$75G RIP IN SPYING
City cops watched Muslims, will curb snooping
Daily News (New York)
April 6, 2018 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 452 words
Byline: BY LAURA DIMON and THOMAS TRACY NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE NYPD has settled a lawsuit filed by Muslim groups in New Jersey over controversial surveillance practices - but cops have not admitted any wrongdoing, officials said Thursday.
The city agreed to pay $75,000 to be divided up among the 11 plaintiffs in the 2012 suit.
The department also agreed to not engage in suspicionless surveillance on the basis of religion or ethnicity, and to have the plaintiffs give input to a policy guide used by the NYPD's intelligence bureau, according to the Center for Constitutional Rights, which represented the plaintiffs.
The New Jersey suit was one of several legal filings claiming some surveillance tactics performed by cops assigned to the Counter Terrorism Bureau in the years since 9/11 were unconstitutional.
The practices were part of the NYPD's often maligned, so-called "Muslim spying program," critics said.
NYPD Deputy Commissioner of Intelligence and Counter Terrorism John Miller (right) called the settlement "another important step forward."
"While there was no admission of wrongdoing or misconduct by the NYPD, what we were able to do was to work with the plaintiffs over time, talk about our rules and procedures, in some cases be able to re-emphasize or add to additional training material," Miller said.
"Our relationship with the Muslim community has probably never been stronger than it is right now."
According to the suit, the NYPD spied on at least 20 mosques, 14 restaurants, 11 retail stores, two grade schools, and two Muslim student associations in New Jersey.
The monitoring included video surveillance, photographing license plates, community mapping, and infiltration by undercover officers and informants.
Through all of this work, the NYPD generated no leads on potential terrorists or terror plots.
A judge dismissed the suit in 2014 but the decision was reversed a year later.
Miller said the settlement will not bar the NYPD from continuing with its current terror investigations.
"There is nothing we were able to do before that we are not able to do now," he said.
The plaintiffs disagreed, claiming the NYPD has agreed to "change their practices and conform them to the Constitution and agree to protocols that will bind them to this in the future."
"We are proud that we stood up to the most powerful police force in the country and against the suspicion and ignorance that guided their discriminatory practices," said lead plaintiff Farhaj Hassan.
Hassan said he isn't surprised that the NYPD refused to admit any wrongdoing.
"A police department not acknowledging wrongdoing is akin to a congressman's 'No comment.'" Farhaj said.
"They know they did it and they won't admit it. We knew from the get-go they are not going to acknowledge wrongdoing."

Graphic

 
[John Miller]

Load-Date: April 6, 2018


End of Document