'India's Response To Mumbai Attack Inadequate'
RTT News (United States)
January 29, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 327 words
Body


(RTTNews) - An influential U.S. policy advisor has termed India&apos;s response to the November 26-29 Mumbai terrorist attack as "inadequate," while suggesting that New Delhi set up a body similar to U.S.&apos; National Counter-Terrorism Centre (NCTC) with possible assistance from Washington, media reports said.
Ashley Tellis, Senior Associate with the Carnegie Endowment of International Peace, a prominent think-tank, was testifying at the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs hearings on "Lessons from the Mumbai Terrorist Attacks."
While appreciating the setting up a National Investigative Agency (NIA) by New Delhi, he said the Indian effort lacked on the preventive aspects of terrorism. He observed that creation of the NIA is important, but post-Mumbai attacks, it does not help India with its perennial problem in terms of prevention.
"They still have to create something like the equivalent of NCTC. They have not done that yet," Tellis said. Indian officials, he said, are still struggling with the issue of classification.
He warned that despite better preventive and response systems in the U.S., a Mumbai-like attack on America by the Islamic terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) was "not inconceivable."
He asserted that it would be a gross error to treat the terrorism facing India--including the terrible Mumbai terrorist attack allegedly by Pakistani nationals with links to the LeT--as simply a problem for New Delhi alone.
In a very real sense, the outage in Mumbai was fundamentally a species of global terrorism not merely because the assailants happened to believe in an obscurantist brand of Islam but, more importantly, because killing Indians turned out to be simply interchangeable with killing citizens of some 15 different nationalities for no apparent reason whatsoever, Tellis added.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document