'Saddam's nuclear mastermind' to speak Tuesday at Miami U.
University Wire
April 5, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 The Miami Student via U-Wire
Length: 308 words
Byline: By Emily Semans, The Miami Student; SOURCE: Miami U.
Dateline: OXFORD, Ohio 
Body


Milt Bearden, a retired CIA officer, and Mahdi Obeidi, who has been called "Saddam's nuclear mastermind," will speak on terrorism and the nuclear threat Tuesday evening.
Miami University's Campus Activities Council Lecture Board is holding a panel discussion at 7 p.m. in Hall Auditorium featuring the two experts.
CAC Lecture Board Chair Jonathan Duxbury said they decided to hold the event because of the student body's interest in current world events, specifically terrorism.
"We hear about terrorism everyday in the news, but don't really know exactly what this term entails," Duxbury said. "It'll be nice to see different perspectives (on the subjects)."
Bearden spent 30 years in the CIA's clandestine services and is also the author of The Black Tulip, a novel about the war in Afghanistan, a contributor to many prestigious publications, and a consultant for CBS News.
Obeidi is the former chief scientist in charge of Iraq's Nuclear Weapons Program under Saddam Hussein and turned over key plans and parts of the Iraqi Nuclear Weapons Program to U.S. Intelligence after the 2003 war in Iraq.
Obeidi's book, The Bomb in My Garden, describes Hussein's quest for nuclear weapons, and how Obeidi circumvented safeguards preventing countries from acquiring knowledge and materials needed to produce weapons of mass destruction.
Patrick Haney, assistant chair of the department of political science, will be moderating the discussion.
Haney said he expects the panelists will discuss terrorism in general, the ongoing war in Afghanistan and the Iraqi intelligence information that led us into the current situation in Iraq.
"These are people with long experience on the subject that maybe ought to be the one thing that keeps people up at night," Haney said.
Tickets are available at the Shriver box office free of cost.
(C) 2005 The Miami Student via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 5, 2005


End of Document