''PORTRAIT OF A TERRORIST'
The New York Times
May 20, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk; Review
Length: 589 words
Byline: By JOHN CORRY
Body


HOW do you like your terrorists? Try sensitive, earnest and principled. On ''Portrait of a Terrorist,'' we get Fernando Gabeira of Brazil, who once helped kidnap a United States Ambassador but now renounces tactics like that. The kidnapping was messy, and Mr. Gabeira now has better things to do. The program will be seen on WNET/Channel 13 at 11 o'clock tonight.
Mr. Gabeira, a popular television journalist and writer in Brazil, took part in the kidnapping of the Ambassador, Charles Burke Elbrick, in 1969. Mr. Elbrick died later of wounds he received during the incident. Mr. Gabeira, the program insists, suffered, too.
He was arrested, imprisoned and tortured. Then he was set free, along with 40 other prisoners, in exchange for the release of a West German Ambassador who was also kidnapped by terrorists. Mr. Gabeira fled to Algeria. Then, although the program doesn't mention it, he lived in Europe. He was away from Brazil eight years.
''Portrait of a Terrorist'' suggests the exile was unjust; Mr. Gabeira confirms it. ''I never considered myself a terrorist,'' he says. Indeed, he acted with only the highest motive: to show that the United States supported the repressive Brazilian regime.
The program - a production of the International Women's Film Project, produced and directed by Helena Solberg and David Meyer, and financed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting - admires Mr. Gabeira for this. When he returned to Brazil under the general amnesty of 1979, the narrator says, he received a ''joyous welcome.'' He is, we are meant to think, a highly moral man.
In fact, ''Portrait of a Terrorist'' is no portrait at all. It's an apology for anyone who believes that kidnappings, bombings and murders are legitimate political weapons. No distinctions are drawn. The program begins by asking, what is a terrorist? Then it mentions Eamon de Valera, Menachem Begin and Mr. Gabeira, suggesting they were all alike. This isn't true; Mr. de Valera and Mr. Begin chose soldiers as their primary targets.
For the appearance of ''balance,'' meanwhile, ''Portrait of a Terrorist'' intersperses brief comments by Diego Ascencio, a former United States Ambassador to Brazil, into its general adulation of Mr. Gabeira. Mr. Ascencio, however, is restricted to nuts and bolts. He says, for example, that ''terrorism is a very, very cost-effective instrument.'' Mr. Gabeira gets to make the big pronouncements.
Thus he says the news media are morally obligated to ''participate'' in terrorist events; the coverage ''forces governments to negotiate.'' He also says military action against terrorism is improper. ''You fight terrorists,'' he declares, ''with food, standard of living and more political freedom.'' One wonders what Islamic fundamentalists would think of that.
Mr. Gabeira goes from platitude to platitude, none of them instructive about terrorism, but all suggesting his, and the program's, high moral and political purpose. There wasn't even anything personal when Mr. Gabeira helped kidnap Ambassador Elbrick; ''I myself,'' he says, ''I always admire the United States.''
That's good to know, of course. It's also good to know that Mr. Gabeira is still fighting the good fight - he's against nuclear weapons, poverty and injustice - and that success hasn't gone to his head. So what if he's now a popular author and television personality? ''His basic political position has never changed,'' the narrator solemnly concludes. The kidnapping and death of an American Ambassador, apparently, were the justified means to an end.


End of Document