'04 Re-Up of Terror Program Looks Doubtful
The American Banker
July 12, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON: IN FOCUS; Pg. 1
Length: 761 words
Byline: By MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite clamoring from the financial services industry and many lawmakers to extend the government's terrorism insurance program long before it expires, the congressional leaders and Bush admi-nistration officials controlling the decision have shown little interest in doing so.
Neither Senate Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, House Financial Services Committee Chairman Michael G. Oxley, nor critical White House officials have taken a position on the matter. The program, in which the government serves as the reinsurer for property/casualty policies that cover acts of terrorism, is set to expire at the end of next year.
A spokesman for Sen. Shelby said Friday that the panel does not plan to explore the issue until next year. Meanwhile, industry officials are concerned about signs that Rep. Oxley, R-Ohio, will not push for renewal on ideological and practical grounds.
Others say there is still hope for renewing the program, because the committee chairmen and the administration are not dug in against it.
"The point is not that Oxley, Shelby, or the White House are unwilling," said J. Patrick Cave, a former aide to Rep. Richard Baker, R-La., and a former Treasury Department official who is now a partner in the Federalist Group, a lobbying organization. "They are waiting for some demonstration of rank-and-file, bipartisan support, and we are starting to see that."
Last week 33 House Democrats, including House Financial Services' ranking Democrat, Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts, introduced a bill similar to one Republicans introduced June 22 with 34 supporters. Both bills would extend the program through 2007.
Other examples of support include a June 4 letter in which more than 100 House Republicans and Democrats asked Treasury Secretary John Snow for an extension, and the Treasury's decision last month to extend a requirement that insurers offer terrorism coverage.
The program was established a year after the Sept. 11 attacks to give private insurers three years to adjust to shouldering the new risk and to ensure the availability of terrorism insurance.
Insurers, lenders, and policyholders say the industry is not ready to handle terrorism coverage without government assistance, which this year covers 90% of claims of over $12.5 billion stemming from such acts and next year will cover 85% of claims of over $15 billion. They argue that if the program is not extended this year, the uncertainty will make it difficult to negotiate policies that extend beyond 2005.
But the White House, like Sen. Shelby, has said it will not decide until next year.
"Any earlier decision would be based upon incomplete information and could provide an inaccurate assessment," Brian Roseboro, the Treasury's under secretary for domestic finance, said in March.
The establishing law requires the Treasury to report to Congress by June 30, 2005, on its effectiveness; on whether property/casualty insurers can offer terrorism risk policies on their own; and on the availability and affordability of such coverage.
The department does not plan to take a position until it completes its report, and Sen. Shelby will probably not decide until then.
"We'll certainly use that as a resource as we consider the issue," the Alabama Republican's spokesman said.
A spokeswoman for Rep. Oxley said he has no time frame for taking a position.
Rep. Oxley has said reauthorization this year is a "long shot."
Last month he told Bloomberg News, "I don't think it's likely. If somebody introduced a bill in the Senate and they get bipartisan cosponsors, that'd kind of change the dynamics."
Bipartisan discussions under way in the Senate could result in the introduction of a bill shortly.
Sources say the signals they have received from Rep. Oxley and his staff indicate that he does not plan to push for extension, because of the administration's reluctance to commit yet and his own ideological concerns about costly government programs.
But these people say Rep. Oxley indicated he would not stand in the way of others on his committee -- including Rep. Baker, who chairs the insurance subcommittee, and Rep. Sue Kelly, R-N.Y., who chairs the oversight subcommittee. (The two helped introduce the Republican bill last month.)
Some industry officials say they prefer provisions in the Democratic bill to make terrorism reinsurance available to group life policies and to maintain the industry's 15% exposure. The Republican bill would raise it to 20% in 2007.
 
Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Oxley

Load-Date: July 9, 2004


End of Document