'24' MADE NO TIME FOR REAL U.S. HEROES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 18, 2010 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LIFESTYLE; Pg. A-2
Length: 651 words
Byline: Tony Norman
Body


By the time Fox decided to cancel "24," most viewers with any sense had long ago abandoned the series. Though never the most realistic show on television, the plots became even more ludicrous and baroque in recent years.
Kiefer Sutherland portrays the show's counter-terrorist "hero" Jack Bauer like a husky-voiced ghost. There's a deadness in Mr. Sutherland's performance that never deviates until Bauer is screaming into a villain's face at the beginning of a torture session.
Jack Bauer was on the receiving end of torture by Russian gangsters earlier this season, but the rogue counter-terrorism agent has proven himself absolutely Cheneyesque in his ability to dish it out in recent weeks.
Last week, Bauer used pliers on the nipples of the Russian assassin who murdered his lover. He then applied flame from a blow torch to the killer's face and body.
During the session, the defiant killer refused to give Bauer the information he wanted despite his ordeal, proving what people of conscience already know -- torture doesn't work.
At one point, the killer spat in Bauer's face. It isn't every day that an audience's sympathy switches away from the hero and to the guy who was part of a conspiracy to detonate a dirty bomb in New York City hours earlier.
Without weighing the morality of his act, Bauer gutted the Russian like a pig to extract a cellphone SIM card he suspected was hidden in the killer's intestinal track.
As Jack Bauer picked through the Russian's stomach, it was obvious that those of us who continue to watch "24" are about as morally compromised as any television audience has ever been.
The previous week, Bauer pursued a double agent who shot several civilians standing between her and freedom. After extracting the information he needed, Bauer shot the now-unarmed woman at close range.
Monday night, Jack Bauer probably did something unthinkable -- again. I have no idea what it was since this column was written hours before the episode aired. If last week's coming attractions are an indication, Bauer succeeded in kidnapping a former American president with inside knowledge of a Russian plot to murder a Middle Eastern leader and detonate a dirty bomb on American soil.
Did Bauer torture the Nixonesque former president to get information about the conspiracy? Even that might be a bridge too far for the series most responsible for setting the tone for human rights abuses at Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib during the Bush years, but I wouldn't put it past him.
Though the paranoid politics of "24" became more anachronistic and embarrassing with each year the show overstayed its welcome, some of its most dubious practices have quietly entered the mainstream of American political thought.
Spooked by criticism from the right that it has been too quick to Mirandize terrorism suspects, the Obama administration has signaled that it is open to taking a harder line against Americans rounded up in terrorist plots. (You never see Jack Bauer reading an American conspirator his Miranda rights, do you?)
This follows the Obama administration's cowardly retreat from prosecuting the suspected Sept. 11 conspirators in New York. Pressure is building to prosecute the terror suspects in a military tribunal far removed from American soil -- preferably Gitmo.
Attorney General Eric Holder insists that the Justice Department hasn't ruled out a civilian trial, but the administration hasn't shown much of a spine when it comes to protecting civil liberties if conservative critics squawk loud enough. More than anything, it wants to look tough -- though not necessarily Jack Bauer tough.
Meanwhile, there is hardly a ripple of dissent about assigning drones to kill a radical Muslim American preacher in Yemen who inspires hatred and terrorism against the country of his birth.
It may be coming to an end on TV in a few weeks, but the odious politics of "24" will remain with us for a long time.

Notes

Tony Norman: tnorman@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1631./

Load-Date: May 18, 2010


End of Document