'82 SOUTH AFRICAN-SWAZI PACT DISCLOSED
The New York Times
April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 408 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa, March 31
Body


South Africa and Swaziland disclosed today that they signed a peace agreement more than two years ago that is similar to a recent nonaggression pact between South Africa and Mozambique.
South Africa's Foreign Minister, Roelof F. Botha, and his Swazi counterpart, Velaphi Dlamini, announced the agreement, contained in letters between the heads of government in February 1982, after talks here today.
South Africa has recently intensified its efforts to normalize relations with its black neighbors, and Foreign Minister Botha told reporters today that peace talks were also under way with Zimbabwe and Botswana. He refused to give details.
South Africa and Swaziland disclose signing peace agreement more than two years ago that is similar to recent nonaggression pact between South Arica and Mozambique; Froeign Min Roelof F Botha says South Africa has peace talks under way with Zimbabwe and Botswana (M)Secrecy Is Explained
Like the accord with Mozambique signed this month, the 1982 agreement with Swaziland binds each nation not to allow its territory to be used by guerrillas against the other. It allows each nation to seek military assistance from the other if threatened by ''terrorism, insurgency and subversion.''
Asked why the agreement was kept secret, Mr. Botha said: ''At the time it was considered expedient for the two Governments to keep it quiet. But now the political climate has changed, improved, and it is now considered expedient to make it known.''
Answering the same question, Mr. Dlamini denied that Swaziland had feared being the first neighboring black-ruled nation to sign a peace agreement with South Africa.
 
Denying Bases to Rebels
South African military officials say one of their principal goals is to deny nearby bases to black nationalist guerrillas such as those of the African National Congress, which is fighting to overthrow white rule.
Diplomats and other experts here say South Africa has pursued a policy of convincing its black neighbors that they will pay heavily for supporting the African National Congress and other insurgents. Before Mozambique entered into negotiations with Pretoria, South African forces conducted devastating raids against A.N.C. bases inside Mozambique.
But unlike Marxist Mozambique, which since independence in 1975 had had hostile relations with the white- ruled republic, Swaziland has enjoyed mostly amicable relations with South Africa, upon which it depends heavily for its trade.


End of Document