'A TOUR OF THE BRIGHTER SIDE'
The New York Times
November 28, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 355 words
Body


To the Editor:
 Your Nov. 15 editorial, ''Philippine Rights, and Wrongs,'' is so unduly pessimistic about the situation in the Philippines that I am moved to take you on a tour of the brighter side.
he recent outbreak of terrorism has aroused nothing but reprehension among the majority of Filipinos. The popular support so eagerly sought by President Marcos's opponents has not and will never materialize because the people know that the only alternative is a return to the chaos which forced the President in 1972 to invoke his constitutional power to declare martial law. The terrorism, incidentally, is being orchestrated and logistically supported in the United States by anti-Marcos elements.
Ernesto Pineda editorial comment responds to November 15 editorial about "Philippine Rights and Wrongs"
The situation in Mindanao is slowly but steadily becoming stabilized. The strength of the Moslem insurgents is being whittled down as more and more rebels return to the Government fold. This is the result of President Marcos's policy of attraction which includes, among other things, the establishment of a special development authority for Mindanao, a recognition of the legitimate aspirations of our Moslem brothers.
 
Despite the ravages of the energy crisis, the economy continues to grow, albeit at a modest rate.  National el ections for the regular members of parliament will be held in 1984, belying your statement that ''there is no ready path out of the cy cle of violence.'' Medical care and facilities are reaching the rural areas. Heart centers, kidney centers, children's centers and m any other health centers have been built and have already benef ited even those who wish ill to President Marcos.
The list is long and, lest I weary you and because of your space restrictions, I shall desist from citing them all. But, to borrow and rephrase a question posed by President-elect Ronald Reagan during the election campaign, ''Are the Filipinos better off now than they were eight years ago?'' The Filipinos would reply with a resounding ''Yes!'' ERNESTO C. PINEDA Consul General of the Philippines New York, Nov. 15, 1980


End of Document