'Absolute Imperative' To Bring 26/11 Perpetrators To Justice': Obama, Singh
RTT News (United States)
November 25, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 400 words
Body


(RTTNews) - In a clear message to Pakistan, the U.S. Tuesday joined India in underscoring the "absolute imperative" to bring to justice the perpetrators of the 26/11 Mumbai attacks, two days before the first anniversary of the carnage that killed 183 people, including six Americans, and injured 283 others.
A joint statement issued Tuesday after their meeting in the Oval office during the India Prime Minister Manmohan Singh&apos;s State visit, the first of the Obama presidency, underlined the need for "resolute and credible steps" to eliminate "safe havens and sanctuaries" in Pakistan and Afghanistan which undermine the security and stability around the world.
Setting out to launch a "new phase" in their strategic partnership, the two leaders signed an MoU on a Counter-terrorism Cooperation Initiative that aims to expand collaboration on counter-terrorism, information sharing, and capacity building, the statement said.
The statement further said that the two leaders also expressed their grave concern about the "threat posed by terrorism and violent extremists emanating from India&apos;s neighborhood, whose impact is felt beyond the region."
They vowed to redouble their efforts to deal effectively with terrorism, while protecting their countries&apos; common ideals and shared values and committed themselves to strengthening global consensus and legal regimes against terrorism.
The two leaders recognized that the India-U.S. partnership is indispensable for global peace and security, it said asserting, "The interests of both countries are best advanced through the values mirrored in their societies."
"They acknowledged the common threat that international terrorism poses to regional and global security," the statement said adding. "They condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and declared that there could be no justification for terrorism anywhere."
President Barack Obama also reiterated the United States&apos; condemnation of the terrorist attack in Mumbai in November 2008.
During their 90-minute meeting, Prime Minister Singh and President Obama agreed to step up cooperation and collaboration on pressing global challenges like terrorism and climate change and decided to take new bilateral initiatives in education, healthcare and agriculture sectors.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 18, 2010


End of Document