'Alternative' interrogation tools ring of torture
USA TODAY
September 14, 2006 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 1453 words
Body


When I was trained as a Navy intelligence officer in the 1960s, I learned that our communist foes tortured captured enemies with water boarding, a method where the prisoner is repeatedly suffocated until he breaks.
Now our president tells us that techniques such as water boarding, which news reports say was a tactic used by the CIA, are not torture. They are merely "alternative" interrogation techniques ("Congress pressed for laws to meet 'new era' threats," News, Sept. 7).
It appears that in the name of expediency, we have adopted the tactics of those authoritarian regimes we used to revile. As a Christian and a patriot, I am deeply saddened that this great nation no longer has the moral fiber to be different from its enemies.
Charles C. Bonwell, retired captain
U.S. Naval Reserve
Green Mountain Falls, Colo.
Never forget acts of terror
My wife and I are British, but we are very fortunate to spend many months in the USA, notably in Tucson. We totally support America's fight against terrorism and support the United Kingdom's full involvement in this war as your allies.
We were in Hong Kong on 9/11, when those terrible attacks on the USA and the civilized world unfolded before our eyes. We were shocked beyond belief, and that shock remains with us. More than a year later, we lost nine good friends from Hong Kong in the Bali attacks in Indonesia.
During the past five years, we have watched with much sadness as there has been a gradual change in public and political attitudes in both the UK and in the USA to the war on terrorism, coupled with the way it is being perceived and portrayed in the media. The issue has become political.
Today, I made myself re-watch scenes of 9/11 and the film United 93 (my wife still can't bring herself to do this), and I deeply implore all Americans and Brits to do the same. We must never forget!
The political games being played on the back of the war on terrorism are deplorable. The terrorists have not gone away. They are here forever. Terrorism has to be recognized for what it is, and it has to be fought constantly. Terrorists are cowards, hiding behind religion, hiding behind civilians, hiding behind their own people and hiding behind masks. They kill without remorse, including their own people, if it fuels their own ends and propaganda.
Please let us all remember  9/11, or Bali 2002, or many of the other terrible, cowardly terrorist attacks over the past two decades.
Roger Bettiss
Tucson
Examine terrorists' hatred
Responding to the 9/11 anniversary, reader James O'Donnell  writes, "We did not start this war." The only war we are in is the war in Iraq -- and we invaded Iraq. Iraq certainly didn't start this war. The so-called war on terror, which O'Donnell refers to, is no more a war than the war on drugs. War can't be waged against a philosophy or an idea. There must be an identified enemy that can surrender ("We remain at war," Letters, Sept. 11).
The rest of the world knows who started this war, and they consider the United States to be the greatest threat to world peace. Until we realize this and acknowledge our errors, and until we realize that terrorism can't be stopped by armies, no matter how powerful they are, we will continue to waste innocent lives and our treasure with no results. We also will create more hatred of the United States and more terrorists.
It is time to examine why we are hated by so many people and to consider conducting ourselves in a manner that will cause the terrorists to have no reason to attack us.
Walt Vanderbush
Franklin, Ind.
Law enforcement powers
The president has the legal right to wiretap our enemies or their agents -- and that is exactly what al-Qaeda is.
If President Clinton had taken such actions after the 1993 truck bombing at the World Trade Center, the 2000 bombing of the USS Cole or the 1998 bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa, all by al-Qaeda and its supporters, then perhaps the Twin Towers would still be standing.
Congress needs to quit screaming and moaning for political gain and get with the program. Lawmakers gutted our FBI, CIA and various other intelligence services in the past decade. But we are at war and we are in peril. Use the tools at our disposal that are necessary to find, trap, capture and kill terrorists.
Alfred Johnson
Troy, Mich.
'Progress' in war on terror
So President Bush has finally come clean and said outright that 9/11 and Iraq have nothing to do with each other. Yet he insists that the war in Iraq is now the central battlefield against al-Qaeda and terrorism, and his administration suggests that if you don't support it you're akin to a fascist appeaser.
Let's review, then, what we have to show for this unnecessary but supposedly crucial war. More than 2,000 U.S. soldiers killed and many thousands more injured;  numerous innocent Iraqis affected; new hatred and new terrorist recruits generated; a more unstable Middle East and less ability to control it. Our national integrity and international goodwill have been substantially eroded. Hundreds of billions of dollars have been spent while we've failed to bolster homeland security and veterans' health care and failed to fund many other programs at home.  The deficit has ballooned. There's no exit strategy except to leave it for the next president.
And now, even leaders in the Pentagon admit this war, which has been horribly mismanaged from the start, is in danger of spiraling out of control. Meanwhile, our focus on Iraq means Afghanistan, the origin of 9/11, continues to fester and we are no closer to finding Osama bin Laden.
I guess by this administration's logic, all these things must be considered "progress" in the war on terror.
David Smith
Seattle
Military is not solution
Ralph Peters' argument for increased military forces rather than an overreliance on high technology weapons is not new ("The myth of immaculate warfare," The Forum, Sept. 6).
Perhaps most disturbing about his piece, however, is its dehumanizing and sterile portrayal of war, which disregards its innocent victims: the thousands of dead Americans, the tens of thousands of dead Iraqis, Israel's massive destruction of Lebanon with U.S. weapons and its brutal and deadly siege for months of Gaza.
Peters, as Vice President Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Israeli leaders do, believes that military power solves political conflicts. Iraq, Afghanistan and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict prove him deadly wrong.
Why does Peters advocate a massive military force? His answer, I believe, can be found in what he wrote in 1997 for the U.S. Army War College Quarterly Parameters:
"The de facto role of the U.S. armed forces will be to keep the world safe for our economy and open to our cultural assault."
Five years after 9/11, terrorism, fear and anxiety have increased because of President Bush's singular reliance on a military solution against terrorism. It's time for dialogue and peaceful resolutions with Muslim nations, beginning with justice and independence for Palestinians. Only justice can defeat terrorism.
Dr. Mohamed Khodr
Winchester, Va.
Who is confused?
It is astounding that Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld would imply that critics of the Iraq and terrorism policies are suffering from "moral or intellectual confusion about what is right or wrong," as USA TODAY reported ("Rumsfeld: Iraq critics morally confused," News, Aug. 30).
This administration used disinformation to get this nation into war and later dismissed it as simply flawed intelligence. It propagandized that the war in Iraq was the same thing as the war on terror, and then made Iraq a haven for terrorists. Who is confused?
To say that this administration is merely "confused" about this war morally and intellectually would be giving them the benefit of the doubt. It would probably be the kindest thing that could be said.
Phil Stout
Jackson, Mich.
Misleading headline
USA TODAY's article on Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's  address to the American Legion's national convention misled readers regarding his  remarks. The headline, "Rumsfeld: Iraq critics morally confused," suggests that Secretary Rumsfeld labeled critics of the Iraq war as "morally confused."
In fact, the secretary never mentioned any critics of the Iraq war in his remarks.
Secretary Rumsfeld reminded people of the similarities between past and current conflicts and warned against a "blame America first" mentality that could undermine our efforts in the current struggle against violent extremism.
Judging by the response -- three standing ovations -- his remarks struck a chord.
We invite your readers to read the full text of the secretary's remarks at http://www.defenselink.mil/speeches/.
Dorrance Smith
Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Public Affairs
Washington

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Brennan Linsley, AP

Load-Date: September 14, 2006


End of Document