'ARAFAT'S CARD' IS HELPING TO BUILD GREATER ISRAEL
The New York Times
March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 534 words
Body


To the Editor:
 It is truly extraordinary how certain political slogans survive - indeed, are repeated by the most sophisticated political observers - in the face of overwhelming evidence that they are devoid of any semblance of truth. Such is the slogan that Arafat refuses to recognize Israel because recognition is his only ''card.''
In his March 18 Op-Ed article, John B. Oakes uncritically reports Arafat's statement that ''I have one card - recognition - and I am not so stupid as to throw it away unless I get something substantial in return.''
In fact, the history of the ArabIsraeli conflict has made it abundantly clear that Arafat's refusal to recognize Israel and to renounce terrorism is
not
 
 his card; it is Israel's card, and always has been. As long as the Government in Jerusalem can point to Arafat's refusal to recognize Israel and to renounce terrorism, it is immune from pressures that would otherwise compel it to abandon or compromise its vision of a Greater Israel.  On the other hand, imagine if Arafat had announced that he recognizes Israel's existence and is revoking the P.L.O.'s charter calling for the destruction of Israel. Middle East realities would have been altered drastically. Whoever occupies the White House - Republican or Democrat - would have insisted on Israeli concessions that would enable negotiations to go forward. Even more significant than American desires would have been the changed political climate within Israel itself.
Israelis, who are tired of war and its heart-rending human toll, would have insisted that their Government do whatever it takes to explore the new opportunities for peace that such a change in the P.L.O.'s position might offer. Even the most ideologically rigid government in Israel would have had to respond to such pressures.
To talk of Arafat's refusal to recognize Israel as a ''card'' he holds therefore verges on the absurd. The opposite is the case: It is this refusal, and nothing else, that gave Prime Minister Begin and gives Prime Minister Shamir the room needed to proceed with the settlements - a process that may soon make the entire question of the future of the West Bank an academic one.
And given Arafat's continuing insistence on resorting to bloody terrorism against Israeli civilians (he boasted responsibility for a recent bombing of a bus that tore women and children to shreds), who has the moral right to tell the Israelis that the P.L.O. is indeed a civilized partner with whom Israel can enter into reliable arrangements for the future of the West Bank?
Admittedly, it is no longer clear whether a dramatic change in Arafat's position can still have the political impact it would have had before his terrorist organization was decimated in Lebanon. But isn't this precisely the tragedy of the Palestinians? Their ''concessions'' have always been one war too late. Today's ''minimal'' demand has always been yesterday's offer by Israel that the Palestinians disdainfully rejected.
It is the bankrupt leadership of the Palestinians themselves, clutching their ''cards,'' that betrayed and continues to betray Palestinian aspirations.
 
HENRY SIEGMAN Executive Director American Jewish Congress New York, March 21, 1984

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document