'Boycott French products' launched over Macron's Islam comments
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 26, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 504 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The Gulf Cooperation Council described Macron's statements as "irresponsible", and said they are aimed at spreading a culture of hatred among peoples.
Macron's office said on Saturday France had gathered its European partners, who share France's demand that Turkey puts a stop to its "dangerous adventures" in the Mediterranean and in the region.
French President Emmanuel Macron speaks in front of a high school in Conflans Sainte-Honorine, northwest of Paris, after a history teacher who opened a discussion with students on caricatures of Islam's Prophet Muhammad was beheaded, October 16, 2020.
Khan's comments follow a similar broadside fired by Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan against Macron, following which France recalled its ambassador from Ankara.
"The calls for a boycott are groundless and must be stopped immediately, like all attacks against our country committed by a radical minority", the diplomat added. "Macron needs treatment on a mental level", Erdogan said in a speech in the central Turkish city of Kayseri.
Insulting the religion or the Prophet carries the death penalty under Pakistan's blasphemy laws.
The diplomatic spat is latest issue to strain relations between France and Turkey, who are allies under North Atlantic Treaty Organisation but disagree on a range of geo-political issues, including the civil wars in Syria and Libya, and the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over disputed Nagorno-Karabakh.
The European Union's top diplomat, Josep Borrell, called the comments Erdogan made on Saturday "unacceptable" and urged Turkey "to cease this unsafe spiral of confrontation".
Ravens plan to add Dez Bryant to practice squad
The Ravens' interest in Bryant goes back much further than this past summer. Information from ESPN's Jamison Hensley was used in this report.
In Qatar and Kuwait, dozens of shops have removed French food products from sale.
"This is a time when Pres Macron could have put healing touch & denied space to extremists rather than creating further polarisation & marginalisation that inevitably leads to radicalisation", Khan said.
"Demonising Islam and Muslims isn't going to keep the social peace in France".
"By attacking Islam, clearly without having any understanding of it, President Macron has attacked & hurt the sentiments of millions of Muslims in Europe & across the world", Khan added.
"The Prophet Mohammed is the most sacred thing in Islam and whoever attacks his honour, attacks an entire people", he told the crowd gathered outside the official residence of French ambassador Eric Danon.
In a statement, Kuwait's foreign ministry warned against the support of abuses and discriminatory policies that link Islam to terrorism, saying it "represents a falsification of reality, insults the teachings of Islam, and offends the feelings of Muslims around the world".
Erdogan on Sunday renewed his personal attacks on Macron, saying in a televised speech the French president "has lost his way" and that "he is a case and he really must be checked up", Reuters reported.

Load-Date: October 26, 2020


End of Document