'Call to Action' on 10-Year Anniversary Of Shooting Death of Ari Halberstam
New York Sun (Archive)
March 2, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEW YORK; Pg. 2
Length: 367 words
Byline: By LISA SCHERZER, Special to the Sun
Body


Standing near the spot on the Brooklyn Bridge where her son was killed 10 years ago, Devorah Halberstam vowed yesterday to keep fighting for broader legislation to combat terrorism.
Mrs. Halberstam's son, Ari, was killed on March 1, 1994, when a Lebanese livery car driver opened fire on a car full of Orthodox Jewish students on the Brooklyn Bridge. He was 16 years old.
"Today is a day to remember. But it is also a call to action," Mrs. Halberstam said at the memorial service beneath one of four "Ari Halberstam Memorial Ramp" signs on the bridge. The Brooklyn Bridge, she said, is a symbol of New York, as well as a symbol of "Ari's unfulfilled life."
"We must support every necessary measure to enhance our safety in these precarious times," Mrs. Halberstam told the crowd. "If even one child is killed by Islamic terrorists, then we have not been doing our jobs."
Governor Pataki joined Mrs. Halberstam in calling for comprehensive antiterrorism legislation to help deter terrorism. He pledged that new legislation, first proposed in November 2001, would ensure that New York has comprehensive anti-terrorism laws.
Among other things, the proposed legislation would create new class A-1 felony offenses for the criminal possession and use of chemical or biological weapons; eliminate the statute of limitations for all terrorist offenses, and create the crimes of conspiracy to commit terrorism and criminal facilitation of terrorism.
Senator Clinton said: "We all owe a great debt of gratitude to Devorah Halberstam. She took the pain and grief any mother would feel and channeled that into action.... I admire the way she worked with so many elected officials to change laws."
Local officials on hand included Rep. Anthony Weiner; the Brooklyn borough president, Marty Markowitz; the City Council speaker, Gifford Miller; city Comptroller William Thompson Jr., and Jonathan Greenspun from Mayor Bloomberg's office.
Seven years after the shooting, under pressure from politicians and the Halberstam family, the FBI reclassified the 1994 shooting from road rage to terrorism, concluding that the killer, Rashid Baz, was motivated by anti-Semitism. Baz was sentenced to 141 years in prison for the murder.

Load-Date: March 2, 2004


End of Document