'DEMONIC FORCES NOW THREATEN TO TEAR US APART'
The New York Times
September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 891 words
Byline: By MERVYN de SILVA; Mervyn de Silva is the editor of the Lanka Guardian magazine in Colombo
Dateline: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka
Body


IN the grip of a harrowing ethnic conflict, the five-year-old separatist insurgency, Sri Lanka has learned to live in a blaze of unwelcome publicity.
The story of the Tamil ''boat people,'' 155 refugees abandoned by a West German ship off Newfoundland, seemed almost too much worldwide exposure to bear. ''We are not a 'refugee-producing country,' '' protested Foreign Minister Shahul Hameed, stung by a Western newspaper comment.
Most European goverments have tightened visa rules for all Sri Lankans - including Britain, despite Sri Lanka's claims as a Commonwealth member. If the refugee and guest worker become insidious carriers of the virus of racial prejudice in Europe, the revenge of the old colonies on erstwhile masters may appear complete. Yet, such a process will not be free of an irony that mocks the third world. Race, language, religion and tribe, the badges of group identity, have been the most fecund source of third world unrest. And often it is the exile abroad who is the promoter of separatist struggles and terrorism at home.
Race more than class, identity rather than ideology is the favorite mode of mobilization of alienated national minorities. As Prof. Wyndraeth H. Morris-Jones, the British political scientist, has noted, two kinds of demands are made. If the group is concentrated, these are likely to be territorial, if dispersed, the demands are for ''proportional'' participation or power-sharing. Sri Lanka's problem, the conflict between the Sinhalese majority and the Tamil minority in the north, belongs to the first category, but the Government hopes a solution can be based on the second.
Ethnic allegiance is no respecter of state borders, which have often been arbitrarily drawn. The struggle for cultural identity is now the world's most potent anti-systemic force, the great destabilizer. The violence it generates defies the neat categories of ''class war'' of Marxism-Leninism just as it makes nonsense of the Soviet-sponsored global terrorism theories of Reaganism-Thatcherism. The phenomenon also confounds countless third world regimes, as was demonstrated this month at the nonaligned summit meeting in Zimbabwe. While it was easy to condemn ''state terrorism'' (South Africa and Israel) and support liberation movements, semantic skills were severely strained to achieve consensus on terrorism and separatism, especially movements receiving external help. The outgoing chairman of the Nonaligned Movement, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India, accuses Pakistan of promoting Sikh terrorism and separatism. But only last month, he conceded statehood to Mizoram and installed the leader of a 20-year insurgency as its Chief Minister.
In no region of the world is the ''identity crisis'' so evident as in South Asia, and no country is a more striking victim than Sri Lanka, once a ''model'' third world democracy and welfare state. Time and space - the rapid acceleration of the crisis in so small a geographic compass - account for the intensity of the demonic forces that now threaten to tear us apart.
 
India's Role
More than 100,000 Sri Lankan Tamil refugees live in camps in the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu, the home of 50 million Tamils. Madras, the state capital, is the base of former Tamil parliamentarians and, more crucially, guerrillas. This refugee presence allowed India to claim a stake in resolving Sri Lanka's ethnic conflict.
Help, direct and covert, from Pakistan, Israel, China, Britain and the United States could not match Indian pressure, and the pressure of the worsening situation on the ground. Terrorist bombs in Colombo, soaring defense spending and economic setbacks, threats of aid cuts by donors - and the partial failure of a major military operation in the north - pushed the Government to the negotiating table with the Tamil moderates.
But the guerrillas say that their minimum nonnegotiable demand is a north-east merger that would combine the predominantly Tamil north with large areas of the ethnically mixed east, where Tamils say they have lived for centuries. Prime Minister Junius R. Jayewardene cannot concede that or be seen to consider it. Already opposition forces led by the former Prime Minister, Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, and supported by the influential Buddhist clergy argue that ''autonomy'' really means ''federalism,'' a sinister word in the Sinhalese vocabulary, rousing fears of separate ''kingdoms.''
The Tamil moderate negotiators returned to India, only to find their leader branded a traitor by the militants. Two of his parliamentary colleagues were assassinated in the Tamil north last year.
The moderates dare not make a unilateral deal with Mr. Jayewardene.
Only India can bridge the gap, but how much leverage does Mr. Gandhi have? Tamil Nadu was the first state in post-independence India to raise the separatist banner. Nehru's formula of linguistic states, with some border adjustments, helped cope with separatism then. It would be an irony of history if the Sri Lankan Tamil issue rekindled Tamil Nadu separatism.
This is the 10th anniversary of the death of Mao Tse-tung. He wrote: ''Countries want freedom, nations want independence, peoples want liberation.'' As the Zimbabwe meeting testified, countries have got freedom and nations have won independence. But third world regimes are now drawn into close encounters of the third kind.

Graphic

 
Photo Tamil guerrillas training in a jungle camp in Sri Lanka (Sygma/Michel Philipot); Map of India and Sri Lanka


End of Document