'Eco-terrorism' prompts concerns
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 23, 2000, Thursday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 422 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


PORTLAND, Ore. - Using darkness for cover, activists smashed a window in a Wisconsin warehouse, crawled inside and placed incendiary devices on a propane tank. They set the timers and fled.
That same day, March 13, a group calling itself the Animal Liberation Front boasted that they'd burned the warehouse down - even though they hadn't. The devices had malfunctioned and last week's attack on the refrigerated warehouse containing gourmet dog food had failed.
Acting solo or side by side, the ALF and its affiliated group - the Earth Liberation Front - have claimed responsibility for a string of costly arson attacks and other acts of sabotage across the country.
In their communiques, the so-called eco-vandals say they're on a crusade to protect animals and the environment. They also say their intentions are non-violent.
It's little comfort to the people who own property that has been destroyed or damaged in the attacks. Dana Watkins, whose dog food warehouse in Viraquo, Wis., was apparently the latest target, used to provide food to fur farms - favorite targets of the vandals.
Watkins worries the radicals may return to finish the job. "Every night we go to bed scared, wondering what will happen," he said.
During the past three years, damage from acts of eco-vandalism has amounted to millions of dollars. Since December 1997, the two groups have taken responsibility for at least 10 arson attacks, including a $ 12 million fire that destroyed a ski lodge in Vail, Colo.
No lives have been lost, but some fear it's a matter of time.
"Until fairly recently, they have been more of a nuisance than a real problem," said Gary Perlstein, co-author of "Perspectives on Terrorism," a book about American fringe groups.
"Somebody is going to die, even if it is accidentally," he said. "When they find that their present activities don't work, they'll have to get more aggressive."
Though their histories are murky, ELF and ALF trace their origins to the late 1970s with the founding of Earth First!, a group energized by anarchist Edward Abbey's novel "The Monkey Wrench Gang."
Environmental vandalism started to mount in the 1980s as conservationists fought to prevent loggers from cutting ancient trees and new concerns were sparked about endangered animals.
By the late 1980s, a number of animal-rights activists had joined radical environmentalists in bids to save wilderness and animals. Some believe there is a link between eco-vandals and the anarchists blamed violence during the World Trade Organization talks in Seattle last year.

Load-Date: March 24, 2000


End of Document