'Eradicate' Islamic State, France urges; French president: Amend constitution to fight terrorists.; CONTINUING COVERAGE TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 17, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 877 words
Byline: Aurelien Breeden, Kimiko De FreytasTamura and Katrin Bennhold
Body


A soldier patrols at Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris on Monday. France is urging its allies to boost intelligence sharing, fight arms trafficking and terror financing, and strengthen border security.
French President Francois Hollande speaks at the Versailles castle Monday: Terrorists "must never be able to spoil France's soul"he said.
PARIS - President Francois Hollande of France called on Monday to amend the constitution to fight potential terrorists at home and for an aggressive effort to "eradicate" the Islamic State abroad.
His call to arms - "France is at war," he told a joint session of the parliament - came as security forces in France and Belgium zeroed in on a suspect they said was the architect of the assault that killed 129 people Friday night in Paris. The suspect, a 27-year-old Belgian, has fought for the Islamic State in Syria and has been linked to other terrorist attacks.
Hollande spoke after the French police raided homes and other sites across the country in an effort to head off possible further attacks and the authorities in Belgium hunted for a suspected assailant in Friday's attacks.
Hollande called for quick action by the parliament on new legislation that would give the government more flexibility to conduct police raids without a warrant and place people under house arrest. He said he would seek court approval for broader surveillance powers. And he called for constitutional amendments that would give more weight to security measures relative to civil liberties.
The changes he is seeking would, among other things, extend the current state of emergency for three months and let the government strip the citizenship of French natives who are convicted of terrorism and hold a second passport.
"Our democracy has prevailed over much more formidable opponents than these cowardly assassins," Hollande said a day after France conducted airstrikes against the Syrian city of Raqqa, the self-proclaimed capital of the Islamic State. It was the country's most intense military strike yet against the radical group, which had claimed responsibility for the attacks in Paris.
The French leader said he would meet soon with President Barack Obama and President Vladimir Putin of Russia in an effort to settle on a united campaign to wipe out the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
"Terrorism will not destroy the republic, because it is the republic that will destroy it," he said.
Three days after the attacks on a soccer stadium, a concert hall and numerous bars and cafes, French and Belgian security services were focused on the radical jihadi they believe was the leader of the plot, Abdelhamid Abaaoud. He is among the most prominent Islamic State fighters to have come out of Belgium.
A French official briefed on the investigation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss operational details, said Abaaoud had mentioned plans to attack "a concert hall" to a French citizen who returned from Syria.
Abaaoud, this official said, had also been in contact with Ismael Omar Mostefai, one of the Paris attackers. Abaaoud also knew another attacker, Ibrahim Abdeslam; they were tried together in 2010 in Belgium for a minor offense.
Hollande said the attacks had been "planned in Syria, organized in Belgium, perpetrated on our soil with French complicity."
The French authorities said Monday that they had conducted 168 raids across the country in an effort to root out possible terrorist threats. The raids extended from the Paris region to the major cities of Lille, Lyon, Marseille and Toulouse, they said. They also said they had arrested 23 people and detained 104 others under house arrest.
But a Frenchman believed to be involved in the Paris attacks, Salah Abdeslam, 26, a brother of Ibrahim Abdeslam, remained at large, eluding a series of raids conducted by the authorities in Molenbeek, the working-class Brussels neighborhood where the brothers lived.
A third brother, Mohamed, and four other men who had been detained in Belgium were released on Monday. At a news conference in Brussels, Mohamed said he did not know Salah Abdeslam's whereabouts and added, "My parents are under shock and have not yet grasped what has happened."
The alleged architect of the plot, Abaaoud, who traveled to Syria last year and even persuaded his 13-year-old brother to join him there, is from the same neighborhood, Molenbeek, as the Abdeslam brothers.
Abaaoud was already a suspect, according to officials and local news reports, in a failed terrorist plot in Belgium in January and an attempt in August to gun down passengers on a high-speed train to Paris from Brussels. The intelligence official said the authorities feared he might be in Europe.
The authorities confirmed on Monday that one of the attackers had entered Europe through Greece on a Syrian passport last month, posing as a migrant.
The man was identified on his passport - found at the soccer stadium north of Paris where he blew himself up on Friday night
- as Ahmad al-Mohammad, 25, a native of Idlib, Syria. The holder of the passport passed through the Greek island of Leros on Oct. 3 and the Serbian border town of Presovo on Oct. 7, according to Greek and Serbian officials. It remained unclear if the passport was authentic.

Load-Date: November 17, 2015


End of Document