'FIGHTING TERRORISM'
The New York Times
September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Cultural Desk; Review
Length: 506 words
Byline: By John Corry
Body


HOW would the United States respond to a nuclear attack staged by terrorists?
''Fighting Terrorism: A National Security View'' tells us. In fact, it acts it out. Former Government officials pretend they are members of the National Security Council, called to advise the President. Whether they offer the correct advice, you must judge for yourself. As television, however, the exercise is compelling. It can be seen on Channels 13 and 21 at 10 P.M.
The program - co-produced by KCET in Los Angeles and Jay LaMonica Productions - is a one-hour condensation of a two-day conference at Georgetown University in May. The Center for Strategic and International Studies invited the former Government officials and other prominent people to participate in a ''crisis management simulation.''
This is the crisis: Terrorists, armed with a nuclear device, have hijacked an American jetliner and forced it to land in Sicily. Initial intelligence reports indicate that Libya, retaliating for the United States air raid in April, has sponsored the hijacking. The National Security Council must act.
Verisimilitude gets a new meaning here. We see, among others, Brent Scowcroft, former national security adviser to President Ford; he plays the chairman of the council. Robert McFarlane, former national security adviser to President Reagan, is the Secretary of Defense. Richard Helms, former Director of Central Intelligence, is the Director of Central Intelligence. Adm. Thomas Moorer, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs, is chairman of the Joint Chiefs. On the surface at least, entertainment is imitating life.
Meanwhile, the crisis unfolds the way one would in life: the council gets much of its news from television. We see the television reports, carefully labeled as ''simulated.'' The airliner has been blown up, releasing a cloud of radiation. Syria, new intelligence indicates, is equally responsible with Libya. The United States thrusts; the Soviet Union parries. The world is moving toward war.
One striking thing about all this is the ease with which the players adapt to television. This may be because most of them are old hands in public life; television is part of the territory. At the same time, it is permissible to wonder whether television's recording of the exercise influences the participants. Television, after all, means they go public.
Thus a participant raises the possibility of assassinating Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. ''It's against the law,'' General Scowcroft snaps. Would he respond so strongly in a private meeting? Les Aspin, appearing as the White House chief of staff, insists that the President must consult Congress. Mr. Aspin, in fact, is the Democratic chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. When he insists on consultations with Congress, he may be making a political point.
Despite this (or, perhaps, because of it), the program is fascinating. ''Fighting Terrorism'' - Blaine Baggett is executive producer - is a primer on high-level strategy. The world does not go to war, but it seems to be a close call.


End of Document