'FIRST WAR OF THE 21ST CENTURY;
$40 BILLION BILL TO FIGHT TERRORISM MOVES AHEAD
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 14, 2001 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-2
Length: 1274 words
Byline: From Associated Press Reports
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush called Tuesday's terrorist attacks "the first war of the 21st century" and the nation's capital remained tense yesterday, two days after the terror attacks that leveled the World Trade Center in New York City and severely damaged the Pentagon.
Vice President Dick Cheney was moved to the security of the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md., as a precaution, his spokeswoman said.
The Secret Service also widened the protective buffer around the White House and Air Force jets patrolled the skies over major U.S. cities.
In another sign of heightened security concerns, lawmakers and staff members streamed out of the U.S. Capitol yesterday evening after a package was found near the first-floor office of Sen. Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va. He is the Senate president pro tempore and third in line of succession to the presidency after the vice president and the speaker of the House.
People were allowed to return when bomb-sniffing dogs did not find explosives and Capitol police removed the package.
Tears welling in his eyes, Bush spoke of a need to win the battle against terrorism.
"I'm a loving guy. And I am also someone, however, who's got a job to do and I intend to do it. And this is a terrible moment," Bush said.
Bush also announced that he would visit New York to see the devastation in lower Manhattan.
"There's a quiet anger in America that is real," Bush told New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the state's governor, George E. Pataki, in a telephone call shown on national television.
He said the federal government was poised to provide "anything it takes to help New York."
Giuliani told Bush: "We're going to sustain a tremendous loss of our bravest and our best people"
Speaking with reporters after the call, Bush said, "I weep and mourn with America. .*.*. I wish I could comfort every single family whose lives have been affected."
He added, "My resolve is steady and strong about winning this war that has been declared on America .*.*. the first war of the 21st century."
At the same time, Bush urged Americans not to exhibit prejudice toward Arab-Americans and Muslims because of the possible ethnic origins of suspects.
Bush's eyes were red and wet as he ended his news conference, his head and hands trembling slightly. He later visited the Washington Hospital Center with the first lady to visit victims of the plane crash at the Pentagon.
Bush made a round of calls to world leaders to receive condolences and seek support for the United States as it struggles to recover from the most devastating terrorist attack in its history.
<ka-20>Bush called Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson and Prime Ministers Junichiro Koizumi of Japan and Silvio Berlusconi of Italy.<ka0>
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the calls were part of Bush's effort to assemble an international coalition against terrorism.
 Meanwhile, Congress moved with uncommon speed toward approving $40 billion to combat terrorism and recover from the attacks, double what Bush requested.
Lawmakers also seemed to be nearing agreement on another measure that would back the use of "necessary and appropriate force" by Bush against the people responsible for the attacks. House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., said the House could consider that bill as early as today.
<ka-10>Hastert said the two sides agreed to drop language opposed by some lawmakers that would also have approved use of force by Bush to "deter and pre-empt any related future acts of terrorism or aggression against the United States." Opponents said that would have gone too far in eliminating Congress' role in future incidents.<ka0>
Leaders were hoping to push the spending measure through the House as early as today, with the Senate to follow. A Saturday session was looking likely.
An eleventh-hour disagreement, in which White House officials sought fewer congressional restraints on spending much of the money, dashed leaders' hopes of completing the measure yesterday.
Lawmakers from New York< cm - where the brunt of the casualties and damage occurred when the World Trade Center was obliterated ->had sought a commitment for $20 billion to aid the state's recovery.
Instead, the bill's final version would require that at least half the $40 billion aid victims and their families, and pay for recovery efforts. That money would most likely be spent in New York, Virginia and Pennsylvania, where Tuesday's fourth hijacked airliner crashed.
In broadly worded language, the $40 billion would go to attack victims; costs by federal and local governments for the rescue, cleanup and rebuilding efforts; and improved security for transportation systems.
It could also be used "to counter, investigate or prosecute domestic or international terrorism" and for "supporting national security" - which could give Bush wide leeway to use funds to strike back at terrorists and their supporters.
Participants said completion of the unity bill could go into next week because of the age-old jealously between the two branches of government over the power to wage war. One of the stickiest points was proposed White House language putting Congress on record behind a Bush use of force in response to the attacks and any future incidents, said aides from both parties who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"We are a co-equal branch of government, and we need to make sure we've thought it through carefully," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss.
In 1964, Congress approved the Gulf of Tonkin resolution authorizing President Johnson "to take all necessary measures" to protect U.S. forces and prevent aggression. Johnson and subsequent presidents used that resolution to wage the Vietnam War, to the regret of many lawmakers.
The Constitution gives the president, as commander in chief, authority to wage war while leaving Congress the power to declare war. Lawmakers of both parties widely support empowering the president to retaliate against the terrorists, but are leery of giving Bush open-ended power.
Also yesterday, the House voted 418-0 yesterday to give families of terrorist attack victims tax breaks normally reserved for casualties in war zones. The bill was expected to sail through the Senate.
The measure would forgive 2001 income taxes for all victims of the attacks and effectively cut in half any estate tax. It would also make federal disaster benefits tax-free and ensure that no tax applies to payments from airlines to families of passengers killed in the four crashes.
There was no immediate official estimate of the bill's cost.
House Republicans also announced plans to proceed as early as next week with a broader economic stimulus plan focused on cuts in the capital-gains tax on investments and business tax incentives.
The Treasury Department is working on administrative tax-relief measures related to the attacks, including a two-week delay in transportation tax deposits made by airlines. Other steps affecting business and individuals could be announced soon.
The House also voted 413-0 to expedite payments of $150,000 to $180,000 to families of police, firefighters and other public safety officers who died or suffered catastrophic injury while responding to the attacks. The bill would speed up a process that frequently takes months.
 The Senate also agreed late last night to broaden the nation's wiretapping laws, making crimes involving terrorism a reason for tapping into telephones and computers for the first time.
That provision was added by voice to a bill providing $42 billion for the Commerce, Justice and State departments for next year. The bill was approved 97-0.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 16, 2001


End of Document