'IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER' DOES JUSTICE TO TIRED GENRE
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
January 21, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: DayBreak-Calendar; Pg. B3
Length: 546 words
Byline: By Sean P. Means THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body

*** 1/2 In the Name of the Father A scorching portrayal of injustice, based on a true case.
One of the most shopworn heroic figures in the Hollywood grab-bag is the man wrongfully accused of a crime.
Director Jim Sheridan ("My Left Foot") breathes fresh life into that old cliche with "In the Name of the Father," a movie made all the more frightening and urgent because it's true.
The film is based on Proved Innocent, the autobiography of Gerry Conlon (played by Daniel Day-Lewis), a hippie and petty thief in Belfast at the height of "The Troubles" between the British military and the Irish Republican Army. When one of Gerry's minor crimes sets off a riot and ticks off both the British and the IRA, Gerry's long-suffering dad, Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite), ships him off to London.
Conlon and an old classmate move into a squatters' tenement with some hippies, but are forced out on the street. As it happens, the one night he spends homeless is Oct. 5, 1974 -- the night the IRA blows up a pub in the London suburb of Guildford, killing five and injuring 75.
Even more unlucky for Conlon is the enactment, two days earlier, of the Prevention of Terrorism Act -- which let British police hold suspects seven days without charges. The police used those broad powers, the movie says, to threaten and torture Conlon and the others. "I'm going to shoot your da," one cop tells Conlon, who breaks down and signs a blank confession.
With those confessions and flimsy evidence, the government tries the Guildford Four for murder, with a trial that borders on the ridiculous (when the prosecution refers to these space cases as "the elite of the IRA," the first reaction is to chuckle). But it's enough for the jury, which convicts Conlon, his classmate and two others. The jury also sends seven others, including Giuseppe, to prison on conspiracy charges.
While the Conlons suffer in prison (the Brits there hate the Irish, too), they begin to reconcile for all the years of anger and disappointment as father and son. Meanwhile, a human-rights lawyer (Emma Thompson) works, against all odds, to appeal the case.
Sheridan invests this straightforward story with rich detail, from the tacky '70s clothing to the squalor of the British prisons. He also convincingly re-creates the hostility that rises like steam from the Belfast streets.
Though Sheridan (who co-wrote the screenplay with Terry George) shows an obvious bias about the innocence of the Guildford Four, he doesn't take sides over "The Troubles" so easily. He may show the British police as brutes, but he also depicts the IRA as misguided terrorists. "The ends justify the means" is as wrongheaded in either camp.
Day-Lewis gives a full-blooded performance, letting loose with all the anger and emotion that he repressed in "The Age of Innocence." Postlethwaite is also wonderful as a man trying to hold his family together even when in prison. Thompson is fine in her underwritten role.
"In the Name of the Father" (rated R for language and the violence of bombings and riots) has been pilloried by conservative British newspapers, which accused the filmmakers of condoning terrorism. But the film does just the opposite -- it is a searing indictment of violence and injustice, whether carried out by the IRA or Scotland Yard.

Graphic

 
Pete Postlethwaite, left, Daniel Day-Lewis portray father, son falsely imprisoned for terrorism in "In the Name of the Father."

Load-Date: April 14, 1995


End of Document