'IT COULD HAPPEN HERE!' Ray: Be alert for Kenya-type mall terror
Daily News (New York)
December 11, 2013 Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 526 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA and BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


STRESSING A spike in global terrorism, outgoing NYPD Commissioner Raymond Kelly warned Tuesday that another attack - on a "soft target" like a mall - could happen here if crimefighters let their guard down.
Kelly, speaking at the 30th annual NYPD Shield conference with private security leaders, noted that in 2012 alone, terrorists carried out 8,500 attacks worldwide, a 69% increase from 2011.
He said the bloodshed resulted in 15,500 deaths, an 89% jump in a single year.
"More than ever this is a time for vigilance, not complacency," said Kelly.
With 16 terror plots targeting New York City foiled since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, including six since 2009, Kelly said the city remains "squarely in the cross hairs of the terrorists."
To underscore the threat, NYPD brass dissected the Sept. 21 terrorist attack in Kenya, in which 67 people were slaughtered in a shopping mall.
An NYPD analysis of the carnage at the Westgate mall in Nairobi served as a cautionary tale, particularly at a time when holiday shoppers are filling New York stores.
"It . . . clearly illustrates that armed assaults by terrorists on 'soft' targets such as a shopping mall are a simple, effective and easy-to-copy tactic," stated the report, which was shared with conferencegoers Tuesday.
At least four members of the Al Qaeda-linked Al Shabab terror group, armed with hand grenades, AK-47 assault rifles and each carrying 240 rounds of ammunition, seized the mall with little resistance.
The report pointed out miscommunication by cops and military resulted in one friendly-fire death and likely aided the terrorists' escape. Bodies of the attackers have not been recovered, the report said.
"Poor coordination and lack of effective communication between police and military commanders resulted in the military troops firing on members of the police tactical team, killing one officer and wounding the team commander," according to the report.
Much of the chaos resulted from plainclothes cops and armed civilians making "identification as 'friend or foe' extremely difficult for other armed first responders," the report said.
"This attack also illustrates the need for early aggressive engagement," said Lt. Kevin Yorke of the NYPD Intelligence Division. Yorke was sent to Nairobi to glean information from the attack.
"Uniformed cops waited over two hours before the police tactical team entered the building," he said. The Somalia-based Al Shabab group claimed responsibility, saying the attack was prompted by Kenya's decision to send troops into Somalia.
The NYPD is so concerned about a copycat attack in New York that it held a simulation drill last month at the Kings Plaza Mall in Brooklyn.
Rebecca Weiner, a top intelligence analyst for the NYPD, said another big concern is home-grown terrorism.
"This means that New Yorkers who seek to play a role in the global jihadi conflict now have a wide range of destinations of choice that they're taking advantage of," Weiner said. "At the same time, they don't have to leave their neighborhoods. Al Qaeda's message, its messengers and its instructions to mobilize to violence are readily available and being graciously consumed online."

Graphic

 
Woman carries a child to safety in Kenyan mall massacre in September. Rifle-toting thug was part of organized Kenya slaughter that top cop Raymond Kelly (below) says could be exported. PHOTOS BY REUTERS

Load-Date: December 11, 2013


End of Document