'JihadJane' pleads not guilty to terrorism charges
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 19, 2010 Friday
CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B02
Length: 291 words
Byline: By Derrick Nunnally

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


In a quick hearing in a crowded federal courtroom, Colleen "JihadJane" LaRose of Pennsburg pleaded not guilty yesterday to terrorism charges.
LaRose, 46, was in the courthouse in Philadelphia just 21/2 minutes for arraignment on charges that she joined a plot by militant Muslims abroad to kill a Swedish artist.
Wearing tight braids in her dirty-blond hair and a green jail uniform, LaRose appeared to pay little notice to the capacity crowd, though defense lawyer Mark Wilson later said she had been smiling slightly.
She delivered her only utterance of the appearance, "Not guilty," in a strong, raspy voice.
U.S. Magistrate Judge Lynne A. Sitarski set a May 3 trial date for LaRose and ordered her to stay in jail, where she has been since she was arrested in October getting off a plane at Philadelphia International Airport.
LaRose, who called herself "JihadJane" and "Fatima LaRose" in scores of online postings avowing hatred for U.S. policies toward Muslims, is accused of stealing an ex-boyfriend's passport and aiding the plot of a group of Islamic dissidents in Europe to kill Lars Vilks, who depicted Muhammad with the body of a dog in 2007.
The charges were briefly summarized in a formal courtroom reading yesterday, but LaRose offered no immediate response.
After the arraignment, Wilson said LaRose had "some awareness" of her global notoriety, but he declined to describe her reaction.
Wilson also declined to discuss LaRose's dealings with federal investigators. Two people close to the investigation have said she confessed to the assassination plot.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Jennifer Arbittier Williams could not be reached for comment after the arraignment.
Contact staff writer Derrick Nunnally at 610-313-8212 or dnunnally@phillynews.com.

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: March 19, 2010


End of Document