'Justice has been done'
The Bismarck Tribune
May 3, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8
Length: 355 words
Body


Osama bin Laden was killed Sunday by a U.S. assault team in Pakistan.
"Justice has been done," President Barack Obama told the American people from the East Room of the White House late in the evening.
The terrorist behind the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, bin Laden was responsible for the deaths of thousands of Americans that day and thousands more in the nearly 10 years of the ensuing War on Terrorism. Bringing him to justice was the righteous reason U.S. forces first put boots on the ground in Afghanistan.
Among those who served in Afghanistan have been many North Dakotans, in the National Guard and on active duty. It has been our fight, too.
Eliminating Osama had become a long-term, grim U.S. goal, and now it's justice achieved by the American forces.
We salute those who chased down and made possible this fatal strike against al-Qaida's leader.
He had become a ghost. Most people believed he was hiding in a cave in the rugged mountains on either side of the Afghanistan-Pakistan border. He was not.
Bin Laden was found living in a $1-million mansion, inside a heavily fortified compound in an affluent suburb of Abbottabad, an hour drive north of the capital of Pakistan.
Wherever he was, we were going to find him.
Many questions remain about how bin Laden came to be in Abbottabad and who was hiding him. They need to be answered.
And there are still al-Qaida cells operating internationally. They need to be eliminated. The fight against terrorism needs to continue.
The killing of bin Laden takes place in a changed world. The people of Egypt, Tunisia, Libya, Syria and other countries in that part of the Muslim world came to see home-grown dictators as the enemy and not the U.S., as bin Laden instructed. It's a pro-democracy Arab Spring, and bin Laden's fanaticism had lost relevance in the Muslim world.
North Dakotans' Midwestern sensibilities make it exceedingly difficult to comprehend the motivations behind terrorism.
However, we know in our hearts and minds that it's evil and that we must stand against it, and that justice must be done.
Taking Osama bin Laden's life was just.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document