'Lone wolf' charged in New York City plot
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
November 21, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 522 words
Byline: wire reports
Body


NEW YORK ? An "al-Qaida sympathizer" who plotted to bomb police and post offices in New York City and to target returning troops has been arrested on numerous terrorism-related charges, city officials said on Sunday. 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced at a news conference the arrest on Saturday of Jose Pimentel of Manhattan, "a 27-year-old al-Qaida sympathizer" who the mayor said was motivated by terrorist propaganda and resentment of U.S. troops in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
The mayor said Pimentel, a U.S. citizen originally from the Dominican Republic, was "plotting to bomb police patrol cars and also postal facilities as well as targeted members of our armed services returning from abroad." 
Authorities have no evidence that Pimentel was working with anyone else, the mayor added. 
"He appears to be a total lone wolf," the mayor said. "He was not part of a larger conspiracy emanating from abroad." 
Instead, Bloomberg said, Pimentel typifies the threat FBI Director Robert Mueller has warned about as U.S. forces erode the ability of terrorists to carry out large-scale attacks. 
Pimentel, also known as Muhammad Yusuf, was accused of having an explosive substance that he planned to use against others and property to terrorize the public. 
The charges accuse him of conspiracy going back at least to October 2010 and include first-degree criminal possession of a weapon as a crime of terrorism and soliciting support for a terrorist act. He was to be arraigned last night. 
Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly identified the suspect as a follower of Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical American-born cleric who rose to become a top figure in al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. Pimental allegedly tried to contact al-Awlaki directly, but never got a response. 
Last August, the suspect allegedly decided to carry out the bomb plot. He "jacked up his speed" when al-Awlaki was killed in a U.S. drone strike Sept. 30 in Yemen, according to the police commissioner. 
"This is just another example of New York City because we are an iconic city ... this is a city that people (who) would want to take away our freedoms gravitate to and focus on," Bloomberg said. 
The New York Police Department's Intelligence Division was involved in the arrest. Kelly said Pimentel spent most of his years in Manhattan and lived about five years in Schenectady. 
According to charging documents in the case, Pimentel maintained a website that included a link to an article in a magazine called Inspire that "is disseminated by al-Qaida with the specific goal of inspiring radical Muslims throughout the world to engage in acts of violence against the West." 
The Inspire article is titled, "Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom." 
In the court documents, an investigator relates how he reviewed recordings of Pimentel talking to a confidential informant about making and detonating his homemade bombs and video recordings from the informant's apartment. 
The video shows Pimentel following directions from the article, scraping the heads from matches, collecting the powder in a bowl and creating an ignition device using Christmas lights, according to authorities. 

Load-Date: November 21, 2011


End of Document