'Militarized urbanism' chokes U.S. cities; Since 9/11, urban areas have been plagued by Jersey barriers and a regrettable bunker mentality
USA TODAY
October 18, 2011 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 970 words
Byline: Julia Vitullo-Martin
Body


After the terrorist attacks of 9/11, prominent commentators argued that in an age of urban terrorism, tall buildings should become a thing of the past -- that cities should decentralize themselves and people should be encouraged to spread out around the country. New York magazine columnist Kurt Andersen contended that the Freedom Tower should be abandoned, calling it "a provocation to ambitious terrorists around the world."
Of course, Americans made their own decisions and -- contrary to all predictions -- moved to cities instead of away from them. Demand for living and working in tall buildings soared, and the race by developers to build the world's tallest resumed.
This is as it should be.
Indeed, a week after the nation observed the 10th anniversary of 9/11, developer Larry Silverstein announced that his 7 World Trade Center, the only tower at Ground Zero to be finished, had been fully leased. The rents -- at a high of $80 per square foot -- proved that he had been right all along to persist in building.
'Glamour, gumption and dollars'
Ignoring  Andersen and all other prophets of doom, Cond Nast last spring leased 30% of the  Freedom Tower (now renamed 1 WTC), thereby promising to bring unmatched glamour, gumption and dollars downtown -- having a decade before successfully rejuvenated the Times Square neighborhood they're now leaving.
It wasn't just New York that was warned off big buildings. Chicago developer J. Paul Beitler, who in the 1990s had tried to build the world's largest building in the Loop, told the Chicago Tribune in 2001 that such a building would be a liability after 9/11: "Instead of being icons representing man's finest hour and business' highest achievement, they are now being viewed as targets in fanatics' gun sights."
But his town of Chicago -- the nation's first city of great architecture -- correctly ignored him and launched a local building boom instead. Its new Class A towers include the Trump International Hotel & Tower, which at 92 stories and  1,389 feet became the second-tallest building in the country in 2009, after Chicago's 1,450-foot  Willis Tower.
Yet there remains a problem. And that is how to save our cities from what's called "militarized urbanism," which is the drive to aggressively -- even belligerently -- secure designated neighborhoods or buildings in order to strengthen control by owners and official authorities. We all want our cities to be safe. But we don't want their beauty, energy and street life destroyed in the process.
Former New York police deputy commissioner Michael Sheehan is probably the most prominent of the few security experts who understand the dilemma. In his book Crush the Cell: How to Defeat Terrorism without Terrorizing Ourselves, he argues that effective counter-terrorism policy needs to balance security measures with good city planning. He writes, "During my tenure at NYPD, I spent considerable time denying requests for Jersey barriers, ugly concrete planters, and bollards proposed by managers and security directors of Manhattan properties."
In the years since 2006, when Sheehan left the NYPD, Manhattan has become jammed with Jersey barriers. At the opening of the U.N. General Assembly last month, many important or landmarked buildings on the East Side -- or any places delegates might go, for that matter -- were surrounded by huge Jersey barriers stamped "NYPD." Instead of looking like the stylish, assured world capital that it is, New York had the appearance of a bunker, made even worse by the horrendous traffic congestion caused by the barriers.
Our national fortress
Washington, D.C., a once graciously planned and welcoming city, is another fortress city. It has been subject since the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing to ugly measures that evoke fear rather than safety, as The Washington Post's Fred Hiatt charged in a column called "Capital Eyesore." Chain-link fences, hostile guard booths, bollards and Jersey barriers disfigure iconic neighborhoods. Major streets have been permanently closed and others shut off, even to pedestrians, when a head of state or important dignitary is staying nearby.
Chicago Mayor Richard Daley successfully fought some of the most destructive security proposals but was unable to prevent the federal government from disfiguring the beautiful public space in front of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe's federal building, first with Jersey barriers and now with huge granite bollards. Indeed, the federal government has spent millions of taxpayer dollars defacing public spaces.
The good news is that push-back from a combination of citizens and professional designers, planners and architects is forcing changes in how the federal government interprets its legislative and regulatory mandates. The National Capital Planning Commission's report sets out strategies for making buildings attractively safe. And it cites successes, such as Washington's Ronald Reagan Building & International Trade Center, which despite strict security has a lively food court in a pretty patio and free Wi-Fi that attracts both tourists and locals.
Paradoxically, the new big buildings are probably the safest precisely because they can be designed and engineered to the highest possible protective standards. As the eminent Dutch architect Jan Willem van Kuilenburg of Monolab told Radio Netherlands Worldwide last month,  clients today have put security front and center.  Renowned for spectacularly modernist designs, he noted that 9/11 has "become embedded into our thought processes, and it will never leave."
That's as it should be. And as we face the future, we must keep building, restoring, expanding and cherishing our cities -- without defacing them.
Julia Vitullo-Martin, a New Yorker, is a senior fellow at the Regional Plan Association and director of RPA's Center for Urban Innovation. 

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Alejandro Gonzalez, USA TODAY (Illustration)

Load-Date: October 18, 2011


End of Document