'MISTAKE' ON IRAQ IS CAMPAIGN FODDER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 17, 1992, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 525 words
Byline: Leslie Gelb
Body


WASHINGTON Did President Bush's policy toward Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait involve law-breaking? Maybe. And maybe some official cover-up afterward. In any event, it would take far too long for an independent counsel to get to the bottom of the matter, and the results would be problematic.  Was the policy merely a mistake, as Bush officials are wont to say? This remarkably generous description would be laughed off by Republicans if Democrats had committed even remotely similar sins. Was it a blunder?  Yes. And of such proportions that Bill Clinton would be crazy not to drag the issue into the campaign.  This much is already clear from the previously secret documents put on display in Congress: The Bush administration knew or had good reason to believe that Saddam Hussein was involved with nuclear weapons, terrorism, genocide with chemical weapons against the Kurds and illegal diversion of loans to buy arms. Yet in the face of all this, Bush & Co. consistently protected him from an increasingly suspicious Congress.  Protect Saddam to what end? To moderate his behavior, the officials say and said. To glimpse how zany this was, to see what they saw as acceptable behavior, look at what they knew or suspected about Saddam from 1988 on: They had good reason to believe Saddam had a secret nuclear weapons program. They knew of its longstanding effort to acquire weapons-grade uranium, and that in 1990 it tried to smuggle in U.S.-made nuclear capacitors.
Bush aides also had definite information about an Iraqi missile program with capabilities well beyond Scuds. Many officials argued that these missiles, given their potential accuracy, made sense only as carriers of a nuclear payload. Some officials further believed Iraq had been diverting loans from the Banco Lavoro to finance this effort.  Administration officials knew Saddam was still engaged in terrorism. In a secret memo in late 1988, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy wrote that the Iraqis had ''curbed their support for Palestinian terrorism, while remaining willing to use international terrorism themselves against their opponents.'' Officials reaffirmed their decision to remove Iraq from the list of terrorist countries.  Officials also knew that Saddam was trying to exterminate Kurds and using chemical weapons to do so. A State Department memo of November 1988 said ''upward of 500 Kurdish villages have been depopulated. . . .'' Knowing or at least worrying about all this, Bush nonetheless approved new farm credits and dual-use technology sales for Iraq and opposed congressionally imposed economic sanctions. And in July 1990, as Saddam's forces were poised to attack Kuwait, he opposed a Senate move to bar further loans to Iraq. As bizarre, on Nov. 16, 1990, with 500,000 U.S. troops already in the Persian Gulf, he vetoed a bill that would have forced him to impose sanctions on states that use chemical weapons.  Just imagine what Bush, Ronald Reagan and other hard-nosed Republicans would be saying today if ''President Dukakis'' or soft-headed Democrats had made any such ''mistake.'' Just imagine.  Copyright 1992 New York Times News Service

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document