'Modern' comedy of terrors
Daily News (New York)
October 19, 2012 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NOW; Pg. 54
Length: 405 words
Byline: BY JOE DZIEMIANOWICZ
Body


'Modern -Terrorism, or They Who Want -to Kill Us and How We Learn to Love Them'
3 Stars
Second Stage Theatre,
305 W. 43rd St. Through Nov. 4. Tickets: $75; (212) 246-4422
It takes steel you-know-whats to write a comedy about terrorists determined to blow up the Empire State Building and NASDAQ.
So give Jon Kern some credit for his intriguing but incomplete play (deep breath) - "Modern Terrorism, or They Who Want to Kill Us and How We Learn to Love Them." Yes, the -title is a nod to -"Dr. Strangelove," another satire of paranoid times.
The play opened Thursday at Second Stage in the shadow of an all-too-genuine and unfunny tale of an Osama-loving Bangladeshi martyr-wanna-be now unfolding in New York.
The action begins with Rahim (Utkarsh Ambudkar, terrific), an adorable Pakistani guy, standing in his shabby Brooklyn living room with a bomb in his underwear. He grouses that it's killing his junk.
Anarchy and suicide missions aren't easy.
That goes double when you're part of a fundamentalist band of bumbling twentysomethings that includes Yalda (Nitya Vidyasagar), a Pakistani--American, and Qala (William Jackson Harper), from Somalia.
There's also Jerome (Steven Boyer, an invaluable comic ace), an upstairs slacker neighbor drawn into the plot. They could all be called "The Cell That Couldn't Blitz Straight."
Kern, a New Yorker who volunteered downtown after 9/11 and now writes for "The Simpsons," began writing "Modern Terrorism" in 2010. He was inspired by a botched Times Square bombing. The script won the Laurents/Hatcher Award for emerging writers, worth $150,000.
Kern can write zingers, no doubt. Act I is all sitcom rhythms and setups, right down to the unlocked apartment door - think "Friends" and "Seinfeld" - that gets Jerome involved. Act II gets more intense as the violence escalates. One bloody spatter pattern recalls the terror-themed "The Lieutenant of Inishmore."
For all the laughs and excellent performances, the play feels flabby. Even the talented director Peter DuBois ("Sons of the Prophet") can't keep it from dragging.
A more nagging issue is the lack of substantive impact. Sure, Kern makes points: Terrorists are just people caught up in myths of good and evil; neighbors are apt to lend a cup of sugar or a bomb part; the face of fear isn't what you think it is. But together they add up to something less than the sum of the parts.
"Modern Terrorism" just isn't as explosive as it wants to be.

Graphic

 
Charged material: Utkarsh Ambudkar and Nitya Vidyasagar play Brooklyn terrorists in a timely satire.

Load-Date: October 19, 2012


End of Document