'MOST WANTED' TERRORIST IS ARRESTED 'CARLOS THE JACKAL' RETURNED BY SUDAN FOR TRIAL IN FRANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
AUGUST 16, 1994, TUESDAY,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 822 words
Byline: ALAN RIDING, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The international terrorist known as Carlos, an almost-mythical figure blamed for a string of bombings and killings across Western Europe in the 1970s and 1980s, was arrested in Sudan on Sunday and flown secretly to France yesterday.
France's interior minister, Charles Pasqua, said the 44-year-old extremist, a native of Venezuela whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, would go on trial for crimes committed in France. ''He is one of the most well known and most dangerous criminals in the world,'' Pasqua said with evident satisfaction.
Although Carlos was not believed to be currently engaged in terrorist activities, his arrest was a dramatic coup for the French security services, which along with intelligence agencies from several Western countries, have been on his trail for the past 20 years.
Carlos's most daring action involved the kidnapping of 11 oil ministers attending an OPEC meeting in Vienna in December 1975. Three people died in the incident, but Carlos and his group were flown to Algeria and released.
At different times, his name was linked to urban guerrilla bands in Japan, Germany, Spain, and Ireland, but he was most closely associated with Arab terrorist groups. Until the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, he was also reportedly protected at various times by East Germany, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
Indeed, such was the mystery surrounding Carlos that he was often credited with terrorist actions that he did not commit, like the killing of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich. Carlos himself, a master of disguise, seemed to take pride in the fact that he repeatedly outsmarted the Western police.
Most recently, he was said to be living in semi-retirement in Damascus, Syria, with his wife, Magdalena Kopp, a former member of the German Baader- Meinhoff gang who spent three years in prison in France in the early 1980s on charges of possessing explosives.
Pasqua said that French intelligence officers were tipped off early this year that Carlos had entered Sudan under a false name with a false diplomatic passport. After this information was confirmed, it was conveyed to Sudanese authorites with a request for his arrest.
Pasqua said that Carlos arrived at the Villacoublay military airport near Paris at 10 a.m. yesterday.
After two hours of interrogation in the headquarters of the Direction of Surveillance of the Territory, France's counterintelligence agency, Carlos was taken to La Sante prison in Paris. He is expected to appear before France's main anti-terrorist investigating judge, Jean-Louis Bruguiere, today.
Sudan officials said the decision to extradite him was evidence that it did not support international terrorism. ''In doing this, the government of Sudan is fulfilling its obligations to the international community in fighting terrorism and fighting against terrorists,'' he said.
France's counterintelligence service has long had a special interest in capturing Carlos because he is accused of killing two of its agents as they were about to arrest him in Paris in June 1975. For this crime, which he admitted in an interview with a Paris-based Arab-language magazine in 1979, Carlos was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment in 1992.
An arrest warrant was also issued for his involvement in a car bombing in Paris in April, 1982, in which one person was killed and 70 wounded. Carlos has been blamed for other attacks in France around that time, including the bombing of a train in March, 1982, that killed five people, and the bombing of Saint-Charles railroad station in Marseilles in December, 1983, in which 6 people were killed and 80 injured.
Pasqua said terrorist actions organized or carried out by Carlos had killed 15 people and wounded 200 others in France alone. ''Around the world, Carlos himself claims responsibility for the deaths of 83 people,'' he said, adding that several other countries might want to bring charges against him.
With Pasqua refusing to provide many details of the operation, however, there was a flurry of speculation here as to why Sudan's government had agreed to hand over Carlos and whether France had made any secret deal with Khartoum to obtain his extradition.
Some experts suggested that Carlos was handed over simply because he had outlived his usefulness. ''He was an historical anachronism whose ideology does not fit into any present-day form of state-sponsored terrorism,'' Vincent Cannistraro, formerly chief of counterterrorism at the Central Intelligence Agency, said. ''He was of use to no one. He was expendable.''
Cannistraro said Carlos was ''a guest'' of Syria's president, Hafez Assad, until about nine months ago, when France, which had discovered his whereabouts, began pressing for his arrest.
''He was even too much of an embarrassment for Assad,'' the former CIA official said. ''When Assad expels you, you're gone.'' Carlos reportedly went briefly to Yemen before moving to Sudan, he added.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Associated Press: French police say this photograph is of ''Carlos the Jackal'' last week in Khartoum, Sudan.

Load-Date: October 14, 1994


End of Document