'NEW' YASSER ARAFAT HAS SAME OLD GOALS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 22, 1989, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 539 words
Byline: Charles Krauthammer COLUMN
Body


WASHINGTON Acolytes of the ''new'' Yasser Arafat - the moderate one who, when speaking English, renounces terrorism and recognizes Israel - are puzzled by his statement in Riyadh on Jan 1: ''Whoever thinks of stopping the intifada before it achieves its goals, I will give him 10 bullets in the chest.'' What was he doing threatening to kill Palestinian moderates, like Bethlehem Mayor Elias Freij, who had proposed a truce in the Palestinian uprising against Israel?  Isn't that the ''old'' Arafat?  There is a long history of Palestinians killing their moderates. The new PLO, the one that renounced terrorism in Geneva, was supposed to have given up such tactics. Moreover, the new PLO was said in Geneva to have recognized Israel's right to exist. Why then in their Arabic communications have top Palestinian leaders repeatedly stressed that the new PLO program is in fact an implementation of the 1974 ''phase'' program for the destruction of Israel?  The conundrums that now face the Arafat revisionists are in fact not conundrums at all. There really never was a revision. His goal was not peace but U.S. recognition. And his audience was not the United States, but the West Bank.  West Bank Palestinians have been rioting and dying for over a year. They want to see that sacrifice turned into some tangible political gain on the ground. They are, however, afraid to make direct approaches to the Israelis, because that infringes on the PLO franchise as ''the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people,'' and the PLO punishes poachers with death.
After a year of the uprising, Arafat was under great pressure to translate the intifada into some political gain. That is why he called the PNC meeting in Algiers to declare a PLO state. But West Bankers saw that sop for the empty gesture it was. Arafat needed American recognition of the PLO and thus implicit legitimization of the PLO demand for a separate Palestinian state.  Hence his little charade in Stockholm and Geneva in which he flirted with the magic words (recognizing Israel and renouncing terrorism) and finally uttered them at a Geneva press conference scripted by the State Department.  That gave him his American breakthrough.  He did read the State Department's words. But there has been no real turn in his position. He has made that cl ear to his real audience, the West Bankers, by his resorting to terror threats against people like Freij and by his saying not a word to contradict PLO leaders who have been explaining all of these moves as an implementation of the phase program for the ''liberation'' of all of Palestine.  Arafat was obliged to appease his West Bank constituents by delivering them something. He delivered the United States. The cost? A few words delivered in English, not repeated, contradicted by future actions and denied by his aides, have been understood by the Palestinians and by Israelis - though not yet by Americans - as a tactical triumph of the first order: something for nothing.  A good deal for him. A bad deal for us. Arafat has now accepted an invitation to address a conference in Washington. James Baker will have to decide whether to grant him a visa. George Shultz was right: Terrorists are not welcome.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document