'Obsession' undid US terrorism policy
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 22, 1987, Thursday


Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 1
Length: 624 words
Byline: Warren Richey, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body


White House officials became ''obsessed'' with gaining the release of American hostages in Lebanon and ignored serious national-security interests in secretly selling arms to Iran, according to the new chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Sen. David L. Boren (D) of Oklahoma says the initial linkage between selling arms and releasing hostages may have begun ''unconsciously'' at the White House but that it developed into an arms-for-hostages deal.
White House officials have maintained that arms sales to Iran were undertaken in an effort to support the emergence of ''moderate'' elements in the Islamic Republic and were never intended as a direct swap of arms for hostages. Some members of Congress question, however, whether any moderates really exist in Iran and whether the Iranians simply duped US officials, promising hostages while all the time receiving US arms badly needed for Iran's war with Iraq.
''Even though the President to this good day may believe and sincerely think that he was trying to (improve relations with Iran) … (administration officials) were so focused on the release of these hostages that they forgot to think what will happen if we undermine the credibility of our whole antiterrorism policy,'' Senator Boren says.
Boren, who sits on the special Senate committee investigating the Iran-contra affair, made his comments after speaking at a terrorism conference here.
Attorney General Edwin Meese III, speaking earlier at the same conference, urged US allies to act with ''determination and courage'' in helping to fight international terrorism.
The attorney general's remarks appear to be intended as encouragement to West Germany following reports that a second West German businessman was taken hostage in Beirut. The abduction is believed to be in retaliation for a pending agreement by West Germany to extradite to the US a Lebanese man suspected of taking part in the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847. The Saturday kidnapping of West German businessman Rudolf Cordes has also been linked to the extradition.
The Justice Department has asked that the suspected hijacker, Muhammad Ali Hamadi, be turned over to American authorities to stand trial in the US.
Mr. Meese stressed the importance of ''political will'' in West Germany and the US to stand up to threats of terrorist retaliation.
''Terrorists cannot be granted immunity simply because they threaten the loss of innocent life,'' Meese said. ''We have a moral obligation to other potential hostages … not to capitulate to hostage-takers. To do so would only encourage many more incidents and many more threats to human life.''
The comments by Boren and Meese come as the administration is struggling to reestablish US credibility as a world leader in antiterrorist efforts.
In a speech Tuesday, Vice-President George Bush sought to reaffirm US policy. He said the administration has not abandoned its position of refusing to grant concessions to terrorists. But he also stressed, ''There is a very thin and delicate line between talking with terrorists and negotiating with terrorists.''
Boren says the American government and news media tend to exaggerate the significance of terrorist attacks and kidnappings. ''We have to be very watchful that we don't allow what is a serious incident and a human tragedy to become a national-security crisis.''
He adds that the White House fixation on the hostage issue may have made it even more difficult to resolve the standoff. ''You cannot deal effectively with a hostage-type situation or other terrorist incident if you let the people on the other side know that you are so obsessed with the situation that you are willing to pay any price to get it ended. You almost doom your actions to failure,'' he says.

Graphic

 
Picture 1, Boren: a tragedy is not a crisis FILE/AP; Picture 2, Meese: determination, courage, AP


End of Document