'Room' Explores a Woman's Psychic War on Terrorism; Movie Review
The New York Times 
June 28, 2006 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MOVIES
Length: 319 words
Byline: NATHAN LEE
Highlight: A Texas woman flees homeland insecurity for a New York vision quest in this acute, resourceful and bracingly ambitious debut film. 
Body


The towers have fallen, the war is on, God is dead, and it's Christmas in Texas. Julia (Cyndi Williams) works the late shift at Paradise Bingo. Racked by migraines and nightmares, she comes home to a short-tempered husband, a daughter who sneaks off at night, terror on the television and an insidious ambient hum. Visions of a large, empty loft creep into her consciousness; she collapses in a supermarket, crashes her car. 
And then one morning she wakes up, robs a safe and boards a plane at George Bush Intercontinental Airport. Destination: New York City. Motivation: to escape from the House of Anxiety and seek solace — or annihilation — in the "Room."
Written and directed by Kyle Henry, "Room" is an existential horror film, a parable of the war against terror being waged in Julia's psyche. A small-scale indie with bountiful ambitions, this resourceful debut ballasts a great deal of conceptual idiosyncrasy (simmering experimental flourishes erupt in a full-blown psychedelic set piece) with strict observations of personality, behavior and the textures of space. 
Ms. Williams's intense, single-minded performance is neatly proportioned to the complex location shooting, which deftly ranges from stagnant Houston suburbs to the plasma-screen apocalypse of Times Square to the labyrinthine mysteries of Brooklyn lofts.
Room
Opens today in Manhattan 
Written and directed by Kyle Henry; director of photography, P J Raval; edited by Pete Beaudreau; music by Fritz Robenalt; produced by Jesse Scolaro, Allen Bain and Darren Goldberg; released by the 7th Floor. At the Two Boots Pioneer Theater, 155 East Third Street, at Avenue A, East Village. Running time: 75 minutes. This film is not rated. 
WITH: Cyndi Williams (Julia Barker), Kenneth Wayne Bradley (Bobby Barker), Alexandra Kiester (Jules Barker), Hannah Nicholas (Nikki Barker), Jacqui Cross (Laveta), Marco Parella (Frank) and Gretchen Krich (Alex/Suzy). 

Load-Date: March 13, 2017


End of Document