'Secret evidence'
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 15, 1997, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1997 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 514 words
Body


In their zeal to protect U.S. citizens against acts of domestic terrorism,  such as the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings, President Clinton  and Congress passed the Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of  1996. Unfortunately, the legislation undermines some of the constitutional  rights that make America the free nation it is.
Nothing illustrates this dilemma better than the case involving Palestinian  refugee Mazen Al-Najjar, a 40-year-old, American-educated engineer who taught  Arabic part time at the University of South Florida in Tampa. He was not  rehired after his visa was not renewed.
TERRORISM
Al-Najjar has been in an Immigration and Naturalization Service holding  facility at the Manatee County Jail since four agents grabbed him from his  northeast Tampa home the morning of May 19. He has been denied bail based on  "secret evidence" said to connect him with the Islamic Jihad, a notorious  terrorist organization in the Middle East.
INS officials allege that the World and Islam Studies Enterprise, the USF  think tank that Al-Najjar managed, is a fund-raising front for terrorists and  that Al-Najjar is an Islamic Jihad shill. Troubles started for Al-Najjar and  others connected to WISE on Oct. 26, 1995, when the head of Palestine Islamic  Jihad was shot to death on the Mediterranean island of Malta. Days later,  Ramadan Shallah, who had been an instructor at USF and a member of WISE,  became the new leader of Islamic Jihad.
Authorities assumed they would find a terrorist cell at USF. But no  convincing evidence to support that suspicion has been made public. After an  internal investigation, USF President Betty Castor said: "Was there illegal  activity, subversive activity, terrorist activity? We don't have any evidence  of that."
Was USF's investigation incomplete? Were Castor's conclusions self-serving?  If the government possesses evidence that the USF investigation missed, it  isn't revealing it.
Yet Al-Najjar remains in jail. No formal charges have been brought against  him. He is being held under an unconstitutional provision of the  Anti-terrorism Act. The merit of the case notwithstanding, the anti-terrorism  legislation allows the government to use informant testimony or other forms of  secret evidence to imprison and deport legal immigrants suspected of terrorism  without letting the suspects cross-examine their accusers.
Remember, the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that aliens have the same rights  of due process that U.S. citizens enjoy. U.S. citizens should expect their  government to take all reasonable steps to protect them from terrorism, both  foreign and domestic. But officials have a responsibility to balance the need  for security with the obligation to protect the constitutional rights of  everyone.
If investigators have incriminating evidence against Al-Najjar, then let  him, his family and the rest of the nation see it. Either Al-Najjar should be  tried - with evidence of his activities in plain view - or he should be set  free. The U.S. Constitution calls for no less. He deserves no less.

Load-Date: August 15, 1997


End of Document