'SECURITY MOMS' MAY END PRESIDENTIAL GENDER GAP;
   POLLSTERS SAY MANY WOMEN WHO TYPICALLY VOTE DEMOCRATIC ARE FAVORING PRESIDENT BUSH BECAUSE OF THE TERRORISM THREAT.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 3, 2004 Sunday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2004 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. A6
Length: 615 words
Byline: Nancy Benac Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Cynthia Moore -- single mother, moderate Democrat -- is the living embodiment of one of Sen. John Kerry's biggest challenges in the presidential race. There are things she doesn't like about President Bush, she says, but the president will get her vote on Nov. 2 because she thinks he'll do a better job of protecting her two daughters.
"Terrorism is something that scares me," says Moore, 34, of Watkins Glen, N.Y. "I like the security of knowing that if I was to get on a plane with my little girls, we would be a lot safer." Kerry's strong performance in the first presidential debate did him no good with Moore -- her mind made up, she didn't even watch.
Moore is just one face behind polling numbers showing that Bush has made big strides among female voters in recent weeks. The Pew Research Center, for example, showed Bush and Kerry running about even among women in a poll taken Sept. 22-26, before the first of three presidential debates, compared with a 10-point advantage for Kerry in August.
Both campaigns are polling furiously this weekend to see how the first debate -- in which terrorism and the war in Iraq were front and center -- might have changed things.
Democracy Corps, a group led by Democratic pollster Stan Greenberg and strategist James Carville, said its survey of 1,318 likely voters who watched the debate showed that Kerry's favorable ratings rose by 15 points among college-educated women and 11 points among older women, two groups that had moved away from him since the Republican convention.
All sides agree that Kerry's election prospects are doomed if he doesn't regain ground with female voters, who tend to make up their minds later than men.
"It's just simply this: In order for Kerry to win, he's got to carry women," says Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew center.
Democratic pollster Doug Schoen, not affiliated with any campaign, sets the bar even higher: "If he doesn't win women by about 10 points, he will not be elected president."
Recent presidential elections have displayed a "gender gap" in which women, who make up about 52 percent of the electorate, lean more Democratic than do men. In 1996, President Clinton beat challenger Bob Dole by 16 points among women and broke even among men as he easily won re-election. In the neck-and-neck 2000 vote, Al Gore had an 11-point advantage over Bush among female voters while men favored Bush by about the same margin.
This time, the gender gap still exists, but the whole scale seems to have shifted in Bush's favor in recent weeks, in part simply because Kerry did more poorly across the board. An AP-Ipsos poll taken Sept. 20-22, for example, showed men favoring Bush by a 57-40 margin while women were about evenly split.
But the numbers also have given rise to speculation about a new bloc of voters known as "security moms," loosely defined as white, married women with children whose leanings in the race are tied to their concern about the impact of terrorism on their families.
Evidence of women's concern about terrorism is sprinkled throughout recent polling data, although men also attach substantial importance to the issue.
Pew, for example, found that 79 percent of women rated concern about terrorism as a top priority, compared with 72 percent of men. The center also found that women showed far greater interest than men in last month's siege at a school in Beslan, Russia, in which more than 330 people were killed, nearly half of them children.
The fact that women's support for Kerry has bounced around in recent polls shows there's still time for him to reclaim lost ground, says Kohut. Women account for up to two-thirds of undecided voters, according to Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.

Graphic

 
Richard Drew - Associated Press
Democratic presidential nominee Sen. John Kerry, his wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, left, and actress Uma Thurman, right, take part Sept. 20 in the Seventh Annual Redbook Mothers & Shakers awards luncheon in New York. "In order for Kerry to win, he's got to carry women," says Andrew Kohut of the Pew Research Center.

Load-Date: October 5, 2004


End of Document