'See something, tell someone,' ex-FBI director urges
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
September 22, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 459 words
Byline: Sara Israelsen-Hartley Deseret News
Body


 PROVO ? During his days as director of the FBI, William Webster remembers one phone tip about a group of joggers surrounding a van. "The person who called into the FBI thought what was unusual was that this group of joggers in jogging suits were all smoking," Webster said Wednesday night at Brigham Young University. 
"We thought that was significant enough and were able to get out and find that this group was engaged in terroristic activity. We confiscated the material and arrested those involved, all because one good citizen though it was strange enough that he'd tell somebody." Webster ? the only man to direct both the FBI and the CIA ? reminded the students that they have the same responsibility: "See something, tell someone." Increasing the spread of information is crucial to stopping terrorism, Webster said, adding that collaboration and communication has greatly improved since he led the FBI from 1978 to 1987 and the CIA from 1987 to 1991. He currently serves as chairman of the Homeland Security Advisory Council. The old motto "need to know," or keeping information to the fewest number of people, has been changed to "need to share," Webster said. That doesn't mean information is given out carelessly or to untrustworthy people, but rather is shared between federal and local and state agencies in counterterrorism efforts. "If you look at the track record in the last nine years, you have to say we must be doing something right," Webster said, referring to the post-9/11 world. The ongoing challenge for the intelligence community is finding the right security balance ? to know how much security is needed, supply it, explain it and have the support and understanding of the American people in the process, but not to over do it," Webster said. "Security is always too much until the day it's not enough." Webster commented that those who are concerned with the body scans in airports could opt instead for a more thorough pat down. Back in 1980, the United States experienced 100 terrorist incidents a year, so Webster made terrorism one of the FBI's priorities, to go along with organized crime, white-collar crime and foreign counterintelligence. Seven years later, when he left for the CIA, there were six incidents that year, he said. "We had to know where the problem was coming from and had to take appropriate action collectively and collaboratively," he said. "Cooperation is the most effective key." In closing, Webster praised the LDS community, from which many FBI agents come. "We have so many FBI agents with LDS backgrounds because (our) values are the same," he said. "Fidelity bravery and integrity, these are the tools by which we manage security and good intelligence and safety." e-mail: sisraelsen@desnews.com 

Load-Date: September 23, 2010


End of Document