'SEGWAY JEREMY' PLEADS GUILTY IN DARK WEB CASE; RYAN SAYS HE WANTED RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL TO COMMIT SUICIDE
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
January 11, 2020 Saturday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2020 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A4
Length: 455 words
Byline:  ED TRELEVEN  , etreleven@madison.com
Body


Jeremy Ryan, a recognized figure at Madison political protests for nearly the past decade, pleaded guilty Friday in federal court to a charge that he tried to buy prohibited radioactive material over the internet.
The hastily arranged plea hearing happened before U.S. District Judge James Peterson, about 10 days before Ryan was to stand trial on the charge, along with a terrorism-related charge that would be dismissed under a plea agreement.
The charge to which Ryan, 31, pleaded guilty was the same charge to which he nearly entered a guilty plea in August. A plea hearing at that point was derailed while Ryan's lawyers and government prosecutors said they continued to work on the deal.
Ryan is scheduled to be sentenced Feb. 12.
The charge carries a maximum prison sentence of 20 years, but under a plea agreement signed last year, Ryan would not serve any additional time beyond the time he has been in custody. Ryan, known to many as "Segway Jeremy" for his mode of personal transport, has been in jail since his arrest in October 2018, when he attempted to pick up a package purportedly containing polonium-210 mailed to him by a vendor on the so-called dark web.
Instead, Ryan had unwittingly made the purchase from an undercover FBI agent with whom he had been conversing off and on for the previous six months.
Prosecutors charged Ryan was looking for the material so he could use it to kill someone. But Ryan's attorneys, federal defenders Joseph Bugni and Peter Moyers, said Ryan intended to use the material to kill himself.
"After 15 months in jail, I am glad the government finally concedes there was no evidence of another target for the poison," Ryan wrote in a statement provided by Moyers on Friday. "It's unfortunate that the government decided it was appropriate to prosecute me for terrorism for 15 months over a suicide attempt that posed no risk to anyone other than myself. But if that's what it wants to waste resources on, so be it."
Ryan's lawyers also had asserted that the statutes under which Ryan was charged were unconstitutional, but those arguments were rejected by Peterson in December.
Moyers said in a statement that he is "delighted" to have reached an agreement with the government and that common ground was found with the government.
"Most importantly, we share its view that Mr. Ryan's conduct does not merit his continued incarceration," Moyers wrote.
Both sides continued to prepare for a trial up until the plea hearing, with Peterson on Thursday rejecting a request by Ryan for blocks of time to meet with his lawyers outside the jail. Peterson ruled Ryan faced the same conditions any criminal defendant who is in custody faces in preparing for a trial and did not need special dispensation.

Graphic

 
 Ryan

Load-Date: January 12, 2020


End of Document