'Silent' terrorists even more deadly
USA TODAY
August 5, 1996, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 588 words
Byline: Steve Komarow
Body


Authorities may suspect Iran in the bombings of the U.S. Air Force
barracks in Saudi Arabia and TWA Flight 800. But their efforts
to nail down the link are made more difficult because of a new
trend in terror: anonymity.
Today's terrorists don't claim credit. Ties to known groups often
are weak. And, chillingly, they make no demands. Their goal is
to shake their enemies with horror, pure and simple.
"The paradigm for terrorism in the '60s and '70s was largely
a rational process," says Steven Emerson, producer of the controversial
PBS documentary Jihad in America and author of four books
on terrorism. "Acts are carried out for the specific purpose
of incurring as many casualties as possible."
The Muslim militants who bombed New York's World Trade Center
wanted that tower of Western finance toppled, even if thousands
died. The Oklahoma City bombing appeared to be directed at the
federal establishment.
To American minds, these incidents are senseless slaughter. And,
in concrete terms, they were failures. The U.S. government remains
strong. The death toll in New York was six.
Barry Rubin, senior scholar at the BESA Center for Strategic Studies
in Israel, says terrorism almost invariably fails if its goals
are too large.
"Terrorism is the strategy of the incompetent or unsuccessful
revolutionary," he says. It's used "when they can't build a
mass base, when they can't threaten the government politically."
History affirms that. John Wilkes Booth's assassination of Abraham
Lincoln couldn't reverse the Civil War.
And it's unlikely the bombing in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 U.S.
servicemen will drive the West from the oil it needs.
But terrorism can accomplish "limited and specific goals," Rubin
says.
The bombing of the U.S. Marines' barracks in Beirut in 1983 was
one of terrorism's greats successes. It killed 239 and drove the
West from Lebanon.
The bombing of a Pan Am 747 over Lockerbie, Scotland, apparently
accomplished its aim -- revenge for the accidental downing of
an Iranian jetliner by a U.S. warship in the Persian Gulf.
But if the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombers failed
to accomplish any measurable goal except death and destruction,
not everyone sees that as failure.
"You try to blow up the World Trade Center because you're angry
at the United States," says Victor LeVine, who has been tracking
terrorism for 25 years at Washington University in St. Louis.
"What do you get out of it? The satisfaction of hurting your
enemy."
Anonymity gives the bomber an aura attractive to the disenfranchised.
And it's clear terrorists no longer need be as skilled as hooded
gunmen who hoodwinked German security to penetrate the Olympic
Village and slaughter 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Games.
Not when common fertilizer can destroy an office building, and
poison gas like that dropped into the Tokyo subway last year can
be home-brewed.
According to the State Department's annual review of international
terrorism, last year saw a worldwide decrease in deaths. But the
report also showed an increase in the United States, from four
to 12. That doesn't include Oklahoma City.
International attacks against U.S. interests jumped to 99, from
66 the previous year. This year, if the explosion aboard TWA Flight
800 that killed 230 is declared an act of terrorism, will eclipse
those numbers dramatically.
LeVine suggests that if the trend continues, terrorists may find
their deeds less satisfying because the USA, like Europe already,
will pay less heed.
"After a while," he says, "people learn to treat terrorism
as part of the world in which they live."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Joe Tabacca, AP; February 1993: Attacks such as the World Trade Center bombing are the work of terrorists who don't make demands; their goal is simply to cause horror.

Load-Date: August 5, 1996


End of Document