'Small' but definitely built to kill
Daily News (New York)
April 16, 2013 Tuesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 315 words
Byline: BY SHAYNA JACOBS and BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE DEADLY homemade bombs set off at the Boston Marathon finish line Monday were rigged with ball bearings and stashed in trash cans.
Two small explosives were ignited 10 seconds apart and were likely triggered by electronic timers or remote detonation devices, two explosives experts told the Daily News.
The first blast created a mushroom cloud and cratered the sidewalk where it had been placed in a garbage can. The second bomb exploded about two blocks away. Police discovered at least two other devices that didn't go off and dismantled them.
The Wall Street Journal, citing sources briefed on the investigation, said police found five possible undetonated devices.
The blasts killed three people and maimed scores of others. A terrorism expert briefed on the investigation told CNN that doctors were "pulling ball-bearings out of people in the emergency room."
The source told the network that preliminary tests showed no C-4 or other high-grade explosive material was used.
"They're most likely improvised," Bruce Hoffman, a Georgetown University terrorism expert, said of the bombs. "They were designed to kill people. They weren't designed to bring down buildings."
Explosives expert Jimmie Oxley, who consulted with detectives on the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, said it wouldn't require much explosive material to create such blasts.
"A couple of pounds of smokeless powder put into a pipe bomb would do it," said Oxley, a professor of chemistry at the University of Rhode Island.
Oxley noted that underwear bomber Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab tried to blow up Northwest Airlines Flight 253 over Detroit with just 2.8 ounces of pentaerythritol tetranitrate.
She said incendiary devices like the ones used in Boston could be made for $100 with instructions found on YouTube. She said a triggering device could be anything from a simple electronic timer to a cell phone.
sjacobs@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: April 16, 2013


End of Document