'Soft power' abroad Foreign Affairs & Terrorism Rough Road Ahead for New President Inauguration Day
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 18, 2009 Sunday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 547 words
Body


Soon after President-elect Barack Obama is sworn in, the world will demand that he articulate a new American stand on a war in the Gaza Strip that has killed hundreds of Palestinian civilians and has seen Hamas rockets fly menacingly into Israel.
Yet the ever-challenging Middle East, with its nuclear threat from Iran and Obama's promise of removing troops from Iraq in 16 months, may not be the new administration's biggest foreign policy concern.
Pakistan, with its unstable government, its nuclear arsenal and its proximity to terrorist enclaves, could present Obama's biggest challenge abroad, predicts Rep. Ike Skelton, D-Mo, chairman of the House Armed Service Committee.
"It is a major, major worry," Skelton says. "Some of the analysts I talk to believe that Pakistan is the most dangerous place in the world."
Obama said last month that in the Pakistan-Afghanistan region, he intended to forge "strategic partnerships ... to stamp out the kind of militant, violent, terrorist extremists" that struck in India last month. He also has promised a better defined effort in the Afghanistan war.
Although those assertions sound reminiscent of the administration of President George W. Bush, Obama is vowing a broad foreign policy makeover to restore America's reputation around the world.
Obama says he will deploy "soft power" - referring to the hope that American ideals and way of life can be as persuasive as military might. Hillary Rodham Clinton, the incoming secretary of state, said last week that Obama's administration would abandon the "rigid ideology" that characterized the Bush White House.
Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond, R-Mo., recommended "smart power" in a letter he wrote to Obama last week. Bond says smart power involves redoubled diplomacy, more Peace Corps initiatives and added educational and cultural exchanges. Bond, the ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said he wholeheartedly endorsed Obama's tentative plan to deliver a major address in an Islamic country soon. Bond recommended Indonesia.
"Your story embodies the American dream and is one that, in and of itself, can help counter anti-Americanism and restore America's image," Bond wrote.
Before traveling abroad, Obama will take steps to redefine that tarnished image. He is expected to follow through with his campaign promise to close the detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where 248 prisoners remain. But he raised doubts about when that would happen when he remarked last weekend that the closure "is more difficult than I think a lot of people realize."
Middle East expert Aaron David Miller of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington said no easy answers awaited Obama. If he decides not to make Gaza a core priority, America will be viewed as weak and unable to control Israel, our close ally. If he deems Gaza a priority, it will be a long process with many minefields.
One minefield lies at home. "He wasn't elected to be the war president or the peace president," said Miller, author of "The Much Too Promised Land." "He was elected to fix America's broken house. Anything that distracts from that in time, resources or political currency won't be viewed favorably."
STLtoday.com/nation • Keep up on what's going on in our country and the world.

Notes

 Foreign affairs & terrorism 

Graphic

 
 PHOTO - Associated Press file photo - not available 

Load-Date: January 18, 2009


End of Document