'Super' security not tested
Business Insurance
February 4, 1991


Copyright 1991 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 36
Length: 725 words
Byline: By MARK A. HOFMANN
Dateline: TAMPA, Fla.
Body


The possibility that winds of terror stirred by Operation Desert Storm would blew into Super Bowl XXV led to extraordinary security measures around Tampa Stadium.
Fortunately, say Tampa police the measures were not tested.  In fact, the largest single category of arrests at the Jan. 27 game was for ticket scalping, rather than any act remotely resembling terrorism.
The Super Bowl went "really smoothly" from a security standpoint, said a Tampa police spokesman.
Authorities had been prepared for considerably rockier conditions.  They had installed metal detectors at all stadium gates, erected a special fence, restricted nearby air traffic and added surveillance of traffic in and around the stadium.
Concern over terrorism led officials to place -- and test -- metal detectors at all 68 stadium turnstiles three weeks before the game, noted Robert L. Smith, Tampa's public safety administrator.
The secured turnstiles were tested prior to the Super Bowl by a group of 3,000 to 4,000 attendees of a football clinic at the stadium, Mr. Smith said.
Further tests were done before practices and other times during the week before the big game he, said.
Security was even tighter at the two press gates, where X-ray machines scanned briefcases, packages and electronic equipment, Mr. Smith said.
The Gulf war also prompted special air traffic restrictions from noon to midnight on game day.  The Federal Aviation Administration banned aircraft from flying lower than 3,000 feet within a five-mile radius of the stadium, except for takeoffs and landings.  The flight restriction within a half-mile radius of the stadium was raised to 5,000 feet.  Even the blimp was kept away.
Only law enforcement and FBI-authorized aircraft were not affected by restrictions.  A single helicopter flying over the stadium provided aerial shots, said the police spokesman.
A 6-foot-high chain-link fence about 60 feet from stadium walls was designed to enhance security.  The security measures extended into the parking lot, where vendors hawked souvenirs inside huge tents patrolled by uniformed and plainclothes police.
About 74,000 people attended the game.  But another 20,000 were in the parking lot during the game, said Mr. Smith, basing his estimate on the 1984 Super Bowl.
Officers in the parking lot were part of a contingent of more than 500 officers from 22 agencies -- including some from other cities -- assigned to the stadium.  The number didn't include private security officers and agents from the FBI, the U.S. Customs Service and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
The stadium itself was placed under 25-hour surveillance, or "lock down," beginning Jan. 19.  Anything going in or out was subject to security checks, Mr. Smith said.  Vehicles entering the area were also subject to inspection.
But Mr. Smith said, the cost of the added security was far from astronomical.  Although a final tally will not be available for some time, he said that contributions from the National Football League, the Tampa Sports Authority and other sources would help defray the costs to the city.
Even police overtime, one of the biggest costs, would only be about $ 40,000, he said.  "The actual impact on the tax budget is not as great as one would assume."
Even had there been no threat of terrorism, security would have been tighter for the Super Bowl than that imposed during a regular season Tampa Bay Buccaneers game, said Mr. Smith.  "There's no comparison."
For example, people were prohibited from carrying any electronic devices into the stadium on Super Sunday, Mr. Smith reported.  In fact, just about every hand-held object other than binoculars was banned.
The forbidden items -- including radios, cameras of all sorts and portable televisions -- were added to a standard list that includes bottles, cans, other containers and umbrellas.  The standing ban on umbrellas was initiated to prevent fans from blocking other people's view of the game.
Tampa Stadium purchased $ 10 million of primary liability insurance and a $ 5 million umbrella policy for the event, while the NFL purchased general liability insurance at undisclosed policy limits.  The NFL also bought $ 30 million in cancellation and abandonment coverage for the event (BI, Jan. 28).  American Broadcasting Cos., which televised the event, did not purchase cancellation coverage (BI, Jan. 21).


End of Document