'Terror's Advocate' offers telling portrait
University Wire
November 1, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Daily Californian via U-Wire
Section: FILM REVIEW
Length: 583 words
Byline: By Evan Winchester, Daily Californian; SOURCE: UC-Berkeley
Dateline: BERKELEY, Calif. 
Body


I sat down to watch Barbet Schroeder's film "Terror's Advocate," a talking-heads style documentary about the notorious French lawyer Jacques Verges, with this question in mind: Who defends terrorists? It's tricky. A certain amount of empathy is required of a lawyer to ensure a solid effort, but on the other hand too much empathy and-well, like I said, Verges is "notorious" for a reason. First of all, the film offers a much-needed premise, especially in light of the other major, vaguely terrorism-themed films that have reached the public. I'm thinking about "World Trade Center" and "United 93." Neither are documentaries, but still: Both deal with the results of terrorism. And both are ultimately weak because they deal only with the strictly heroic story of Americans under attack. Perhaps a fine, human story-but one that deals with only 50 percent of the humans. For a topic as worthy of criticism as terrorism, we ought to do better.
"Terror's Advocate" is a successful portrait of someone deeply engaged with that other side. He's an intellectual at the crossroads of anti-colonialism and the starkest, most violent aspects of the revolutionary spirit. He manages to smirk while discussing car bombs, body counts. He defended Carlos the Jackal, a notorious terrorist and extortionist. He defended the Nazi Klaus Barbie, the "Butcher of Lyons." During the film's credits, photographs of dictators he defended cycle past. It becomes difficult to keep up. He is buddies with Pol Pot.
The film is interesting, even though it's over 130 minutes long, partly because Verges' life reads like a spy novel. And the moral complications brought on by his political theories are truly tangled, despite his smug resolve.
One of his early cases was Djamila Bouhired, an Algerian who in 1956 blew up a milk bar and killed 11 people. And then, after she spent time in prison, she and Verges got married and had two kids. How's that for an intersection of theory and praxis?
But oddly enough, when Verges went off the national radar between 1970 and '78 he abandoned his family completely.
The story gets murkier. What began as morally ambiguous (sympathizing with the more violent tendencies of suppressed Algerians) seemed to take a sharp turn for the worse in Verges' later cases. First there was his defense of Carlos the Jackal, who was more devoted to making cash than supporting any political cause. But more psychologically intriguing is Verges' infatuation with Magdalena Kopp, who had once been embroiled in both crime and romance with Carlos. Verges visited her extensively in prison and continued to see her after her release.
It seems Jacques Verges has a thing for terrorists.
But more importantly for the scope of the film, Verges has a thing for himself. His captivating ego ultimately drives the plot. It also offers answers to many of the "Why would someone-" and "How could someone-" questions, at least regarding this individual. Defending the Nazi Klaus Barbie was a thrill. After all, with 40 prosecutors versus one defense lawyer, "It means I am worth 40 of them." He says this in his resplendent office. The smirk is there, and so is the fat cigar.
Occasionally the film offers brief shots of the carnage caused by some of his clients. The pictures remind us what is at stake more powerfully than words can. Listening to Verges talk in his office, one gets the feeling that, were he not its star, "Terror's Advocate" is a film he would try hard to avoid.
(C) 2007 Daily Californian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 2, 2007


End of Document