'Terrorism' - a term notoriously difficult to pin down
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 18, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 12
Length: 866 words
Byline: By Rushworth M. Kidder, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Body


Just exactly what is ''terrorism''?
Following the American bombing of Libya, the word is being bandied about on all sides. The United States and its allies refer to the regime of Col. Muammar Qaddafi as ''terrorist,'' while Libya and its friends describe the US action as ''terrorism.''
In fact, the term is notoriously difficult to pin down.
''The great difficulty when you get into (discussions of terrorism is that) right away you run into problems with definitions,'' notes Noel Koch, a specialist in terrorism at the US Defense Department.
Last summer, when Vice-President George Bush convened his Task Force on Combatting Terrorism, the group spent a number of days simply trying to agree on a definition. The final report notes that ''terrorism is a phenomenon easier to describe than to define.''
The problem, terrorism experts say, is that the term shifts according to one's viewpoint. The United Nations has struggled long and hard over the problem, since it is often said that ''one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.'' Terrorism, a pejorative term, is often described by those who favor it as ''paramilitary action,'' as ''resistance to occupation,'' or as part of a ''war of national liberation.''
Nevertheless, experts on terrorism interviewed recently in the US, Europe, and the Middle East agree on some common elements.
''The crucial element,'' says Prof. Paul Wilkinson of the University of Aberdeen, Scotland, ''is the deliberate attempt to create fear, intensive fear, in order to coerce the wider target into giving in to what the terrorist wants.''
Prof. Eytan Gilboa of Hebrew University in Jerusalem notes that ''we have to make a distinction between the accidental killing of innocent civilians and an official deliberate policy of hurting civilians.''
He notes that civilians are often killed both in guerrilla warfare and in terrorism.
''The question is if you do it by accident or if you do it on purpose,'' he says. ''In my understanding of it, terrorism means that you do it on purpose.''
British scholar Brian Crozier calls attention to different forms of terrorism.
''There's disruptive terrorism,'' he says, and ''there's theatrical terrorism to draw attention to the cause. And there is a very important form of terrorism which is nearly always overlooked, and that's what I call coercive terrorism: terrorism against the terrorists' own side.''
In that category, for example, come the numerous bombings and assassinations carried out by various Palestinian groups against one another.
Other scholars emphasize that terrorism needs both a political motive and an audience. The motives underlying common crime are more often individual rather than political. And common crime usually involves only two parties (the criminal and the victim), whereas terrorism, which seeks to amplify and spread fear, has three: the victim, the criminal, and the audience, usually reached through the news media.
Other terms commonly used in discussions of terrorism include:
* State-sponsored terrorism. This term is applied when an established government supports the activities of terrorist organizations. It is usually reserved for cases in which the sponsoring nation uses the terrorists to further its own policy goals beyond the territory in which the terrorism occurs. Libya, Syria, and Iran are generally recognized as major state sponsors of terrorism, although some experts believe much of the funding and support for international terrorism can be traced to the Soviet Union and its East bloc allies.
* State terror. This term covers acts of violence and intimidation perpetrated not by small groups of clandestine terrorists but by the military and political apparatus of the state itself. Nazi Germany practiced state terror, as do many communist countries. The term is open to broad interpretation: Palestinians on the Israeli-occupied West Bank accuse Israel of practicing state terror, and Libya accuses the US of the same thing.
 
Selected US definitions
Department of Defense, 1983
''The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence by a revolutionary organization against individuals or property with the intention of coercing or intimidating governments or societies, often for political or ideological purposes.''
 
FBI, 1983
''The unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives.''
 
State Department, 1984
''Premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine state agents.''
 
Department of Justice, 1984
''Violent criminal conduct apparently intended:
* To intimidate or coerce a civilian population.
* To influence the conduct of a government by intimidation or coercion.
* To affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping.''
 
The Vice-President's Task Force on Combatting Terrorism, 1986
''The unlawful use or threat of violence against persons or property to further political or social objectives. It is usually intended to intimidate or coerce a government, individuals, or groups or to modify their behavior or policies.''


End of Document