'Terrorism tax' targets students
USA TODAY
February 3, 2000, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 434 words
Body


A college student scans a packed lecture hall and sees a sea of
nameless, studious peers. An immigration official scans the same
hall and sees potential terrorists.
Starting next year, all foreign students and scholars on U.S.
campuses, no matter how loyal, will be treated as suspects. They'll
be fingerprinted and watched -- and they'll pay for the privilege.
Under a plan proposed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
the 500,000 foreigners would be required at registration to pay
a $ 95 fee -- call it a terrorism tax -- to support a computer
system that would track their whereabouts. Colleges would be responsible
for collecting the tax and fingerprints.
Plans for taxing young visitors originated after the 1993 World
Trade Center bombing: One of the convicted conspirators, Eyad
Ismoil, had entered the USA in 1989 on a student visa, then remained
here illegally after dropping out of Wichita State University.
In the post-bombing climate, Congress in 1996 put into law the
INS' recommendations about watching foreign students more closely.
The INS contended that its tracking system would alert the agency
when a student acted suspiciously, say, by dropping out.
Yet, exceptions aside, foreign students are model visitors. They're
aggressively recruited by U.S. colleges and employers. The biggest
proportion come from Japan, Western Europe and Canada. Fewer than
3,000 are from Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Syria, North Korea and Cuba
-- countries the State Department accuses of sponsoring terrorism.
What's more, the U.S. government already has checks on foreign
students, which it fails to utilize efficiently. Colleges have
for decades been required to report detailed information on any
foreign student the INS inquires about. Yet the INS rarely inquires,
according to college student advisers who collect the data. And
it has bungled compiling the data for agencies that need it: INS
wasn't able to answer an FBI query in 1998 on the whereabouts
of Iraqi students, according to U.S. News & World Report.
The State Department also has the power to withhold visas from
applicants whom it suspects might steal U.S. technology or become
involved in terrorism. Yet from 1992-96, the State Department
rejected fewer than 1% of visas on such grounds, and then reversed
itself on appeal in almost half of the cases, according to a study
by the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
One terrorist who gets into the USA under false pretenses is one
too many. But rather than punish with blanket suspicion all foreign
students, the government's immigration officials should fix the
genuinely troubling inefficiencies that already exist.

Load-Date: February 3, 2000


End of Document