'Terrorism' of different sort at local eatery William G. "Hoosier" Smith East Lampeter Township
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
August 1, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 10
Length: 329 words
Byline: Lancaster New Era Staff
Series: LETTERS
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Editor, New Era:
I should have written this letter several months ago, but with everything that seems to happen anywhere in the world, sometimes things seem trivial.
However, it was a few months back, a Friday evening, when my wife said that she felt like having pizza for dinner while we settled in to watch a little television. I phoned in our order and went to pick up two items.
Upon entering the pizza shop, the very first thing which caught my attention was an employee of the restaurant who was working behind the counter and handling the food. What caught my eyes was the fact that the man sneezed, turning his head to do so into his arm.
For whatever reason, I chose to totally block this incident from my thoughts. So I paid for the two items, drove home, and the wife, her mother, and yours truly had what we thought was a nice pizza dinner.
However, the very next day, my wife and mother-in-law became very ill with flu-like symptoms (We had all received flu shots, by the way) and I spent the next two days taking care of them. After that, I fell ill, as well, for a couple of days.
If I had taken the time to really consider what I had seen at that restaurant back then, it would have been the wise thing to have told the person at the register to cancel the order, and then tell my wife that we would have to find another restaurant to order from.
It was obvious that the employee at this particular pizza shop was ill and should never have been allowed to work that afternoon.
Managers and assistant managers of restaurants have the duty to put the health and safety of the general public first and foremost, ahead of their employees' need for a day's pay.
People are so concerned about terrorism of various types, yet this incident should prove that there are other serious issues to consider where the well-being of the general population is concerned.
Heaven only knows how many other customers were sickened that Friday evening because of the individual in question.

Load-Date: August 2, 2007


End of Document