'Terrorism' and the politics of nomenclature
University Wire
August 31, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Cornell Daily Sun via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 497 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Cornell Daily Sun; SOURCE: Cornell U.
Dateline: ITHACA, N.Y. 
Body


Minutes after news of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks spread, President Bush had received calls of sympathy and solidarity from national leaders all over the world. France was behind us; Pakistan and South Korea staunchly supported us. And not only the leaders but the people of these nations rallied around the American flag along with citizens of the United States. It was a time of mourning but also a time of hope in which most of the world was drawn closer together than ever before in recent memory.
Such things never last. Three years later, most of Europe and Asia hates America, if not Americans themselves. The Middle East is an even more volatile hotbed of terror than it was before.
Worldwide resentment runs high, both on a personal level with President Bush and on a policy level over the war in Iraq and the treatment of prisoners in Guantanamo Bay.
The fact is, the whole world came to our side when we needed it most. Now we've abandoned them under the auspices of the "War on Terror."
In theory, a war to stop terrorism worldwide is a noble and necessary goal. Terror is surely the greatest threat to world peace today. But in practice, the banner of this cause has been abused to justify losses of civil liberties under the Patriot Act and an unnecessary invasion of Iraq that has made the United States more vulnerable to Islamic fundamentalists, not less.
So it is not surprising that, although it received muted media coverage at best, Spain's March 11 terrorist attacks prompted calls from conservatives that "we are all Spaniards." That was certainly a noble statement, an acknowledgment that we now share an enemy with someone else across the sea.
Last week, two planes were downed within minutes of each other in Russia. The most likely reason was terrorism from Chechen separatists trying to affect upcoming elections. Unfortunately, however, that act of terror did not rile up the neocons on this side of the Atlantic, or even the liberals for that matter. Although it was certainly a terrorist act, it was not an act by Islamic fundamentalists against the United States or one of its allies.
The working definition of the word "terrorism" has changed fundamentally since Sept. 11. Under this definition, Timothy McVeigh was not a terrorist; neither was the Unabomber. The Lockerbie crash also doesn't count, and forget about the Paris metro threats. Domestic terrorism is not terrorism, and threats not directed against the United States are not threats at all.
Perhaps if we actually pursued our stated goals with this War on Terror, we'd have more respect around the world. Perhaps if we came to others' aid in the same way that they came to ours, we wouldn't be seen as selfish and overbearing.
This working definition is certainly not working. Terror is terror wherever it roams and whomever if affects. If we are to be a truly compassionate nation that stands for freedom, we need to rework that definition right now.
(C) 2003 Cornell Daily Sun via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 31, 2004


End of Document