'Terrorism maps' are latest bestseller
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 05, 2001, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: CITY & STATE; AMERICA RESPONDS; Pg. 3B
Length: 597 words
Byline: LINDA GIBSON
Dateline: TAMPA
Body


Should military action be taken against Osama bin Laden, John Gifford plans to use colored pushpins to track troop movements on a special "War on Terrorism" map he bought this week at A World of Maps on N Florida Avenue.
"I want to be able to follow along," said Gifford, a 50-year-old tile contractor from Tampa.
ABC News plans to give some of the "War on Terrorism" maps it purchased to reporters heading to Pakistan. Good Morning America bought two for Diane Sawyer, one for her office and one for her home, said David Swift of Largo, who designed the map after watching the store of which he is part-owner sell every map it had of Afghanistan in the days after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
MAP05
Unlike most, Swift's map shows both Southwest Asia and the Middle East, including Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Arabian Peninsula and parts of Iran, China and India. It's topographical, showing how mountainous Afghanistan is as well as each country's capital, major cities, railroads, airports and highways.
A small American flag takes up the bottom two corners of the map, which measures 2 feet by 3 feet and costs $ 34.95 with lamination and $ 19.95 without.
Within a week of putting the map on sale, the store sold 375 and expects the other 600 already printed to sell quickly.
"At the first sign of military action, we won't be able to keep up with demand," Swift said.
Maps of Afghanistan in New York City were snapped up within 24 hours of the attacks. The U.S. State Department bought the entire stock kept by Map Link of Santa Barbara, Calif., the country's biggest wholesale map distributor.
The sole manufacturer of maps of Afghanistan is a small company in Germany, which became swamped with back orders, Swift said.
That left smaller outlets such as A World of Maps in Tampa, which advertises in the Yellow Pages of Manhattan.
The business, which opened in 1991, sells custom maps to businesses, law enforcement, the military, news organizations and government agencies. It also sells compasses, globes, atlases and satellite images.
Swift's "World of Terrorism" map shows where Islamic extremists are thought to be hiding, and includes the Middle East, where conflict between Islamic nations and the West has been most intense.
National Geographic is offering a similar map, printing 10,000 that show Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Middle East.
The goal is to give "a better view of the entire theater of concern," said Gavin Maurer, a vice president for marketing for National Geographic.
At Map Link since the attack, customers have bought 6,000 copies of a map of the Middle East originally published during Desert Storm, said sales manager Martana Rybnicek. Like those being produced by National Geographic and A World of Maps, it shows both the Middle East and Southwest Asia, from Turkey in the west to Pakistan in the east.
Swift also produced a large map of Southwest Asia for an ABC affiliate in New Haven, Conn., which will use it as a backdrop for reports from a military expert on terrorism. He also did one of the Middle East for the U.S. Navy to use for "tactical planning."
Orders from the Middle East aren't unusual for the store, which has customers worldwide. But since the attacks, store employees have been scrutinizing orders.
They turned one down recently, a request from a businessman in the United Arab Emirates for a map of the Arabian Peninsula. It struck them as strange, since such maps are likely to be available there.
"Now we're actually thinking, who are we making this for?" said Gilbert D'Amore, general manager of the store. "Who's using it and what for?"

Graphic

 
PHOTO, THOMAS M. GOETHE; David A. Swift, a cartographer and vice president of sales at A World of Maps in Tampa, has produced a "War on Terrorism" map showing Southwest Asia and the Middle East. "At the first sign of military action, we won't be able to keep up with demand," he said.

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document