'Terrorist state' list should be flexible, State official says Targeting the real 'troublemakers'
USA TODAY
April 13, 2000, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 823 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- The State Department's chief terrorism fighter says
he would like to see countries meet U.S. requirements to come
off a list of terrorist-sponsoring states so that he can concentrate
on the "troublemakers."
"I have told people on Capitol Hill, 'If you have a problem with
Cuba on human rights, get your own sanctions, don't use mine,'
" says Michael Sheehan, U.S. coordinator for counterterrorism.
In an interview, Sheehan gave a preview of the State Department's
annual report on terrorism, due to be made public April 28.
No discussions have occurred or are planned with the Cuban government
on the terrorist issue, Sheehan cautions, and he stresses that
in any case, Cuba would not come off the list this year.
The report, covering activity in 1999, will list as terrorist
sponsors the same seven countries that have been on the list since
its inception in 1979: Iran, Syria, Sudan, North Korea, Cuba,
Iraq and Libya.
But Sheehan says his goal is to change that roster, which he concedes
has become a politicized instrument to punish countries for reasons
that sometimes have nothing to do with terrorism. "I want to
get this list more dynamic so I can focus on the remaining guys
who are troublemakers," he says.
A former Green Beret, Sheehan says he faced Cuban troops in Central
America in the 1980s. But since the collapse of the Soviet Union
in 1991, the regime of Fidel Castro no longer acts as Moscow's
proxy in supporting the dwindling ranks of left-wing revolutionaries.
Cuba, he says, needs to take other steps, including expelling
10 aging Puerto Rican terrorists.
U.S. opponents of the Castro government, already angered by efforts
to return Elian Gonzalez to his father, vehemently object to changing
Cuba's status. "I will not be surprised by any Clinton move in
the last nine months of his presidency, including granting Castro
the Presidential Medal of Freedom," Rep. Lincoln Diaz-Balart,
R-Fla., says. Recalling that Cuba in 1996 shot down two approaching
planes piloted by members of an anti-Castro U.S. group, killing
four Americans, Balart adds: "If that's not terrorism, what is?"
Sheehan confirmed an earlier USA TODAY story that North Korea
is the likeliest candidate for removal. While repressive domestically,
the Stalinist nation has not been linked with an act of international
terrorism in a decade. The chief reason it remains on the list,
Sheehan says, is that it harbors four or five Japanese Red Army
members who hijacked a Japanese plane in 1970.
Sheehan met last month with a North Korean official in New York
and explained conditions for removal. "North Korea doesn't have
hard things to do," he says.
The terrorist list originated after passage of the Export Administration
Act of 1979. Dozens of other laws passed since then refer to the
original law. They oblige the United States to oppose loans from
international lending organizations to countries on the list and
also bar U.S. credits for exports, even food. Newer laws make
it possible for U.S. citizens to sue countries for terrorist acts
committed by groups those countries are alleged to support. Pending
legislation would allow successful plaintiffs to attach the U.S.
assets of terrorist sponsors.
Critics note that once a country makes the list, it is politically
difficult to get off. That has deprived policymakers of flexibility.
None of the list's original members has changed, with the exception
of South Yemen, which ceased to exist when it merged with northern
Yemen in 1990.
In his upcoming report, Sheehan says, he will not rank terrorist
sponsors. He says he will focus less on specific countries than
on two areas that have become havens for violent groups.
"South Asia --Afghanistan and Pakistan -- and the arc between
Tehran, Damascus and Beirut, those are the real problem areas,"
Sheehan says.
Among the groups finding refuge in South Asia are those tied to
exiled Saudi Osama bin Laden, which threaten the United States,
and anti-India factions that have hijacked planes and intervened
in the disputed province of Kashmir.
In the second area are Hamas and Hezbollah, which target
the Middle East peace process and have received support from Iran
and Syria.
No additional countries have been added to the State Department
list, partly out of concern that economic sanctions could prove
counterproductive. The report, Sheehan says, will have some relatively
good news -- only six Americans died at the hands of terrorists
in 1999, compared with 12 in 1998.
He praised Jordan, the Palestinian Authority and Egypt -- as well
as officials on the border with Canada -- for intelligence and
police work that broke up terrorist plots late last year before
they could be carried out.
Sanctions have also had an impact, Sheehan says. He notes that
Libya last year turned over two suspects in the 1988 Pan Am 103
bombing after a seven-year ban on air travel to Libya imposed
by the United Nations. "What works against terrorism" Sheehan
says, is "sustained diplomatic pressure, political will and courage."

Load-Date: April 13, 2000


End of Document