'THE TIME TO REFORM THE UNITED NATIONS IS NOW';
RICE, IN FIRST SPEECH AT GENERAL ASSEMBLY, SAYS TO TRY HARDER
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 18, 2005 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 551 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The United Nations must make itself more relevant to tackle 21st century problems and should condemn as terrorists those who target civilians whatever their cause, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said yesterday.
 Recalling the historic founding of the United Nations 60 years ago, Rice told the General Assembly, "In this new world, we must again embrace the challenge of building for the future."
 World leaders at a summit last week adopted a watered-down version of proposed reforms advanced by Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by the Bush administration.
Rice, in her first speech before the General Assembly, called on the 191 nations to try harder.
 "The time to reform the United Nations is now," she said. "And we must seize this opportunity together."
 Rice placed terrorism at the head of her list. Appealing for adoption of a comprehensive convention on terrorism, she said there could be no definition of terrorism that excludes from condemnation any group that harms innocent civilians.
 Defying the view that one man's terrorist is another's freedom fighter, Rice said, "No cause, no movement, and no grievance can justify the intentional killing of innocent civilians and noncombatants."
 She added, "This is unacceptable by any moral standard."
 Preceding Rice to the rostrum, Annan said condemnation of terrorism must be unqualified and that the 191 countries should "forge a global counterterrorism strategy that weakens terrorists and strengthens the international community."
 In her speech, which drew modest applause, Rice called on rich countries to help poor ones with development assistance. And developing countries, she said, "have responsibility to govern justly, to advance economic liberty, and to invest in their people."
 The reform document adopted last week makes a stab at revising the way the United Nations deals with human rights. Rice called for a much tougher approach.
 She said the new council that is being established should have more credibility. And that, she said, means it should "never, never empower brutal dictatorships to sit in judgment of responsible democracies."
 The council, Rice said, "must have the moral authority to condemn all violators of human rights -- even those that sit among us in this hall."
 "For this institution to become an engine of change in the 21st century it must now change itself," Rice said. "The United Nations must launch a lasting revolution of reform."
 Rice has locked arms with Annan on reform, declaring him an effective manager with whom she can work closely.
 "I have never had a better relationship with anyone than Kofi Annan," Rice said last week, separating U.S. concerns about management flaws and corruption from the U.N.'s top diplomat.
 In her speech, Rice dealt with the 35-page reform document as a useful first step, but no more than that.
 The U.S. delegation, headed by reform-minded Ambassador John R. Bolton, never reluctant to point out U.N. shortcomings even at the risk of irritating traditional diplomats, is expected to follow up Rice's recommendations with resolutions in the coming weeks.
 President Bush, in his speech last week to the U.N., tried to motivate adoption of measures to counter poverty by linking it with terrorism. He listed a number of countries that have suffered at the hands of terrorists.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Daniel Berehulak/Getty Images: Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice speaks to the U.N. General Assembly yesterday in New York City.

Load-Date: September 20, 2005


End of Document