'THEIR MISSION IS MURDER'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 1998, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. C18
Length: 826 words
Body

 
TERRORISM
The news was sudden, abrupt and startling. On Thursday, the United States conducted air strikes on a camp run by Saudi extremist Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan and a "chemical weapons" factory connected to him in Sudan. Details were sketchy, and purposefully so. But, if the claims of the United States are true, President Bill Clinton had no choice but to act quickly and decisively.
The decision to undertake military action is always a grievous one. It is one that presidents must take only upon "precise" and "irrefutable" evidence, to quote President Ronald Reagan's speech after the 1986 air strike on Libya. And it must only be taken after serious deliberation of feasible alternatives.
As President Clinton observed in his late-afternoon speech to the nation, sometimes diplomacy and law enforcement are inadequate in the fight against terrorists.
In a brief announcement before he left Martha's Vineyard and in his televised address later in the afternoon, the president gave four reasons for ordering the attacks: The United States had "convincing" evidence that Osama bin Laden was behind the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, that left 250 people dead and thousands injured. He said he had evidence that bin Laden was behind a string of other terrorist plots, including the attack on peacekeepers in Somalia, plans to blow up six 747 airliners and plots to kill the president of Egypt and the pope. A more compelling spur to action now, though, was the evidence that other attacks on U.S. embassies were imminent and that bin Laden was seeking to acquire chemical weapons.
As soon as security permits, the president should present this evidence to America and to the world.
Whatever the outcome of the air strikes, the United States should still be taking all defensive measures it can to protect U.S. embassies. But a strictly defensive posture is not a sufficient alternative to terrorism, in the short or long haul.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., suggested that the administration might have pressured the Taliban in Afghanistan to turn over bin Laden, as a story in The New York Times reported. That option may have been wishful thinking as the Taliban's chief mullah vowed to "defend Osama with our blood."
Besides, even if the Taliban, enmeshed in their own civil war, tried to deliver bin Laden into U.S. hands, there's no assurance that they would have succeeded - given bin Laden's possession of sophicated military hardware and a dedicated fighting force.
Up until Thursday, U.S. military actions against terrorism have been against governments that support terrorist activities: Jimmy Carter's abortive rescue mission to free the hostages in Iran; Mr. Reagan's air strikes against Moammar Khadafy; Mr. Clinton's retaliation against Iraq for supporting an assassination attempt against former President George Bush.
The attack on bin Laden's compound in Afghanistan and the factory outside Khartoum reflect the changes in terrorism itself. Individuals, such as bin Laden, with a visceral hatred against the United States and a fortune to feed it, can declare their own wars and wage them - as he has done. How does the United States fight against that without using the tools of war as well?
If bin Laden were hiding in Iran or Syria, the United States probably wouldn't have attacked. The danger of retaliation would undoubtedly be too great. Sudan and Afghanistan, engrossed in their own wars, are in no position to hit back. But, with his obviously far-flung network, bin Laden himself might be. And Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen suggested as much.
Indeed, the lesson of the history of the U.S. effort against terrorism is a discouraging one. Escalations in the war against terrorism can lead to escalations by the terrorists. The Reagan administration's bombing of Libya in which the U.S. sought to kill Col. Khadafy, is thought to have led to the bombing of Pan Am 103. The morality of the whole bloody business sometimes seems to devolve into a colossal game of tit-for-tat.
Yet, how can the United States sit idly by in the face of the evidence of bin Laden's complicity in past terrorism and plans for the future?
It is unfortunate that Mr. Clinton did not consult a broader range of congressional leaders beforehand. He did, however, inform House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott in advance of the air strikes.
Notification is an important symbolic act: When the United States acts militarily, it needs to act as a unified government for practical and constitutional reasons. In this particular case, consultation with other top leaders in Congress might also have dulled the salacious speculation on the timing of the strikes.
Thursday's attack won't end terrorism. It can't. But if it has prevented car bombings of other U.S. embassies and saved lives, it was justified. If it ends or even significantly cripples bin Laden's operation, it was justified.

Load-Date: August 21, 1998


End of Document