'THE EVIL ANGEL' OF TERRORISM KILLED RABIN
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 07, 1995, Tuesday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 642 words
Byline: Anthony Lewis
Body


FOR months the Israeli right had poured hate on Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin. Leaders of the Jewish settler movement said he was a traitor for
agreeing to withdraw from parts of the West Bank - which God, they said,
had given to Israel. Extremist rabbis called him a murderer for making
peace with the Palestinians and said it would be morally in order to
kill him.
At one right-wing political rally, a poster portrayed Rabin with a
hooked nose dripping blood: a cartoon that could have come from the Nazi
paper Der Sturmer. At another, he was shown in an SS uniform.
Security officials warned Rabin that the violent rhetoric could lead to
violent acts. But this was Israel, where political leaders mix with
ordinary citizens in the most casual way. A Jew kill the prime minister
of Israel? It couldn't happen.
It happened. And so we learn again that words of hate have consequences:
in Israel as in America.
Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of Israel's main opposition party of the
right, the Likud, said Rabin had been "slain by a madman." That we
cannot know before a diagnosis. What we do know is that he was killed by
a man who acted on the poisonous rhetoric of these past months. Words of
hate can move the mad as they can the sane.
There is another warning for us in this act of destruction. That is the
awful danger of treating political ideas as religious commands.
"I acted alone on God's orders," the 25-year-old student arrested as
the assassin, Yigal Amir, told the police, "and I have no regrets."
In a democratic state, politics is a means of ordering differences of
view peacefully. It necessarily requires compromise. It cannot work as a
zero-sum game.
Religion can of course form one's political views. It can shape moral
premises. But that is a very different thing from saying that God has
drawn the boundaries of a state.
Israel is a successful country today, modern and prosperous. It cannot
remain that, and be a contented society, if its territorial ambitions
require it to rule by force over another people.
Rabin came to understand that, and his understanding is his legacy. He
was a tough soldier, whose immediate instinct as defense minister when
the intifada broke out was to put it down - as he said - by "force,
might, beatings."
But remarkably, in a man of his age, he was able to change. He saw that
reliance on force to keep down a subject population was corrupting
Israel. He even came to understand, after an initial reluctance verging
on revulsion, that Yasser Arafat was the best partner Israel had in
trying to create a peaceful relationship with the Palestinians.
Toward the end there was one other change in Rabin that is worth noting.
He and Shimon Peres had been bitter enemies for decades. But he accepted
the structure of peace negotiated at Oslo by the foreign minister, and
at the White House in September made a point of saluting "my full
partner in peace, Shimon Peres."
Peres, as his successor, is totally committed to the negotiation of
peace. But everyone knows that he has handicaps. He has never won the
trust of many Israelis. And he does not have the reputation of an old
hawk that enabled Rabin to get away, politically, with the arrangements
for partial withdrawal from the West Bank. If he said so, people
thought, it was safe.
Assassinations have effects. That ghastly truth cannot be avoided. The
United States would be a different country today, very different, if
John Kennedy and Robert Kennedy had not been murdered. How vulnerable we
are to those who think of the gun as a legitimate political device: "The
evil angels of death by terrorism," as Rabin warned at the White House.
That is no reason to abandon hope for peace between Israel and all its
neighbors. It is reason to be realistic about the politics of a country
with substantial numbers of citizens who are opposed to the only
achievable terms of peace.
Lewis is a columnist for the New York Times.

Load-Date: November 7, 1995


End of Document