'THIS IS NOT WHAT CHAIM WEIZMANN ENVISIONED
The New York Times
August 6, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 316 words
Body


To the Editor:
 The most obscene thing about the bombardment of Beirut is to see hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of devastating and deadly ammunition screaming into the ruins and rubble of the city.
he point of measuring this ammunition in terms of dollars and not tonnage is that the money is ours, yours and mine.
The most obscene thing about the bombardment of Beirut is to see hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of devastating and deadly ammunition screaming into the ruins and rubble of the city.It was given to Israel by the American taxpayers. It was given for the defense, not the aggrandizement, of the Jewish state.
But aggrandizement - imperialist expansion - is clearly the aim of the present Israeli Government. If the Palestine Liberation Organization is subdued and dispersed (it will not be exterminated), Israel will certainly expand into the West Bank, institutionalize the colonialist re-pression of its Arab population and usurp the only territory that might form the main body of a Palestinian state.
This is not what the Father of Israel, Chaim Weizmann, envisioned; it is not what a disillusioned and distressed minority of Israelis - a numerical minority but a powerful moral force - wants; it is not what another such influential minority, among Israel's American supporters, bargains for.
And it is all so futile and hopeless: Those hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of bombs and shells and rockets will not extinguish Palestinian Arab nationalism, prevent future terrorism, do justice to the Arabs and their legitimate aspirations to self-determination, quench the smoldering resentment against Israel and bring lasting peace to the Middle East, even peace in our time.
The Middle East will remain a powder keg, a potential flash point for a far wider war than the one raging today in the mini-state of Lebanon.  CLIFTON DANIEL Point o'Woods, L.I., Aug. 3, 1982


End of Document