'THIS IS TERRORISM' Beastie Boy raps Trump Leads rally after Nazi scrawl outrage
Daily News (New York)
November 21, 2016 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 545 words
Byline: BY ADAM SCHRADER, ERIN DURKIN, ELLEN MOYNIHAN, ANDY MAI and STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Rikki Reyna, Andy Mai and John Annese
Body


A MEMBER of the Beastie Boys urged New Yorkers to "Get It Together" Sunday and oppose President-elect Donald Trump during a packed rally at a Brooklyn playground that was vandalized with swastikas.
Adam Horovitz, better known as Ad-Rock, spoke at Adam Yauch Park, which was named in his honor following the band member's 2012 death. The playground was defaced Friday with two swastikas and the words "Go Trump!"
Horovitz said the Brooklyn Heights park had special significance to many of the 2,000 people at the rally because of the connection to the beloved hip-hop artist, but the vandalism went far beyond music.
"This is more about someone in our community linking Nazi Germany to Donald Trump in a 'hell yeah' kind of way in a park where children play," Horovitz said.
The swastikas, spray-painted on playground equipment, had been painted over by Sunday. Paper cutouts of hearts and a pile of flowers replaced the symbols of hate.
Horovitz then launched into a long list of racist, Trump-related vandalism and other incidents around the country since the Republican's victory on Election Day.
Among the many examples: a woman eating at a restaurant in nearby Boerum Hill was punched in the face last week by a Trump supporter angry at her dismay about the election.
"Keep your eyes open, stand up for each other. This is homegrown terrorism for real," Horovitz said. "I reject Donald Trump's vision for America. New York City, I'm asking you to do the same."
Acting Brooklyn District Attorney Eric Gonzalez vowed to aggressively prosecute all hate crimes, saying "We will not stand for bigotry in our backyard."
In Queens, hundreds attended a protest against Trump and celebrated the city's diverse population. Activists gave postcards preaddressed to the President-elect at Trump Tower to people at Diversity Plaza in Jackson Heights, with directions in English, Spanish, and Chinese.
"Dear Donald," the postcards read, "I'm from Queens, just like you. Let me remind you what your home borough is like."
In the same park, Public Advocate Letitia James hosted a rally with speakers from groups including Planned Parenthood of New York, Common Cause, Food and Water Watch and Gays Against Guns, which was formed after the June massacre at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando.
Also Sunday, Dominican-American pols denounced Sen. Jeff Sessions, Donald Trump's pick for attorney general, for his comments dismissing Dominican immigrants as contributing nothing to American society.
At the LGBT Community Center in Greenwich Village, Mayor de Blasio called on the city's residents to "live out the alternative to the hateful picture that Trump has painted."
Referring to Hillary Clinton's lead in the popular vote, de Blasio said, "If this nation has fundamentally changed because of the election of Nov. 8, then why is the Democratic candidate ahead by 1.2 million votes right now?"
At the Grand Hyatt in Midtown, about 200 demonstrators gathered to protest the Zionist Organization of America gala, carrying signs reading, "Jews against hate," "Welcome immigrants and deport Bannon." Organizers said Trump's recently tapped chief strategist, Stephen Bannon - once the head of the right-wing media organization Breitbart News, a haven for white supremacists - would attend. He was a no-show.

Graphic

 
Beastie Boy Adam Horovitz (far l.), at rally Sunday in Brooklyn park named for late bandmate Adam Yauch, rips "vision" of President-elect Donald Trump (r., with N.J. Gov. Chris Christie), which he blamed for Nazi graffiti (left). AFP; GETTY; AMY LAZARIDES

Load-Date: November 21, 2016


End of Document