'Top priority has to be the war on terrorism'
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
October 19, 2002, Saturday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 324 words
Body


'Our top priority has to be the war on terrorism. Al-Qaida is getting ready to strike again.'
 -- Sen. Kent Conrad, D-N.D., on his vote against giving President Bush the authority to use military force against Iraq.
q q q
 'I finally concluded that it wasn't whether we have to disarm Saddam Hussein, it's really when and how.'
 -- Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., on his vote in favor of giving President Bush the authority to use military force against Iraq.
 q q q
 'I didn't realize I would be judged by an unwritten standard, rather than by the law. In this case, that's what has happened. In North Dakota, we have kind of a presumption of ethical behavior . Here (in Washington), you seem to be guilty until proven innocent, particularly at election time.'
 -- Chairman of the Federal Housing Finance Board John Korsmo, on what he described as a mistake in inviting Federal Home Loan Bank executives to a Rick Clayburgh fund-raiser.
 q q q
 'In good faith, North Dakota, along with the other basin states, has been helping for 13 years to develop a plan that meets the modern needs of the basin. Unfortunately, the continuing delays in adopting a revised master manual have resulted in another inadequate APO (Annual Operating Plan) .'
 -- North Dakota Gov. John Hoeven, criticizing the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for delays in creating a master operating manual for the Missouri River.
 q q q
 'It's kind of strange, but both of them said earlier this week that they hoped they died hunting bluebills.'
 -- Brendan Walsh, on the drowning deaths Tuesday of his duck hunting companions, Joseph Tonyan, 35, and Philip Fleming, 37, of McHenry, Ill.
 q q q
 'As if the criminals of seminary are being sent to this Siberia, I wasn't forced here. I don't regret having come out here to serve.'
 -- Ty Stoneburner, who serves a parish in Keene for the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, on coming to North Dakota as a seminary intern at Faith Lutheran in Bismarck.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document