'Tough on terror' platform reigns
USA TODAY
September 20, 2004, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 905 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Body

One TV ad shows a dark-haired "terrorist" scoping out a nuclear power plant through binoculars and taking photos of a passing train. Another shows black smoke pouring from the World Trade Center towers.
Wisconsin Republican Tim Michels is using those unsettling images to try to unseat two-term Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold, whom Michels portrays as weak on terrorism and homeland security.
In radio ads, Michels is just as tough. The former Army Ranger says Feingold "put innocent lives at risk" with his Senate votes against the USA Patriot Act, a controversial anti-terror law, and the Department of Homeland Security.
It has been two years since former Georgia senator Max Cleland -- a veteran who lost both legs and an arm in Vietnam -- was defeated for re-election when his Republican opponent painted him as soft on national security. After airing TV ads that pictured Cleland, Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, Republican Saxby Chambliss won a surprise victory. And he sent a powerful message to this year's crop of candidates: Voters want politicians who are tough on terrorism and serious about homeland security.
This year, the war on terrorism has been fair game in the presidential race. Democratic Sen. John Kerry continually attacks President Bush over the situation in Iraq and the amount of international support his administration has been able to muster. Vice President Cheney opened a new front earlier this month by saying that if Kerry wins, "the danger is that we'll get hit again."
Northwest to Southeast
Now the issue is spreading to congressional races:
 * In Washington state, where Republican Rep. George Nethercutt is challenging Democratic Sen. Patty Murray, charges over who would be tougher on terrorism are dominating the campaign.
Campaigning for Nethercutt last month, former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani touted him as the candidate who understands that the best defense against terrorism at home is a good offense abroad. Murray voted against authorizing the war in Iraq.
The candidates also have battled over who would do more to increase port security, a big issue in the state. Each side has singled out specific votes to accuse the other of voting to cut funds for port security and the Coast Guard.
"The war on terrorists is a huge issue in this campaign," says Nethercutt spokesman Alex Conant. "Voters are looking for leaders who understand the threats we face and know how to win this war."
 * In North Carolina, the Senate race to succeed Democratic vice presidential nominee John Edwards is focusing increasingly on terrorism. The Democrats' Senate campaign committee has questioned the voting record of Republican Rep. Richard Burr, who touts his credentials as a member of the House Intelligence Committee. Erskine Bowles, the Democratic candidate, accuses the Republican-controlled Congress of underfunding homeland security.
One of Burr's campaign commercials features images of soldiers, schoolchildren and firefighters as Burr promises to use his experience to protect the nation. "After all, there's no second place in the war against terror," Burr says.
Bowles, an investment banker who served as President Clinton's chief of staff, says he would vote to increase funding for tighter security at chemical and nuclear plants, at ports and along the nation's borders.
 * Democrats are attacking incumbent Republican senators in Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania for their votes on homeland security spending for 2005. The votes were on Democratic amendments that would have increased funding for explosive detection equipment, emergency communications systems, port security, and grants to police and firefighters.
 * The issues also are affecting some races for the House of Representatives, customarily fought over local concerns. In Connecticut, Democrat Jim Sullivan is trying to use Republican Rep. Rob Simmons' national security experience against him. He's charging that as a former CIA officer, Simmons should have realized Iraq would become a quagmire and voted against authorizing the war. Simmons' campaign manager, Peggy Deschenes, says voters will reject Sullivan's "crass attacks."
'Potentially potent'
How ads such as Michels' will play, and whether the attacks ultimately succeed, is unclear. Political consultants active in this year's congressional races say there are too many variables that could affect the November election, such as whether violence in Iraq escalates or subsides, and whether terrorists attack on U.S. soil or against Americans abroad.
But there's little doubt that "it's a potentially potent issue," says Curtis Gans of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate.
Feingold agrees. "For any American, and that certainly includes me, fighting terrorism and the organization that hit us on 9/11 is our top priority," he says. He defends his lone Senate vote against the Patriot Act, arguing it undermined civil liberties and gave the government unnecessary powers of surveillance. He also opposed creating the Department of Homeland Security for fear that some provisions would trample constitutionally protected freedoms.
University of Wisconsin political scientist Donald Ferree says it's too early to tell how big a role national security and terrorism will play in the 2004 elections. But he says the issues could sway voters in close races. "In the wake of 9/11," Ferree says, "the whole political landscape has changed."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Michels for Senate via AP; PHOTO, B/W, Nethercutt for Senate; Indelible image: Tim Michels of Wisconsin, who is running for a U.S. Senate seat, uses footage of the Sept. 11 attacks in his TV ad. <>Evoking 9/11: George Nethercutt of Washington state, left, touts his endorsement by former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani.

Load-Date: September 21, 2004


End of Document