'U' center safeguards food supply;
"Government can't do it alone," U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said in announcing the new Center for Food Protection and Defense.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 7, 2004, Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 437 words
Byline: Mary Jane Smetanka; Staff Writer
Body


Federal officials gave their seal of approval Tuesday to a new anti-terrorism food center at the University of Minnesota, and announced that they are looking for a university to be host to a new security center that will study terrorism and its effects.
     U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge and Agriculture Secretary Ann Veneman called the $15 million grant that will fund research and education at the university's Center for Food Protection and Defense part of a national strategy not only to protect the food supply from intentional contamination but to safeguard a $1.24 trillion industry that millions of Americans rely on to make a living.
     "Government can't do it alone," Ridge told a crowd at McNamara Alumni Center on the Minneapolis campus. "In each of these cases, partnerships between government and our great research universities, businesses and scientists will produce together what would be impossible individually … .
   "This task is a huge and complicated one. Our efforts must be as widespread and comprehensive as the very system that puts food on the tables of millions of Americans, every day three times a day."
     Security was tight at the Alumni Center, where university President Robert Bruininks rubbed elbows with politicos ranging from Gov. Tim Pawlenty to U.S. Reps. Martin Olav Sabo, Mark Kennedy and Betty McCollum. Texas A&M University, which received an $18 million grant to set up a center that will work on foreign animal diseases, sent representatives, and private food companies sent officials from as far away as California.
     The university's center, one of three established at schools around the nation to work on security-related issues, will concentrate on protecting the food supply from intentional contamination. Research will range from devising ways to detect dangerous substances in food to mapping how food gets from the farmfield to the consumer and who handles it along the way. Up to 90 investigators at the university and other schools as well as outside experts and people in food companies will be involved in the work.
     The $15 million grant funds work for three years, but university officials hope it will act as seed money for continuing research.
     In addition to the Minnesota and Texas A&M centers, the University of Southern California has set up a center on risk and economic analysis of terrorism. Ridge said his department soon will be accepting proposals from universities for a fourth center that focuses on the behavioral and social aspects of terrorism and counter-terrorism.
     Mary Jane Smetanka is at smetan@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 8, 2004


End of Document