'Understanding is not condoning' Iranian professor saysimproving foreign policy is America's best bet in beating terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
November 7, 2001, Wednesday C3,C5,C7,C8,C10,C11


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBOR;
Length: 404 words
Byline: Shruti Date Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Students and faculty members filled the student and administration center lounge at Harper College Monday afternoon to try to understand the origins of terrorism.  
Lake Forest College professor Ahmad Sadri, an Iranian-born sociologist, talked candidly about what he believed to be the roots of and solution to terrorism.  
As a Muslim from the Middle East he brought in his personal insight about Islam, and as a sociologist he delivered his academic analysis about the events of Sept. 11.  
He pointed out that fear and uncertainty are two obvious effects of the recent terrorist attacks, and the threat to Americans' safety should prompt the public to take an active interest in future foreign policy decisions.  
"We have to live with anxiety," he said. "These feelings of fear are new to us, but that living with uncertainty is part of the human condition."  
Now, Americans are just as vulnerable as the rest of the world to attacks.  
"Globalization has now caught up with us and punctured our cushion," Sadri said.  
He said, in part, the attacks resulted from the U.S. government's foreign policy in the Middle East.  
The U.S. government, for example, in the past has supported dictators in countries against the wishes of the local citizenry, as was the case in Iran in the 1970s.  
"It's no wonder that Americans are perceived as bullies in the world."  
Some people have decried this explanation as a "blame-the- victim" theory.  
But Sadri disagreed.  
"We have to understand terrorists," Sadri said. "Understanding is not condoning."  
He added that U.S. foreign policy has not always reflected the values of democracy and self-determination that Americans hold close to their hearts.  
"We need a better image in the world because we are no longer protected by two oceans," Sadri said. "Americans should care about foreign policy because it is our safety at stake."  
The town hall-style meeting is the first in a four-part series Harper plans to present this fall.  
The series is intended to give the Northwest suburban community a forum to examine the impact of terrorism on their neighborhoods.  
Former FBI commander Danny Coulson, author of "The War on Terrorism: Past, Present and Future," will speak at 7:30 p.m. Nov. 14 in Harper's business and social science center theater.  
Admission is $7 with discounts available for Harper students, faculty and staff.  
For tickets, call the Harper box office at (847) 925-6100.

Graphic

 
Harterrorism-ne1105palMJ Lake Forest College Professor Ahmad Sadri, an Iranian-born scholar, emphasized the need for Americans to understand the roots of terrorism to find a solution during a discussion at Harper College in Palatine Monday. Mark Black/Daily Herald

Load-Date: November 8, 2001


End of Document