'United in a new kind of grief';
How should people of faith respond to terrorism?
SUNDAY NEWS (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 30, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: PERSPECTIVE,; IN MY OPINION
Length: 778 words
Byline: The Rev. Canon Peter Eaton, Special to the Sunday News
Body


Editor's note: Send "In My Opinion" submissions to Helen Colwell Adams, Sunday News, P.O. Box 1328, Lancaster, Pa. 17608-1328; e-mail hcolwell@lnpnews.com.  
Three historic, religious traditions -- Judaism, Islam and Christianity -- share a noble heritage.
Not only are our origins bound up with one another, not only do we claim a common ancestry in our father Abraham, but we share a common destiny.
For we know that until there is genuine peace and justice between Christian, Jew and Muslim, there will be no peace and justice on earth.
#PETE.S302900#
We speak a language about God that is not about hate, and we must speak that common language of faith clearly now more than ever.
First and foremost, this terrible and horrific assault by terrorists is not some expression of divine wrath.
God did not do this, nor did God will it to happen. God has not "withdrawn" his protection because of our national sin, as though God normally provides our nation with some sort of heavenly Star Wars program.
This was an act of human terrorism and barbarity, not an act of divine judgment and retribution.
We who are followers of Jesus know that God was not in the hands of the hijackers, but in the torment of those who knew they were about to die.
God was not looking down on the towers of the World Trade Center from a place of heavenly safety, but was suffering and struggling and weeping in the rubble.
God was not in the language of hate and fear that took control of the planes, but in the language of the love that some were able to communicate to their families on their cell phones and in e-mail messages.
Americans who follow the Christian faith now know also something more about our common humanity with those in our world today who have suffered, and continue to suffer, the kind of terrorism we have suffered.
We are united in a new kind of grief.
If, as Christians believe, God has revealed God's divine life to us in the vulnerability and suffering of Jesus, then God continues to be revealed in the vulnerability and suffering of every son and daughter of God today wherever they suffer, at the hands of whomsoever they suffer.
God does not speak the language of hatred and rejection in any circumstance, and we who claim the name of Christian cannot answer hatred with hatred.
Nor shall we ever again be able to distance ourselves from the acts of terrorism that continue throughout the world.
As people of faith we are grounded in the example of Jesus.
As an old Anglican priest, Father Keble Talbot, once said so memorably, at the worst time Jesus did the best deed. In the midst of his own terror, pain and abandonment, Jesus' actions and words were for others.
On the eve of his own death, Jesus gave himself away to his friends, and even to his enemies, in a new and intimate way.
And he gave us the example that, if we want to be like him, we too must do the best deeds at the worst times.
All people of faith know that religion can be perverted and used as a weapon of fear and hate.
There are Christians who do it, Jews who do it and Muslims who do it.
We have been hearing such perversions of Christianity in our country, most especially in the days since the terrorist attacks, and Christian fundamentalism of that sort is no different in its potential consequences from Jewish or Muslim fundamentalism.
People of faith also understand that, just as those who use Christianity as a weapon are those from whom we distance ourselves and who do not define the Christian faith for the vast majority of Christians the world over, so those who use the great faiths of Judaism and Islam to justify hate and violence do not define those great religious traditions, either.
And perhaps hardest of all, we who are grounded in faith know that, as deep as the cause of the patriot is in the American soul, as the great preacher Canon Eric James has said, the cause of the kingdom of God is greater even than that of the patriot.
It is precisely our love of our country that must compel us to remember who we are as Christian people, and what both the ideals of our democracy and the requirement of our faith demand of us.
These are some of the chief groundings of faith that must guide us through the emotions of these tragic days.
It is not an easy road, and the journey before us will take every ounce of moral and religious courage that we have.
But at our best the people of God, Christians, Jews and Muslims, are a living testimony to the faith that we can be called to a nobler life, a deeper communion, a more perfect way, a new, converted language.
The Rev. Canon Peter Eaton is rector of St. James Episcopal Church, Lancaster, and honorary canon theologian to the Bishop of Utah.

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document