'V' coming at right time
University Wire
March 20, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Daily Toreador via U-Wire
Section: FILM REVIEW
Length: 618 words
Byline: By Jeremy Reynolds, Daily Toreador; SOURCE: Texas Tech
Dateline: LUBBOCK, Texas 
Body


Vengeance always has been a moneymaker for Hollywood from "Man on Fire" to "Kill Bill." "V for Vendetta" -- the newest film from the creators of the "Matrix" -- is one of the strongest films to come out in 2006.
The movie is a solid piece of filmmaking from the opening scene where star Natalie Portman reads a poem that sets the stage for the story, to the end credits where The Rolling Stones' "Street Fighting Man" is playing.
Though the movie is based on a graphic novel, it is not a comic book film. This is a political-thriller that hits terrorism harder than any other film dared to in the past five years. The movie is placed in the future, but it should not be confused with a science-fiction film. It is a movie about revolution, death and transformation.
When the audience members leave the theater, they will pose questions about the issues raised in the film. The plot draws a lot of inspiration from the issues in American society today; from gay marriage to the government using illegal wiretaps to a certain news station that is known for being the government's public-relations machine.
The plot revolves around a masked terrorist known only as V from the marks he leaves after each of his murders. During one of his killing sprees, which he justifies as helping England's society revolt, he saves a young girl (Portman) and takes her back to his home. When she wakes up, she learns she cannot leave because it is too dangerous for her out on the street.
She accepts this fate and eventually agrees to help him in his quest. Her resolve in his ideas leads her to loosing her hair during a torturing session, and her coming to grips with the deaths of her parents.
First-time director James McTeigue has a few moments in the film where he shows complete brilliance. The chilling atmosphere he creates is perfect for the war between the terrorist and the totalitarian British society. His camera angles show he took a lot of tips away from his days as serving as a second-unit director under the Wachowski Brothers -- directors of "The Matrix Trilogy."
This film was pushed back from its original release date of last fall because of fear it might strike a lot of familiar cords with citizens of London after the bombings last summer. After seeing the movie I understand why.
The bombings in the film are hardcore terrorism acts, which creates a problem for the audience because you know you are supposed to like the main character, but it is sort of hard when he is justifying blowing buildings up by saying it will provoke change.
Hugo Weaving, who audience members might recognize as being Agent Smith from the "Matrix" trilogy, is one of the two actors who play the masked hero. He was called in after the first actor dropped out because of creative differences. Since the audience never can see his face or facial expressions, his words must become his character. The way his words roll off in a poetic rhythm thanks to the script by the Wachowski shows a strong acting talent on the part of Weaving.
Whether someone will walk away calling V a terrorist or a freedom fighter is still up in the air, but everyone will walk away talking about this film that has a meaning that is bone deep.
"V for Vendetta" is the first major motion picture to be released since America's war on terrorism to question where the line of terrorism stops and the line of freedom fighter begins. It is a film no studio would have touched four years ago and no audience member was ready for.
The film invokes changes and it questions everything America stands for right now. It is a solid film all around, and the ideas behind it show a deep thought that most films aim for but ultimately miss.
(C) 2006 Daily Toreador via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 20, 2006


End of Document