'V' entertains, provokes
University Wire
March 21, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 The Independent Collegian via U-Wire
Section: FILM REVIEW
Length: 463 words
Byline: Dan Russell, The Independent Collegian; SOURCE: U. Toledo
Dateline: TOLEDO, Ohio 
Body


Perhaps better than any theatrical release from last year, "V for Vendetta" succeeds as both enticing entertainment and an emotive discussion starter.
Set in the near future, this film from the forces behind "The Matrix" presents a totalitarian England where freedoms are taken away in the name of security.
A man simply known as V uses tactics of terrorism to fight back at the government while also trying to stir up revolution among the oppressed people of his country.
Then, in comes the average, everyday girl, Evey, who soon finds herself embroiled with V and his fight.
A good film works on many levels, and every aspect of the multi-layered "V for Vendetta" succeeds.
It has interesting political ideas, dealing with themes of corruption, freedom, terrorism and truth.
The notion that one man's terrorist is another's freedom fighter is explored, but the complexities of such a concept are never ignored.
The tragically heroic V is not meant as an example of Osama, and this is not "Fahrenheit 9/11 Part II: Now With Masks."
Rather than assaulting with pseudo-philosophy and overlong action sequences, this is an involving experience with a genuine story arc and characters that are both textured and real.
The direction from newcomer James McTeigue is fresh, and the images brought to the screen clearly contain ambition and passion.
The performances cannot be overlooked, either.
Natalie Portman does a great job as Evey, but the real standout is Hugh Weaving as V.
Best known as Agent Smith from the "Matrix" trilogy, his face is always covered by a mask. He transcends this limitation, however, by conveying his emotions through subtle movements and the sound of his voice.
Of course, then there is the "C" word: controversy.
While I've only heard a few voices of outrage, I urge anyone who thinks this is simply an anti-American, pro-terrorism film to see it.
Besides the fact that the source material was not written to match such beliefs (the graphic novel "V for Vendetta" was written in the mid-1990s), for as many existent parallels to modern American politics as there are, there are also differences.
The "bad guy" totalitarian government here has more in common with the Taliban or Nazi Germany than the Bush administration.
In many ways, this is a universal story that is unlikely to age.
"V for Vendetta" also has a lot of references to history and historical art, and its theme is more than a simple appraisal or condemnation of some new political practice.
Critic's Conclusion: Filled with involving characters and intriguing ideas, "V for Vendetta" succeeds in many ways as it moves beyond controversy or political hot points to do the most important thing of all: tell a story.
Few films are brilliant, but this surely comes close.
(C) 2006 The Independent Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 21, 2006


End of Document