'V' blurs heroism, terrorism
University Wire
March 21, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Daily Lobo via U-Wire
Section: FILM REVIEW
Length: 529 words
Byline: By Abel Horwitz, Daily Lobo; SOURCE: U. New Mexico
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. 
Body


"V For Vendetta" is a futuristic film that warns of the dangers of a fascist government and justifies terrorist actions to topple such powers.
The film takes place in London in the near future. The government has become increasingly fascist over the years to quell terrorist attacks on London's underground system and water supply. "V For Vendetta" was scheduled for release last November, but after the bombings in London they decided to push the release back five months.
In the London of the future there are strict curfews in effect, and secret police abound. Homosexuals, Muslims and other undesirables have been rounded up, and the government makes it no secret that they listen in on people's private conversations. This is all done under the banner of "For Your Protection." The citizens of London tolerate it all.
The hero of the story, Evey, played by Natalie Portman, works for the British Television Network, the puppet news organization of the government that assures the people all is well and the government is just. Evey gets caught outside after curfew by the secret police, who immediately hold her down and attempt to rape her. Their efforts are thwarted by a masked man, V, played by Hugo Weaving, who wields knives and speaks in riddles.
The plot of the film is complex. V goes around London killing key political allies who all have a connection to his never fully revealed past. While this is going on, V is bringing Evey deeper into his plan to topple the government. Meanwhile, the two are being investigated by Detective Finch, played by Stephen Rea, who attempts to unravel the mysteries of who V and Evey are. Finch is slowly coming to the realization that the government which he gives allegiance to might just be more dangerous than the terrorists he's been assigned to bring down.
"V For Vendetta" is Larry and Andy Wachowski's follow-up film to "The Matrix" trilogy, a series of films that started out with a filmmaking revolution and ended with a whimper.
Keep in mind that the Wachowski brothers did not direct the film. They wrote and produced it, but left the directing up to their "Matrix" assistant director, James McTeigue. The result is a directing style that pales in comparison to "The Matrix" films but still gives the film a dark, comic book atmosphere. "V For Vendetta" will not revolutionize filmmaking the way "The Matrix" did, but that's hardly a criticism.
The message of this film is also in question. Is it warning us about the powers of our current administration, the media and the strength of the government, or is it simply a cool sci-fi film where stuff gets blown up?
The politics of "V For Vendetta" will be endlessly discussed on Internet talk back sites for years to come.
Does this film justify terrorism to topple a corrupt government, or is it simply a comic book turned film that makes you leave the theater thinking? Any way you look at it, "V For Vendetta" is a solid piece of filmmaking, one that deserves to be seen before it is wrongly categorized as an anti-Bush or a pro-terrorist film. "V For Vendetta" is a film that asks you to think for yourself. See it, and then make up your mind.
(C) 2006 Daily Lobo via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 21, 2006


End of Document