'Vendetta' explores value of terrorism
University Wire
March 21, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 The Daily Cardinal via U-Wire
Section: FILM REVIEW
Length: 776 words
Byline: By William Temby, The Daily Cardinal; SOURCE: U. Wisconsin
Dateline: MADISON, Wis. 
Body


"V for Vendetta" is packed with expectations and controversy. It is the first post-"Matrix" outing for the Wachowski brothers and director James McTeigue (their former assistant director). It also must measure up as an adaptation of the classic graphic novel written by Alan Moore and illustrated by David Lloyd. And don't forget-the "hero" goes around blowing up buildings in the name of freedom.
"Vendetta" takes place in a futuristic Britain, where the fascist regime of High Chancellor Sutler (John Hurt) rules the citizenry through surveillance, propaganda and fear. Police accost and nearly rape young Evey Hammond (Natalie Portman) before she is rescued by "V" (Hugo Weaving)-a man wearing a Guy Fawkes mask, wielding knives and quoting "Macbeth." The night's finale features V air-conducting Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture" as London's Old Bailey courtrooms are blown to bits.
The next day, V vows to the public that a year from that night, the houses of Parliament will be destroyed in an effort to rouse Britain's oppressed people and topple Sutler's government. Claims that the film is "anti-American" or "pro-terrorist" are as simplistic as those hailing V as a "freedom fighter." Despite an expected thinning of Moore's graphic novel, "Vendetta" retains the complexity that makes the story difficult and compelling. Evey -- not V -- is the most accessible and sympathetic character to audiences. As Evey states, V is "a monster."
While it appears he does not target civilians in his bombings, he murders numerous party members who experimented on him years ago without any sign of remorse. He manipulates everyone he interacts with, even Evey, in pursuing his vendetta. Despite obvious efforts to make him easier to identify with in the film, V is not a "hero" character, and terrorism is not glorified. Rather, the question is raised, "is terrorism, directed against extremely oppressive governments, ever justified?"
Sadly, the Wachowskis' script makes sure every viewer knows "Vendetta" is a film of big ideas and important questions about the value of freedom and the nature of totalitarianism. However, the film's themes were better addressed decades ago in books like "1984," "Fahrenheit 451," "Brave New World" and Moore's original graphic novel. Though simply undertaking such topics is commendable for a big-budget, mainstream film, "Vendetta" drops them around like anvils all too often. V delivers a handful of lines ready-made for trailer soundbites, and the only way the High Chancellor could appear more evil is with the addition of a Hitler mustache.
But the film is visually marvelous. McTeigue captures an appropriate level of desolation for the slightly futuristic, dystopian London. The "Shadow Gallery," V's base of operations, retains the Renaissance-man style of the novel, warmly packed with leather-bound books, old movie posters and a rundown jukebox.
The action, surprisingly, plays a minor role. Unlike in the "Matrix" sequels, action scenes do not destroy the rapid pace of the plot by dragging on for painful lengths -- a testament to McTeigue's judgment. The fights and explosions are still very exciting; they simply take second-billing to the story. Weaving's performance succeeds wildly, given he is masked throughout. While High Chancellor Sutler is a one-note character, Hurt's "evil dictator" schtick is fantastic. The secondary cast is excellent as well; Stephen Rea as lead investigator Finch admirably carries the many scenes that do not contain V or Evey, and Tim Pigott-Smith plays Sutler's right-hand man Creedy with an appropriate level of dour attitude and sadism. Stephen Fry, Roger Allam and Sinead Cusack all prove memorable, despite spending minor amounts of time on screen.
Portman deserves particular praise as Evey Hammond. Her best section of the film is also the section perfectly adapted from the novel. A co-worker she is staying with is kidnapped in the night after producing a scathing anti-Sutler show, and Evey is captured while trying to escape. She is subsequently tortured and urged to reveal the name or location of V. While in her cell, she discovers a powerful letter from a former detainee, a lesbian named Valerie (played wonderfully by Natasha Wightman).
Evey's torture, Valerie's story and the aftermath of Evey's capture are some of the most touching and poignant moments in recent big-budget memory. Despite its various flaws and controversial material, the movie succeeds because of moments such as these. The grand, sweeping statements fall flat, but the most subtle and human moments of "Vendetta" make the entire flawed endeavor worthwhile.
(C) 2006 The Daily Cardinal via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 21, 2006


End of Document