'War on Terror' needs to focus more on Islam
University Wire
July 19, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1204 words
Byline: By Todd Bembry, Daily Mississippian; SOURCE: U. Mississippi
Dateline: OXFORD, Miss. 
Body


The world has now seen images of the London Four photographed together by a security camera outside an underground station shortly before they split up and proceeded to undertake their deadly work. The men responsible for the deadliest attack on the City of London since Goerring's Luftwaffe were the picture of the anonymity and normalcy of British commuters going about their business using the world's best organized subway system.
Since the London bombings, we have learned much about the perpetrators and practically all of what we have discovered directly challenges what our elites have told us is the nature of terrorism. We have been told that the terrorists who would engage in suicide bombings are crazy or insane. This may be true at some level, according to what we in the West believe to be rational behavior, but none of the London Four displayed any identifiable traits of insanity -- prior to transforming themselves into human explosives delivery systems.
We have been told that terrorists hate "freedom." This characterization might make sense if it were applied to an archetypal figure from Afghanistan or from some other desolate and repressive regime. But these killers were born and reared in Britain and, by all accounts, fully participating members of British society with all the freedoms and responsibilities that being a member of that society entails.
We have been told that terrorists are often anti-intellectual; at least one of the four was university educated and worked as an educator. We have been told that terrorists are criminals and thugs. This is undoubtedly true a posteriori after the lives of 50-plus people have been snuffed out. Before the killers made the fateful decision to detonate, none of them had any kind of criminal background whatsoever. MI-5, the British domestic intelligence service, actually determined, due to lack of conclusive evidence, that one of the killers, Sidique Khan, was not a threat in earlier investigations for suspicious activity.
The killers that have attacked the West in Spanish train stations, New York skyscrapers, the London tube and in the streets of Holland have little in common at all. Theo Van Gogh, a relative of the artist, was butchered like a hog by a religiously motivated jihadist. His killer's trial ended this past month. Some have been Arabs, some are Britons of Pakistani descent and still others are Yemenis. They didn't share a common language -- except perhaps English. Some have been known to come from terrorist cells related to al Qaeda. Others have had no previous involvement with any known cells. Some have been single, others have had families. One of the London killers left behind an 8-month-old child.
The only thing that the killers have had in common is this: All have so far been young men and all were adherents to a fundamentally virulent form of Islam. The four in London all evidently met at a local mosque known for its fiery anti-British and anti-Western rhetoric; Van Gogh's killers said plainly that killing Van Gogh was essentially his religious duty as Van Gogh, whose documentary work dealt with the treatment of women in Islamic societies, was an infidel.
This comes as a shock to many of our elites who have insisted that Islam and terrorism are not mutually linked. Western apologists have told us that terrorism is linked to Western, read American and British, foreign policy in Afghanistan and Iraq and have nothing to do with anything, implied or inherent, in the Islamic faith.
What is even more shocking to some British elites is how shockingly wrong they have been on the nature of immigration and the assimilation process. Instead of Western liberalism creating perfect British citizens out of all of its recent immigrant populations and culturally assimilating, and therefore softening the incidences of religious extremism in a pluralistic society, what has instead happened is a potent mix of Western education combined with some of the worst aspects of the societies that those immigrants left behind. The result is catastrophic. Instead of a "Brave New World" of multicultural assimilation, Britons must now wonder if they have permitted a fifth column entrance. It is a disturbing trend that while the vast majority of Muslims in Western countries are opposed to terrorism against the West, that opposition seems to always be tempered.
Rarely is there an unequivocal condemnation of such actions, although Spanish Muslims were the first to issue just such a fatwa against terrorism in the wake of the Madrid bombings, and, as this is the first such condemnation, it must be lauded. Instead, the typical response is something to the degree of yes, such actions are not acceptable, but such actions are understandable. Any psychologist will tell you that "yes, but" really means "no."
This isn't to say that Islam is the enemy. It can't be, and we in the West mustn't allow those who would seek to define the current terrorism problem as Islam versus the West, like al Qaeda and Bin Laden, to succeed. It goes without saying that the vast majority of Muslim immigrants to Western countries reject extremism and seek only to make a living and make a life in their new homes. But it is unmistakable that extremist Islamic religious figures, like imans at certain mosques and sheikhs like Mohammed Abdel-Rahman and other clerics, are enablers of terrorism in their teachings. It is unmistakable that anti-Western terrorists do fit a certain profile.
We in the West must be willing to shake off our blinders to these simple facts, and then devise counter policies that will seek to truly make us more secure. Living in denial, imposed by the spectre of radical political correctness, about the nature of the threat does not make us more secure. Instead, it makes us less.
It is not a coherent, rational or productive national policy for Homeland Security to frisk 5-year-old black American children at the airport while the State Department offers thousands of visas to students from countries that are known homes of virulent, and violent, Islamic extremists. Defending the borders of Iraq with the Texas National Guard, while the Texas border with Mexico is a wide open hole, and the INS does not know who is in the United States legally or illegally, due to expired visas. This is not rational if we are truly concerned with defending our borders and wishing to know who enters this country and for what purpose.
If we are truly engaged in what has been called a "war on terror," we must define once and for all who and what the enemy is, if it is to be properly engaged and won. Any "war on terrorism" that cannot even properly define who and what the enemy might be is doomed to failure. If this is indeed a war, it must be vigorously prosecuted, however, that is to be defined, as the ultimate goal. This will require the elites in Washington and in London to make hard policy choices on domestic intelligence gathering, immigration policy and even civil liberties. Let us all hope that those elites will have the courage to make them, rather than settle for the easy and politically expedient choice that mollifies all and serves the best interests of none.
(C) 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 19, 2005


End of Document