'War in the shadows': How U.S. will fight terrorism
USA TODAY
August 24, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; COVER STORY
Length: 1508 words
Byline: Andrea Stone
Body


With missile strikes last week against terrorist targets in Afghanistan
and Sudan, the United States may have entered a war without end.
The action put the United States in the front lines of an escalating
war on terrorism.
And America has never faced an enemy like this: one that has no
borders, no government, no diplomats, no standing armies. Unlike
the terrorists of the 1980s who looked to Libya or Iran for support,
Osama bin Laden's global network pledges allegiance to no state
and limits attacks to no continent. Besides the embassy bombings
in East Africa that prompted Thursday's missile attack, these
holy warriors have been linked to bombings and assassination attempts
from the Philippines to Ethiopia to New York.
To bin Laden and his followers, America is a force for evil whose
military bases and corporations must be banished from the Arab
world. Once they are gone, these radicals hope, national borders
drawn by the West can be erased to create one united Muslim nation.
This war of the future is a conflict that cannot be measured by
territory gained. If we won, how would we know?
This is a war in which the daily skirmishes are played out in
office buildings, airports, subways -- anywhere a terrorist might
strike. And that, as recent history has shown, can be anywhere.
As Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering said, "In life there
is no perfect security."
Americans have known since the 1993 explosion at New York's World
Trade Center that terrorist violence is no longer just happens
somewhere else. That blast, too, was linked to bin Laden, the
millionaire believed to be behind the U.S. embassy bombings in
Sudan and Kenya. It hit home again in 1995, when home-grown terrorists
set off a bomb at the federal building in Oklahoma City. But Thursday's
strong military reaction to the bombings in Africa may finally
drive home that the United States is in a global war that has
been building for years. While not formally declared, this is
a conflict in which the Clinton administration is saying enough
is enough.
After the Oklahoma City bombing, Congress authorized the president
to "use all necessary means, including covert action and military
force, to disrupt, dismantle, and destroy international infrastructure
used by international terrorists including overseas terrorist
training facilities and safe havens."
On Thursday, President Clinton used those expanded powers to strike
back at bin Laden. Now Americans are being asked to consider themselves
at war every bit as much as previous generations who locked themselves
in bomb shelters.
"We've got to stay right on top of it and keep the American people
on the ball so that we know that we can win this," Sen. Orrin
Hatch, R-Utah, said Sunday on CBS's Face the Nation. "It's
the new war that we've got to wage."
Constitutional conflicts
But what kind of war? This is not a struggle to seize territory,
control air space or open sea lanes. Unlike the Persian Gulf War,
when military planners could follow lessons from World War II
desert campaigns, there is no precedent to fall back on. For an
idea of what the United States faces on the hinge of the millennium,
look to the long battles between Great Britain and the Irish Republican
Army or Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. And
perhaps accept that those nations at times have had to compromise
civil rights in the name of national security through curfews,
background checks, curtailed access to public buildings and more
metal detectors.
"We have to balance the need to protect the American people against
the need to continue our democratic freedom," said Defense Secretary
William Cohen on NBC's Meet the Press. "There's going
to be that constitutional tension that will continue to exist."
That was evident from the moment the attacks were announced. The
Pentagon refused to divulge any details about the strikes. The
military acted as if under wartime censorship rules not seen since
U.S. troops hit the beaches in Normandy.
"The less you say the better," says Anthony Cordesman, a defense
analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
"You don't want to give terrorists any kind of road map as to
how you're going to respond."
After all, this is war. A war fought by a military force that
must reassess its mission in a post-Cold War world where the spread
of nuclear weapons and the threat of biological warfare can render
the most high-tech weapons impotent. By intelligence-gatherers
working behind the scenes to head off the next attack and accountants
scanning bank records for international money laundering. By security
agencies that erect more concrete barricades, monitor more metal
detectors and question more "suspicious" looking people at airports
and government buildings. And by citizens who live in a society
that can no longer quite trust them -- or anyone -- anymore.
It is a time of high anxiety, says Brian Doyle, a psychiatry professor
at Georgetown University Medical School. And those barriers erected
at the Washington Monument this weekend, while they are an image
of fear, also offer reassurance that measures are being taken
to protect the public.
"Every time you see a blockade you realize, 'Oh, my God, someone
sees danger,' but there is danger and you have to contend with
that," he says. "It's unclear to me what specific benefit concrete
bunkers around the Washington Monument will provide . . . (However,)
anxiety skyrockets in the absence of appropriate action. Simply
sitting being paralyzed by dread just makes you feel worse."
Covert warriors
In this new war, there are few TV images of soldiers boarding
planes or top guns piloting jets off aircraft carriers. The real
battles are being waged covertly by the CIA, the FBI and other
intelligence and law enforcement agencies that have stepped up
counter-terrorism units. Some analysts compare the struggle to
the Cold War, when every government agency focused on one objective:
defeating communism.
Others disagree. "The thought that this replaces the Cold War
is ridiculous," says Carol Lancaster at the School of Foreign
Service at Georgetown University. "This is not threatening the
survival of the American people."
Still, as in the Cold War, the weapon is information. Whether
it is a turncoat's tip or a military unit teaching local civil
defense officials about biological and chemical weapons, information
is the key to victory.
George Washington University professor Bernard Reich, a specialist
in Middle Eastern terrorism, says last week's missile strike points
to a need for greater investment in intelligence. For less than
the cost of rebuilding or renovating a damaged embassy, he says,
the United States could hire hundreds of agents and analysts to
collect and interpret information.
"If I were the CIA director," he said, "I would be up on the
Hill right now saying that I needed 100 more analysts."
FBI agents working in Kenya say that even if the United States
succeeds in wiping out bin Laden -- which administration officials
insist was not the goal of last week's attack -- the Saudi financier
has already trained tens of thousands of terrorists now operating
in more than a dozen countries and in a half-dozen different groups,
many of them working independently.
His network includes followers throughout the Middle East, Central
Asia, Africa, Western Europe and the United States. His adherents
have fought in Algeria, Bosnia, Chechnya, Eritrea, the Philippines,
Somalia, Tajikistan, Yemen and Kosovo.
"The United States must remember that Osama bin Laden gives the
orders from Afghanistan, but second-hand people carry them out,"
says Ronni Shaked, an Israeli expert on Islamic terrorist groups.
"His people are everywhere. This will not be a simple war."
Bin Laden's Afghan training camp and other radical bases "are
best described as loosely organized structures that are designed
essentially to perform psychological and sociological missions,
to instill terror," says Baker Spring, a defense analyst at the
conservative Heritage Foundation think tank.
No short term effort
On Sunday, a small army of senior U.S. officials took to the TV
talk shows to wage a psychological war of their own. They warned
that the nation was "in for the long haul."
"This is something that we're going to be dealing with at the
end of the century and into the next one," said Secretary of
State Madeleine Albright on ABC's This Week.
To underscore that the missile attacks were not a "one-shot deal,"
the Pentagon said it would not rule out future strikes. Clinton
announced Saturday that he had ordered a freeze on bin Laden's
financial assets and dealings in the United States and urged other
nations to do the same. But bin Laden, who has issued a fatwa
decree to kill Americans, is unlikely to have much money invested
in the United States.
Thursday's action illustrated that this war against bin Laden
had escalated beyond economic sanctions.
"We're involved in the kind of struggle that's not going to go
away," says Cordesman. "The only thing worse than being the
world's policeman is having no policeman at all."
Contributing: Mimi Hall, Kevin Johnson and Tom Squitieri in Washington
and Jack Kelley in Nairobi, Kenya

Graphic

 
PHOTO, color, Amr Nabil, AFP

Load-Date: August 24, 1998


End of Document