'we will prevail,' Obama vows; He says nation will be 'relentless' in fighting terror
USA TODAY
December 7, 2015 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 396 words
Byline: Gregory Korte, USA TODAY
Body


President Obama sought to reassure the nation Sunday night amid renewed fears of terrorism, promising to defeat the forces of wanton violence.
"The threat from terrorism is real, but we will overcome it," the president vowed in a prime-time televised address. "We will prevail by being strong and smart, resilient and relentless."
Obama said the terrorist threat has "evolved into a new phase" of attacks hatched at home by extremists "poisoning the minds" of killers already on U.S. soil.
He called on Americans to resist letting fear dictate the response to the mass shootings last week in San Bernardino, Calif. -- or the broader threat from terrorism. He said the FBI has no evidence that the killers were directed by terrorist overseas or were part of a broader conspiracy.
The speech, Obama's third Oval Office address, came three weeks after a terrorist attack in Paris killed 130 people and four days after a husband-and-wife team -- apparently inspired by a similar ideology -- fatally shot 14 at a holiday party.
The White House did not preview any new policies or strategies that the president would announce in his speech, and Obama has resisted sending ground combat troops to Syria or Iraq, where the Islamic State militant group has strongholds.
The U.S. military has ramped up its campaign against the Islamic State in recent weeks: More special operations forces have been dispatched to advise and assist Syrian opposition forces and Iraqi forces.
Since the San Bernardino attacks, Obama has stressed combating the extremist ideology that inspires terrorists by enlisting help from the Muslim-American community to offset such beliefs.
Obama has asked Congress to approve a new use-of-force authorization that would update the global war-on-terror resolution Congress first passed in 2001. He has proposed tightening the visa waiver program, and floated a plan that would prohibit anyone on the "no-fly" terrorist watch list from purchasing a firearm.
Republican presidential candidates reacted with sharp attacks.
"Is that all there is?" Donald Trump, the leader in Republican polls, tweeted. "We need a new President -- FAST!"
Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., appearing on Fox News right after the speech, said Obama failed to address public concerns about the threats from the Islamic State. Nothing the president said "will assuage people's fears," the Florida senator said. 

Graphic

 
photo Pool photo by Saul Loeb

Load-Date: December 8, 2015


End of Document