'We are facilitating their ability to recruit'
Charleston Gazette-Mail
July 29, 2018, Sunday


Copyright 2018 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P4B
Length: 791 words
Byline: Souad Mekhennet and Joby Warrick The Washington Post
Body


BRUSSELS - A few months before his killing rampage, convicted robber and prison inmate Benjamin Herman had a jailhouse conversion of a sort. A white suburban teen and a nominal Catholic when he was first incarcerated, he emerged in late May as an avowed Islamist who would murder three people within hours of gaining freedom on a work-release program.
Herman fatally stabbed two female police officers during his hour-long attack in the Belgian city of Liege, and then used one of their pistols to kill a passing motorist. Shouting "Allahu akbar, he seized a hostage and wounded two more officers before being shot dead in a gun battle with police.
Afterward, as the facts about the killings came to light, one biographical detail stood out: Herman, a product of Belgium's French-speaking middle class, had come under the sway of a group of radical Islamist inmates in prison.
In a country that has acted aggressively to put extremists behind bars as a means of preventing terrorism, the attack stoked fears that Belgium's policy could be having the opposite effect, creating hotbeds of radicalism and sprouting new generations of would-be terrorists.
"Never have so many people been arrested on charges related to terrorism, and never have we seen so many of these guys in prison together, said Thomas Renard, a Belgian terrorism expert and researcher at the Egmont Royal Institute for International Relations in Brussels. "In bringing them together, we are facilitating their ability to recruit. And that is something that will stay with us for a long time.
Across Europe, prisons are the latest battleground in the evolving fight against Islamist-inspired terrorism. Beginning five years ago, Western countries saw thousands of their citizens migrate to Iraq and Syria to join the Islamic State or other Islamist groups. Since 2016, hundreds have returned, but the mood at home has changed. Traumatized by terrorist attacks and a swelling refugee crisis, European countries since 2016 have taken a hard line on returnees, enacting tough laws that require criminal charges and incarceration for anyone who traveled to the Middle East or sought to support Islamists groups abroad. Until 2016, many returnees were simply allowed to go home if there was no proof they had been fighters or involved in terrorist acts.
Europe has seen fewer deaths from terrorist attacks since the policies went into effect. But now European officials are grappling with a new problem: how to prevent prisons from becoming training and recruitment centers for future terrorists. From Belgium and the Netherlands to Germany and France, law enforcement officials are experimenting with markedly different approaches to the problem, including reeducation programs and the near-total isolation of the most radicalized inmates. The efforts are a race against time, as many of the jailed returnees will regain their freedom in less than two years.
"They come to the end of their sentence, and we have no choice but to release them, said a Belgian official who helps supervise the treatment of Islamist inmates in that country's largest prisons. The official, like several others interviewed, spoke on the condition of anonymity out of concern that former inmates might target them.
"Some of them, the official said, "could be human bombs.
"""
Ittre Prison, a walled, high-security complex southwest of Brussels, is one of Belgium's most notorious, one-time home to convicted child molester and murderer Marc Dutroux and a host of organized crime figures. In 2007, it was the site of a spectacular escape by Nordin Benallal, Belgium's "jailbreak king, who used a helicopter crash on the prison's grounds as a diversion that allowed him to escape.Today, Ittre is known as one of two Belgian prisons with special isolation units for dealing with the most radical of the country's jailed Islamists. Called DeRadex, the unit is home to men regarded by Belgian officials as particularly dangerous. As of last month, Ittre's DeRadex section held 13.
The inmates in the section are allowed to socialize with others within the isolation unit only during certain hours and under close supervision. Isolation is, in fact, the essential ingredient in Belgium's new approach for dealing with radicalized prisoners: Although they may not be able to separate inmates from their extremist ideas, prison officials can at least prevent them from contaminating others.
Not all of DeRadex's inhabitants have been convicted on terrorism charges or even have a history of violence. But they are known and feared for their charismatic personalities and ability to draw others to the radical Islamist cause.
"Every time we put them with the rest of the detainees, they engage in recruitment activities, said Val

Load-Date: July 31, 2018


End of Document