'WHO ARE THESE SMILING KILLERES?'
The New York Times
December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 716 words
Byline: By RICHARD D. LYONS
Body


THE outbreak of terrorism worrying American leaders is likely to worsen because the world has entered a period of fundamentalism that spawns acts of fanaticism, according to researchers into violence and its causes. These students of terrorism agree that it is virtually impossible to prevent killings by fanatics who are themselves willing to die.
 Readiness to die for a political belief is so alien to Occidental thought as to baffle most Americans, and indeed the classic cases in recent times have been Oriental: The Japanese kamikaze pilots who dove to their deaths; the Buddhist monks in Vietnam who set themselves on fire, and now the truck drivers in the Middle East who have killed hundreds of people as well as themselves.
''A lot of people are suddenly asking such questions as: 'Who are these smiling killers?' 'Why are they acting the way they are?' and 'Is there any way to stop them other than putting up more sandbags?' '' said Dr. Lawrence Z. Freedman, professor of psychiatry at the University of Chicago and chairman of its Institute for Social and Behavioral Pathology.
Researchers into violence and terrorism and their causes say that outbreak of terrorism, particularly in Middle East, is likely to worsen because world has entered period of fundamentalism that spawns acts of fanaticism; say it is virtually impossible to prevent killings by fanatics who are willing themselves to die (M)
According to Dr. Freedman and other experts, the answers can be both simple and complex. ''It's easy to simply say you're giving your life for your country,'' he said. Yet being part of a religious terrorist group energizes and reinforces the mysticism of it. You are extending yourself to a degree that makes the risks involved, up to and including the loss of your life, secondary to the ultimate gain of the messianic force that is driving you and those around you.''
There is general agreement that the actions of the present group of terrorists stem from religious conditioning inculcated by extremist Shiite imams for hundreds of years. The current conduct of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and the lesser fundamentalist religious leaders of an extremist sect calling itself the Islamic Holy War derives from feuds that started with the formation in Persia at the end of the 11th century of the original Assassins.
 When Suicide Enhances Life
Dr. Paul Wilkinson, professor of international relations at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland, said the minority Shiite fundamentalists were challenging the Sunni orthodoxy. He decribed the situation in the Middle East as ''particularly dangerous because the alliance of Persian Gulf states favoring Iraq is viewed by the religious fundamentalists as the embodiment of the anti-Moslem movement, and the existence of ties between moderate Arab states and the Western nations is high in the Iranian Book of Devils.''
Dr. Robert Lifton, a professor of psychiatry at Yale who has written extensively on the psychology of extremism, said that terrorists ''resort to violence paradoxically in order to affirm their own vitality.'' He added, ''Expressions of terror, even if they are suicidal, can be seen as life-enhancing because the terrorist may see himself sacrificing his life in order to affirm the life of his group. That's why its so hard to suppress terror along traditional lines.''
''We're in the middle of a worldwide epidemic of religious and political fundamentalism,'' he continued. ''We know from the history of Protestant fundamentalism in this country that it is likely to arise where there is fear of the loss of fundamentals, of basic life- affirming beliefs and experiences, indeed of life itself. Hence we have fertile soil everywhere for the emergence of fundamentalism and the invoking of sacred scripture, religious or political, for solutions of all conflicts or problems, not only moral but also political, military and economic.''
Brian M. Jenkins, a Rand Corporation analyst, noted that ''Americans tend to underestimate the power of religious commitment and turn to psychiatrists for explanations of abhorrent behavior. Western society may find it inconceivable that people are willing to blow themselves up in the name of Allah, but the bewilderment is as much a reflection of our society as that of the extremist Shiite.''


End of Document