'Wing' attacks terrorism badly
 Philadelphia Daily News
OCTOBER 4, 2001 Thursday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 11
Length: 532 words
Byline: ELLEN GRAY
Body


SOMETIMES BAD TV happens to good people.
Last night, it happened to the cast of NBC's "The West Wing" and millions of their fans as the show made an ill-advised attempt to cross from its parallel - and fictional - universe into our all-too-real one for one night only.
The object: To explain terrorism, breaking down complex issues into bite-sized pieces that could be swallowed between commercial breaks.
The result: A preachy, artificial hour that at times seemed closer to a "Nick News" special than an adult-oriented drama. While the issues addressed were important ones - the differences between Muslims and Muslim extremists, the role of the CIA in a free society, the ancient roots of the Arab-Israeli conflict - there was little that people who'd watched a reasonable amount of news coverage in the past three weeks would have missed. "West Wing" viewers, reputed to be the most affluent and best-educated audience in broadcast television, probably needed the lecture less than most.
But a lecture is what they got.
The show, which was presented in widescreen format - now practically required for "very special episodes" - opened with deputy chief of staff Josh Lyman (Bradley Whitford) being roped into addressing a group of very bright high school students. When a call comes that the White House is in "crash" mode because of a security breach, he takes them to the cafeteria. When he's conveniently asked a question about terrorism, he proceeds to explain Islamic fundamentalism, with a little help from his friends - Toby (Richard Schiff), C.J. (Allison Janney), Sam (Rob Lowe) and Charlie (Dule Hill) - all of whom drop in on cue. Even President Bartlet (Martin Sheen) shows up briefly, leaving behind the first lady (Stockard Channing) to tell the kids a Biblical bedtime story, the story of Abraham's two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, the ancestors of the Jews and Arabs.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in the White House, chief of staff Leo McGarry (John Spencer) is questioning a suspected terrorist, an Arab-American (Ajay Naidu) who just happens to be in the employ of the President of the United States.
None of this is terrible or even in bad taste. But it is fake, and fake in a way that fiction doesn't have to be.
In deciding to postpone the show's third season premiere, the resolution of a cliffhanger involving his MS-afflicted president's decision on whether to seek re-election, creator Aaron Sorkin set out to write an episode that would stand alone.
It can't, though.
The attacks of Sept. 11 were never alluded to in last night's episode, but it's clear something big must have happened - terrorism simply wasn't Topic No. 1 for many teen-agers or their parents on Sept. 10. But if last night's episode takes place in a post-attack world, well, then suddenly next week's "West Wing" seems even less relevant.
As the real president found out himself three weeks ago, there are certain events that can take over a presidency, shifting its focus forever.
President Bartlet's universe was a safer one. He should have stayed there. *
You can reach Ellen Gray by e-mail at
elgray@phillynews.com, by fax at 215-854-5852 or by mail at the Philadelphia Daily News, Box 7788, Philadelphia, Pa. 19101.  

Notes

TELEVISION

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Last night's "The West Wing" took on a bit of reality TV by dealing with terrorism. In it, C.J. Cregg (Allison Janney), left, and Charlie Young (Dule Hill) take time to explain subject to high schoolers.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document