'You are making a mockery of this': Man guilty of Lake County terrorism threats admonished by judge
Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
February 16, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 515 words
Byline: Jim Newton, Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
Body


Feb. 16--A California man convicted for making terrorism threats following courtroom appearances that featured outbursts and mental-fitness evaluations was granted the right to represent himself throughout the remainder of proceedings in Lake County Circuit Court -- then was admonished by the judge after using profanity.
After answering a series of questions about his education and understanding of the court process, Judge Mark Levitt ruled Thursday that Daniel Pederson, 36, may represent himself in court for post-trial motions and a pending sentencing hearing.
When told the earliest date the judge could hold a status hearing on motions that include a request for a new trial was early March, Pederson became irritated, and as the hearing concluded, said "I don't really give a (expletive)" as he was being led away by court security officers.
Levitt immediately called him back to the bench.
"Now you are making a mockery of this," Levitt said, adding that he would not allow such language or behavior in his courtroom, and because Pederson is now acting as a defense attorney, he will hold him to an even higher standard of conduct.
Pederson's two public defenders, Keith Grant and Jack Idlas, were discharged by Levitt during Thursday's hearing, and after submitting defense documents to the court, they left the courtroom without comment.
Pederson then immediately ran into a series of roadblocks after Levitt denied a request to be freed from jail while he prepares his defense, and he was also unsuccessful in securing his next court date as quickly as he wished.
In May 2016, Pederson was convicted of making terrorism threats against the Lake County Building and Gurnee Police Department after he initially accepted, but then rejected, a negotiated plea deal.
Under terms of the previous deal, he would have already just about served his sentence, but now awaits sentencing for conviction at trial of the class X felony, which carries a range of between 6 and 30 years in prison. He will be given credit for time served in Lake County Jail and a state mental health facility.
Pederson tried to argue that he was not a flight risk and should be freed because under the plea deal, to be served at 50 percent, he would have likely been out of jail now anyway, but Levitt responded "what makes you think you will get six years?"
The judge told Pederson that if he wanted to once again explore negotiations on the sentence, he may discuss the issue with prosecutors Ben Dillon and Lauren Callinan.
The case against Pederson began Sept. 12, 2014, when prosecutors said he called the Illinois Department of Health Care and Family Services and said he was going to "kill people" and "light up" the Lake County Courthouse in Waukegan and the Gurnee Police Department.
Dillon and Callinan declined to comment on Pederson representing himself for the remainder of the case.
jrnewton@tribpub.com
___ (c)2018 the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) Visit the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) at www.chicagotribune.com/suburbs/lake-county-news-sun Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: February 16, 2018


End of Document