1 dead, 10 hurt in crash near mosque suspected as terrorism; Authorities are investigating incident as a potential terrorist attack; driver arrested.
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 18, 2017 Sunday


Copyright 2017 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION WORLD; -
Length: 390 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


London A vehicle struck pedestrians near a mosque in north London early Monday morning, killing one man and injuring 10 people in what police are investigating as a terrorist incident.
Police said the 48-year-old man who was driving the car has been arrested and taken to a hospital as a precaution. He will be given a mental health evaluation.
The crash occurred at a time when the multiethnic neighborhood was crowded with Muslims leaving the Finsbury Park mosque after Ramadan prayers.
Police said the driver was detained by the crowd until police arrived.
The crash occurred shortly after midnight when police received reports of a collision between a van and pedestrians. Police said eight of the injured were hospitalized; the other two had minor injuries and were treated at the scene.
Eyewitnesses reported seeing police give emergency heart massage to at least one of the injured.
The Muslim Council tweeted that worshippers had been struck and said its prayers were with the victims.
London police closed the area to normal traffic. A helicopter circled above the area as a large cordon was established to keep motorists and pedestrians away.
Eyewitness told Sky News and other British media that the van seemed to have veered and hit people intentionally.
Mohammed Shafiq of the Ramadhan Foundation, a Muslim organization, said that based on eyewitness reports it seems to be a "deliberate attack against innocent Muslims."
The Finsbury Park mosque was associated with extremist ideology for several years after the 9/11 attacks in the United States but was shut down and reorganized. It has not been associated with radical views for more than a decade.
Prime Minister Theresa May described the crash as a "terrible incident." The statement from her office said her thoughts were with the injured, their loved ones and emergency services who responded to the scene.
Britain's terrorist alert has been set at "severe" meaning an attack is highly likely.
Earlier this month, a van veered into pedestrians on London Bridge, setting off vehicle and knife attacks that killed eight people and wounded many others on the bridge and in the nearby Borough Market area. Three Muslim extremists who carried out the attack were killed by police.
Manchester was also hit by a severe attack when a bomber killed more than 20 people at an Ariana Grande concert.

Load-Date: June 28, 2017


End of Document