1 IN 4 RELEASED GITMO DETAINEES LINKED TO TERRORISM, REPORT SAYS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 9, 2010 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 483 words
Byline: Carol Rosenberg, The Miami Herald
Body


MIAMI -- About one-fourth of all released Guantanamo detainees have been confirmed or suspected of engaging in terrorism or insurgency activity, the vast majority of them freed in the Bush years, according to a new U.S. intelligence report.
Director of National Intelligence James Clapper included the figure in a report filed Tuesday with Congress that was required by the 2010 U.S. intelligence funding bill.
The 150 former Guantanamo detainees who turned to terrorism or may have done so include 83 men who are at large, 54 who are now in custody and 13 who have been confirmed dead.
In all, the United States has released some 600 captives from Guantanamo. Some have been repatriated to their home nations, others resettled in third countries, and six were sent home after their deaths -- five of them apparent suicides.
The report said 81 men -- 13.5 percent of those released -- were confirmed to have gone on to plan, fund, conduct or recruit for attacks or suicide bombings on U.S. coalition forces or civilians.
In one of the most notorious confirmed cases, Kuwaiti Abdullah al-Ajmi, 29, blew himself up in a truck bombing at Iraqi Army headquarters in Mosul in March 2008. He had spent three years at Guantanamo as Detainee No. 220 and was released through a Bush administration review process in 2005.
Another 11.5 percent of those once held at Guantanamo, or 65 men, are suspected in terror attacks. Those suspicions were based on a single report or "plausible but unverified" information, the intelligence directorate said.
The prison camp census Wednesday stood at 174. Only three of those held have been convicted of war crimes. They include confessed teen terrorist Omar Khadr, who is slated to return to his native Canada next year under a plea agreement. Only one captive is currently facing trial by military commission.
Sen. Kit Bond, R-Mo., who sits on the intelligence committee, used the occasion of the report to urge the White House to stop detainee releases from Guantanamo.
"It is unacceptable to continue transferring these dangerous detainees when we know that 1 in 4 are confirmed or suspected of returning to the fight," Mr. Bond said in a statement that accused President Barack Obama of trying to fulfill a campaign promise to close the facility, rather than "protecting Americans from terrorists."
At the White House, Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes replied, "We take any incidence of recidivism very seriously. We will deal with recidivists the way we deal with any individual who threatens our national security: by working to bring them to justice."
Tuesday's report provided none of the recidivist captives' names or nationalities. It did distinguish between Bush-era releases and those during the current Obama administration, which established a Task Force Review of each captive file in a failed bid to empty the southeast Cuba prison camps by Jan. 22, 2010.

Load-Date: December 9, 2010


End of Document