10 French Soldiers Killed Near Kabul
The New York Times
August 20, 2008 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 274 words
Byline: By CAROLINE BROTHERS and TOM RACHMAN
Dateline: PARIS 
Body


Ten French soldiers were killed and 21 were wounded in an ambush in Afghanistan,  President Nicolas Sarkozy of France said on Tuesday. 
  The ambush, the deadliest episode for the international forces in Afghanistan in more than three years, came at a time of worsening violence in Afghanistan, and  mounting concerns that radical Islamic terrorists may have shifted their focus to Afghanistan from  Iraq.
  ''In its fight against terrorism, France has been dealt a harsh blow,'' Mr. Sarkozy said in a statement. He said he would travel to Kabul later in the day.
  The ambush took place on Monday, when French parachutists were on a joint reconnaissance mission with the Afghan Army, the president said. They were quickly pinned down, and eventually fought off the attackers when allied air support arrived. 
  ''I acknowledge with respect and emotion the courage of these men, who fulfilled their duty to the point of the supreme sacrifice,'' Mr. Sarkozy said. ''My determination is intact. France is determined to pursue the struggle against terrorism, for democracy, and freedom.'' 
  Afghan officials told The Associated Press that the ambush took place in the Surobi district of Kabul Province, about 30 miles east of Kabul, the Afghan capital. One official said that four of the French soldiers who died were first captured by the attackers, and then were killed. 
  France has about 3,000 military personnel in Afghanistan, operating as part of a NATO-led coalition. The A.P. said the ambush on  Monday was the deadliest attack against international troops in the country since June 2005, when 16 American troops were killed in Kunar Province.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 20, 2008


End of Document