11 indicted in terrorism on area Asians
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 23, 1994, Friday, Tampa Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: TAMPA TODAY; TAMPA BAY & STATE; Pg. 3B
Length: 407 words
Byline: PAUL ABERCROMBIE
Dateline: TAMPA
Body


Eleven men who authorities say are part of a gang that has terrorized the bay  area's Asian community for several years have been indicted on federal  racketeering charges.
The U.S. Attorney's Office on Thursday announced the indictments of the  men, who they say are responsible for home invasions, restaurant hold-ups and  murder.
The indictments came after a more than yearlong investigation involving the  FBI, Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office, Tampa Police Department and the  U.S. Attorney's Office.
ASIAN
Dressed in a natty sweater and denim shirt, Hai Van Nguyen, a 30-year-old  Tampa resident described as the gang's ringleader, scowled and cocked his head  to one side Thursday during his arraignment before Federal Magistrate Judge  Tom McCoun.
Six of the eleven men charged already were jailed, and the other five were  arrested Wednesday and Thursday, officials said.
Most of the men already had been charged in state court with a variety of  crimes, including the April 23 murder of Khanh Quoc Le during a robbery in the  parking lot of the Little Saigon Restaurant in Tampa.
They have also been linked to a number of home invasions - usually  targeting other Asians - that have occurred in the last year. Local  authorities have said they believe fear of retaliation has kept many victims  from speaking up.
The federal racketeering charges were brought because of the conspiratorial  nature of the crimes.
"It allowed us to pull all the crimes together for a federal case," said  FBI spokesman Bob Ulmer.
If convicted of racketeering, the men could face up to life in prison.
Many of the men have lengthy criminal records. Hai Van Nguyen was sentenced  in 1988 for 12 years in prison for armed robbery and kidnapping, but was  released by 1991.
The other men indicted on racketeering charges include: Conghau Huu To, 25,  and Tuan Duc Phung, 22, both of Tampa; Lap Van Le, 22, and Nguyen Tu Doan, 22,  of Atlanta; Tai Tan Pham, 22, of New Jersey; Liem Thanh Luong, 20, of Anaheim,  Calif., and Thanh Le, 23, Tam Mihn Le, 28, and Dung Quoc Nguyen, 18, all of  St. Petersburg.
The FBI and the U.S. Attorney's Office believe this indictment has netted  the entire gang, though it's possible some have ties to gang members  elsewhere.
"They know Vietnamese gang leaders in other states," Ulmer said. "But as  for them having tentacles stretching into other states, we don't think that's  true right now."
A pretrial hearing will be held Jan. 17.

Load-Date: December 23, 1994


End of Document