11 men face federal charges of planning terrorism overseas
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
June 28, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 312 words
Byline: By David Stout New York Times News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- Federal agents carried out raids in three states early on Friday, rounding up men who officials said belonged to an anti-American terror group and were practicing for attacks in other countries.
Eleven men were charged in a 41-count federal indictment with conspiring to "prepare for and engage in violent jihad" against targets in the Philippines, Chechnya and Kashmir, a disputed border region claimed by both India and Pakistan.
Six of the suspects were picked up on Friday, in Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia, the authorities said. Two others charged in the plot were already in custody, while three others are believed to be in Saudi Arabia.
There was no suggestion by the authorities that the 11 men were planning any terror attacks against the United States, and it was difficult to ascertain how serious a threat investigators believed the men to be. But federal prosecutors appeared to treat the matter seriously on Friday.
"These indictments are a stark reminder that terrorist organizations of various allegiances are active in the United States, and these groups exploit America's freedom as a weapon to recruit and position themselves on our shores, in our society," the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, Paul J. McNulty, said at a news conference in Alexandria.
The authorities said the suspects had been stockpiling weapons and ammunition and meeting at an Islamic center in suburban Washington, where a cleric inspired them to violence.
The men are accused of membership in an extremist Muslim organization, Lashkar-e-Taiba, sometimes rendered as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, whose main goal is driving India out of the disputed Kashmir territory, federal authorities said. The organization, whose name means "army of the righteous," is on the State Department's list of terror organizations and is characterized as strongly anti-American.

Load-Date: June 28, 2003


End of Document