11-VOLUME MANUAL A HOW-TO GUIDE FOR TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
October 2, 2001, Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 420 words
Byline: By CORKY SIEMASZKO DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body

The "Manual of Afghan Jihad" is the new Koran for Islamic terrorists.
While the real Koran advocates peace, the 11-volume opus that Osama Bin Laden's soldiers follow is a manual for mayhem.
Like the bomb-making and sabotage guide "The Anarchist Cookbook," the Bin Laden books are a chilling read. In addition to instructions on using poison gas or slitting an enemy's throat, the guide is full of warped religious exhortations that make clear the enemy is us.
"Adopt the path of jihad according to the teachings of Islam against the un-Islamic and satanic states, as well as against those Muslim states where true Islam has not been introduced," the manual says.
There's also a chapter that the Sept. 11 terrorists may have consulted - on hand-to-hand combat, with instructions about "how to threaten with a knife, piercing with a knife."
Bin Laden's hijackers are believed to have taken over four jets using knives or box cutters.
The terrorist tomes were obtained by The Associated Press from a former Afghan guerrilla who said he got them from a renegade Libyan fighter who stole them in July from Bin Laden's headquarters in Kandahar, which is also the home base of Afghanistan's Taliban rulers.
The preface to "Mouswada al Jihad al Afghani," the Arabic name of the manual, says it was compiled by "The Services Office of the Training Camps" and that this "Services Office" was founded by Bin Laden. The target is identified as "the enemies of our movement, the enemies of Allah, for any Islamic group."
Each volume begins with dedications to Bin Laden, who "took part in jihad with his life and money in Afghanistan," and other allies of Islamic terrorism.
Written in Arabic, each volume runs from 250 to 500 pages and deals with a specific area of expertise.
"What's your desire?" the text asks. Then it provides the answer with step-by-step instructions on how to acquire and mix various explosives.
'Preparedness for war'
Another section gives detailed instructions on how to blow up a plane, take an armored vehicle, ambush an airport or spy on a military base.
A chapter on security and intelligence says that "in preparedness for war, security and intelligence-gathering of the enemy's power and strategy have been emphasized, according to the instructions of the Koran."
The chapter on "basic sabotage and destruction" offers would-be assassins options including "poison-making, poisonous gases and poisonous drugs."
They are instructed on what kind of plants can be used to make poison gas and how much is needed to kill a man.

Graphic

 
AP BIBLE OF BILE Some of the 11 volumes of "Manual of Afghan Jihad," which teach assassination and mass murder.

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document