12 HELD IN SWEEP * 'Enough,' says PM as ISIS brags * Trump tweets attack on London mayor
Daily News (New York)
June 5, 2017 Monday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2017 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 705 words
Byline: BY MEERA JAGANNATHAN, DAN GOOD and STEPHEN REX BROWN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Elizabeth Elizalde and News Wire Services
Body


ISIS CLAIMED responsibility Sunday for the London attack that left seven people dead and dozens injured as British Prime Minister Theresa May declared "enough is enough."
Police arrested 12 people as part of a growing investigation into the three terrorists who used a van and large knives to turn a balmy evening into a bloodbath. The Islamic State declared online that its "fighters" had carried out the attack, according to the SITE intelligence group.
Authorities were racing to determine if the attackers, who were killed by police, had accomplices.
May also warned that the country faces a new threat from copycat terrorist attacks. The country has suffered three horrific attacks already this year.
On May 22, a suicide bomber blew himself up at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester, killing 22, many of the victims teens and one just 8 years old. A vehicle and knife attack in London in March left five people dead.
"While we have made significant progress in recent years, there is, to be frank, far too much tolerance of extremism in our country," May said.
"We believe we are experiencing a new trend in the threat we face," she added, saying "terrorism breeds terrorism."
Five credible terrorist plots have been disrupted since March, she said.
"It is time to say, enough is enough," May said.
The prime minister called for internet companies to regulate extremism, but said "safe spaces in the real world" needed to be rooted out, too.
"That will require some difficult, and often embarrassing, conversations," she said. She vowed the United Kingdom's general election set for Thursday will go ahead as planned.
President Trump, meanwhile, fired off three tweets criticizing London Mayor Sadiq Khan.
"At least 7 dead and 48 wounded in terror attack and Mayor of London says there is 'no reason to be alarmed!' " Trump tweeted. Khan actually said people should not be alarmed by the increased police presence on the streets.
Khan's spokesman replied he had "more important things to do than respond to Donald Trump's ill-informed tweet."
Hours later, Trump condemned the attack publicly.
Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) vowed the U.S. would support Britain in the fight against terrorism - but that Trump could do more.
"Amazingly, with terrorism on the rise, President Trump actually proposed cutting vital anti-terrorism funding in his budget last week," Schumer said. "Given what has happened in Europe, we are calling on the President to immediately abandon these proposed cuts."
The dozen arrests on Sunday occurred in Barking, east of London, the Metropolitan Police Service said in a statement. The suspects were five men and seven women, between the ages of 19 and 60.
A 55-year-old suspect was later released without charges, officials said.
The identities of the attackers have not been revealed.
They plowed a van into pedestrians at busy London Bridge, then attacked people at nearby Borough Market before being shot dead by police.
"They went, 'This is for Allah,' and they had a woman on the floor. They were stabbing her," witness Gerard Vowls said.
Florin Morariu, a Romanian chef who works in the Bread Ahead bakery, said he saw people running and some fainting.
Then two people approached another person and "began to stick the knife in . . . and then I froze and I didn't know what to do," he said.
Morariu hit one attacker in the head with a breadbasket.
"There was a car with a loudspeaker saying, 'Go, go,' and they (police) threw a grenade . . . and then I ran," he said.
Richard Angell was eating at a local restaurant when the terrorists struck. Overlaying the terror with civility, Angell went back Sunday to pay his bill.
"I've got to pay my bill. Also, we haven't given the staff a tip, and they looked out for us when they should have been helping themselves," he said.
The three terrorists wore suicide belts that were later revealed to be fake.
Officers killed the attackers within eight minutes of arriving at the scene, police said.
Police gunfire accidentally left a bystander with noncritical injuries, Metropolitan Police Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley said, describing an "unprecedented" 50 rounds fired by eight officers.
"There is clearly more to do, and we will work relentlessly to get to the facts," he said.

Graphic

 
The day after devastating attack, Britons show their resolve Sunday with clear message to terrorists amid memorial to victims. Left, a bobby displays her grief. Upper left, Prime Minister Theresa May says there is "far too much tolerance of extremism in our country." Upper right, one of suspects arrested in probe. REUTERS; AFP/GETTY

Load-Date: June 6, 2017


End of Document