13 years after 9/11, terror threat undiminished
USA TODAY
August 7, 2014 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 523 words
Byline: James S. Robbins
Body


Last January, President Obama dismissed the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria  as a mere junior varsity terrorist outfit compared with al-Qaeda. "The analogy we use around here sometimes, and I think is accurate," he told The New Yorker, "is if a JV team puts on Lakers uniforms, that doesn't make them Kobe Bryant."
Flash-forward to this summer. Islamist radicals control vast lands across Iraq and Syria, and this week they crossed the border into Lebanon. Their victims' heads festoon telephone wires in Raqqa, Syria, and they have posted videos online showing mass executions of prostrate Iraqis.
Other terror groups are rallying to their black banner. In June, the group shortened its name to simply the Islamic State, with its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, assuming the title of caliph. President Obama may think these militants are JV, but they clearly see themselves as big league.
The Islamic State is metastasizing much the same way al-Qaeda did, but on an accelerated timeline. Osama bin Laden's network grew in the 1990s by recruiting foreign fighters who had battled the Red Army in Afghanistan in the 1980s. The Islamic State has developed its own deep bench of talent, recruiting from countries throughout the Middle East, Europe and even the United States. Franchises are reportedly opening in Libya and Tunisia. The North African terror conglomerate Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb  has aligned with the Islamic State. Nigerian Boko Haram leader Abubakar Shekau has sworn allegiance to al-Baghdadi, as has Abu Sayaaf leader Isnilon Hapilon in the Philippines.
The Islamic State now controls more fighters, more territory and a larger alliance system than al-Qaeda ever did.
Like bin Laden, al-Baghdadi is exploiting the breakdown in state sovereignty and seizing control of ungoverned spaces. The problem of governance is even worse today than it was in the 1990s, though the White House seems unaware. In June, Obama declared that "the world is less violent than it has ever been." In July, White House spokesman Josh Earnest boasted of the administration's role in increasing global "tranquility." Obama's perspective is that America is winning the war on terrorism because bin Laden is dead and U.S. drones continue to decimate "core al-Qaeda."
This perspective is dangerously outdated. The war on terrorism has always been less a battle against a specific terror organization than a struggle against a violent, transnational extremist ideology. Al-Qaeda is no longer the leading force in global Islamist terrorism; the torch has passed to the Islamic State, which we ignore at our peril.
In his first public statement as caliph, al-Baghdadi proclaimed that the world is divided into two camps, the "camp of Islam" and the "camp of the Jews, the crusaders (and) their allies," led by the United States. Like bin Laden, he has a vision.
When leaving prison in Iraq in 2009, he told his U.S. captors, "I'll see you guys in New York." We may not be at war with the Islamic State, but it is at war with us.
James S. Robbins, author of The Real Custer: From Boy General to Tragic Hero, is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors. 

Load-Date: August 7, 2014


End of Document