14 accused of illegally funneling money to Middle East Charges include racketeering conspiracy, bank fraud, conspiracy to receive stolen goods and transporting money to avoid reporting requirements.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 15, 2008 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. C4
Length: 778 words
Byline: By Robert Patrick ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH 
Body


St. Louis - A federal indictment made public Tuesday accuses 14 people of operating a criminal enterprise here that illegally funneled money to the Palestinian territories.
Although the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force was one of the agencies on the case, officials would not comment on whether they think terrorism was involved in the crime.
"Our investigation continues and we will go wherever the leads take us," said John Gillies, special agent in charge of the FBI at St. Louis.
U.S. Attorney Catherine Hanaway said, "We can't say anything more than what's in the indictment."
Officials did acknowledge that nonterrorism investigations are often begun or conducted by the task force, which uses federal and local officers side-by-side. The Internal Revenue Service and the Postal Inspection Service were also involved.
After a three-year investigation, federal agents and local police served search warrants Tuesday morning and arrested nine men on charges including racketeering conspiracy, bank fraud, conspiracy to receive stolen goods and transporting money to avoid reporting requirements. Hanaway called the raids "a massive show of force."
Officials said two suspects are at large in the U.S., two at large overseas and one has agreed to surrender.
According to the indictment, handed down last week and unsealed Tuesday, members of the "Hamed Organization," led by Bassam H. "Sam" Hamed, 33, of Florissant, were enriching themselves and unspecified associates in the U.S. and transferring money to "entities" in the Palestinian territories.
Federal officials would not specify those entities, other than to say they were not individuals. Officials also would not say anything about the purpose of either the money or the entities.
The indictment says that as far back as 2000, the men were using St. Louis area convenience stores as headquarters of the criminal enterprise, selling contraband or stolen cigarettes, liquor, infant formula, computers and GPS units.
Leaders of the conspiracy lied on bank and mortgage loan forms and fraudulently sold the stores and other property to other members of the conspiracy so that they could siphon money off the loans, the indictment claims.
The gang got the money to Israel, Palestine or Jordan with couriers who secretly carried cash, jewelry, cashiers checks and business checks, the indictment says.
Officials said that some of the alleged conspirators are U.S. citizens and the others were here legally.
Hanaway estimated that $250,000 may have been sent overseas out of possibly as much as $1.5 million in criminal earnings.
The stores raided Tuesday were:
- Ferguson Market, 9101 West Florissant Road in Ferguson.
- Regal Food I, 4201 McCree Avenue, St. Louis.
- Regal Food II, 3852 Virginia Avenue, St. Louis.
- Prince Market, 9826 St. Charles Rock Road, St. Ann.
- St. Louis Supermarket, 4331 Natural Bridge Avenue, St. Louis.
The manager of a McDonald's next to the Ferguson Market, who would only identify himself only as "Keith," said police arrived as early as 5 or 6 a.m. at the market. At 1 p.m. Tuesday, investigators were still there, with vehicles blocking the driveway, but they left less than an hour later.
According to the indictment, Bassam Hamed's brothers Ghandi H. "Andy" Hamed, 30, and Ayoub H. "Frank" Hamed, 27, were also involved in the conspiracy, as was Said Jarabaa, 35. All live in Florissant except Ayoub Hamed, who lives in Hazelwood.
Jarabaa was tried on federal arson conspiracy charges in 2005 for allegedly trying to burn down grocery stores for insurance money. Jurors were deadlocked, and he was not retried.
Also charged in the indictment Tuesday were Florissant residents Suhail Jarabaa, 28, Mohammed Badwan, 33, Mazen Badwan, 36, Abdelkarim Badwan, 58, Nael Abdeljabbar, 48, and Nayef Lutfeyyah, 66; Hazelwood resident Mahmoud Ghannam, 46; St. Louis residents Mahir Mohammad, 44, and Shahrazad Ramadan, 55; and Rayqa Jarabaa, 58, of the Middle East. 
Two women at Bassam Hamed's home declined to comment when a reporter stopped by Tuesday afternoon.
Lawyer Rob Lutfiyya, who has represented a number of the men in civil and business matters, said that although he recognizes that the "innuendo" may suggest terrorism connections, he doubted it.
"I would be shocked if that was the case," he said.
"They're hard-working guys. They're family guys. They're trying to make names for themselves," he said. Lutfiyya said the men came to the U.S. as teens and still have family in the Middle East.
"I'm sure they were sending money to support them," he said, "just like people send money to Mexico to support their families."
He added, "It's tough if you're in the West Bank and trying to make a living."

Load-Date: October 15, 2008


End of Document