14-year-old arrested in plot to hold class hostage: Mesa 8th-grader suspected of terrorism, assault
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
March 24, 2007 Saturday


Copyright 2007 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 335 words
Byline: Christian Richardson, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Body


Mar. 24--A 14-year-old boy who told police he planned to hold his class hostage and harm anyone who tried to stop him was arrested Friday on suspicion of terrorism, attempted kidnapping and aggravated assault.
Police had been investigating the eighth-grader at Mesa's Powell Junior High School after a girl reported he had threatened her with a knife Thursday, said Mesa police spokeswoman Holly Hosac.
The teen is described as having been a good student, involved with the Boy Scouts and Young Marines, Hosac said. The Tribune is choosing not to identify him because of his age.
On Thursday he confronted the girl with a knife and pulled her off the sidewalk, Hosac said. She escaped and told police about the incident.
On Friday morning, officers waited on campus for him, but when he didn't show up they went to his home. There, police said they found the teen with a backpack filled with a gun, knives, rope and chain.
He told officers that he intended to hold his third-hour class hostage and said he wouldn't let police stand in his way, Hosac said, adding that there is a boy in that class he didn't like.
In a letter addressed to parents, principal Nancy Guerra Roberts called the threats "a serious matter."
"A student who harasses or threatens someone will face disciplinary action from school in addition to possible police action," she wrote.
The teen was arrested on suspicion of terrorism, attempted aggravated assault, kidnapping, aggravated assault, attempted kidnapping, aggravated assault against a police officer and attempted interference with an educational institution.
He was transported to a holding facility for juveniles in Mesa, but police will recommend he be tried as an adult, Hosac said.
Copyright (c) 2007, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: March 25, 2007


End of Document