15 years later, Iran leads way in terror, repression
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 11, 1994, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 922 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It's almost a truism in this town that Americans - in government or out -  don't like to think about more than one foreign villain at a time.
For 45 years or so, our chief international threat came from the Soviets  and our entire focus was on the "Red menace" from Moscow. When the Kremlin's  empire fell apart a few years back, Saddam Hussein's Iraq replaced it as the  foremost enemy of democracy and everything else we hold sacred.
More recently, the torch passed on to North Korea, which may or may not  have a few atomic bombs and definitely has a pair of leaders unstable enough  to use them.
WSHIRAN-2
But for quite a while now, another country out there has been more of a  day-to-day threat to us than the others even though it's not as powerful. That  country, some of you won't be surprised to hear, is Iran.
The Islamic Republic in Iran is celebrating its 15th anniversary today, and  this is as good a time as any to take another look at the country whose hatred  for America exceeds all others.
Most of us remember very well when the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini took  power in February 1979 and how it wasn't long before his followers seized the  U.S. Embassy and held 52 American diplomats hostage for more than a year.
Many of us also remember that Iran quickly earned itself a reputation as  one of the world's leading human rights abusers and supporters of  international terrorism.
Among the many terror groups receiving money from the Iranians over the  years, probably none is better known than Lebanon's Hezbollah organization.  This is the organization that bombed the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, killed 241  U.S. Marines near the Beirut airport and held Americans hostage in various  parts of the country in the early 1980s.
Other radical or terrorist groups getting Iranian aid included the Hamas  fundamentalists in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, the fundamentalist  government in Sudan, Islamic groups in Egypt and the Islamic Front in Algeria.
There are even suspicions that Iranian money was involved in the bombing of  the World Trade Center in New York.
Under Khomeini and his successors in Tehran, Iranian hit teams also have  been busy over the past decade assassinating exiled opponents of the regime.
Their most prominent victim was Iran's former prime minister, Shahpour  Bakhtiar, whose throat was slit outside his Paris home in 1991. But the hit  teams' favorite targets over the years have been members of the People's  Mojahedin, largest and best organized of the Iranian opposition groups.
The latest flap over Iranian terrorism came last month when France released  two Iranian intelligence agents wanted in Switzerland for the killing of an  Iranian dissident in Geneva.
The Swiss protested, of course, and so did the United States. It didn't do  any good. The two Iranians went back home, and the French would say only that  they were released because "national interests" were at stake.
That was generally interpreted as meaning the Iranians had promised to hold  off killing anybody on French territory for a while.
When it comes to human rights, the Iranian regime now led by President  Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has been no less bloody than it has been in  supporting terrorism.
The State Department's latest international human rights report has Iran  near the top of the list of nations using assassination, torture and  repression to silence its domestic critics.
Most of the dirty work is carried out by the Revolutionary Guards or agents  from the Ministry of Intelligence and Security, popularly known as VEVAK. By  most accounts, both organizations are now more dreaded than Shah Reza  Pahlavi's Savak secret police were before the revolution.
According to the State Department, Rafsanjani's government "equates active  political opposition to Iran's Islamic revolution with terrorism." In  practice, that means the government is summarily executing hundreds of  political dissidents without fair trials.
The "trials" - if you can call them that - often last five minutes or  less. Defense lawyers are unheard of and the charges are often things like  "moral corruption" or even stranger, "siding with global arrogance."
Torture is another common practice in Iran, according to the State  Department. Among the favorite methods used are suspending prisoners in  contorted positions for long periods of time, burning them with cigarettes,  beating them with cables or clubs and starving them until they confess.
When the International Red Cross sent in a team to look into the torture  allegations, its members were thrown out of the country.
Religious persecution has been another hallmark of the Islamic republic.  The 10 percent of Iranians who aren't Shiite Muslims suffer varying degrees of  discrimination.
Worst treated are members of the Bahai religion, an offshoot of Islam the  authorities consider heretical and illegitimate. Thousands of Bahais have been  imprisoned and hundreds executed since 1979.
Two incidents of what is believed to be government-sanctioned religious  persecution occurred last month. The bishop of the small Assemblies of God  Christian church was murdered and the 12-year-old daughter of a Bahai  religious leader was kidnapped and tortured.
The United Nations has a special envoy to look into Iran's human rights  abuses but he has been barred from the country for the past three years.
This is the country marking its 15th anniversary today. Many in Tehran will  be celebrating, but I'll bet that just as many will be wondering what it is  they accomplished back in 1979.

Load-Date: February 15, 1994


End of Document