15 years of neglect invited embassy disasters
USA TODAY
August 13, 1998, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 421 words
Body


In the aftermath of murderous attacks on two American embassies
in Africa, the rush to avoid a repeat -- and to escape blame --
is on. The State Department has closed six vulnerable embassies,
at least temporarily, President Clinton wants a report on security
shortages at U.S. facilities worldwide produced pronto, and Congress
promises expedited funding for security upgrades.
That's all fitting -- and embarrassingly late, as reports Wednesday
made painfully obvious.
The State Department revealed that twice in the past eight months,
pleas from the ambassador to Kenya for a new, safer embassy were
rejected for lack of money. That response is the norm, not an
exception.
For 15 years, the White House and Congress have done a dismal
job of protecting U.S. facilities abroad despite frequent warnings.
Since 1983, when bombers attacked U.S. embassies in Kuwait and
Beirut and killed 241 Marines at their barracks in Lebanon, the
risks have been glaring. A special commission appointed to investigate
those attacks explicitly defined the need to fortify U.S. assets
overseas. A decade later, after a bomb killed 19 at a military
training center in Saudi Arabia, an investigation again found
a lack of preparedness.
Yet over the past 10 years, Congress, squeezing to balance the
budget, has authorized only $ 1 billion of more than $ 3 billion
sought by the commission to upgrade vulnerable facilities. The
Reagan, Bush and Clinton administrations did no better, consistently
failing to make a strong, public case for counterterrorism needs
or to insist on the appropriations the commission wanted.
This past year, the General Accounting Office, Congress' watchdog,
has repeated warnings about the lack of focus, poor management
and ineffective budgeting among the 40 agencies, bureaus and offices
sharing a role in combating terrorism. Confusion about who is
doing what -- and even in defining terrorism -- is so pervasive
that the GAO was unable to determine just how much is allocated
each year for terrorism needs by federal agencies.
In this leadership vacuum and ensuing confusion, the political
pledges that routinely followed each disaster have proved hollow.
So far, the response to the African attacks is no different. Neither
Clinton nor Congress has offered any definitive plan for improving
security, settling instead for another round of vague promises
to provide money.
More than 250 people paid with their lives last Friday for past
bumbling. But unless the nation's leaders learn to back their
words with action, it's nearly certain to happen again.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Bill Foley, AP

Load-Date: August 13, 1998


End of Document