15th East Asia summit: India emphasizes respecting the territorial integrity
The Sentinel
November 15, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 502 words
Byline: Sentinel Digital Desk
Body


New Delhi: India on Saturday in a direct message to China, expressed concern over "movements and incidents" that "erode" trust within The South China Sea and stressed the importance of adhering to global legislation, upholding territorial integrity and sovereignty.
In an address at the 15th East Asia Summit (EAS), S Jaishankar, the External Affairs Minister spoke about the Indo-Pacific and noted the growing interest in the region as an integrated and organic marine space with ASEAN of 10 countries at its center.
Regarding the new announcement of insurance policies through several nations for the Indo-Pacific region, the external affairs Minister said that it would not be a problem to reconcile multiple approaches in any way, if there is a dedication to global cooperation.
The summit held in the digital format was chaired by Prime Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, in his capacity as chair of Affiliation of Southeast Asian international locations (ASEAN). The event was attended by all the EAS members.
India generally represented the summit by the Prime Minister.
In an addition, Minister Jaishankar underlined the need for greater global corporations in the post-Covid world to cutting across nationwide obstacles such as Terrorism, climate change, and pandemics. The Minister said.
The East Asia Summit is a premier forum in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of dealing with issues relating to security and defense.
Since its inception in 2005, it's been playing an important role within the strategic, geopolitical, and financial evolution of East Asia.
The East Asia Summit includes India, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia, New Zealand, the United States, and Russia.
Minister Jaishankar stressed the significance of the EAS because the leaders-led forum to exchange views on strategic issues and spoke of the "significance of adhering to global legislation, respecting territorial integrity and sovereignty, and selling a rules-based international order". MEA stated.
His comments on the need to uphold territorial integrity and sovereignty came amid the bitter borderline between India and China in eastern Ladakh, and Beijing's growing expansionist actions in the South China Sea and Indo-Pacific.
China claims sovereignty over the 15th East Asia summit that entire South China Sea, heavily supplying hydrocarbons. However, several ASEAN member countries oppose claims with Vietnam, the Philippines, and Brunei.
Amid the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, China has significantly ramped up military crimes over the past few months, intensifying global concerns in the South China Sea.
India has been pitching for a rules-based order within the region in compliance with global law, particularly the Joint International Venues Convention in Regulation of the Sea (UNCLOS).
The summit issued a proclamation and similarly followed 4 statements on marine sustainability; Epidemic prevention and reaction; Girls, Peace and Safety; and secure expansion of the regional financial system, the MEA stated.

Load-Date: November 16, 2020


End of Document