171 city police officers move up the ranks;
Anti-terrorism unit announced
 Philadelphia Daily News
March 16, 2002 Saturday


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: M; news
Length: 807 words
Byline: NICOLE WEISENSEE EGAN weisenn@phillynews.com  
Body


AMASSIVE WAVE of transfers in the Philadelphia Police Department went into effect late yesterday after a morning promotions ceremony that elevated 171 officers to new positions.
Interim Police Commissioner Sylvester Johnson, who received a standing ovation from the audience at Temple University's Liacouras Center, also announced he has formed a new anti-terrorism unit and shifted resources to place a greater emphasis on fighting drugs.
It's all about fighting crime smarter and more efficiently, he said. "I think we have to fight the national terrorists and the local terrorists [the drug dealers]," he said in an interview last night.
He also said he is making the Special Victims Unit, which investigates rapes and child abuse cases, its own division. Joseph Mooney, who oversaw the unit as a captain, will now oversee it as an inspector.
"We've formed a good coalition with the women's groups and I wanted to let them know I take their issues seriously," Johnson said.
Johnson's anti-terrorism unit will be run by newly promoted Chief Inspector Charles Temparali and Inspectors Joseph O'Connor and Charles Grasso.
O'Connor comes from the Command Inspections Bureau, or night command, where he was banished last May from his prestigious post as head of the Tactical Training Unit. He was passed over for a promotion to chief inspector because of a district attorney probe into the possible cover-up of a car accident he had nearly two years ago.
Grasso was transferred from the Southwest Police Division. They will work out of Police Headquarters, will liaison with the federal terrorism task force and will go to New York on April 2 to begin training, Johnson said.
"Grasso is an expert in hazardous materials and is a diver," Johnson said."O'Connor was in Army intelligence and is fluent in three or four different languages. I need people in the department to give me daily updates on what's going on with terrorism because when something happens we have to be united."
Two newly promoted inspectors - Mark Dorsey and Joseph Sullivan - will preside over the Narcotics Division. They replace Inspector Jeremiah Daley, who will move to the Northeast Police Division.
"In 1997, there was one inspector with 200 people," Johnson said. "We now have 600 people in narcotics. It's just too many people for one inspector."
Daley replaces Inspector Joe Fox, who was promoted to chief inspector and will now oversee the Quality Assurance Bureau, which tracks crime statistics. Fox replaces Chief Inspector Vince DeBlasis, who will run the Community Affairs Bureau.
Chief Inspector William Blackburn, who oversaw the South detective divisions, will work alongside Chief Inspector Ray Rooney at the Narcotics Division.
Keith Sadler, who was just promoted to chief inspector, will move from the East Police Division, which covers parts of Kensington, Port Richmond, Fishtown and North Philadelphia, to work with Chief Inspector Frank Pryor at the Patrol Bureau at Police Headquarters. Chief Inspector Robert Davis will work with Chief Inspector John Maxwell, who oversees all detective divisions.
Steve Johnson, who headed highway patrol as a captain, will preside over the Southwest Police Division as an inspector. His replacement is Capt. Tom Nestel from the 25th Police District, which encompasses parts of Kensington and North Philadelphia.
Some of the transfers elevate those who were in the dog house - like Capt. Michael Weaver, who is being transferred from night command, a traditional dumping ground for cops on the hot seat, to oversee the 3rd Police District in South Philadelphia.
Weaver, a highly regarded commander, was sent to night command almost two years ago. He and the other captain of the 24th Police District, Deborah Matefy, were disciplined by former Police Commissioner John Timoney because they failed to stop an officer from selling T-shirts mocking the police beating of carjacking suspect Thomas Jones. Matefy was moved to the Police Board of Inquiry last September.
"He's a hard worker and he's always been a hard worker and I believe in redemption," Johnson said of Weaver.
The interim commissioner, meanwhile, is still waiting for his own promotion but said he is not worried about what his title is.
"As long as the last two words are 'police commissioner' and the mayor has told me to be the police commissioner, then I am going to move forward," Johnson said. "If I do not act as the police commissioner, then I will be undermined and attacked and the department and the city will suffer."
Mayor Street said once again yesterday that he has his own timetable for making a decision about Johnson; that there is no national search for a police commissioner and that Johnson is doing a "great" job.
"I've told him, 'You're the interim commissioner - but act like you're the commissioner,' " Street told the Daily News editorial board.

Load-Date: March 28, 2002


End of Document