18 convicted of terrorism in Belgium
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
October 1, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a7
Length: 619 words
Byline: CONSTANT BRAND, Associated Press writer
Body


BRUSSELS, Belgium -- A court Tuesday convicted 18 Muslims including one planning to blow up a base believed to hold U.S. nuclear weapons for involvement in a European terror ring recruiting for al-Qaida and the Taliban.
The defendants were sentenced to up to 10 years in prison. They included a Tunisian who aided the Sept. 9, 2001, assassination of Ahmed Shah Massood, the Afghan military commander who led opposition to the Taliban militia that ruled his country.
The verdict was the latest in a slew of cases resulting from a sweep of suspected Islamic militants around Europe after the attacks on New York and Washington. European nations have been giving more powers to police, prosecutors and judges to root out suspects, and have beefed up security measures at airports and seaports.
But Tuesday's sentencing the conclusion of Belgium's biggest terrorism trial ever comes while the government is still considering new legislation with tougher penalties. Such legislation has been in the works for months.
"To get the definition of terrorism into the law books … this will be finalized by the end of the year," said Justice Ministry spokeswoman Saar Vanderplatsen.
Federal prosecutors charged the group had formed a "spider's web" of Islamic radicals plotting attacks and recruiting fighters in Europe for al-Qaida and the now-deposed Taliban in Afghanistan.
"Terrorism has destroyed the liberty and freedom of individuals," Judge Claire de Gryse said. "These acts must be sanctioned most severely."
Nizar Trabelsi, a 33-year-old Tunisian who played soccer for several German teams, was sentenced to the maximum 10 years. He admitted planning to drive a car bomb into the canteen at Kleine Brogel, a Belgian air base where U.S. nuclear weapons are believed to be stored.
Trabelsi testified that he intended to kill American soldiers, not to detonate nuclear warheads. About 100 American military personnel are stationed at the base.
Another Tunisian-born defendant, Tarek Maaroufi, 37, was convicted of involvement in the assassination of Massood, the anti-Taliban military commander. He was sentenced to six years in prison.
Sixteen others were convicted of lesser crimes and received sentences ranging from two to five years. Five defendants were acquitted for insufficient evidence.
None of the defendants was allowed to address the court during the three-hour session. Trabelsi was stone-faced as the sentences were read.
Trabelsi, who says he met Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan and asked to become a suicide bomber, was arrested in Brussels on Sept. 13, 2001. Police later discovered the raw materials for a huge bomb in the back of a Brussels restaurant.
The judge said phone and credit card records introduced as evidence showed Trabelsi's links with terrorist cells in other parts of Europe.
"While bin Laden was preparing for attacks on the United States, Trabelsi with others were preparing and looking for explosives in Europe," she concluded.
Defense lawyers called the sentence "overly severe" given Trabelsi's cooperation with investigators and the remorse he had shown during the trial. "They made an example of Mr. Trabelsi after the Sept. 11 attacks," lawyer Yves de Quevy said, adding an appeal was possible.
Trabelsi came to Europe in 1989 for a tryout with the German first-division team Fortuna Duesseldorf. The 19-year-old forward got a contract but never made it off the reserve list and was soon let go.
Over the next few years he bounced from team to team in the minor leagues, acquiring a cocaine habit and lengthy criminal record. Eventually, he made his way to al-Qaida training camps in Afghanistan, where trial evidence showed he placed himself on a "list of martyrs" ready to commit suicide attacks.

Load-Date: October 1, 2003


End of Document