19 Killed in Uzbekistan; Terrorism Blamed
The New York Times
March 30, 2004 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 764 words
Byline: By SETH MYDANS
Dateline: MOSCOW, Tuesday, March 30 
Body


Nineteen people were killed and at least 26 wounded in a series of terrorist incidents in the Central Asian nation of Uzbekistan, the Uzbek prosecutor general said Monday.
 The prosecutor, Rashid Kadyrov, told reporters in Tashkent, the capital, that the deaths involved two bombings, two attacks on police officers and an explosion that killed 10 people at a building where bombs were being assembled.
 He blamed Islamic militants, who have been the target of harsh crackdowns in Uzbekistan, where the United States has an important military base near the Afghan border.
 ''These were terrorist acts,'' he said. ''There is reason to believe they were prepared over a long period and coordinated from a center, possibly abroad. All the terror acts are interconnected, according to our preliminary investigation.''
 On Tuesday morning, there was at least one more explosion outside Tashkent followed by an exchange of gunfire involving the police, news agencies reported from Uzbekistan.
 The United States Embassy cautioned Americans in Uzbekistan to be on ''highest alert'' and said, ''Other terrorists are believed still at large and may be attempting additional attacks.''
 The explosion at the bomb-making site occurred on Sunday night in the city of Bukhara, Mr. Kadyrov said.
 In Tashkent, three police officers were killed in attacks on Sunday night and early Monday, he said. Three more police officers and a child were killed in what he called two suicide bombings on Monday near the Chorsu Bazaar in Tashkent's Old City.
 Female suicide bombers carried out the attacks at the bazaar, near a large children's store and at a nearby bus stop, he said. It is the first time that suicide bombers have been blamed in an attack in Uzbekistan.
 In a televised address, President Islam Karimov said the attacks had been planned overseas as part of an international terrorist network.
 ''Once again it should be noted that to carry out such terrorist acts one needs immense sums of money,'' he said, ''and it is understandable that in the world there are forces that sponsor terrorism.''
 Mr. Kadyrov concurred. ''The character and method of this act is not common to our people,'' he said. ''It was probably exported from abroad.'' Both men said some arrests had been made.
 The attacks recalled a series of nearly simultaneous bombings in Tashkent in 1999 in which the authorities said 19 people had been killed and more than 100 injured.
 Those attacks were blamed on the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, a fugitive group now based in neighboring Afghanistan and believed by experts to be linked to Al Qaeda. They followed a series of killings of officials in the Fergana Valley in Uzbekistan in 1997 that were also blamed on Islamic extremists.
 Since then Uzbekistan has carried out a campaign of repression against Muslim dissidents, which is documented in a report by Human Rights Watch to be released on Tuesday.
 Uzbekistan, a largely Muslim nation in a region where militancy has been growing, has been a strategic ally of the United States as it pursues terrorist groups since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
 In a report earlier this month, the International Crisis Group, an independent monitoring organization, said the fight against terrorism should not be used to justify Uzbekistan's human rights record.
 ''The regime has been given too much of a free ride because it is seen as a partner against terrorism and Islamist extremism,'' said David Lewis, who heads the group's Central Asia Project. ''But engagement with it must become much more critical in order to stem the serious, potentially long-term damage being done to the West's credibility in this predominantly Muslim region.''
 At a news conference on Monday, Foreign Minister Sadyk Safayev said the attacks had been carried out by ''by the hands of international terror, including Hizb ut-Tahrir and Wahhabis.''
 Hizb ut-Tahrir, which aims to set up a pan-Islamic state that would include post-Soviet Central Asia, is outlawed in Uzbekistan, and many of its members have been arrested. The strict Islamic Wahhabi sect is also outlawed.
 In London, a spokesman for Hizb ut-Tahrir, Imran Waheed, denied involvement in the attacks on Monday and asserted that the violence might have been staged by the government as a pretext for more arrests.
 The killings preceded several international assessments of the country's human rights record.
 In April the Bush administration must decide whether Uzbekistan has made ''substantial and continuing progress'' on human rights to be eligible for $50 million in aid, including military assistance.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Map of Uzbekistan highlighting Tashkent: There were attacks in Tashkent and an explosion in Bukhara.      

Load-Date: March 30, 2004


End of Document