19 years later, relations with Iran begin to thaw
USA TODAY
June 19, 1998, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 391 words
Body


President Clinton Thursday left no doubt about future U.S. intentions
toward Iran. "What we want is a genuine reconciliation," the
president stated, unequivocally.
And so, 19 years after Iran enraged the nation by holding 52 Americans
hostage in the U.S. embassy for 444 days, rapprochement appears
firmly under way.
Since the relatively moderate Mohammad Khatami won election as
Iranian president last year, the administration has probed prospects
for reducing hostility.
The first small step was to send American wrestlers to Tehran
in February, recalling the "table-tennis diplomacy" Richard
Nixon used to end the isolation of China. More of the same may
be seen Sunday as the USA plays Iran in the World Cup soccer competition
in France.
Academic and cultural exchanges followed. And on Wednesday, Secretary
of State Madeleine Albright previewed Clinton's overtures in a
speech that praised the progress of both Khatami and Iran. The
administration privately cast her comments as a change in tone
and content that ultimately could lead to reconciliation.
As Albright pointed out, Iran has been experimenting with moderation
-- however cautiously -- since Khatami's 70% landslide win a year
ago. Once elected, Khatami promptly risked the fury of militant
anti-American fundamentalists by praising U.S. democratic traditions,
in an interview on CNN, and expressing regret for the hostage
outrages. He followed up with long-sought denunciations of terrorism
and expressions of sympathy for Israeli victims of terrorists.
Iran also has improved drug fighting within its borders, Albright
argued, and worked for peace in Afghanistan.
These successes do not mean that Iran will soon be a Jeffersonian
democracy. Tehran's ties to terrorism remain troubling, and its
government's pursuit of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass
destruction has no good purpose. Further, Khatami's power is limited
by a conservative legislature and the fact that he shares power
with Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khameini,
who is no moderate.
But even so, responding to his openings is in our interest. Two
decades of isolation helped prod Iran toward moderation by depriving
it of oil revenue it dearly wants, but confrontation can't be
productive forever.
With Iran showing signs of willingness to turn away from terrorism,
now is the time to start substituting carrots for sticks.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: June 19, 1998


End of Document