1989 SAW DECLINE IN TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 1, 1990, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C
Length: 398 words
Body


TERRORISM DECLINED sharply last year, although 16 U.S. citizens were killed and 19 wounded in attacks, the State Department reported Monday.  In 1988, 192 Americans were killed and 40 wounded.  The annual report to Congress criticized Syria and Iran, which President George Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III praised Monday for helping in the release of American hostage Frank H. Reed.  The two countries remain on the department's list of supporters of terrorism.  The State Department noted Syria's willingness to help liberate Western hostages and a pledge by President Hafez Assad to punish the kidnappers.  But the report also says that Syria continued to provide support and haven for a variety of terrorist groups, including the militant Hezbollah, which is believed to have links to the captors of the six remaining American hostages in Lebanon.  The report accuses Iran of continuing to use terrorism in pursuit of its foreign policy goals.  It cites, for example, a call for the death of Salman Rushdie, author of ''The Satanic Verses,'' and increased attacks against interests of Saudi Arabia.  But the report notes that incidents of Iranian-sponsored terrorism decreased from 32 in 1988 to 28 last year.  Libya also is listed as a sponsor of terrorism, but it, too, is credited with continuing to show public signs of moderation. There were no incidents throughout the year directly attributable to the North African country led by Col. Moammar Gadhafi, the report said.
The level of terrorism worldwide declined by nearly 38 percent - from 856 incidents in 1988 to 528 last year.  The Afghan government curtailed its terrorist campaign in neighboring Pakistan, and operations by groups associated with the Palestine Liberation Organization sharply declined after Chairman Yasser Arafat publicly renounced terrorism in December 1988, the report said.  The only spectacular operation was the bombing of a French airliner over Niger in September, killing 171.  A change in accounting by the State Department's Counter-Terrorism Office also contributed to the decrease. For the first time, violence by Palestinians against Palestinians on the Israeli-held West Bank and in Gaza was not considered an act of international terrorism.  Such attacks now are considered a form of ''intra-ethnic violence,'' meaning within the same group. That helps reduce the overall total.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document