1998 TERRORISM HIT A RECORD HIGH / THE BOMBINGS OF TWO U.S. EMBASSIES IN AFRICA CONTRIBUTED TO THE HIGH NUMBER OF CASUALTIES.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 1, 1999 Saturday D EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 448 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorism took a record toll last year, with 741 people killed and 5,952 injured, the State Department said in a report released yesterday.
Many of the casualties were the result of bombings at two U.S. embassies in Africa.
The attacks in Kenya and Tanzania and then the indictment of Osama bin Laden, a longtime sponsor with ties to groups in several countries, reflect the changing face of terrorism.
While state-sponsored terrorism remains a grave problem, "direct government involvement in committing such acts continues to decline," Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said yesterday.
"Unfortunately, this progress has been countered by the rise of terrorist groups that are less directly dependent on states," Albright said in a statement.
"Some have broad geographical reach and have found ways to support themselves through criminal enterprises, such as drug smuggling, kidnapping and extortion."
About 40 percent of the attacks worldwide last year - 111 of them - were aimed at U.S. targets. Seventy-seven were bombings of multinational oil pipelines in Colombia in which 71 people, including 28 children, were killed.
Colombian terrorists kidnapped seven U.S. citizens, and the group FARC has not accounted for three missionaries it kidnapped in 1993, the State Department said in its report, which it delivers to Congress annually.
The department made no changes in listing seven countries - Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria - as sponsors of terrorism. This makes the seven ineligible for U.S. support in seeking assistance from international financial institutions.
The bombing at the U.S. Embassy in Kenya in August killed 291 people, including 12 U.S. citizens, and wounded about 5,000 people.
The bombing in Tanzania killed 10 people and wounded 77.
Worldwide, there were 273 terrorist attacks last year, a decline from 304 in 1997 and the lowest total since 1971, the department said. There were no acts of terrorism on U.S. territory.
Bin Laden, a Saudi who founded the group al-Qaida while in Afghanistan in 1979; his military commander, Muhammad Atef; and four others were indicted in a court in New York in November in connection with the bombings at the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
In August, the United States struck a purported terrorist training camp in Afghanistan with missiles, and it also destroyed a pharmaceutical factory in Sudan that was said to be connected to terrorist activities.
But Afghanistan is not listed as a sponsor of terrorism.
The Taliban militia, which controls most of the country, was host to bin Laden and his group, the report said. But it has not formed a government recognized by the United Nations or the United States.

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document