2 activists charged at NATO meeting
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 21, 2012 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 340 words
Byline: By MICHAEL TARM Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


CHICAGO - Prosecutors on Sunday charged two more activists with crimes tied to the NATO summit, accusing one of boasting that he could blow up a downtown Chicago bridge and that he concealed some explosives in a hollowed-out Harry Potter novel.
But defense attorneys said after the men appeared in court Sunday that the allegations were trumped up by informers or undercover officers known as "Mo" and "Gloves." The aim, they argued, was to scare protesters in town for the summit.
"He is being targeted because of his beliefs," defense attorney Molly Armour said of her client, Sebastian Senakiewicz. "These charges are extremely sensational."
Senakiewicz, 24, of Chicago, is charged with falsely making a terrorist threat. Mark Neiweem, 28, of Chicago, is charged with attempted possession of explosives or incendiary devices after he allegedly sought materials to construct a pipe bomb.
The charges came after three other activists were accused Saturday of manufacturing Molotov cocktails and harboring plans to attack President Barack Obama's campaign headquarters and other targets during the NATO meeting.
Prosecutors told a judge at a Sunday hearing that Senakiewicz, a Polish native, bragged about possessing explosives, supposedly concealing some in the book. But searches did not uncover explosives, prosecutors said.
In court documents, prosecutors said Senakiewicz indicated he is an anarchist who was "upset with the lack of chaos in Chicago."
Neiweem wrote a list of ingredients required to build a pipe bomb and indicated that model rocket engines for the device could be purchased at Hobby Lobby stores, Cook County prosecutors said.
The trio charged Saturday were Brian Church, 20, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Jared Chase, 24, of Keene, N.H.; and Brent Vincent Betterly, 24, of Oakland Park, Fla. They were arrested on Wednesday and face charges of conspiracy to commit terrorism, material support for terrorism and possession of explosives. Prosecutors said the two men charged Sunday have no connection to Church, Chase or Betterly.

Load-Date: May 21, 2012


End of Document