2 Americans held in terrorism inquiry
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 7, 2010 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 899 words
Byline: By BRUCE SHIPKOWSKI AND MATT APUZZO • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


ELMWOOD PARK, N.J. - They were recorded talking jihad against their fellow Americans. But they hadn't talked the jihadists into accepting them.
When the two men from New Jersey tried to fly out of New York's Kennedy Airport in hopes of getting terrorism training in Somalia, investigators who had been following them for years were waiting for each of them at the gate, officials said Sunday.
Mohamed Mahmood Alessa, 20, and Carlos Eduardo Almonte, 26, were arrested Saturday before they could board separate flights to Egypt and then continue on to Somalia, federal officials in New Jersey and the New York Police Department said.
They are the latest of several U.S. Muslims accused of joining or trying to join terrorist groups, radicalized with help from fellow Americans preaching violent jihad over the Internet.
Authorities say they recorded Alessa and Almonte talking about attacking Americans. Alessa allegedly said he would outdo Maj. Nidal Hasan, the Army psychiatrist accused of killing 13 people at Fort Hood, Texas, last year.
They had no known connections to established terrorist groups, however. They had traveled to Jordan three years ago and tried to get into Iraq, only to be rejected by jihadists, New York Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said. Their trip to Somalia apparently amounted to a leap of faith that they would be embraced by al-Shabab, a violent extremist group based in Somalia and connected to al-Qaida. Al-Shabab was designated by the U.S. as a terrorist group in 2008.
Law enforcement became aware of the men in the fall of 2006, after receiving a tip. Since then, during the lengthy investigation, a New York Police Department undercover officer recorded conversations with the men in which they spoke about jihad against Americans.
Kelly said Alessa, of North Bergen, and Almonte, of Elmwood Park, were American citizens. Alessa was born in the United States and is of Palestinian descent. Almonte is a naturalized citizen who was born in the Dominican Republic.
Investigators say they are among many U.S. terrorism suspects to have been inspired by two well-known U.S. citizens who have recruited terrorists through the Internet: Adam Gadahn, an al-Qaida spokesman in Pakistan, and Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical al-Qaida cleric hiding in Yemen who is believed to have helped inspire recent attacks, including the Fort Hood shooting, the Times Square bombing attempt and the failed Christmas Day airline bombing. Both men have made public calls for smaller, single acts of terrorism, and court documents indicate that Alessa and Almonte were inspired by that idea.
Alessa and Almonte face charges of conspiring to kill, maim and kidnap people outside the United States by joining al-Shabab. Teams of state and federal law enforcement agents who have been investigating the men took them into custody, authorities said. They are scheduled to appear today in federal court in Newark.
David Castro, 56, of Elmwood Park, is an Army reservist who lives across the street from Almonte. He said he doesn't know the suspect but knows his father and described the family as friendly.
Terrorists' recruiting techniques "almost seem better than the U.S. Army," Castro said. "This is happening not just in bad neighborhoods. This is happening in good neighborhoods like this one."
Alessa lived with his parents in the densely populated New York suburb of North Bergen, said Hemant Shah, the family's landlord. Alessa was attending Bergen County Community College, Shah said, and his father worked at a convenience store.
Although court documents depict two men deeply committed to terrorism, their training was apparently scattershot. They lifted weights, hiked in the snow at a park, bought military-style pants and water bottles, played violent video games and watched terrorist videos online.
The men said they planned to get weapons when they went abroad. The only weapons they possessed were two folding knives.
Alessa and Almonte had planned their trip to Somalia for several months, officials said. Both had bragged about wanting to wage holy war against the United States both at home and internationally, according to a criminal complaint.
Officials said the two men were not planning an imminent attack in the New York-New Jersey area and weren't suspected of plotting any violence on their flights.
The two men knew early on they had come to the attention of law enforcement. By the end of 2006, agents had talked with Almonte and a family member, and in March 2007, the FBI conducted a consensual search of his computer, revealing documents advocating jihad against the perceived enemies of Islam, court papers show.
Last November, investigators recorded Alessa telling Almonte that lots of people needed to be killed. "My soul cannot rest until I shed blood," Alessa said, according to court documents.
Somalia, an impoverished East African nation of about 10 million people, has not had a functioning government for more than a decade, although the U.S. is backing a transitional government there. The Pentagon's top commander in the region has included Somalia on a list of countries where clandestine American military operations designed to disrupt militant groups would be targeted.
Almonte told the undercover officer in April that there would soon be American troops in Somalia, which he allegedly said was good because it would not be as gratifying to kill only Africans.

Load-Date: June 8, 2010


End of Document