2 held at Sky Harbor amid security concern
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
December 27, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 464 words
Byline: Blake Herzog, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Body


Dec. 27--"Suspicious behavior" by two men on a flight from Orlando, Fla., to Phoenix Saturday night led to their being detained and questioned by federal anti-terrorism authorities once they arrived at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, officials said Sunday.
Transportation Security Administration spokeswoman Suzanne Trevino said passengers on US Air flight 192 reported concerns about the men to the flight crew, and the pilot requested that law enforcement personnel meet the plane when it made its scheduled landing at Sky Harbor.
TSA and FBI officials removed and detained the two men for questioning, and the plane was searched after the remaining passengers deplaned, Trevino said. The flight was delayed for about an hour before continuing to San Diego, its final destination.
Phoenix FBI agent and media coordinator Manuel Johnson said Sunday afternoon the men, described as Middle Eastern, reportedly did a few things that led the passengers to report them. They were talking loudly to each other in a foreign language, a conversation they told authorities was about issues earlier in the day, on the way to the airport.
"One of them made the other late, for whatever reason," Johnson said.
One was also observed watching what appeared to be footage of a suicide bombing but was actually a scene from the movie "The Kingdom," and one also got up from his seat while the seat-belt warning sign was still lit, Johnson said.
Johnson said the men were "cooperative" during questioning and were released and allowed to continue on to California. He did not know how long the men were detained.
The incident happened between two security scares Friday and Sunday on planes flying from Nigeria to Detroit. A Nigerian man, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, has been accused of attempting to set off an explosive device on the Christmas Day flight and led the TSA to tighten screening across the country. The other incident involved a passenger who was sick and spent an hour in the bathroom. It appeared not to be terrorism-related as of Sunday afternoon.
Johnson said officials depend on public information, among other things, to find potential threats, but said passengers have to be discerning as well: "We want passengers to be vigilant, but we also don't agree with racial profiling." He said he would not characterize Saturday's incident as an example of racial profiling.
To see more of The Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.eastvalleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: December 28, 2009


End of Document