2 LEADERS OF SPANISH REVOLT;
Jaime Milans del Bosch
The New York Times
February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 281 words
Body


Lieut. Gen. Jaime Milans del Bosch, who declared a military revolt yesterday in Valencia as supporters seized Parliament in Madrid, is known as a prominent follower of Franco … 65 years old … In military since 1934, two years before Franco uprising … Critic of Spanish democracy as too weak to contain terrorism … Passed over after Franco's death in 1975 although in line for promotion to army chief of staff … Sent to command eastern military region of Valencia … Rumored to have been involved in 1980 conspiracy to capture Prime Minister and his Cabinet … Reportedly received telephone call yesterday from leader of attack on Parliament: ''Uneventful, my general, all is in hand.''
 
Antonio Tejero Molina
Lieut. Col. Antonio Tejero Molina, the Spanish Civil Guard officer who led the takeover of Parliament yesterday, was making his second attempt since November 1978 to seize power … Angered by continued terrorism and the granting of autonomy to Spanish regions … Got no further in first attempt than strategy session with four officers, three of whom reported to authorities his plan to hold Government ministers hostage until King Juan Carlos agreed to name right-wing regime … Arrested and tried with remaining officer on sedition charges … Sentenced in May 1980 to prison term but because of arrest was released and returned to duty … 49 years old and unmarried … Known as a nationalist who believes post-Franco governments have been too weak … Has repeatedly proclaimed loyalty to the King but has denounced Parliament, which he faced yesterday with drawn pistol.
Biographical information of Spanish coup leaders, Lieut gen Jaime Milans del Bosch and Antonio Tejero Molina is given

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Jamie Milans Photo of Spanish revolt


End of Document