2 MENACHEM BEGINS
The New York Times
July 23, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-ed
Length: 884 words
Byline: By David Biale
Body


.8,2On July 22, 1946, the Irgun Tzvai Leumi, under the leadership of Menachem Begin, bombed the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, killing 91 people. Mr. Begin argued at the time - and the evidence seems to support him -that his underground group gave ample warning to the British Mandatory authorities, who used the hotel as their headquarters, to evacuate the building. Whether or not one agrees with its tactics, the Irgun's target was not innocent civilians but a military and political installation.
Thirty-five years later, almost to the day, the Israeli Air Force, acting on Prime Minister Menachem Begin's orders, bombed several apartment buildings in a densely populated area of Beirut, killing at least 300 people, most of them civilians. No warning was given; no attempt made to avoid killing innocent people. On the contrary, despite the disingenuous disclaimer that Israel had no intention of killing civilians, Mr. Begin dismissed the slaughter of these people by denouncing the Palestinian guerrillas for having establishing their headquarters - the intended target - in buildings in the midst of a civilian concentration.
David Biale Op-Ed comment discusses recent order of Prime Minister Menachem Begin's order to bomb area in Beirut and compares 1946 order for bombing
The contrast between Menachem Begin the underground leader and Menachem Begin the Prime Minister could not be more striking.  Where the one claimed to have acted under a code of moral responsibility, the other rejects moral considerations and places all responsibility on the shoulders of his enemies. Moreover, where the one acted as the leader of a small underground organization facing the possibility of British retaliation against the whole Jewish community in Palestine, the other is the head of a sovereign state whose air force operates with virtual impunity. The one adopted a certain restraint despite his weakness and desperation while the other uses excessive force despite his relative strength and security.
The Palestine Liberation Organization deserves much of the blame for the cycle of violence against both Arab and Israeli civilians. It was the P.L.O. and not Israel that, in the last decade, initiated such callous attacks as those on Maalot, Qiryat Shemona, the Tel Aviv-Haifa coastal highway, and Misgav Am, to name but a few. There is a significant difference between the P.L.O.'s terrorism for the sake of killing and the military struggle of the Jewish underground against the British in the 1940's.
But the scandalous and counterproductive tactics of the P.L.O.  cannot be used as justification for similar terrorism by the Israeli military. Not only is Israel capable of much greater devastation - 100 Arabs killed in Beirut for each Israeli killed in the rocket attack on Nahariya - but there is a fundamental difference between a terrorist group and a sovereign state.
The inexcusable callousness of the P.L.O. is a measure of its desperation and lack of political responsibility. Furthermore, in the anarchy of Lebanon, where the civilian population is hostage to every armed gang, no one can prevent Al Fatah, the principal guerrilla organization in the P.L.O., and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, from setting up headquarters in an apartment building. But a sovereign state like Israel is not desperate since it has instruments of government as well as ample military power. For a sovereign state, the exercise of power means the acceptance of responsibility. When Israel adopts the rules dictated by its terrorist opponents, it loses control of its actions and diminishes its own sovereignty.
Lebanon has become the Cambodia of the Middle East. For the Syrians, Palestinians, and Israelis, it is a ''sideshow'' - a land that can be bombed, overrun, and subjugated with no regard for the lives of its people. Israel would do well to remember the disastrous experience of the United States in Cambodia where large-scale bombing and invasion of the enemy's sancturies destroyed that country, strengthened the indigenous rebels, and contributed in no small measure to the ultimate defeat of the United States in Indochina.
Bombing remains one of the least effective instruments of politics. It serves only to mobilize one's enemy and strengthen his resolve while one's own moral stance disintegrates.
Israel's legitimate need for security on its border with Lebanon requires today, more than ever, a political solution to the problem of the Palestinians, as the former Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin argued after the bombing of Beirut. In addition, Israel's internal cohesion and continued support from its friends abroad depend on belief in the justice of its cause, which can only be eroded by indiscriminate bombing.
Those who are commited to the historic right of the Jews to a sovereign state of their own should raise their voices in a demand for the exercise of power with responsibility. Perhaps only then will Menachem Begin remember the high moral purpose that informed his own struggle for Jewish statehood in the 1940's. Otherwise, it will be hard to distinguish him from Israel's enemies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David Biale is associate professor of history and Jewish studies at the State University of New York at Binghamton.


End of Document