2 minutes with David A. Sterling, CEO of Sterling & Sterling Inc. of Woodbury
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
August 11, 2006


Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 284 words
Byline: David Reich-Hale
Body


For 17 years, David A. Sterling has been the top executive at the insurance brokerage his grandfather started in 1932. With terrorism and hurricanes lurking in the shadows, Sterling discusses how his industry has changed.
Insurance companies are still reacting to last year's hurricane season. How has that mattered to Long Island? The issue is capacity. In the aftermath of Florida and Hurricane Andrew in 1992, a lot of Long Island homes were cut. That happened again in the wake of Katrina and Wilma last year. Insurance companies only have the capacity to insure so many homes and risk so much in losses, so they make cuts.
But why are the cuts made on Long Island, which is not at the same level of risk as, say, the Carolinas or the Gulf Coast? Intuitively it makes sense to say that the Gulf Coast or Florida is a bigger risk. But we're not out of the woods. And if one hit Long Island, we would be in deep doo- doo. With property values as they are, a storm that destroys four streets would cause billions of dollars in damages. For the industry, it would be a catastrophe of monumental proportions.
What else has changed about your industry? Terrorism is a major issue because New York City is generally considered one of the biggest targets in the world. Most companies on Long Island have some sort of presence in the city.
How has the changing dynamics of insurance changed the way you do business? We have a lot more to do. Customers won't pay too much, so we have to find a way to drive down costs. If we don't do it, someone else will. We do a risk analysis and dig deeper, to see how our clients do business. Traditionally, people said, "This is my business, what's my quote?" Those days are over.

Load-Date: August 11, 2006


End of Document