2 Russian agents are convicted in Chechen rebel's death
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 1, 2004 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 400 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DOHA, Qatar
Body


In a verdict with implications for the war on terrorism, a court convicted two Russian intelligence officers of assassinating a Chechen rebel leader. The judge said Russian officials had approved the killing and ordered both agents to serve 25 years in prison for the car bombing.
The decision was regarded by some as a major embarrassment for President Vladimir Putin, whose government has waged a fierce crackdown on rebels in the breakaway Chechen republic.
Judge Ibrahim al-Nasr said the plot to assassinate Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev, a rebel leader and former Chechen president, was carried out in Qatar with the backing of "Russian leadership" and coordinated between Moscow and the Russian Embassy here.
Russian lawmaker Viktor Ilyukhin -- deputy head of the lower house's security committee -- said "it is a pretty serious slap in the face for Russia and, first of all, its president. To put it bluntly, we've screwed up."
Yandarbiyev had been linked to terrorism by Russia, the United States and the United Nations. He was killed when a bomb planted in his car exploded as he drove from attending Friday services at a Doha mosque on Feb. 13. His teenage son was injured.
The Russian agents were arrested soon after. Russia has denied involvement in Yandarbiyev's killing and has said the defendants were gathering intelligence about terrorism.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said "Moscow, as before, considers the two Russian citizens detained in Qatar as not involved in the attack on Yandarbiyev."
Lavrov said the agents will appeal. Their Russian lawyers said in a statement that the appeal would argue that the agents' arrest violated diplomatic immunity and that their confessions were obtained through torture.
The trial -- and its verdict -- demonstrated that government agents working overseas in the war on terrorism will not necessarily be granted immunity for acts aimed at reining in people or groups their countries view as terrorists.
Sergei Markov of the Institute of Political Research in Moscow said the verdict "indicated that the Qatar authorities do not consider Yandarbiyev as a criminal who had been financing terrorist groups. Instead, they considered him a friend of Qatar and a true-believing Muslim."
Yandarbiyev was Chechnya's acting president in 1996-97. He had lived in Qatar since 2000. Moscow had sought his extradition on charges of terrorism and links to al-Qaida.

Notes

WORLD

Graphic

 
photo; Photo headshot - Chechen rebel leader Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev had been linked to terrorism.

Load-Date: July 1, 2004


End of Document