2 TESTIFY DETAINEE HAD NO ROLE IN SEPT. 11
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 2, 2008 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-4
Length: 632 words
Byline: JERRY MARKON, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba 
Body


Osama bin Laden's former driver was a "primitive" chauffer and mechanic who "was not fit to plan or execute" terrorist attacks, the self-described mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks told jurors in writing yesterday at the driver's military trial.
Khalid Sheik Mohammed, the alleged Sept. 11 architect, wrote that Salim Ahmed Hamdan was a low-level support staffer who never joined al-Qaida and did not share bin Laden's ideology. Mr. Hamdan is on trial in the first U.S. military commission since World War II. His lawyers rested their case yesterday, and closing arguments are scheduled for Monday.
"He did not play any role. He was not a soldier, he was a driver," Mr. Mohammed said in answers to written questions from Mr. Hamdan's lawyers that were relayed to the six military jurors who will render a verdict. "His nature was more primitive (Bedouin) person and far from civilization. He was not fit to plan or execute."
The testimony provided another tantalizing glimpse inside the mind of Mr. Mohammed, who has been charged in the most devastating terrorist attack in U.S. history and has been a figure of intrigue since his arrest in 2003. He sketched out a vision of al-Qaida as a group whose members also have "wives and children and schools," and said anyone who thinks a mere driver would be involved in attacks "is a fool."
What effect his written testimony will have on the Hamdan jury is uncertain. Attorneys for Mr. Hamdan, who is charged with ferrying weapons for al-Qaida as part of a terrorism conspiracy, had wanted Mr. Mohammed to testify live in court at the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo. They had told jurors that there was "a significant chance" that they would hear from the perpetrators of the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks.
But Mr. Mohammed, after answering written questions, refused to meet with Mr. Hamdan's lawyers and declined to appear in court. His written remarks back up the defense's argument that Mr. Hamdan was a mere chauffeur, uninvolved in terrorism. But it is uncertain whether a military jury will take the word of an accused al-Qaida leader.
The statements of Mr. Mohammed, who first appeared in court in June and railed at the military commission system that is expected to try him as well, revealed no lack of self-confidence. He called himself the "executive director of 9/11," and said he oversaw all al-Qaida cells operating outside Afghanistan. He dismissed drivers such as Mr. Hamdan, a Yemeni father of two with a fourth-grade education, as mostly "illiterate."
His statement said Americans do not understand that al-Qaida is a multi-faceted terrorist organization that also employs a support network of professionals, such as teachers and computer engineers. "We are not gangs," he wrote.
"As the American Army, [we] have drivers, cooks, crewmen and legal personal," Mr. Mohammed wrote, according to a translation from his original Arabic provided to the jurors. "We also, are human beings; ... we have interests in life. Our people have wives and children and schools. ... You cannot understand terrorism and Al-Qaida from [the] 9/11 operation."
Mr. Mohammed said al-Qaida was able to carry out its attacks successfully because of its diffuse structure and penchant for secrecy. "One of the reasons for the success of the outside operations is the secrecy of the operations," he wrote. "So many of [bin Laden's] inner circles have no knowledge of what he was planning, and so many of al-Qaida's members, and even the trainers at the military camps, do not have any knowledge of the works of the outside cells. That includes the civilian employees."
Mr. Hamdan, whom prosecution witnesses have described as personally close to bin Laden, was a mere cog in the al-Qaida structure, the self-proclaimed terrorist leader wrote.

Load-Date: August 5, 2008


End of Document