20-YEAR MANHUNT FOR "TRUE PROFESSIONAL OF TERRORISM' FINALLY OVER
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 16, 1994, Tuesday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 565 words
Byline: Elaine Ganley
Body


PARIS (AP) - Carlos the Jackal, the
free-lance terrorist whose alleged bombings and hijackings made him
one of the world's most wanted men, landed behind bars Monday in
Paris.
Sudan arrested the Venezuelan-born fugitive and turned him over
to France, ending a 20-year hunt for the man whose bloody exploits
mirrored the brand of thriller that gave him his nickname.
As a terrorist-for-hire, Carlos reportedly teamed up with some
of the world's most notorious groups, including Germany's Red Army
Faction, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in
Spain and various Palestinian organizations.
He was most often linked to the murky world of Middle East
terrorism.  Intelligence reports connected him with the 1972 massacre
of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, a 1975 attack on OPEC
headquarters and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to
Entebbe, Uganda, which ended with an Israeli commando raid.
Carlos, 44, was locked up in La Sante prison in southern Paris.
He was to go before a special terrorism judge today for indictment
in at least one killing and the opening of an investigation into
numerous others.
A French court convicted Carlos in absentia in June 1992 and
sentenced him to life in prison for the 1975 shooting deaths of two
counterintelligence agents.  Under French law, he will have to be
retried for the slayings.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, announcing the arrest, called
Carlos "a true professional of terrorism" who claims to have killed
83 people around the world.
"I rejoice that one of the most dangerous terrorists in recent
years is now in the hands of justice," he said.
Pasqua said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for
killing at least 15 people on French soil and injuring 200.
Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, got his nom de
guerre after British tabloids learned that a copy of Frederick
Forsyth's 1971 thriller, "Day of the Jackal," was found in one of
his early London safehouses.  The novel tells the story of a
professional killer hired to assassinate French President Charles de
Gaulle.
The flamboyant terrorist long worked in the foreign operations
section of the feared Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
Carlos also is suspected in the 1974 takeover of the French
Embassy in The Hague, Netherlands, and the 1975 attack on the
headquarters of the OPEC oil cartel in Vienna, Austria, in which
three people were killed and 11 taken hostage.
Pasqua described him as a "mercenary at the disposition of the
liberation movements of the world."
France's former intelligence chief, Pierre Marion, said that
during the Cold War, Carlos moved between East Germany,
Czechoslovakia and Syria "with extraordinary protections at his
disposal|e.  To catch him then wasn't possible."
With the fall of communism, Carlos lost his protection, Marion
said.
Pasqua said French counterintelligence agents, helped by
friendly countries, found Carlos early this year in Sudan, where he
had gone six months ago on a false passport and was living under a
false name.
"Yesterday morning, Sudanese authorities let us know they had
positively identified Carlos and were ready to respond to French
arrest warrants," he said.
Carlos was returned to France on Monday.
Born Oct. 12, 1949, Carlos is the son of a wealthy communist
Venezuelan lawyer, Jose Altagracia Ramirez Navas, who gave each of
his three sons one name of Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir
Ilyich Lenin.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document