2003 Mumbai Blasts: Trio Sentenced To Death
RTT News (United States)
August 6, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 425 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Thursday, the designated Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) court in the western Indian metropolis of Mumbai sentenced to death the three main convicts in the 2003 Mumbai twin- explosion case, reports say.
The three Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) activists were found guilty of carrying out twin bomb explosions at the Gateway of India and Zhaveri Bazaar in the Indian financial capital August 25, 2003 that left 54 dead and 244 injured. One of them is a woman.
Confirming Thursday&apos;s development, special public prosecutor Ujjwal Nikam told reporters outside the court that Special POTA judge M R Puranik had sentenced to death Mohammed Hanif Sayed (46), his wife Fahimda (43) and their associate Ashrat Ansari(32).
He said the trio deserved the death penalty as the case fell in the rarest of the rare category.
"We are happy that all three got the death penalty. It is a message to people who indulge in terrorism that the law will not spare them if they commit such barbarous acts," Nikam said.
This is for the first time a couple was found guilty of terrorist acts under POTA. Along with the couple, Hanif and Fehmida, their 16-year-old daughter was also arrested for the offense but was later discharged as she was a minor.
Two other accused, Mohammed Ansari Ladoowala and Mohammed Hasan Batterywala, were also discharged from the case by the POTA court after the Supreme Court upheld a POTA review committee report that said there was no case against the duo.
LeT&apos;s role in the twin blasts was, however, bared by an accused-turned-approver, who told the court that a conspiracy meeting, which was attended by the outfit&apos;s activists from Pakistan, was held in Dubai.
The trio was sentenced to death under section 3(2) of POTA, and sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder) and 120 (b) (conspiracy) of IPC, he said.
The three were also sentenced to varying prison terms under the provisions of Explosives Substances Act, Explosives Act and Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act.
They were held guilty of planting powerful bombs in two taxis which exploded at the iconic Gateway of India and Zhaveri Bazaar August 25, 2003. They were convicted for their role in the blasts under various Sections of IPC, POTA, Explosives Substances Act and Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act.
July 28, around a month before the blasts, the trio planted a bomb in a municipal bus in suburban Ghatkopar which killed two persons.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document