2004 REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION Ready to take center stage Terrorism likely to define speech, as it has Bush's presidency
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 2, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 677 words
Byline: WALTER R. MEARS THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


ANALYSIS
NEW YORK - President Bush's mission in New York is to tell Americans what they can expect of him during four more years in the White House - and to begin his final drive to convince them that's what they want.
The polls rate Bush and Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry almost dead even. The Democrats are nervous, talking about changes to strengthen the Kerry operation. Bush adviser Karl Rove said a virtual tie at this point is good enough to put the president on the way to victory.
The White House promises he will present a forward-looking agenda for a second term when he accepts renomination at the Republican National Convention tonight. It is not likely to be a surprising one. What Bush has to offer in a second term has been foretold by what he did, or tried, in his first.
Labor Day, once considered the real starting line for presidential campaigns, is at hand - but Kerry and Bush have been running hard against each other for six months now, and most of what they have to offer, they've offered.
Now comes the push, the hard sell, the effort by each man and his campaign to make his offer the one the voters accept.
Overriding it all will be the war on terror, the issue that transformed Bush and his presidency after the 2001 attacks that destroyed the World Trade Center towers and killed nearly 3,000 people. That's the reason the Republican convention came to New York for the first time, and Sept. 11 - along with the war in Iraq - will be dominant themes in Bush's convention finale address,
just as they have been in the four days of oratory that led up to it.
"Sept. 14, 2001, I stood in the ruins of the Twin Towers," Bush told a campaign rally in Columbus, Ohio, on the way to the convention. "Since that day … I wake up every morning trying to figure out how best to protect our country."
Bush came to New York vowing the United States will win the war on terror, after a campaign glitch in which he told a TV interviewer that it could not be won. The Democrats jumped on that opening, saying it was no time for defeatism, and Bush instantly tried to close it, saying win, win, win. What he'd meant, he said, was that it couldn't be won in the traditional sense, with a formal surrender by the enemy.
But the president must deliver a broader agenda at the same time, to deal with economic stress, job losses, health care, the high price of gasoline.
The voters want reassurance against terrorism - the polls show Bush with a clear advantage over Kerry in public confidence on that front - and on the war in Iraq. The president had to admit the administration didn't foresee the war after the war, the insurgencies that have raged since Saddam Hussein's regime was quickly toppled.
They want more, though, as Bush's father learned to his political grief 12 years ago, when he lost to Bill Clinton. "The lesson is in 1992, the election was not about the Gulf War … a clear victory," he said in a CBS convention interview. "The lesson was about the economy.
"But I'll guarantee you the president is not going to make the mistake I had," the first President Bush said. "He is going to get out the message that the economy is doing pretty darn well."
Bush has been pushing that, declaring that his tax cuts are strengthening economic growth and creating jobs - and that Kerry would dampen that progress with tax increases. Kerry argues that the richest Americans shouldn't be getting tax breaks.
Vice President Dick Cheney previewed Bush on economic policy in his own acceptance speech Wednesday night: "Businesses are creating jobs, people are returning to work. … The Bush tax cuts are working."
Overall, Rove said in an AP interview, the acceptance speech is Bush's time to talk about an agenda for the future, about the accomplishments of his first term, and about himself as well.
"It gives people a chance to get reacquainted with him personally," Rove said. "In a time of war, a president becomes more a commander in chief and less the familiar person that they knew before. And this gives him a chance to refresh people's memories."

Load-Date: September 3, 2004


End of Document