2009 report on terrorism now rings true; Official had warned of surge in militias, white supremacists.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 23, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A6
Length: 646 words
Byline: By Curtis Tate
Body


WASHINGTON - In April 2009, Daryl Johnson was caught in a firestorm because of a report he wrote at the Department of Homeland Security.
It warned of a surge in activity by right-wing groups, including militias, white supremacists, anti-government activists and others motivated by racial grievances toward the nation's first black president and the consequences of a faltering economy.
Republicans in Congress called the report an attack on conservatives. Janet Napolitano, then the secretary of homeland security, apologized for the report and it was withdrawn. Johnson's unit was disbanded.
Nearly eight years later, Johnson's warnings have proved prescient in a string of incidents including the killings of a Kansas abortion doctor and a security guard at the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, and mass shootings at a Sikh temple in Wisconsin and an African-American church in South Carolina.
Last week, a foiled alleged plot by three men to attack anapartmentcomplexinhabited by Muslim Somali immigrants in western Kansas further demonstrated that it isn't just foreign terrorists or those sympathetic to them that Americans have to worry about.
"This is exactly the type of threatweweretalkingabout," said Johnson, who is now a homeland security consultant. "It's continued to grow over the past eight years."
The three Kansas men - Curtis Allen, Gavin Wright and Patrick Stein - were indicted by a federal grand jury Wednesday on one count of conspiring to use a weapon of mass destruction. They are accused of plotting to detonate truck bombs around the complex in Garden City, Kan., where 120 Somalis live and worship.
The FBI arrested the men last Friday in Liberal, Kan., after an undercover investigation.
According to a complaint filed in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Kansas, the men belonged to a militia group called the Crusaders, known for its anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim and anti-government views.
The group referred to the Somali immigrants, who work at a local meatpacking plant, as "cockroaches," the complaint said.
The men had discussed using rocket-propelled grenades to attack the complex, proposed dipping bullets in pigs' blood and considered using something like the fertilizer-and-fuel-oil combination that Timothy McVeigh used in the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, according to the complaint. The three talked about attacking area churches that supported the Somali migrants, according to the complaint, and said they wouldn't show the children any mercy.
"The only good Muslim is a dead Muslim," Stein allegedly said.
According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks the activities of extremist groups, the number of anti-Muslim hate groups has increased 42 percent since 2014.
"This is just symptomatic of the really unprecedented rise in anti-Muslim bigotry in our society," said Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations.
Hooper and others say the federal government's focus on terrorism from abroad, or domestic terrorism carried out by people sympathetic to foreign terrorist groups, diverts attention from threats against Muslims.
"The attitude seems to be it cannot be terrorism unless a Muslim commits an act of violence," he said.
Hooper said Republican presidentialcandidateDonald Trump had fueled anti-Muslim bias by calling for, among other things, prohibiting Muslims from entering the country and widespread surveillance of mosques. "All of this stuff adds up," he said.
The suspects in Kansas allegedly planned to carry out their attack Nov. 9 - the day after Election Day.
"The militia and anti-government types are using the election to recruit more people and fuel more paranoia," Johnson said.
Gillian Christensen, a spokeswoman for the Department of Homeland Security, said its mission involved protecting the country from a wide range of threats, including domestic ones.

Load-Date: October 23, 2016


End of Document