26 DIE IN SALVADOR IN POLITICAL STRIFE
The New York Times
August 27, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 290 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, Aug. 26
Body


At least 26 people died in this country's political violence yesterday and today, judicial authorities reported. Scores of prisoners at San Salvador jails continued a partial hunger strike for a fifth day to demand speedier trials.
At least 26 people die in past two days in Salvadoran political violence
Officials said 9 of 26 bodies discovered along highways in a 24-hour period yesterday and today were found in the central province of San Vicente, where leftist guerrillas fighting troops of the United States-backed government are active in rural areas.
An additional four men and a woman were found shot to death on the highway that leads west from San Salvador to Santa Ana, they said.  Thus far this week, at least 76 people are reported to have been killed, compared with about 100 last week.
 
26,000 Dead in Two Years
More than 26,000 people have died since October 1979 in fighting between the guerrillas and Government troops, and in related attacks by right-wing death squads against suspected supporters of the rebels.
The Justice Minister, Manuel Antonio Solano, said today that 175 prisoners accused of terrorism were continuing the partial hunger strike to demand a speed-up in the judicial process and an end to the state of siege under which civil liberties have been suspended.
Judicial authorities had said yesterday that 249 prisoners were taking part in the protest, which began Saturday, and were refusing all food and liquids. But Mr. Solano said the protesters were on a self-imposed diet of water, fresh fruit and honey.
''We recognize their right to take or refuse regular prison food,'' he said. ''However, we have medical services ready to tend to anyone whose health deteriorates as a result of his decision not to eat.''


End of Document