2: Terrorism coverage
Business Insurance
January 6, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 12
Length: 369 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


Just when it appeared that legislation creating a federal terrorism insurance backstop would be put off until the next Congress-or perhaps forever-the lame ducks of the 107th Congress put aside their differences and approved a measure that President Bush signed into law on Nov. 26.
That was almost a year to the day after the House of Representatives passed its own version of federal terrorism insurance legislation. What followed kept risk managers, insurers and the business community as a whole on edge for nearly a year.
The Senate didn't move with the House's speed. In fact, the Senate didn't move at all for more than six months, as lawmakers wrestled over what, if any, limits on punitive damages should apply to building owners and other victims of terrorism found liable for negligence. While the House measure had contained broad protections, the measure that ultimately emerged from the Senate remained largely silent on tort reform.
That wasn't the only difference in the approaches taken by the two chambers. The House bill would have created a government loan program to help insurers pay losses from future acts of terrorism, with the understanding that insurers would repay the loans. The Senate measure, though, essentially called for a cost-sharing arrangement in which the federal government would act as a reinsurer against catastrophic terrorist attacks.
President Bush, meanwhile, launched a high-profile campaign for the enactment of terrorism insurance legislation, holding that it was necessary to jump-start the economy. Advocates of the legislation regarded the president's efforts on behalf of the bill-and his willingness to craft a compromise on the measure's tort provisions-as key to breaking the congressional logjam and setting the stage for approval by the post-election session of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002.
As year-end renewals approached, risk managers, brokers and insurers all scrambled to figure out exactly how the law would affect the marketplace. There was no single answer to that question. There was, however, a single heartfelt hope that, after working a year to achieve a key yet elusive legislative goal, the product of that struggle would never be needed.

Load-Date: January 10, 2003


End of Document