2nd person linked to terrorist suspect
USA TODAY
December 31, 1999, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 558 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson; Bill Nichols
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- As federal authorities moved Thursday to defuse
possible millennium-related terrorism on several fronts, officials
linked a second person to a suspected Algerian terrorist.
The suspect, Abdel Ghani, was nabbed in a raid conducted by the
Joint Terrorist Task Force in Brooklyn, N.Y. Ghani was charged
with concealing material support for the Algerian, Ahmed Ressam.
A criminal complaint says Ghani traveled to Seattle from Dec.
11 through Dec. 16 and was to meet with Ressam.
Prosecutors, meanwhile, said a Canadian woman accused of immigrant
smuggling and a suspected Algerian terrorist arrested with bombmaking
materials in Washington state are members of the same cell of
the Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA) as Ressam.
Lucia Garofalo was denied bail in a Vermont federal court after
prosecutors alleged that the GIA agent who funded her world travel
was once a roommate of Ressam.
Ressam was arrested Dec. 14 while carrying a highly explosive
material known as RDX into Washington state from Canada.
Garofalo was detained five days later at a border crossing in
Vermont, accused of smuggling Algerian nationals into the United
States. "As someone who possesses such close ties to terrorist
organizations and especially in light of the arrest of Ressam,"
prosecutors said in court documents filed Thursday, "Garofalo
appears to present a substantial risk that her actions are in
aid of terrorism."
Concern about terrorist-related incidents had authorities across
the country on alert.
-- In New York, officials prepared to dispatch more than 8,000
officers to the streets tonight to guard against disruption of
the Times Square celebration.
-- In Boston, federal officials announced the arrest of an Algerian
national on illegal immigration charges. Ouali Mohamed Abdel Aziz
reportedly told authorities he had been living in the Boston area
after jumping from an Algerian tanker as it left Boston harbor
more than two years ago.
-- In Fresno, Calif., defenses were being strengthened after
the theft of 200 pounds of explosives from a police bomb squad
facility.
FBI Director Louis Freeh met Thursday with Canadian intelligence
and law enforcement officials in Washington, D.C. Officials said
no "specific development prompted (the) meeting." Rather, they
said, the meeting was designed to "ensure continuing close coordination
of law enforcement and intelligence issues."
Throughout the weekend, President Clinton and his national security
team will be balancing their roles as hosts of the capital's millennium
celebration while also keeping abreast of any Y2K or terrorism-related
developments.
One focal point of the efforts will be at the CIA's Counter-Terrorism
Center at the agency's Langley, Va., headquarters.
Intelligence officials say the center has been on a 24-hour state
of heightened alert for the past several days. The center is described
as one of the government's nerve centers for counterterrorism
activities. In addition to CIA analysts and operatives, there
will be representatives on hand from agencies including the FBI,
Secret Service, Immigration and Naturalization Service, Pentagon
and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency also is ready to respond
to any potential terrorist incident or Y2K-related emergency.
It has established 10 regional centers that could draw support
from 26 federal agencies and the Red Cross.

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, b/w, AP(2); Ressam: Suspect was arrested while carrying explosive material. Garofalo: This is a courtroom sketch of the Canadian suspect.

Load-Date: December 31, 1999


End of Document