2nd term staked on war on terrorism
USA TODAY
September 3, 2004, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 804 words
Byline: Susan Page
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body

NEW YORK -- Four years ago, Texas Gov. George W. Bush accepted the Republican nomination for president in a speech laced with the sentiments of "compassionate conservatism" and promises to use "good times for great goals." Terrorism wasn't mentioned.
Last night, President Bush stood on a circular platform in the center of a cheering crowd in Madison Square Garden to accept his party's nomination for a second term. His hair was grayer, his tone was tougher and his agenda had changed.
In a speech that was alternately sweeping and stern, Bush described a world whose dangers were revealed by the Sept. 11 attacks, demanding a steady hand and strong measures in response. "We have fought the terrorists across the Earth not for pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at stake," he said.
Terrorism has become Bush's greatest challenge as president and his biggest advantage as a candidate. Voters' assessment that he is more likely to keep their families and the nation safe has kept his re-election contest all but tied despite the advantage that Democratic challenger John Kerry holds when it comes to handling the economy, health care and education.
On domestic issues, Bush promised to pursue a fundamental change in Social Security by allowing younger Americans to establish private savings accounts with some of their payroll taxes. He said he would lead a bipartisan effort to simplify the tax code -- he called it "a complicated mess" -- although he didn't provide any specifics for that considerable undertaking.
He outlined modest initiatives to require more testing of high school students, to use tax incentives to encourage investment in poor neighborhoods and to expand health care coverage for low-income people. While he has criticized Kerry for the cost of his proposals, Bush didn't specify how he would finance his own.
But his prime-time address made clear that the heart of his administration for the next four years would be the battle against al-Qaeda and the search for safety from those who would do Americans harm. On this issue he will claim a second term, or lose it.
His opening words referred to the attack on the World Trade Center, just a few miles from where he stood. He defended the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq that followed, and the loss of U.S. lives in their prosecution. The Sept. 11 attacks were a theme woven through the 63-minute address.
"This moment in the life of our country will be remembered," Bush told an attentive, hushed crowd. "Generations will know if we kept our faith and kept our word. Generations will know if we seized this moment and used it to build a future of safety and peace. The freedom of many, and the future security of our nation, now depend on us."
Despite more arrests of protesters on New York streets -- and the forcible removal of two protesters during Bush's speech -- the mood inside Madison Square Garden was celebratory and confident.
Nearly every seat was taken. Thousands waved small American flags. Delegates from Bush's home state of Texas wore matching red-white-and-blue Western shirts and white cowboy hats.
Bush stood atop a full-color rendition of the presidential seal, the convention hall reconfigured for the evening to project an intimate, theater-in-the-round feel. But he used a lectern and a teleprompter, speaking more to the TV cameras in front of him than the supporters who surrounded him.
Bush's top strategists acknowledged that the election now two months away remains too close to call. Bush's speech was crucial, they said, as a moment when he could speak to voters without the filter of an interview or debate.
In 2000, the task for Bush at the GOP convention in Philadelphia was to introduce himself to American voters, many of whom knew only that he was the oldest son and namesake of a previous president. His task last night was to reintroduce himself to voters, especially those who after four years have qualms about his leadership.
Before he came on stage, he reinforced his image as down-to-earth and straight-talking with folksy videos that included testimonials from wife Laura and daughters Jenna and Barbara.
"In the last four years, you and I have come to know each other," he said in his speech. "Even when we don't agree, at least you know what I believe and where I stand. You may have noticed I have a few flaws, too." He mentioned his tendency toward malapropisms and "a certain swagger, which in Texas is called 'walking.' "
Bush referred to Kerry just once by name, but the attacks on the Democratic ticket that marked previous nights of the convention didn't abate. Again and again, Bush derided "my opponent" for his views and votes on the war, Medicare, taxes, education and defense.
The audience booed on cue.
"We are on the path to the future," Bush said, "and we are not turning back."

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, Color, Todd Plitt, USA TODAY (2); Making his case: President Bush addresses Republican delegates Thursday night at Madison Square Garden in New York City. The hall was reconfigured for his speech; he spoke from a platform in the center of the crowd. <>On path to the future": President Bush and first lady Laura Bush wave to the cheering crowd as balloons and confetti fall after his acceptance speech Thursday night at the Republican National Convention.

Load-Date: September 3, 2004


End of Document