2nd Terrorism-Related Trial Added To Tampa Docket In January
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 1, 2004 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 3
Length: 281 words
Byline: ELAINE SILVESTRINI, , esilvestrini@tampatrib.com
Body


MAN ACCUSED OF TRYING TO BUY ARMS TO HELP FARC
By ELAINE SILVESTRINI
esilvestrini@tampatrib.com
TAMPA — This city may have two terrorism-related trials starting in January.
U.S. District Judge James D. Whittemore said Thursday that he will put the case of Carlos Gamarra-Murillo on the trial calendar in January. Gamarra-Murillo is charged with attempting to provide support to a terrorist organization by buying $4 million worth of weapons for a Colombian paramilitary group.
If the trial starts in January, it could take place at the same time as the trial of Sami Al-Arian and three codefendants — Sameeh Hammoudeh, Hatim Naji Fariz, and Ghassan Zayed Ballut — who face a Jan. 5 trial on charges they provided support to the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Gamarra, 53, was arrested April 1 after he tried to purchase the arms from Tampa-based undercover investigators for the FBI and Customs Enforcement, authorities said.
They said he tried to purchase a cache of weapons for the left-wing Colombian paramilitary organization Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. FARC is the largest paramilitary group in Colombia and has been designated a terrorist organization by the U.S. State Department.
Gamarra had been scheduled to go on trial next week. But his attorney, federal public defender Maria Guzman, asked for more time to prepare.
Without setting a date, Whittemore said Thursday that he would place the case on the January trial calendar, on the condition Gamarra sign a document waiving his right to a speedy trial.
Reporter Elaine Silvestrini can be reached at (813) 259-7837.
Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

COURTS

Graphic

 
PHOTO
Gamarra-Murillo Arrested in April after he was accused of trying to buy arms from Tampa undercover investigators for a Colombian group

Load-Date: October 2, 2004


End of Document