2nd-term realities limit agenda; Bush expresses optimism about progress in Iraq; no big initiatives on domestic side
USA TODAY
February 1, 2006 Wednesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 879 words
Byline: Susan Page
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Bush is not a man of small ambitions.
From the start of his tenure, he has used State of the Union addresses to unveil promises stunning in their sweep. In 2002, he vowed to confront a trio of rogue nations he dubbed the "axis of evil." Last year, he outlined plans not only to overhaul Social Security and simplify the federal tax code but also to pursue "the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world."
Tuesday night, however, he launched a second start of his second term with a downsized domestic agenda and an acknowledgement that his presidency will be judged in large part by the outcome of the conflict in Iraq.
Bush strode into the House of Representatives with the same Texas-sized confidence as ever. His tone was optimistic. Midway through his speech, he saluted Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito, who was seated with his Supreme Court colleagues just hours after being confirmed by the Senate. The impact of the two conservative and relatively young Bush appointees to the high court is likely to be felt long after the president himself has left office.
The substance of the proposals Bush outlined, however, reflected the realities of his sixth year in office: the erosion of his job-approval rating, the constraints of a budget deficit that the Congressional Budget Office estimates at $337 billion this year, the limits of the time left in his term and the costs of the war that divides the nation.
He expressed optimism that some of the 138,000 U.S. troops deployed in Iraq could be withdrawn soon. "The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home," he said. "As we make progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly take the lead, we should be able to further decrease our troop levels."
But he added that was a decision that should be made by "military commanders, not by politicians in Washington, D.C."
What Bush said was notable. So was what he didn't say.
The first half of the address dealt with foreign policy  and the threat of terrorism. He used the word "terror" or "terrorism" or "terrorists" 20 times during the speech, "freedom" 15 times, "security" nine times and "victory" six.
He challenged Iran to abandon its nuclear ambitions but never mentioned North Korea, which is now believed to have  nuclear weapons. He pressed for progress toward democracy in Saudi Arabia and Egypt and noted only in passing that Palestinian elections last week put the terrorist group Hamas in power. "Elections are vital, but they are only the beginning," he said.
On the domestic front, there was no dominant initiative such as last year's Social Security overhaul but rather a collection of smaller-scale proposals. He talked about reducing the nation's dependence on foreign oil and preserving American competitiveness in the global economy. Just two sentences were devoted to initiatives to ease access to health insurance, identified beforehand as a major theme.
Rebuilding the Katrina-battered Gulf Coast got about as many words near the end of the address.
The response from Democrats was less than welcoming. The health savings accounts that Bush champions are "great for somebody who can save," Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid of Nevada said before Bush spoke. "It's also great for Wall Street. But for 46million Americans who are uninsured or underinsured, it does nothing at all."
House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi of California scoffed at Bush's credibility in addressing energy problems. Republicans are "captives of the oil industry," she said.
During the speech, the sharp partisan divide on Capitol Hill was audible and visible.
Only the Republican side stood and applauded when Bush decried "defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure" in Iraq. "Hindsight alone is not wisdom, and second-guessing is not a strategy," he said.
Only Democrats stood and cheered when he noted that "Congress did not act last year on my proposal to save Social Security."
Bush has just completed a difficult year marked by growing questions about the decision to go to war, soaring gasoline prices, the faltering government response to Hurricane Katrina and a brewing corruption scandal in the Republican-controlled Congress.
By 58%-38%, Americans surveyed by the USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll this month called Bush's second term a failure.
As in every State of the Union he has delivered since the Sept. 11 attacks in the first year of his presidency, Bush emphasized the threat of terrorism -- the area in which he gets his highest ratings. He defended his decision to approve domestic spying, without court warrants, of people suspected of links to terrorism. He suggested that those (mostly Democrats) who have called for withdrawal from Iraq would increase the danger to Americans at home.
"If we were to leave these vicious attackers alone, they would not leave us alone," he said. "They would simply move the battlefield to our own shores."
Even friendly analysts say that the Iraq war -- a test of his approach to terrorism and a conflict in which more than 2,200 American troops have died -- is the hinge of his presidency. If Iraq "goes to hell," says Reuel Marc Gerecht, a Middle East expert at the American Enterprise Institute, "the administration goes with it."
Contributing: Kathy Kiely

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY

Load-Date: February 1, 2006


End of Document