3 BERLIN POWERS ACT ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 851 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM; Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BONN, April 12
Body


Responding to the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque a week ago, the three Western powers responsible for security in that city announced today that they were taking measures to check ''international terrorism'' and eject persons ''posing a threat to the population of Berlin.''
A statement issued in the name of the United States, Britain and France said the measures were ''exceptional and provisional.''
In a concession to French wishes, the statement did not name Libyan diplomats stationed in East Berlin.
Both American and British military commanders had pressed for a specific ban on Libyan envoys on the ground that they were implicated in the bombing of the discotheque, which took the lives of an American serviceman and a Turkish woman and left 230 others wounded.
Americans Exasperated
The reluctance by the French to single out the Libyans - expressed during a week of meetings that became enmeshed in legalistic detail - reportedly exasperated their American counterparts. ''The French definitely wanted to pursue a low-profile approach,'' an American diplomat said.
Peter Boone, a British spokesman for the three allies, said the unspecified measures were aimed at ''international terrorism,'' but he declined to give ''details of any particular group of people or nation that might be affected.''
Another American diplomat insisted that, although not naming the Libyans, the compromise reached late Friday would deter members of their mission from crossing from East Berlin. ''The point is that we've got an allied position,'' the American said, ''and I feel better today than I did yesterday.'' Various Western diplomats said that if any members of the Libyan People's Bureau in East Berlin, which functions as an embassy, crossed into the western sector, they would be escorted back to the Communist side by the West Berlin police. But it was believed that by this evening no one had been ejected from the city as a result of the new order.
In France this week the new conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac announced tough measures aimed at checking terrorism at home. But France is caught up in a difficult situation in Lebanon, where eight of its citizens have been taken hostage by Moslem terrorists, and Paris has been racked by bombings aimed at securing the release of jailed terrorists who tried to assassinate the former Iranian Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar.
Despite the attempt to display allied unity in West Berlin, the effect of the French misgivings was to reinforce the impression that some Western European nations are not eager for a confrontation with Libya, where thousands of Europeans are employed.
 
Soviet Abandoned Command
Under a postwar occupation statute, the United States, Britain and France are responsible for law and order in their respective sectors of West Berlin, although actual law enforcement work is done by the German police. The Soviet Union abandoned the four-power allied command in 1948, but the three NATO members have maintained the Soviet offices in the command headquarters, preserving a fiction of World War II allied unity.
The decision announced today declared that the West Berlin authorities ''have been asked to remove from the Western sectors persons identified as posing a threat to the population of Berlin.''
''The measures are exceptional and provisional and do not affect the principle of movement throughout Berlin,'' it said.
Although the Communist authorities walled off East Berlin in 1961, access to West Berlin has always been unimpeded to stress the principle, upheld by the allies and West Germany, that the city is legally undivided. In normal times, West Berlin customs agents sometimes check for smuggling of duty-free goods, which are sold by East Germany in the subway that links the two sides of the city.
Because they enjoy diplomatic immunity, accredited diplomats in East Berlin also pass unchecked out of the Communist side of the city, which theoretically enables them to smuggle weapons, explosives or people in their vehicles.
 
Surveillance Was Tightened
Even before the discotheque bombing, however, surveillance of the entry points to West Berlin had been tightened, according to Western sources, and under the new measures diplomatic vehicles will be the object of special scrutiny. Each diplomatic mission in East Berlin has a specific license number, making surveillance of vehicles rather easy, but it is less simple to keep track of the thousands of people who travel daily to West Berlin on the subway.
Two days ago the Western allies received unusual - and for them unwelcome - backing for their crackdown in West Berlin. Erich Honecker, the East German Communist leader, personally condemned terrorism and urged the West Berlin police to exercise normal border controls.
Mr. Honecker's clear interest in making this proposal was to underscore the point that a normal international frontier divides the city. To assert their postwar occupation rights in all of Berlin, Britain, France and the United States regularly send patrols into East Berlin, and the Soviet Union does the same in West Berlin.


End of Document