3 blasts rock Thai capital
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
February 15, 2012 Wednesday


Copyright 2012 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 438 words
Byline: Los Angeles Times
Body


BANGKOK -- Three explosions rattled downtown Bangkok on Tuesday, a day after bombers targeted Israeli Embassy staff in India and Georgia, and police announced that at least one of the suspects in Thailand's capital was an Iranian national. 
Israeli officials quickly blamed Iran for the afternoon blasts, which authorities said injured the Iranian and four Thais. 
"I would like to ask the people not to panic," Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra said as security was stepped up throughout the Thai capital. "The authorities have now arrested an attacker." 
Thai police said an explosive device detonated in a home rented by Iranians in downtown Bangkok's Sukhumvit Road area. Two men in the house managed to escape while a third reportedly tried to flag a taxi, which refused to stop given the man's bloodied condition. 
The man then threw a grenade at the taxi, Bangkok Police Deputy Commissioner Pisit Pisutsak said, injuring the driver. As police closed in, the suspect threw another grenade at them -- only to have it detonate near the attacker, seriously injuring his legs. 
Police arrested the man, identified as Saci Morabi, 50, and took him to a hospital, where he faced questioning. 
A manhunt ensued for the two other suspects. A man thought to be one of them was subsequently arrested at Bangkok's international airport trying to board a flight to Malaysia. He was variously identified as Mohamed Hazaei or Mohamed Hasahi, 41. 
Government spokesperson Thitima Chaiseng said the police found papers indicating the injured suspect was Iranian. "However, we do not know yet about the second and third men and are awaiting police information on that," she added. 
The Bangkok blasts happened after an attack Monday on an Israeli diplomatic vehicle in New Delhi, which injured four people, and a failed attempt to blow up an Israeli vehicle in the Georgian capital of Tblisi. 
Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at Singapore's Nanyang Technological University, said the two days of explosions suggest the start of an Asian terror wave by Hezbollah operatives. 
"Some of the operatives who've been inducted may not know each other, planning and striking independently," he said. 
However, other experts were more skeptical. 
"The attacks in India, Georgia and now Thailand have all been highly amateurish, and lack the sophistication that would normally be expected from an operation executed by either Hezbollah or Iran's own external operations wing, the Quds Force," Will Hartley, head of the Terrorism and Insurgency Center at London's IHS Jane's, said in a statement. 

Load-Date: February 15, 2012


End of Document