3 Convicted Who Led Charity Tied To Militants
The New York Times
January 12, 2008 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 687 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR
Body


Three leaders of a defunct Islamic charity were convicted Friday of defrauding the federal government by winning tax-exempt status for their organization while concealing the fact that it supported militant fighters in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
  Part of the government's case centered on the accusation that the charity was the offshoot of a Brooklyn organization, Alkifah Refugee Center, now defunct, which sent aid to a group helping fighters in Afghanistan that later helped give rise to Al Qaeda. 
  The three defendants -- Emadeddin Muntasser, Samir Al-Monla and Muhamed Mubayyid -- face up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine; sentencing is scheduled for April. All three are longtime United States residents, though only Mr. Monla, 50, is a citizen. Mr. Muntasser, 43, is Libyan, and Mr. Mubayyid, 42, is Lebanese. 
  Defense lawyers said they planned to appeal the verdict, issued in Federal District Court in Boston. One described the case as inflated by federal prosecutors to look like terrorism.
  The charity, Care International, which has no relationship to the worldwide organization of the same name, raised $1.7 million for the 10 years that it was active, from 1993 and 2003, according to government documents. 
  Much of the money was funneled through the Global Relief Foundation, said Dean Boyd, a spokesman for the Justice Department, with Care International also directly supporting militant fighters in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Chechnya. 
  During that period, the defendants filed  forms saying they were helping war orphans, widows and refugees in Muslim nations, which won them tax-exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service, the documents said. But the group also produced a newsletter promoting Muslim militants fighting ''jihad'' in various countries, the documents said. 
  ''For years, these defendants used an allegedly charitable organization as a front for the collection of donations that they used to support violent jihadists,'' Kenneth L. Wainstein, the assistant attorney general for national security, said in a statement after the verdict. ''This prosecution serves notice that we will not tolerate the use of charities for promoting terrorism.''
  Despite such statements from prosecutors about terrorism, no terrorism charges were brought, and the organization does not appear on the government's list of terrorist groups. The department does not comment on the reasons behind charging decisions, Mr. Boyd said. 
  The Treasury and Justice Departments have had little success in winning convictions against some half-dozen Islamic charities that were shuttered amid accusations of providing material support for terrorism, including the Global Relief Foundation. 
  Norman S. Zalkind, the lawyer for Mr. Muntasser, who founded Care International, said no terrorism charges were brought because there was no evidence linking any of the defendants to terrorism. ''These are tax charges about false statements,'' Mr. Zalkind said. ''There is no evidence of money going to anywhere other than charitable purposes.''
  To prevent the idea of terrorism from prejudicing the trial, Judge F. Dennis Saylor IV had barred prosecutors from referring to Osama bin Laden, the Sept. 11 attacks or Al Qaeda. 
  Mr. Zalkind said that, technically, any charitable organization was supposed to provide examples of its newsletter or other promotional material to the I.R.S. when it applied for tax-exempt status. Care International's failure to do that was the heart of the government's case, he said, calling the requirement widely ignored by many organizations. 
  Government prosecutors said the men also disguised the fact that Care International was a successor to Alkifah Refugee Center. Alkifah had funneled money and volunteers to the mujahedeen fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan, and some of them later went on to form Al Qaeda. 
  Mr. Zalkind said that although the men were volunteers for Alkifah in Boston, the charity could not be considered a formal offshoot since they were not officers of Alkifah. He noted that the United States had fully supported those helping the mujahedeen. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 12, 2008


End of Document