3 GUILTY OF TERRORISM CHARGE SENTENCED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 22, 1994, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 309 words
Byline: Tim Bryant Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Three men who admitted they were a St. Louis component of an international terrorist network should be out of prison early next year.
On Friday, U.S. District Judge Donald J. Stohr sentenced Tawfiq Musa and his brothers, Saif and Luie Nijmeh, to 21 months in prison. Because they have been locked up since their indictment in March 1993, they'll soon be free.
All three defendants pleaded guilty in July to a federal racketeering charge that carries a statutory maximum of 20 years in prison.
Stephanie Seleman, a local director of the Anti Defamation League of B'Nai B'rith, attended the sentencing. She said afterward that her group is closely watching the activities of "hate groups."
"We need to make sure that everybody knows terrorism exists," she said.
Federal prosecutors and the FBI alleged that the Nijmehs and Musa were members of Abu Nidal, a Palestinian terrorist group.
The FBI has blamed Abu Nidal for more than 90 attacks in 20 countries since it formed in 1974. Musa and the Nijmehs pleaded guilty to racketeering by conspiring to take part in a terrorist group.
They pleaded guilty to charges they made various international trips in 1987 and 1988 on behalf of the group. Prosecutors said the defendants acted as money couriers and conduits of information.
Musa, 45, of Milwaukee, ran a liquor store in Wisconsin. Authorities said he led the Abu Nidal "cell" in St. Louis. Saif Nijmeh, 35, of Bridgeton and Luie Nijmeh, 30, of Dayton, Ohio, had a liquor store in Hillsdale.
Before reaching a plea agreement, prosecutors accused Musa and the Nijmehs of plotting terrorism, conspiring to kill Jews and discussing an attack on the Israeli Embassy in Washington.
In August, prosecutors dropped charges against a fourth defendant, Zein Isa, who is on Missouri's death row for murdering his daughter, Tina, 16, in 1989. Isa, 62, has diabetes and is ill.

Load-Date: October 24, 1994


End of Document