3 LATIN NATIONS TRADE ACCUSATIONS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 4, 2008 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-2
Length: 375 words
Byline: TOBY MUSE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia 
Body


Venezuela and Ecuador yesterday sought to make Colombia pay a high diplomatic and economic price for killing a leftist rebel leader in the Ecuadorean jungle -- expelling its diplomats, ordering troops to the border and largely halting trade at key points along the frontier.
But Colombia quickly struck back, revealing what it said were incriminating documents seized from the rebel camp that suggest that its neighbors have been secretly supporting the rebels' deadly insurgency.
And in a tit-for-tat move, Venezuela later displayed the laptop of a slain drug trafficker, which it said contained information implicating Colombia's national police chief in the cocaine trade.
Colombia's national police chief said the documents show Venezuela recently paid $300 million to the rebels, among other financial and political ties that date back years, and that high-level meetings have been held between rebels and Ecuadorean officials.
And this shocker: Colombia says some documents suggest that the rebels have bought and sold uranium.
"When they mention negotiations for 50 kilos of uranium, this means that the FARC are taking big steps in the world of terrorism to become a global aggressor. We're not talking of domestic guerrilla, but transnational terrorism," Gen. Oscar Naranjo said at an explosive news conference.
Gen. Naranjo didn't give any details about when, where or from whom the uranium was allegedly bought. He provided no proof of the payment and wouldn't release copies of the documents, which he said are "tremendously revelatory" and are being examined with the help of U.S. experts.
Both Venezuela and Ecuador dismissed his allegations as lies. They expelled Colombia's top diplomats and recalled their own. Ecuador's President Rafael Correa planned to visit five Latin American countries starting today to defend his decision to break off diplomatic relations, accusing Colombia of being an enemy of peace and lying about the nature of the raid.
Colombia said military commandos, tracking Mr. Reyes through an informant, were fired upon from Ecuadorean territory.
But Mr. Correa said Colombia deliberately carried out the strike beyond its borders, and that the rebels were "bombed and massacred as they slept, using precision technology."

Load-Date: March 4, 2008


End of Document