3 more in Britain charged in suspected terror plot
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 30, 2006 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 310 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


British anti-terrorist police charged three more people late Tuesday with conspiring to commit murder in the alleged plot to blow up U.S.-bound airliners.
The three -- Mohammed Yasar Gulzar, Mohammed Shamin Uddin and Nabeel Hussain -- were also charged with preparing to commit terrorism by helping in an alleged plan to smuggle explosives aboard the planes, police said.
Eleven people have now been charged on those two counts. Four others were charged with lesser offenses, including having knowledge of a terrorist activity but not disclosing information about it.
A Scotland Yard statement said Gulzar, Uddin and Hussain conspired with eight other suspects in the alleged plot and had intended to commit "acts of terrorism engaged in conduct to give effect to their intention to smuggle the component parts of improvised explosive devices onto aircraft and assemble and detonate them on board."
All three men will be arraigned today.
Of 25 people originally arrested, 15 have been charged and are being held by police, five others remain in custody without charge and five have been released.
A deadline for the detention of the remaining five suspects held without charge expires today, but a police spokesman said it was not yet decided whether they would be charged or whether police would seek further time for questioning.
Senior police officers said last week they were analyzing thousands of pieces of evidence seized in searches of dozens of properties and two stretches of woodland.
Investigators have found chemicals that can be used to make bombs, including hydrogen peroxide, and electrical components during their searches, said Peter Clarke, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist department.
Months of surveillance had produced "significant video and audio recordings" about the alleged plot, he said, including "martyrdom videos" by some of the suspects.

Load-Date: August 30, 2006


End of Document