3 NEW YORKERS ACCUSED OF BUYING ARMS FOR I.R.A.
The New York Times
June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 603 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER
Body


Three New York men who reportedly told undercover agents they were interested in ''social justice'' in Northern Ireland were arrested by Federal authorities Friday night and yesterday morning on charges of supplying weapons to the Irish Republican Army.
Two of the men - Thomas Falvey, a 56-year-old laborer, of 90-29 187th Place, Hollis, Queens, and George Harrison, a 67-year-old security guard, of 465 East Ninth Street, Brooklyn - were seized outside Mr. Falvey's home Friday evening, hours after they had paid an undercover agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation $16,000 for 42 automatic rifles, submachine guns and handguns. Both were born in Ireland, the F.B.I. said.
Federal Authorities arrest three New York men on charges of supplying weapons to Irish Republican Army
The third man, Patrick Mullin, a 43-year-old telephone company employee, was taken into custody at 7:40 A.M. yesterday at his home at 575 Ridgewood Avenue, Brooklyn, where the authorities found seven automatic rifles similar to the M-16's used in Vietnam, a machine pistol, a pre-World War II 20-millimeter cannon and a flame thrower.
''All of these weapons were to be delivered to the Irish Republican Army in Ireland for use in the continuing acts of terrorism by the I.R.A. in that country,'' said Donald J. McGorty, the agent in charge of the F.B.I. division charged with investigating international terrorism.
At a news conference at F.B.I. headquarters in lower Manhattan, where some of the weapons were displayed, Mr. McGorty said none of the men arrested were members of any of the Irish-American organizations that have been sympathetic to the fight against the British in Northern Ireland.
But he said Mr. Falvey and Mr. Harrison had been seen at demonstrations in New York backing the hunger strikers at the Maze prison in Belfast and at the anti-British protest at Lincoln Center last week when Prince Charles attended a performance of the Royal Ballet.
After the three men were arrested, Mr. McGorty said, they told authorities that they had begun obtaining weapons for the Irish Republican Army for reasons of ''social justice, not money.''
All three were arraigned in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, then released on $100,000 bail each.  Mr. McGorty, who said the F.B.I. had worked jointly with Customs agents in the investigation, said that while he was certain the men intended to export the weapons, he could not say precisely how the shipping was to have been done.
Mr. McCorty said the F.B.I. began to focus on the three men after it had learned that they were particularly interested in obtaining ammunition for the 20-millimeter cannon recovered in Mr. Mullin's basement.
After delivering 24 rounds of ammunition for the cannon, which Mr.  McCorty said was to be ''used to shoot down British helicopters,'' undercover agents offered to provide the assortment of 42 weapons for $16,000.
Mr. McCorty said an agent delivered the arms to Mr. Falvey's garage at 9:30 P.M. Friday and left with the $16,000. At 10:50 P.M., he said, several agents ''saw Falvey and Harrison leaving with a bag, and that's when they were arrested.''
When the agents arrested Mr. Mullin the next morning, Mr. McGorty said, they found several thousand rounds of ammunition, apparently for small arms, and ''numerous rifle parts,'' as well as the other weapons.
Mr. McCorty said the men faced up to 10 years in prison and fines of up to $10,000, for violation of firearms statutes.  He said the agents had been unable to determine where Mr. Falvey and Mr. Harrison had obtained the money to buy the weaponsk, whose serial numbers had been obliterated.


End of Document