3 PALESTINIAN GUNMEN KILLED BY ISRAELIS IN SECURITY ZONE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 1989, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 324 words
Body


JERUSALEM - Israel killed three Palestinian gunmen trying to penetrate its northern border Monday and charged that PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat had failed to keep his promise to renounce terrorism.  The gunmen were killed in Israel's security zone in southern Lebanon, less than a mile from Israel's border and about one mile from Kibbutz Menara, a collective.
The raid by guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Front, a dissident splinter group of the Palestine Liberation Organization, marked the deepest penetration of the security zone in the five incursions reported since December.  ''This is just one more indication that the PLO does not control groups that officially belong to it,'' said Motti Amichai, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry.  Arafat renounced terrorism in December, leading to the opening of a dialogue between the United States and the PLO, a dialogue that has been bitterly criticized in Israel.  In the last month, 20 Palestinian gunmen have been killed by Israeli soldiers in abortive attacks from Lebanon. The PLO says its renunciation of terrorism does not apply to raids on Israeli military targets.  In Beirut, Lebanon, a spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Front confirmed that three of its fighters had been killed in the clash. The group opposes Arafat's leadership of the PLO.  The Israeli army said soldiers had recovered Kalashnikov rifles from the bodies, pictures of previous Front fighters killed in the security zone, grenades, hand-held missiles, barbed-wire cutters and knives.  Meanwhile Monday, Israeli authori ties reopened a Palestinian village inside the boundaries of Jerusalem after keeping residents in their homes for five days, arresting 40 and confiscating appliances and cars in tax raids.  Residents of the village, Issawiyeh, said police made most of the arrests Wednesday in house-to-house searches in which 21 youths were detained on suspicion of carrying out anti-Israeli activities.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document