3 Years Later, Trial Is Set to Start in a Plot to Use Fuel Tanks to Bomb Kennedy Airport
The New York Times
June 30, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 24
Length: 868 words
Byline: By A. G. SULZBERGER
Body


Three years have passed since the authorities warned that Islamic terrorist plotters had once again placed New York ''in their cross hairs,'' describing an international conspiracy to detonate fuel tanks at Kennedy International Airport and set off cascading explosions along a fuel pipeline that cuts through much of the city and the surrounding region. 
  In that time, public attention has been diverted to a number of plots that came far nearer to fruition, including the recent attempted car bombing in Times Square, a planned string of suicide bombings on the subway that was aborted days before execution, and the planting, prosecutors say, of what perpetrators believed to be explosives at the entrances of two synagogues. 
  But this week, three years after the initial arrests, the airport bombing case is finally scheduled to go to trial in United States District Court in Brooklyn. The trial is to begin on Wednesday after a jury is finalized and is expected to last much of the summer, opening a rare window into the world of counterterrorism operations. 
  As prosecutors describe it, the plot was led by a Kennedy airport cargo handler and a member of the Guyanese Parliament, involved a Islamist group based in Trinidad and was set up to make ''the World Trade Center attack seem small.'' But law enforcement authorities have privately questioned whether the men would have had the capacity to pull off the attack.
  ''The allegations are significant,'' said Edward C. O'Callahan, a former terrorism prosecutor from Manhattan who now works in private practice. ''It was an international conspiracy.''
  The number of defendants was cut in recent weeks to two from four, after one defendant was removed from the case and granted a separate trial because of medical issues and another pleaded guilty.
  The two remaining defendants are the men whom the authorities have portrayed as the central figures in the plot: Russell M. Defreitas, 66, a naturalized immigrant from Guyana who worked at the airport and who has been described as the mastermind, and Abdul Kadir, 58, a Guyanese politician who prosecutors say helped with logistics. Each faces five counts of conspiring to commit acts of terrorism and a potential life sentence. 
  As lawyers for these men polished their opening arguments, one of the other defendants in the case, a Guyanese man known as Abdel Nur, 60, pleaded guilty on Tuesday to a single count of providing material support for terrorism. 
  Mr. Nur, who said his real name was Compton Eversley, was emotional throughout the hearing, his voice catching on his words and his hands reaching up to wipe away tears as he assured Judge Dora L. Irizarry that he understood the significance of his plea. ''Guilty, your honor,'' he said clearly when the time came. 
  Prosecutors said Mr. Nur was an associate of Mr. Kadir who served as an intermediary between Mr. Defreitas and the hard-line Islamist group Jamaat al Muslimeen. Mr. Nur traveled with Mr. Defreitas to Trinidad, where the group is based, to lobby it to provide support for a terrorist attack, prosecutors said. 
  The material support charge, which was not included in the original indictment, carries a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. His lawyer said Mr. Nur would not be a witness against the other defendants. He is scheduled to be sentenced in November. 
  Earlier this month, another defendant, Kareem Ibrahim, 59, of Trinidad was removed from the case because of health problems and will be tried separately.
  The case against Mr. Defreitas and Mr. Kadir may be based in significant part on their own words, including those captured in recordings made by  an informant for the government who officials say conspired with them. During his arrest, Mr. Defreitas also admitted to being ''the brain of everything,'' according to court documents.
  On Monday, Judge Irizarry rejected a request from a lawyer for Mr. Defreitas to postpone the trial to allow time to determine if documents newly released by prosecutors with the United States attorney's office in Brooklyn require a new defense strategy. 
  The request cited a 2006 memorandum between two federal agents that said that Mr. Defreitas and others ''appeared to want to carry out a terrorist attack in the United States, but that they currently lack the funding and logistical support to carry out the operation.'' 
  The memorandum called for ''a full-court press'' on Mr. Defreitas, including introducing him to potential financial and logistical contacts through the confidential informant, ''with an eye toward building a case of material support to terrorism,'' according to the defense filing. 
  Prosecutors in the case accused the defense of taking the excerpts out of context and trying to capitalize on the publicity from a court-ordered delay in another recent federal terrorism trial in White Plains, of the four men from Newburgh, N.Y., accused of trying to bomb two synagogues in the Riverdale area of the Bronx. Judge Irizarry agreed, saying she did not see how the new documents changed the case.
  ''This is going to be a very long trial going through the summer,'' the judge said. ''And I just don't see any reason to delay this any further.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Abdul Kadir, left, one of two defendants remaining in the case. Two were removed: Kareem Ibrahim, center, will be tried separately for medical reasons, and Abdel Nur, right, pleaded guilty. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDRES LEIGHTON/ASSOCIATED PRESS)                                                 

Load-Date: June 30, 2010


End of Document