3,192 TERROR ATTACKS IN '04, U.S. SAYS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 6, 2005 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 290 words
Byline: KATHERINE SHRADER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


There were nearly 3,200 terrorist attacks worldwide last year, a federal counterterrorism center said yesterday, using a broader definition that increased fivefold the number of attacks the agency had been counting.
The National Counterterrorism Center's interim director, John Brennan, called a new database that was to go online today at www.tkb.org "the most comprehensive U.S. effort to date to track terrorist incidents worldwide."
But he cautioned that comparing the new tally with previous ones was comparing apples to oranges.
 In 2004, the counterterrorism center says, there were 3,192 terror attacks worldwide with 28,433 people wounded, killed or kidnapped.
 In government numbers made public in April, using a more stringent definition of terrorism, the State Department and the counterterrorism center had tallied 651 significant international terror attacks with more than 9,000 victims.
 Iraq, with 866, had the most terror attacks against civilians and other noncombatants, according to the new database. In April, Iraq was said to have had 201 attacks. The new numbers included attacks on Iraqis by Iraqis, a category previously excluded because it wasn't considered international terrorism.
 Terrorism statistics have become a hot-button issue with the Bush administration's war on terror. Critics have said previous government reports did not reflect an increase in global terrorism. Brennan and other government officials blamed human error and a definition of terrorism that had not been updated since the 1980s.
 Following the criticism, the counterterrorism center sought to establish a public, searchable database of attacks, starting with attacks from 2004, to allow private researchers access to the unclassified information.

Load-Date: July 7, 2005


End of Document