3/11
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 13, 2004 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 466 words
Series: EDITORIALS
Body


The hunt for those responsible for Thursday's horrific bombings in Madrid will be complicated by the fact that modern terrorism wears many faces. In the immediate aftermath of the bombings, Spanish authorities blamed ETA, an indigenous terrorist group that has carried out attacks for decades in the name of Basque independence. But later in the day, a group claiming links to al-Qaida took responsibility for the attacks. In truth, the bombings bore earmarks of ETA and al-Qaida - and even raised fears that terrorist cells associated with both groups might have collaborated in some way.
Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar has been one of the staunchest supporters of the Bush administration's antiterrorism policies. That association has made Spain a likely target of al-Qaida, which is known to have had operatives in Spain since the early 1990s. Other clues also point to al-Qaida: The attack came on March 11 - exactly two-and-a-half years after the 9/11 attacks in the United States. And the coordinated bombings were a common signature of al-Qaida operations.
However, other signs point to ETA. The group had warned of attacks timed to disrupt Sunday's national elections in Spain, and the type of explosive used in the bombings has often been used by ETA.
ETA and al-Qaida have something else in common: Both groups have been rejected by most of the people that each claims to represent. Most Basques have distanced themselves from ETA's political agenda, which champions an independent state carved out of the Basque provinces on both sides of the Spanish-French border. Similarly, most members of the growing Arab populations in Spain and elsewhere in Western Europe condemn the terrorist tactics of al-Qaida and other fanatic groups claiming to represent Islam.
Spain has suffered from decades of terrorist violence, and Aznar and other national leaders say they will not be deterred by the worst terrorist attack in the country's history. Aznar, who was the target of an earlier assassination attempt, will soon leave office after two terms, but his government's strong anti-terrorism stance is unlikely to change. The major parties agreed that Sunday's elections should be held as scheduled.
In the meantime, Spain's investigation, with help from the United States and other international authorities, will have to focus on home-grown terrorism as well as al-Qaida. Since the Sept. 11 attacks and the U.S. military responses in Afghanistan and Iraq, Americans have come to associate terrorism with Islamic fundamentalism. Unfortunately, the world is even more complicated and dangerous than that. Terrorism also can be Spanish or Irish in origin - or as American as Timothy McVeigh - and succeeding in the war against terrorism will require a unified response to a universal threat.

Load-Date: March 14, 2004


End of Document