4 ARE ACCUSED IN JURY FROM PARIS TERRORISM TRIAL
The New York Times
December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 554 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Dec. 5
Body


Four jurors on a nine-member panel were excused today from participation in the murder trial of suspected members of the terrorist group Direct Action, raising the possibility that the trial would be stopped.
The trial, which began Monday, was marked from the outset by warnings of retaliation by the chief defendant, Regis Schleicher, who is believed to be a founder of Direct Action.
Three of the jurors said they were suffering from ''nerves'' and illness. A fourth juror, who failed to turn up for today's session following a death in her family, is also asking to be excused from a trial.
Mr. Schleicher said Monday that all the members of the court would be ''exposed to the rigors of proletarian justice.'' He told the presiding judge that it would be impossible for the police to protect all of the jurors indefinitely. Mr. Schleicher has since refused to appear at the trial.
 
Replacement Pool Exhausted
All of the departing jurors were replaced with alternates by the presiding judge, but this exhausted the number of replacement jurors available. Thus, if any more jurors decide to drop out as the trial continues next week, the case would have to be postponed until a new jury could be assembled, a process that judicial sources said would take at least one month.
The trial, which completed its third day today, is of three suspected members of Direct Action who are accused of killing two policemen during an identity check on a Paris street three years ago.
In addition to Mr. Schleicher, who is 29 years old, the other defendants are two brothers, Claude and Nicolas Halfen, 30 and 23 years old respectively. The prosecution is charging that the three men were transporting a cache of arms contained in sacks from one hiding place to another when they attracted the attention of some patrolling plainclothes policemen.
When the police approached them, the three men opened fire, killing two of them and wounding another, before escaping in a stolen car, according to the prosecution.
 
Killing of Industrialist
Direct Action, which is believed to consist of only a dozen or so active members, took responsibility last month for the killing of Georges Besse, the chairman of Renault, the giant French car manufacturer. The police believed the killing may have been aimed at intimidating jurors and witnesses in the ongoing trial.
The departure of the four jurors was also an embarrassment to the French police; it seemed to reflect a failure on their part to instill the public with confidence in their ability to prevent Action Direct members from striking.
The trial, which is scheduled to end on Friday, has so far heard a reading of the prosecution charges against the defendants, which are largely based on the testimony of a former Direct Action member, Frederique Germain, who decided to cooperate with the police. Ms. Germain is expected to appear in court as a witness next week.
The trial, the first of its kind involving Direct Action, has been taking place amid the heaviest security measures ever to surround a French court, with every person entering the courtroom, including prosecutors and defense lawyers, subject to thorough body searches.
At the end of each session, jurors are taken via underground passages to a neighboring building from which they are whisked away in cars escorted by police motorcycles.


End of Document