4 BOMBING SUSPECTS ARRESTED IN RAIDS BY THE LONDON POLICE
The New York Times
December 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 335 words
Dateline: LONDON, Dec. 21
Body


Detectives made a series of dawn raids this morning, arresting four suspected sympathizers of the Irish Republican Army in connection with the explosion outside Harrods last Saturday.
The I.R.A. admitted responsibility for the blast, in which five people died, including one American, and more than 90 people were hurt. Two badly wounded policemen remain on the critical list, but most of the others who were wounded are recovering rapidly.
London police arrest four suspected sympathizers of IRA in connection with explosion outside Harrods department store (S)
Comdr. William Hucklesby of the antiterrorist squad, who is heading the investigation, interviewed the four detainees, who were arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act. Under British law their names were not disclosed. Commander Hucklesby is also trying to trace the car, a blue Austin 1300, in which the bomb was planted.
The four suspects, who can be detained for up to 48 hours without being formally charged, are being held at the top-security Paddington Green police station, which is ringed by electronic barriers. At least one of the four was reliably reported to be an Irishman.
 
No Contact With M.P.
Meanwhile, the Minister for Northern Ireland, James Prior, disclosed that he had ordered his office to have no contact whatever with Gerry Adams, the Member of Parliament for West Belfast who heads the Sinn Fein organization, or any of his associates. Mr. Adams has refused to condemn the attack by the I.R.A., of which Sinn Fein is the political arm.
Mr. Prior is expected to take other steps against Sinn Fein, but these are expected to fall well short of a total ban on the organization, which is legal both in Britain and Ireland.
As business began to improve at Harrods, which reopened Monday morning to sparse crowds, three Chicago police representatives - two ranking officers and a sergeant - flew to London in an expression of solidarity with their British colleagues. They met this afternoon with their counterparts at Scotland Yard.


End of Document