4 CHARGED IN SUFFOLK ECO-TERRORISM SPREE
Daily News (New York)
February 16, 2001, Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
Section: SUBURBAN;
Length: 480 words
Byline: BY ROBERT GEARTY DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body

Four teenagers have been charged with carrying out a campaign of eco-terrorism in Suffolk County as members of a shadowy group called the Earth Liberation Front, federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The four were part of a loose-knit cell that burned trucks and homes under construction and plotted to burn a duck farm and a McDonald's, all in the Town of Brookhaven, said Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch.
Charged with arson and arson conspiracy was Connor Cash, 19. Charged with arson conspiracy were Jared McIntyre, 17, Matthew Rammelkamp, 16, and George Mashkow Jr., 17.
Cash was arrested yesterday. McIntyre, the son of a New York City cop, pleaded guilty to the arson conspiracy charge in a secret proceeding Friday. Rammelkamp and Mashkow pleaded guilty to the same charge Wednesday.
The apprehensions were a major breakthrough for federal authorities in their investigation of the Earth Liberation Front, which has claimed responsibility for acts of economic sabotage across the country that have caused $30 million in damage.
"This is . . . the first time defendants have admitted their membership in this underground organization," Lynch said.
The Earth Liberation Front has said it targets those it feels are destroying or exploiting the environment. After burning four partially built homes in Mount Sinai, the group left graffiti that read, "If you build, we will burn it."
"In response, let me say, 'If you burn it, we will find you,' " said Barry Mawn, the head of the FBI's New York office.
Lynch said the acts of arson were referred to by the Earth Liberation Front members as "direct actions."
The group, and an interrelated organization, the Animal Liberation Front, were set up into small groups with limited contact between each other to thwart investigators.
They used electronic mail, Web sites and electronic bulletin boards to communicate with each other, plot acts and seek publicity. Instructions for constructing delayed-action incendiary devices, such as those used in the Long Island arson, were available on the Earth Liberation Front Web site.
Cash, of Sound Beach, was charged with conspiring with the others to burn the Mount Sinai homes Dec. 30.
Prosecutors said he procured the gasoline for the incendiary devices and instructed the others to carry out the torching because as an adult, he feared he would face greater penalties if caught.
McIntyre, of Coram, and the other two were accused of carrying out the Dec. 9 arson of four new homes in Middle Island and plotting to torch a Center Moriches duck farm and a McDonald's in Miller Place.
Mashkow, of Coram, and McIntyre were charged in the Dec. 19 torching of a home under construction in Miller Place.
Rammelkamp, of Miller Place, and McIntyre were charged with carrying out the torching of the Mount Sinai homes.
Lynch said all face five to 20 years in prison as well as fines and restitution of $358,000.

Load-Date: February 16, 2001


End of Document