4 G.I.'s Die in Afghanistan; Qaeda Deputy Attacks Foreign 'Infidel Forces'
The New York Times
June 23, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 459 words
Byline: By CARLOTTA GALL
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 22 
Body


Four American soldiers were killed and one was wounded in a battle with Taliban insurgents on Wednesday in the far northeastern region of Afghanistan, the American military said Thursday.
  The latest casualties came during military operations against insurgents across eastern and southern Afghanistan, and as the fugitive second in command of Al Qaeda, Ayman al-Zawahiri, called on Afghans to rise up against the foreign forces.
''I am calling upon Muslims in Kabul in particular and in all Afghanistan in general for the sake of God to stand up in an honest stand in the face of the infidel forces that are invading Muslim lands,'' he said in a videotape broadcast Thursday by Al Jazeera television, The Associated Press reported.
  President Hamid Karzai, at a news conference on Thursday in Kabul, urged other nations to reassess their approach to curbing terrorism in Afghanistan, saying the deaths of hundreds of Afghans in fighting with American-led forces was ''not acceptable,'' news agencies reported.
  The four American soldiers were killed in Nuristan, one of the country's most inaccessible regions, ''while conducting security operations to interdict enemy movement through northern Nuristan,'' the United States military said. 
  Coalition aircraft joined the fighting, but it was not clear how many rebels were killed, the military said. The wounded soldier was in stable condition.
  Suspected Taliban militants also bombed two coalition convoys in southern Afghanistan late Tuesday, killing a civilian bystander and wounding 13 people, including 6 Canadian soldiers, the American military said. 
  Violence has increased sharply as suspected Taliban insurgents have appeared in large numbers across the south and east, attacking government and foreign forces. Military officials say the attacks are an attempt to thwart NATO forces as they take command of southern Afghanistan from American forces.
  Mr. Karzai has been weakened by the strong show of force by fighters suspected to be from the Taliban, in particular in his home province of Kandahar, and by recent riots in Kabul, in which many protesters shouted slogans against him as well as his American backers.
  Showing frustration at the news conference, Mr. Karzai said the approach being taken by coalition forces to hunt down militants did not focus on the roots of terrorism itself.
  ''We must engage strategically in disarming terrorism by stopping their sources of supply of money, training, equipment and motivation,'' he said.
  ''We know the causes,'' he said. ''There are shortcomings and inabilities in our system; that weakness is present all over the country. But there is no doubt it is largely because of foreign factors, terrorism and planned and coordinated attacks.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 23, 2006


End of Document