4 MEN GUILTY OF BOMBING TRADE CENTER; MESSAGE OF VERDICT IS: U.S. WON'T 'TOLERATE TERRORISM'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 5, 1994, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A; PROFILE Mohammad A. Salameh Nidal A. Ayyad Mahmud Abouhalima Ahmad Ajaj Ramzi Yousef Abdul Rahman Yasin Bilal Alkaisi
Length: 1039 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


To a shout of "Injustice!" four men were convicted Friday in the World Trade Center bombing, a verdict the government hailed as an unmistakable message that extremists cannot get away with terrorism in America.
"Islam is coming back!" cried one defendant, Nidal Ayyad, glaring at the jury as it pronounced the four men guilty on all charges.
"Injustice!" shouted another defendant, Mohammad Salameh, pounding on the defense table.
The defendants face life in prison without parole when sentenced by U.S.  District Judge Kevin Duffy on May 4.
"They should be executed," said Walter Stokes, 47, who was among those injured in the blast. "There wasn't enough penalties for them."
The anonymous federal jury returned the verdicts on the sixth day of deliberation, and a year and six days after the blast. The explosion killed six people, injured more than 1,000 and shattered Americans' confidence that terrorism was a foreign problem.
"The signal should go out across the world that anyone who seeks to come into this county to practice terrorism will have the full weight of law enforcement brought against them," President Bill Clinton said.
U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White said the verdict "should send a clear and unmistakable message that we will not tolerate terrorism in this country." Her office prosecuted the case.
After the verdicts, the State Department warned Americans overseas of potential attacks by Islamic extremists.
The verdicts - on conspiracy, assault and various explosives charges - came on the Muslim Sabbath and during Ramadan, the holy month of daytime fasting.
As the jury forewoman repeatedly said "guilty," Salameh shook his head dejectedly. Defendant Ahmad Ajaj appeared to smile in wonderment, then joined a chant of "Allahu Akbar!"- Arabic for "God is great!"
One of Ayyad's brothers, Yousef Ayyad, who was seated in the back of the courtroom, cursed the jurors and screamed at them: "You are all liars! My brother is innocent!" Duffy immediately found him guilty of criminal contempt.
The defendants and Yousef Ayyad brother were restrained by U.S. marshals who ringed the courtroom. They were all led away.  Terrorists' Roles
Salameh, 26, a Palestinian, was accused of helping bankroll the attack, building the bomb and renting the van that carried it into the trade center's underground parking garage.
Prosecutors said Nidal Ayyad, 26, a chemist, had ordered chemicals for the bomb and later told news organizations the motive: to protest against U.S. aid to Israel.
Witnesses said the fourth defendant, Mahmud Abouhalima, 34, had frequented the apartment where the bomb was built, while Ajaj, 28, had provided bombmaking expertise. Ajaj was in jail on a false-passport conviction when the blast occurred.
Ajaj lived in Houston; the others in New Jersey suburbs of New York City.
Defense attorneys contended that the government had twisted the evidence to trap the defendants in a web of conspiracy.
Salameh's attorney, Robert Precht, said he would appeal. He called it a "shameful day" because of pretrial leaks designed to "demonize" his client.
"No one in the government should be patting themselves on the back and pretending this was a fair outcome," Precht said.
Hassen Abdellah, attorney for Abouhalima, said the verdict had come too quickly after the five-month trial, which included 207 prosecution witnesses, four defense witnesses and more than 1,000 exhibits.
But Abdellah added, "I'm not going to second-guess the jury. We hope they did the best they could under the circumstances." He said he didn't know whether he would appeal.
Whereas some defense lawyers would not even concede it was a bomb that devastated the Trade Center, Precht surprisingly acknowledged during closing arguments the existence of a bombing conspiracy but said that Salameh was not involved. Precht insisted his client was an unwitting dupe of the man alleged to be the ringleader, Ramzi Yousef, and therefore was innocent. Yousef is a fugitive.
Salameh later complained to the judge about his attorney's comment.
The noontime blast on Feb. 26, 1993, blew a five-story-deep crater in a garage beneath the trade center.
The 1,200 pounds of explosives inside a yellow Ryder van wrecked the skyscrapers' power and emergency systems. Tens of thousands of people fled down smoky, dark stairwells in a six-hour evacuation, emerging with soot on their faces and terror in their eyes.
A pregnant woman was plucked off a rooftop by a police helicopter.  Seventeen kindergartners spent five hours trapped in an elevator.
Among the six people killed were a pregnant clerical worker and a Trade Center worker whose body wasn't found for two weeks.
Two days after the blast, investigators found van parts in the rubble, one with a vehicle identification number. That led them to Salameh, who was arrested March 4 as he tried to recover a $ 400 deposit on the rental van.
Also charged with conspiracy in the bombing were Bilal Alkaisi, 28, who awaits trial, and fugitives Yousef, 26, and Abdul Yasin, 33.
White said the government was investing "considerable efforts" to find the fugitives. She did not elaborate.  15 Charged In Plot
In a related case, 15 others face trial this fall on charges they plotted to blow up the United Nations, the federal building housing the FBI and two tunnels and a bridge connecting Manhattan and New Jersey. The Trade Center bombing allegedly was part of that conspiracy.
One defendant in that case is Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, a blind Muslim cleric who is alleged to have inspired the group with fiery rhetoric he delivered in a mosque in Jersey City. Abdel-Rahman was acquitted in Egypt of charges that he provoked the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981.
Another defendant is El Sayyid Nosair, who was acquitted of murdering extremist Rabbi Meir Kahane but has been jailed for three years on related weapons charges. Prosecutors linked all four defendants in the Trade Center trial to Nosair.
Threats of violence were made even before the Trade Center verdicts. In a secretly taped conversation with a government informer, a defendant in the upcoming trial warns that the U.S. government "shall receive a blow of the kind they've never experienced in their life" if the four defendants were sentenced to life in prison.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Photo Headshot of Mohammad A. Salameh - 26, Jordanian citizen of Palestinian descent, of Jersey City, N.J. Prosecution: Rented van that carried the bomb, then staged alibi by reporting van stolen the night before the bombing. Rented storage locker where bomb chemicals were found and apartment that became bomb factory; his fingerprints were at both places. Helped finance bombing and was seen with van the day of attack.  (2) Photo Headshot of Nidal A. Ayyad - 26, chemical engineer, naturalized American citizen who was born in Kuwait to Palestinian parents of Maplewood, N.J. Prosecution: Wrote letter to The New York Times saying motive for bombing was U.S. Aid to Israel; similar letter was on computer desk at work. Coworkers identified his voice on taped message to the Daily News. Helped finance bombing, ordered chemicals and hydrogen gas and rented cars for Salameh to drive on two scouting missions to Trade Center. (3) Photo Headshot of Mahmud Abouhalima - 34, born in Egypt, former New York City cab driver; of Woodbridge, N.J. Prosecution: Often was at the apartment that became bomb factory and frequently telephoned the others. Paid for gas for Salameh's van just before bombing. Sulfuric acids was on his dress show. Traces of nitroglycerin was in a refrigerator he had bought. His fingerprint was on a book page about demolishing buildings. Fled after bombing, arrested in Egypt. (4) Photo Headshot of Ahmad Ajaj - 28, Palestinian, of Houston. Prosecution: Went to Pakistan in April 1992 for military training. Arrested re-entering the United States Sept. 1, 1992, with bogus passport, wasn't released until after bombing. His luggage had bombmaking books with the bomb's recipe; his and Yousef's fingerprints were on them talked in code from jail with Yousef. (5) Graphic Chart by Tom Borgman/Post-Dispatch - Defendants in the World Trade Center Bombing What prosecutors contended about the seven men charged in the World Trade Center Bombing: Fugitives: Ramzi Yousef - 26, Of Jersey City. Prosecution: Cam to United States on Ajaj's flight with plans to bomb a U.S. target. Ordered chemicals, built bomb. Fled to Iraq hours after bombing. Abdul Rahman Yasin - 33, of Jersey City.  Prosecution: Taught Salameh to drive the van. Came from Iraq in fall 0f 1992 and helped build bomb, burning holes into jeans later found by the FBI. Also believed to have fled to Iraq. Charged Awaiting Trial Bilal Alkaisi - 28, of New York City. Prosecution: Shared Jersey City Bank account with Salameh. Severed from trial; reasons for giving him separate trial are unclear. source: Associated Press.

Load-Date: March 7, 1994


End of Document