4 suspected of ties to terrorism arrested; Homeland Security reports do not provide conclusive evidence of terrorist activity
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 20, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. d5
Length: 273 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Authorities have arrested four people accused of having ties to suspected terrorists and blocked 12 more from entering the United States in the first two weeks of this year, according to government documents.
Daily reports from the Homeland Security Operations Center do not contain classified information.
They are not distributed publicly and generally are intended to remain secret.
They offer a glimpse into what national security officials are doing to prevent an attack, detailing arrests, criminal incidents and law enforcement tips.
A counterterrorism official confirmed Wednesday that the documents made available online this week were legitimate.
The publication - at http://cryptome.org - initially led to an investigation of a possible security breach, but apparently their Internet posting resulted from an unsecured link on Energy Department's Web site that has since been corrected, the official said.
Three arrests came last week in Michigan, New York and Louisiana, and suspects were either held in connection with terrorism investigations or placed in deportation proceedings, according to the documents. The fourth came Jan. 6 at Los Angeles International Airport.
The documents do not provide conclusive evidence of terrorist activity, said national security experts. They described the documents as part of the government's attempts to share information about possible leads with law enforcement agencies across the country.
"When you put something in this channel, it's 'Leave no stone unturned, put everything in there, no matter how remotely relevant it is,"' said Roger Cressey, a former White House counterterrorism official.

Load-Date: January 20, 2005


End of Document