46 nations late with terrorism reports
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 16, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 354 words
Body


UNITED NATIONS (AP) -- A quarter of the 189 countries in the United Nations have failed to submit reports on measures they are taking to fight terrorism, and the Security Council urged them to do so as soon as possible.
Less than three weeks after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States, the council adopted a resolution requiring all countries to stop supporting, financing and providing sanctuary to terrorists.
Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, who chairs a committee established to monitor how countries are implementing its provisions, told the council on Monday that 143 countries have submitted reports -- but 46 have not.
Diplomats said many are poor African and small island nations.
"We understand that putting together a full report may be difficult for countries which have little experience of dealing with terrorism or for whom the preparation of such a report is a significant strain on their government machinery," Greenstock said.
Nonetheless, he said it is "extremely important" that all countries start a dialogue with the committee before May 31. That would be more than five months after the initial late December deadline.
Syria's U.N. Ambassador Mikhail Wehbe said the failure to submit reports was not the result of "ill will" but the lack of financial, technical and administrative resources.
The reports are being reviewed by outside experts, who can use terrorism-related intelligence from governments in their analysis of compliance. Confidential letters from the panel, on which all 15 council nations are represented, are being sent to each country.
The committee is making suggestions for changes in legislation and procedures to fight terrorism, and collecting offers from richer nations to provide technical expertise to countries in need. It has reviewed and responded to 62 countries and hopes to finish the remaining 81 reports by the end of May, Greenstock said.
U.S. deputy ambassador James Cunningham noted the "significant progress" the committee has made over the past six months and praised it for helping to focus international efforts on the global threat of terrorism.

Load-Date: April 16, 2002


End of Document