5 Americans' possible terror links probed
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 10, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 447 words
Byline: DEVLIN BARRETT and PAMELA HESS The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - Five young Americans captured in Pakistan are under investigation for possible links to terrorism after their families found a disturbing farewell video the missing men left behind showing scenes of war and casualties and saying Muslims must be defended. Frantic relatives and worried FBI agents have been searching for the five men for more than a week, since their disappearance in late November. The missing men, ranging in age from 19 to 25, have family roots in the northern Virginia and Washington, D.C., area. 
One, Ramy Zamzam, is a dental student at Howard University. Two U.S. officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the case, said the five are believed to be under arrest in Pakistan. On the heels of charges against a Chicago man accused of plotting international terrorism, the case is another worrisome sign that Americans can be recruited within the United States to enlist in terrorist networks. Leaders of an Islamic American group said the families of the five men asked the FBI for help and were particularly disturbed to see the video message. "One person appeared in that video and they made references to the ongoing conflict in the world, and that young Muslims have to do something," said Nihad Awad, of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, or CAIR. "The video's about 11 minutes and it's like a farewell. And they did not specify what they would be doing. But just hearing and seeing videos similar on the Internet, it just made me uncomfortable," Awad said. The video has not been made public. Before the men left, they did not seem to have become militant, a local imam said. "From all of our interviews, there was no sign they were outwardly radicalized," said Imam Johari Abdul-Malik. One of Zamzam's younger brothers, interviewed at the family's Alexandria, Va., apartment, said Zamzam has a 4.0 grade-point average and is "a good guy." "He's a normal Joe," said the brother, identifying himself only by a nickname, Zam. In Pakistan, police officer Tahir Gujjar said five Americans were picked up in a raid on a house in Sarghoda in the eastern province of Punjab. He did not identify them, but said three are of Pakistani descent, one is of Egyptian descent and the other has Yemeni heritage. S.M. Imran Gardezi, press minister at the Pakistani Embassy in Washington, said the men "are under arrest in Pakistan. The investigation is to see whether they had any links to any extremist groups." No charges have been filed. Pakistani regional police chief Mian Javed Islam told The Associated Press that the men spent the past few days in the city of Sarghoda, which is near an air base.

Load-Date: December 10, 2009


End of Document