5 DEFY COURT ORDER TO TESTIFY IN NEW YEAR'S EVE BOMBINGS
The New York Times
January 20, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 702 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED
Body


Five self-described advocates of Puerto Rican independence yesterday defied a Federal judge's order to testify before a grand jury looking into the New Year's Eve bombings in Manhattan and Brooklyn that severely injured three police officers. The five were permitted to remain free pending further legal proceedings.
The F.A.L.N., a Puerto Rican terrorist group, is suspected of having carried out the four dynamite bombings, one of which occurred at Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the scene of yesterday's court session.
After the five refused to obey Judge Charles P. Sifton's order to testify, the judge said he would consider a Government request that they be prosecuted for criminal contempt.
Five self-described advocates of Puerto Rican independence yesterday defied a Federal judge's order to testify before a grand jury looking into the New Year's Eve bombings in Manhattan and Brooklyn that severely injured three police officers.Panel Called 'Tool of Coercion'
The five - two Puerto Rican brothers from New York and three Mexican-Americans from California and Colorado - have repeatedly denied that they have any information to give the grand jury. They have also said they will not ''collaborate'' with it because it is a ''tool of coercion'' aimed at all advocates of Puerto Rican independence, including those acting legally.
The five say they have committed no crimes and are not members of the F.A.L.N. The Federal Bureau of Investigation characterized them last September as ''the remaining unincarcerated leadership of the F.A.L.N.,'' an accusation the five say is untrue.
Later yesterday, Paul Moore Jr., Protestant Episcopal Bishop of New York, charged that the the grand jury in the case was being used for a ''witch hunt'' and as a ''means of intimidating people who want to participate in the Puerto Rican independence movement.''
The Bishop, who was among 75 supporters at the court session, stressed in an interview that ''I in no way sympathize with terrorism'' and ''I am horrified'' by the ''alleged terroristic acts of the F.A.L.N.'' But, he said, in this instance ''I happen to feel the grand jury is being used as an instrument of harassment toward the independence movement of Puerto Rico as a political movement.''
 
Bishop Explains Role in Case
Bishop Moore, who spoke by telephone from his Manhattan office after leaving the court proceeding before it ended, said he had attended it ''primarily in a supportive role for one of my people going through a difficult situation.'' He was referring to one of the five, Maria Cueto, 39 years old, of Los Angeles, an Episcopal Church member and a former executive director of its National Commission on Hispanic Affairs.
Raymond J. Dearie, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, said he had no comment on Bishop Moore's statements ''except to say the matter is before the courts and we look forward to its prompt resolution.''
An assistant United States attorney, James Harmon Jr., said in court that the grand jury was not concerned with the political beliefs of the five and that it was ''a question of investigating bombings,'' including those in the 1970's for which the F.A.L.N. has claimed responsibility.
 
'A Friend Was Almost Killed'
In one of these, Bishop Moore later said while telling of his opposition to terrorism, ''a friend of mine was almost killed.'' This was the 1975 blast that killed four persons at Fraunces Tavern in Manhattan.
Those refusing to testify yesterday have similarly refused in past inquiries into the F.A.L.N. In addition to Miss Cueto, they are Steven Guerra, 29, of San Francisco; Ricardo Romero, 46, of Alamosa, Colo.; Julio Rosado, 44, of Brooklyn, and his brother Andres, 38, of Manhattan.
Another Rosado brother, Luis, 32, is being sought as the person who authorities say anonymously called a radio station on New Year's Eve and said the blast was the work of the F.A.L.N.
The downtown Brooklyn courthouse where yesterday's proceedings took place still has some boarded-up windows to testify to the Dec. 31 explosions there. Security was heavy yesterday, with all those entering having to pass through weapons-detection equipment.
F.A.L.N. stands for the Spanish words for Armed Forces of National Liberation.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Paul Moore Jr.


End of Document