5 ISLAMIC PUBLICATIONS ARE BANNED IN FRANCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 10, 1994, WEDNESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 318 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


France has banned five Islamic publications and ordered regional officials to guard against "Islamic terrorism" because of threats from Algerian extremists.
The measures were criticized by political parties and the leader of the Paris mosque, who said he feared the action could amount to the French government seeing "a potential terrorist in all Muslims."
The stepped-up vigilance - including heightened security at airports and rail stations and the questioning of thousands of people in identity checks in Paris - follows the killings last week of five Frenchmen in Algeria.
According to police sources quoted by French newspapers, Islamic radicals from Algeria have formed a network that could be used as a support base by terrorists.
The Interior Ministry responded by making public Tuesday the news that it had banned five Islamic publications.
Imposed Saturday, the ban said the publications could not be sold or distributed in France because of "their violently anti-Western and anti-French tone and the call to terrorism they contain."
The three Arab-language and two French-language publications "are of a nature to endanger public order," the Interior Ministry said. "It is urgent in the current context to forbid these publications throughout (French) territory."
The ban was issued on the day the Islamic Salvation Army threatened unspecified reprisals against France unless it frees 17 Muslim fundamentalists detained after last Wednesday's deadly attack on a diplomatic compound in Algiers.
Paris wants to expel the 17 but will not send them to Algeria, where they risk death for their views.
Sheik Abdelkadi Sahraoui, an exiled leader of the Islamic Salvation Front, a party linked to the Islamic Salvation Army, said Tuesday that any attacks would not take place in France.
The armed group "opposes only the Algerian regime and strikes only the forces of repression in Algeria," he said in a statement.

Graphic

 
Color Photo by AP - Amid The Ashes Of A Forest - Residents of the Garden Valley and Kelsey areas north of Placerville, Calif., trudge through the scorched manzanitas and pines to survey the damage caused by a fire near their homes Monday. Officals said the fire was the work of an arsonist.

Load-Date: August 11, 1994


End of Document