5 KILLED IN ORLY AIRPORT BOMBING; ARMENIANS CLAIM RESPONSIBILITY
The New York Times
July 16, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 1004 words
Byline: By E.J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, July 15
Body


A bomb exploded in a suitcase at a Turkish Airlines check-in counter at Orly Airport today, killing at least five people and wounding 56.
An Armenian group said it was responsible for the explosion, which sent luggage and shards of glass flying through the terminal.  Vacationers and other travelers ran screaming through corridors and out of doors as they tried to escape the crowded terminal, which filled with thick, gray smoke.
''The explosion was very, very brief, but extremely violent,'' said Dr. Cyrus Irampour, a French psychiatrist. ''The noise made less of an impression. It was the flames. I got up and turned around and it was flames.''
PARIS, July 15 - A bomb exploded in a suitcase at a Turkish Airlines check-in counter at Orly Airport today, killing at least five people and wounding 56.Injured Flee Blast
''There was great panic,'' he added. ''I saw people who were going out of the air terminal who were on fire.'' One man hobbled out of the terminal, his leg bleeding. Others fled in tattered, burned clothes, their limbs bloodied. Several of the seriously injured were carried out to the sidewalk by friends before police and fire officials arrived.
It was the second attack claimed by Armenian groups in two days. On Thursday a previously unknown group calling itself the Armenian Revolutionary Army telephoned a news agency here saying it was responsible for the shooting death of a Turkish diplomat, Dursun Aksoy, in Brussels.
The two groups say they are avenging the killing of countless Armenians by the Turks after World War I.  In the last decade at least 30 people, most of them Turkish diplomats, have died in attacks by Armenian groups.
 
Turks Criticize French
Foreign Minister Ilter Turkmen said in a statement issued in Ankara, ''It is now clear what threat the savagery of such terrorism poses for all nations.''
In a reference aimed at the French, Mr. Turkmen said that ''especially those who support or tolerate terrorism should now realize that terrorist acts can also cause serious damage for themselves.''
Turkish officials have argued that France, which has a large Armenian population, has encouraged attacks by supporting the Armenian cause. Turkish officials have protested French television programs sympathetic to the Armenian cause and what they say is French leniency to Armenians who were captured.
In an unusual demonstration of concern, Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy went to the airport and condemned the attack as an act of cowardice.
''The Government condemns this attack with indignation,'' he said.  ''All will be done to find and punish its authors.'' Later Mr. Mauroy visited a hospital where some of the most seriously injured were being treated and also sent a telegram to the Turkish Prime Minister expressing the French Government's indignation.
The Secertary of State for Public Safety, Joseph Franceschi, flew to Orly from Nice, and the Interior Minister, Gaston Defferre, flew to Paris from his home in Marseilles to hold a meeting of his office's antiterrorist bureau.
The Government response appeared designed to stave off criticisms that it was unable to uphold public order, a charge leveled against France's ruling Socialists last summer after a series of terrorist attacks, including one that shattered a restaurant in Paris' old Marais quarter last year.
The French police said that their initial investigation indicated that the explosive used was of Czechoslovak manufacture, the same type of explosive used in the attack on a synagogue in Paris in 1980. That attack, like the attack in the Marais two years later, set off a period of national soul-searching about terrorism and the persistence of anti-Semitism.
 
No Americans Injured
Among the dead in the attack today were at least one Turk and a French national. The police were not immediately able to establish the nationality of the other three who were killed. The police described one of the unidentified victims as a ''Middle Eastern type'' between the ages of 25 and 30 who wore a T-shirt and blue jeans and may, according to the police, have deposited the bomb.
According to a police statement, 40 of those injured were Turkish.  No Americans were on the list of the injured.  The bomb went off at about 2:10 P.M., ripping apart a bag destined for a flight to Istanbul. It exploded about an hour before the flight was scheduled to take off, and the police speculated it may have been intended to explode once the flight was airborne.
''It was going up the conveyor belt -it exploded, and there were lots of flame,'' said Mireille Boucher, a 31-year-old airport employee who was working at the Turkish Airline desk at the time of the explosion, and whose face was cut by the debris.
 
'Everyone Panicked'
Richard Keene, a 31-year-old firefighter from Telford, Pa., said: ''Everyone panicked. Smoke kept filling the area. Everything smelled like gunpowder.''
Initially, many at the airport who heard the blast thought it was the last of the Bastille Day firecrackers. France celebrated its national holiday on Thursday.
Jim Mohn of Guttenberg, N.J., said: ''We didn't panic. We didn't understand the situation, I thought it was a big firecracker. They were throwing them everywhere yesterday.''
 
----
 
Turkey Warns of Retaliation
ANKARA, Turkey, July 15 (UPI) -Turkey vowed today to make Armenian extremists ''pay heavily'' for the latest attacks against Turkish diplomats and Turkish interests in Europe, and a gang of youths threw stones at the French Cultural Center, shattering its glass doors, and spilling red paint at its entrance.
Foreign Minister Ilter Turkmen denounced the latest violence that has been claimed by Armenian groups, which included the killing of a Turkish diplomat in Brussels Thursday and the bombing of a Turkish Airlines counter at Orly Airport near Paris today.
''The Turkish nation's retaliation will be as heavy as its patience has been great,'' Mr. Turkmen said in a statement. ''Armenian organizations are committing the worst example of genocide, but they will pay heavily for these crimes.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: map of Paris, showing location of airport photo of rescue workers and wounded in Orly Airport


End of Document