5 LONDON BOMBS LINKED TO LIBYANS
The New York Times
March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 558 words
Byline: By BARNABY J. FEDER
Dateline: LONDON, March 10
Body


A bomb went off at a basement nightclub here early today, wounding 24 people, three of them seriously. The police said it might have been planted by Libyan terrorists as part of a campaign against Libyan exiles.  Four other bombs Friday night were also linked to Libyans. One exploded a short time before the nightclub blast outside a shop in the Bayswater district that sells Arab newspapers. No injuries were reported.
Bomb explodes in basement nightclub inMayfair section of London; illustration; 24 people hurt; police link Libyan terrorists and tensions between supporters of Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi and Libyan exiles; 2d bomb explodes in Bayswater shop selling Arab publications; 3 other bombs found before explosion (S)
The nightclub explosion was in the Mayfield district, near Berkeley Square.
The three other bombs were found before they went off. One was at another Bayswater magazine shop and two were at a similar shop in Kensington.
The incidents came 10 days after Scotland Yard and the Foreign Office had warned of tensions here between supporters of Libya's ruler, Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Libyan exiles.
On March 2, Scotland Yard alerted exiles, news shops and other potential targets of expected attacks. Anti-Qaddafi groups have charged that the campaign is being controlled from Libya.  (Sir Geoffrey Howe, Britain's Foreign Secretary, ordered Ambassador Oliver Miles to inform the Libyan authorities that the police suspected Libyan involvement in the bombings, The Associated Press reported. A Foreign Office spokesman said: ''The use of British territory for acts of terrorism by any foreign group is totally unacceptable. We expect the Libyan authorities to do everything in their power to persuade Libyan residents in London not to commit criminal acts.'')
The police have closely monitored Libyans in Britain since a Libyan journalist and a Libyan lawyer were gunned down in separate incidents in 1980. Four Libyan nationals attached to the embassy were expelled at the time. The embassy had no comment today, but has previously denied any campaign to harm exiles.
At a news conference, William Hucklesby, head of Scotland Yard's antiterrorist squad, said the police hoped to find and question three Libyans who left the nightclub, L'Auberg, before the bomb exploded there. The police said there were about 120 patrons in the club.
Scotland Yard described the bombs as ''professionally made'' with timers and two pounds of explosives. Clubgo ers were fortunate that they did not also include the nuts, bolts, and metal fragments that have made bombs set off by the Irish Republican Army so lethal, according to Commander Hucklesby. Most of those hurt had minor cuts or bruises and were quickly released from a hospital.
''There was a very large and big noise but no one knew whether it was an electricity fault or a bomb,'' said Alan Raad, a Lebanese businessman. ''Women were screaming and people were running everywhere after the explosion.''
Although the police said the bomb was not incendiary, a small fire broke out and contributed to the initial panic, according to witnesses.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher praised the quick action of the police for preventing three of the bombs from going off. She noted that the Government tried to monitor all organizations thought to have members willing to resort to terrorism.

Graphic

 
photo of club after blast


End of Document