5 men are accused of trying to buy 100 Stinger missiles
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
November 24, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 473 words
Byline: John Shiffman McClatchy Newspapers
Body


 PHILADELPHIA ? The FBI terrorism task force in Philadelphia has arrested five men of Lebanese origin, following an extensive international undercover sting in which one of the men allegedly tried to purchase 100 Stinger missiles designed to shoot down aircraft. The central figure in the case planned to use the anti-aircraft weapons and 250 machine guns in the Middle East, and asked to have them exported to Iran or Syria for use by "the Resistance," a reference to the Palestinians fighting Israelis, according to an FBI affidavit unsealed Monday. 
The case began in June 2007 as a stolen goods case in which an undercover agent in Philadelphia began selling purportedly stolen goods ? laptop computers, cell phones and video games ? to one of the conspirators in Slovakia. But the FBI says the investigation soon evolved into a case involving weapons systems. In March of this year, Dani Nemr Tarraf asked an undercover FBI agent in Philadelphia if he "could acquire missiles or rockets that were capable of shooting down airplanes or helicopters," according to the FBI affidavit. According to an affidavit by FBI Supervisory Agent Samuel Smemo Jr. of the Joint Terrorism Task Force, the undercover agent met with Tarraf in Slovakia in May to discuss their business, and the following conversation took place: Undercover agent: "You got to know that all my stuff comes. I'm not a regular businessman." Tarraf: "Absolutely." Agent: "All my stuff. ... It's stolen." Tarraf: "Yes, yes I know." During a meeting in Philadelphia in June, Tarraf allegedly asked for missiles that could "take down an F-16," the FBI said. Tarraf also allegedly asked for 250 Colt M4 Carbine machine guns. Tarraf allegedly made a $20,000 down payment for the missiles and machine guns in late July, instructing the undercover FBI agent to ship them to the port of Latakia in Syria. In August, the FBI says, the undercover agent sold Tarraf approximately 1,000 military-grade compasses, shipping them to Beruit, with instructions from Tarraf to falsely mark them as "spare parts" on export documents. Tarraf allegedly traveled to Philadelphia on Saturday and was arrested by the local terrorism task force. The documents unsealed Monday do not describe the circumstances of his arrest. Federal officials in Philadelphia declined to comment. Tarraf is being held without bond at the Federal Detention Center in Philadelphia. He is charged with conspiracy to acquire missile system designed to destroy aircraft, transport stolen property, conspiracy to possess machine guns and conspiracy to commit passport fraud. Three others were charged with conspiracy to transport stolen property. Details about the men were not immediately available. A fifth man, Ali Fadel Yahfoufi, a citizen of Lebanon, was charged with Tarraf with conspiracy to commit passport fraud.  

Load-Date: November 24, 2009


End of Document