5 years later, UC-Davis remembers Sept. 11
University Wire
September 11, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The California Aggie via U-Wire
Length: 316 words
Byline: From Staff Reports, The California Aggie; SOURCE: UC-Davis
Dateline: DAVIS, Calif. 
Body


Five years ago, 19 terrorists hijacked four commercial passenger jetliners, crashing two into the World Trade Center in New York City and one into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Va. Passengers aboard the fourth jetliner overpowered hijackers and crashed in Shanksville, Pa. More than 3,000 people died in the attacks.
The major effects of the events of Sept. 11, 2001, manifest themselves today in the forms of Operation Enduring Freedom, the United States' military response to Sept. 11 in Iraq and Afghanistan and increased airport security and studies of terrorism, human rights and biological weapons. The entertainment industry has also responded to the attacks with two recent films, "United 93" and "World Trade Center."
At the University of California-Davis, courses have been added to supplement students' understanding of the post-Sept. 11 world, including "The Question of Iraq," taught by Keith Watenpaugh, associate professor of modern Islam, human rights and peace.
Watenpaugh, who studied in Iraq both before and after the 2003 military operation, said the effects of the war in the country are profound.
"No matter how bad you imagine things in Iraq to be, the truth is usually worse," he said this summer. "We predicted bad things would happen, but many problems we saw have gotten worse."
Despite increased security measures in the United States, terrorists attempted to use Gatorade as a liquid explosive last month on airliners traveling from the United Kingdom to the United States.
In the years since Sept. 11, stronger security measures have been implemented, but there is still more to be done, said President George Bush after the failed terrorism attempt last month.
"This country is safer than it was prior to 9/11. We've taken a lot of measures to protect the American people," Bush said. "Obviously we still aren't completely safe."
(C) 2006 The California Aggie via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 11, 2006


End of Document