6 die in attacks in Chechnya
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 20, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 3
Length: 327 words
Byline: MUSA SADULAYEV and SIMON SHUSTER The Associated Press
Body


GROZNY, Russia - Islamic insurgents including a suicide bomber stormed Chechnya's parliament on Tuesday, leaving six people dead and 17 injured in one of the most brazen attacks on the provincial capital in months, officials said. Ten years after the latest separatist war in the volatile region in southern Russia and after a decade of roundups and disappearances of Islamic suspects, it appears that Chechnya's Kremlin-backed administration still can't stop separatists from trying to blow up parliament. Tuesday's attack left a grim scene around the parliament building, with body parts and a decapitated corpse lying on the ground near shattered window glass. 
Interior Ministry special forces paced the area in camouflage fatigues, wielding grenade-launching Kalashnikov rifles. Chechnya, part of Russia's volatile North Caucasus region, has been battling an Islamist insurgency for years despite the iron rule of its Moscow-backed president, Ramzan Kadyrov. The exact motive for Tuesday's attack was not known, but Russian Interior Minister Rashid Nurgaliyev was in Grozny for talks with Kadyrov about recent violence. Kadyrov sought to play down the attack, saying the assailants were quickly killed. His office said Russia's Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and President Dmitry Medvedev called him to offer assistance. Medvedev, on a visit to France, was briefed about the attack by Russian security officials. The White House condemned the attack and offered condolences to the families of the dead and wounded. "Terrorism is unacceptable in any form," said Mike Hammer, a spokesman for the National Security Council. He added the U.S. was working with Russia to fight terrorism and protect "the innocent who always suffer from its brutal tactics." Chechen police spokesman Ramzan Bekkhoyev told The Associated Press that one militant set off a bomb at the gates of the parliament complex in Grozny, the Chechen capital, killing himself and wounding others.

Load-Date: October 25, 2010


End of Document