6 Farmers Killed in Attack in Xinjiang
The New York Times Blogs 
(Sinosphere)
July 14, 2014 Monday


Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 863 words
Byline: ANDREW JACOBS
Highlight: The attacks were part of a late-night spate of home invasions that appear to be a slow-burn effort to sow terror among migrants to the region. 
Body


In the latest outbreak of violence in the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, assailants have stabbed to death six ethnic Han farmers in a late-night spate of home invasions that appear to be part of a slow-burn effort to sow terror among migrants to the region, Radio Free Asia reportedon Monday.
Like most recent incidents of ethnic bloodletting, news of the attack was quickly removed from the Internet in China. But Radio Free Asia, quoting local police officials, said that seven men were involved in the killings, which took place on Wednesday in Uchturpan, known in Chinese as Wushi, a rural county in Aksu Prefecture that has been the scene of deadly clashes between the police and ethnic Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking people who are predominantly Muslim.
In the latest attack, the police shot and killed one suspected attacker and captured three other suspects, Radio Free Asia reported. A warrant that circulated on the Internet suggested that three others were still at large. The report said one of the stabbing victims, a woman, had survived.
The attack comes amid a year-long "strike hard" campaign that Beijing is waging against what it calls Islamic-inspired terrorism in Xinjiang, and it follows a series of brutal, high-profile attacks across the country that have taken aim at ordinary Han, the dominant ethnic group in China, unnerving government leaders.
The final straw appears to have been a bombing in May at an outdoor produce market in Urumqi, the regional capital, that left 43 dead, including four attackers, and injured more than 90 others. In the days that followed, security officials promised to pacify the region through an iron-fisted campaign that President Xi Jinping vowed would involve "walls made of copper and steel" and "nets spread from the earth to the sky" to capture those involved in the violence, according to the state news agency Xinhua.
Since the crackdown started, state news media have reported the arrests of more than 400 people in Xinjiang, many of whom have already been sentenced. Last month, 13 people in three cities were           executed after local courts convicted them of organizing and leading terrorist groups,            according to Xinhua. On Friday, 32 others were handed lengthy prison sentences, three of them life terms, for having downloaded and circulated what the state media described as religious extremist video and audio files. Like most legal proceedings in China, the trials were closed to foreign journalists.
Exile groups and local residents say the continuing crackdown has heightened the fear and resentment that have been steadily poisoning ethnic relations in Xinjiang since rioting in 2009 claimed nearly 200 lives, most of them Han who were hacked to death by young Uighur men in the streets of Urumqi.
In recent months, there have been almost weekly reports of small-scale attacks across the region. Last week, investigatorsarrested four Uighur men who they say ambushed Kashgar's antiterrorism commander in a rural area and stabbed him nearly 40 times before dumping his body into a reservoir. In late June, five Uighurs, two of them police officers, were fatally shot during a raid on a farmhouse in Kashgar Prefecture. In late April, three Han officials on a fishing trip in the same area were also murdered.
Experts say that disenchantment among Uighurs has grown alongside mounting economic disparity between Han and Uighur, and that the discontent is fueled by government restrictions on religious practices, including what news reports describe as aggressive efforts to dissuade students and government workers from fasting during the holy month of Ramadan.
Many Uighurs are also frustrated by the increasing influx of Han migrants who have shifted the region's demographic balance, reducing the proportion of Uighur inhabitants to 45 percent. Ethnic Han now make up 40 percent of Xinjiang's population, up from less than 7 percent in 1949.
Rohan Gunaratna, an expert on international terrorism, said the security juggernaut being rolled out by Beijing was unlikely to have an impact on the growing number of freelance attacks that ostensibly seek to terrorize Han residents and perhaps force them to leave the region.
"If there is real hatred, law enforcement cannot prevent such incidents," said Mr. Gunaratna, director of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological Universityin Singapore. "The authorities have to promote coexistence and tolerance and build a strong relationship between the Han and Uighur because it's not possible to police every house, village and street."
It is unclear why the farmers in Uchturpan were targeted. Repeated calls to the police went unanswered on Monday. But Radio Free Asia, quoting local officials, said that the stabbing victims were prosperous landowners who had recently purchased large tracts of farmland.
Tensions in the area have been high for some time. In February, Chinese security forces shot andkilled eight people who they said tried to attack a group of police officers with machetes and canisters of liquefied compressed gas, state media reported. Three of the assailants died when the canisters were detonated.

Load-Date: July 14, 2014


End of Document