6 fronts of the war on terrorism
USA TODAY
September 11, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 485 words
Byline: John Diamond
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON
President Bush declared shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks that the United States would fight terrorism on five fronts -- military, intelligence-gathering, diplomacy, finance and law enforcement. The administration and Congress agreed to add a sixth last year, creating the Department of Homeland Security to stop terrorists at airports, power plants and other vulnerable spots inside U.S. borders. Outside the country, the administration has deployed thousands of troops and covert operatives, worked to disrupt terrorist money sources, enlisted the cooperation of allies and made new ones, all to disrupt shadowy terrorist groups that experts say extend far beyond al-Qaeda.
But two years after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, there is no clear way to gauge whether the United States is winning what U.S. national security officials call GWOT, the global war on terrorism.
For every al-Qaeda leader arrested in one distant corner of the globe, the terror group or its loosely linked affiliates manage to pull off a deadly attack in some other equally distant corner. Ramzi bin al-Shibh and Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the men accused of being most directly involved in planning the Sept. 11 attacks, are in CIA custody undergoing nearly daily questioning at an undisclosed location overseas. But Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri, the group's leaders, remain at large.
President Bush's repeated assertions that the war in Iraq was part of the broader war on terrorism have proved true, but in ways that the Bush administration may not have anticipated. Al-Qaeda is trying to turn Iraq into another Afghanistan, a place where loyal Muslims from across the Islamic world must flock to fight the "crusader forces" of the West. A U.S. intelligence official says tersely, "It's a matter of growing concern."
There has been no large-scale terrorist attack in the USA since Sept. 11, though experts are divided on what that means. Explanations include: aggressive defensive action by U.S. intelligence and law enforcement; al-Qaeda's preoccupation with defending itself from U.S. attack on its Afghan base of operations; the availability of easier-to-hit U.S. or Western targets in places such as Iraq or Southeast Asia; or, ominously, al-Qaeda's pattern of spacing major strikes several years apart.
After Sept. 11, CIA Director George Tenet warned that the nation should prepare for a protracted war on terror, one that would last years, possibly decades, and far outlast individual careers in Washington. Two years after he made those predictions, there appears no reason why he should revise them.
TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE
USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll
Worries down, but not out
How worried are you that you or someone in your family will become a victim of terrorism?
September 22, 2001
Very/somewhat worried: 49%
Not too worried/not at all: 50%
August 25-26
Very/somewhat worried: 41%
Not too worried/not at all: 59%

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Scott Nelson, Getty Images; GRAPHIC, B/W, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll of 1, 009 adults. Margin of error: +/- 3 percentage points (BAR GRAPH); In dangerous spot: U.S. soldiers move with weapons ready through a street in Samarra, Iraq, last month. Troops are threatened frequently by attackers using rocket-propelled grenades, small arms and improvised explosive devices.

Load-Date: September 11, 2003


End of Document