6 Immigrants From Bosnia Face Charges of Terrorism
The New York Times
February 7, 2015 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 339 words
Byline: By ASHLEY SOUTHALL
Body


Six Bosnian immigrants face federal terrorism charges of aiding Islamic extremists based in Syria and Iraq, including providing them with American military uniforms to be used in attacks planned abroad, the Justice Department said in an indictment unsealed on Friday.
According to the indictment filed in federal court in St. Louis, the defendants, beginning in April 2013, provided money and surplus American military equipment to members of the Islamic State militant group and of Al Qaeda, through intermediaries in Turkey and Saudi Arabia.  
  Prosecutors said they communicated with the militants on social media using coded language and sent thousands of dollars to them, their families and their supporters. 
  They also shipped supplies, such as military boots, camouflage clothing and rifle scopes through the United States Postal Service to Turkey, where the goods were then sent to Syria, according to the indictment.
  All of the defendants are charged with conspiring to provide material support and resources to terrorists, and with providing material support to terrorists. 
  Ramiz Zijad Hodzic, 40, and Nihad Rosic, 26, are also charged with conspiring to kill and maim persons in a foreign country.
  Mr. Hodzic provided tactical advice to foreign fighters and Mr. Rosic tried to travel to Syria, according to the indictment.
  Five of the defendants are in the United States and have been arrested, while a sixth defendant, who has not been detained, is overseas.
  The remaining defendants are Mr. Hodzic's wife, Sedina Unkic Hodzic, 35, and Armin Harcevic, 37, of St. Louis County, Mo.; Mediha Medy Salkicevic, 34, of Schiller Park, Ill.; and Jasminka Ramic, 42, of Rockford, Ill. 
  Mr. Rosic is from Utica, N.Y.
  Three are naturalized United States citizens and the rest are permanent citizens or refugees.
  One other Bosnian immigrant who left the United States in 2013 to fight in Syria was named in the indictment and described as a facilitator, but he was not charged because he is believed to have been killed in 2014. 

Load-Date: February 7, 2015


End of Document