6 Q's About the News | Terror Attack on Charlie Hebdo Newspaper in Paris Kills 12
The New York Times Blogs 
(The Learning Network)
January 8, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: EDUCATION
Length: 271 words
Byline: KATHERINE SCHULTEN
Highlight: Why do President Fran&#231;ois Hollande and others believe that the killers were an act of terrorism? 
Body


 In "Terror Attack on Paris Newspaper, Charlie Hebdo, Kills 12," Dan Bilefsky and Maia de la Baume write about Wednesday's strike on a satirical newspaper.  
 WHERE did masked gunmen kill 12 on Wednesday?
 WHAT is known about the killers and the attack?
 WHY do President François Hollande and others believe that the killers were an act of terrorism?
 HOW have thousands in France and around the world shown "grief mixed with expressions of dismay and demonstrations of solidarity for free speech"?
 WHY do the police believe the killers had received military training?
 WHEN was Charlie Hebdo badly damaged by a firebomb earlier?
 WHO were some of the victims of Wednesday's attack?
 WHY are many in Europe worried that Islamic radicalism and terrorism are being imported?
 HOW did President Obama and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany respond to the attacks?
 For Higher-Order Thinking 
A related article begins this way:
The sophisticated, military-style strike Wednesday on a French newspaper known for satirizing Islam is sure to accelerate the growth of anti-Islamic sentiment in Europe, feeding far-right nationalist parties like France's National Front.
"This is a dangerous moment for European societies," said Peter Neumann, director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King's College London. "With increasing radicalization among supporters of jihadist organizations and the white working class increasingly feeling disenfranchised and uncoupled from elites, things are coming to a head."
Do you agree that anti-Islamic and anti-immigrant sentiment may grow as a result of the attacks? WHY or WHY not? 

Load-Date: January 8, 2015


End of Document