60 ISRAELI JEWS CAUGHT IN DRAGNET;
 HELD ON VISA CHARGES, BUT TERRORISM LINKS APPEAR TO BE UNLIKELY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 25, 2001 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 722 words
Byline: JOHN MINTZ, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


At least 60 young Israeli Jews have been arrested and detained around the country on immigration charges since the Sept. 11 attacks, many of them held on U.S. government officials' invocation of national security.
 Federal officials have presented no evidence that the Israelis, most of whom worked selling toys and trinkets at kiosks in shopping malls, had anything to do with terrorism. In one of the few cases to reach a hearing, a federal administrative law judge in Cleveland rejected any suggestion that the 11 Israelis before her had any ties to terrorists.
 The cases -- in Ohio, Missouri, Texas and California -- originated in the weeks following the World Trade Center bombings. Tipsters apparently called the FBI or the Immigration and Naturalization Service to report suspicions about Middle Eastern-looking people who were living together in apartments and working in groups at shopping malls, sources involved in the cases said.
Federal agents arrested dozens of the Israeli men and women in late October and early November on charges of working without authorization while in the United States on tourist visas -- documents that don't allow their holders to be employed. Agents interrogated the Israelis and in most cases ordered them held without bond.
 In several of the cases, such as those in Cleveland and St. Louis, INS officials testified in court hearings that the cases were "of special interest to the government," a term that federal agents have used in many of the hundreds of cases involving mostly Muslim Arab men who have been detained around the country since the terrorist attacks.
 An INS official said the agency would not comment on the case of the Israelis. But he said the use of the term "special interest" means the case in question is "related to the investigation of Sept. 11."
 Justice Department spokesman Dan Nelson also declined to comment on the cases but added that in general, "post-9/11, every time somebody's picked up on an immigration law violation, there's going to be greater scrutiny.
 "We're conducting the largest investigation in U.S. history, and we're trying to prevent and disrupt terrorist attacks," Nelson added. "We're leaving no stone unturned."
 Israeli officials said the cases involved only the Israelis' apparently illegal employment in the United States, and that U.S. officials are not making any claim that any of them was involved in terrorism.
 "Israelis visiting the U.S. have to respect the laws of the host country," said Mark Regev, a spokesman for the Israeli Embassy in Washington, which has been in touch with many of its detained citizens. "If they're in violation of their visa, there are consequences to be paid, especially after Sept. 11."
 All the Israeli detainees are in their early 20s and are observing a time-honored tradition in their country -- touring the world following their mandatory service in the Israeli military. A number of them had served in counter-terrorist units in Israel, a close U.S. ally in the fight against terrorism.
 "It was obvious they mistook us" as Arabs from Israel, said Israeli army veteran Liron Diamant, 24, in describing his arrest on Oct. 31 at an apartment in Findlay, Ohio. In an hours-long interrogation by FBI agents, he and his friends were questioned in detail about their Israeli military service, Diamant said.
 "All of us cooperated fully with them," he said. "We want to help the U.S. anti-terror effort, since we fight the same enemy in our country."
 The investigations of the Israelis working at malls is separate from another case of detained Israelis, in New York. On Sept. 11, five young Israeli army veterans who worked for a moving company were observed at a park on the Hudson River in New Jersey snapping photographs of the burning World Trade Center and seemingly clowning around.
 To complicate matters, when authorities arrested them they had box cutters in their moving van -- the type of weapons used by the terrorist hijackers.
 Two other Israelis working for the same firm were arrested later.
 Officials found they all had overstayed their visas, and they were held in a federal jail in Brooklyn until last week, when they began to be returned to their homes in Israel.
 Back in Ohio, Diamant is waiting for his next court date, and for word that he and his friends, too, can return to their country.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE HOMEFRONT

Load-Date: November 30, 2001


End of Document