60 nations meet to help Afghans battle violence, drugs
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 1, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A20
Length: 393 words
Byline: Beth Gardiner, Associated Press
Body


Afghanistan set out a plan yesterday to tackle problems including opium production, corruption and terrorism, as envoys from more than 60 nations pledged they would help the shattered nation along the road to peace and self-sufficiency.
Dignitaries at the opening of a two-day conference on Afghanistan's future spoke proudly of the country's achievements since a U.S.-led coalition toppled the Taliban regime in 2001. But they agreed that with poverty widespread and violence flaring, it still had a long way to go.
"From a nation held hostage by terrorism and by terrorists, Afghanistan today is a nascent democracy," U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said.
However, he said: "Our optimism is necessarily tempered by the serious challenges ahead... terrorism, extreme violence, the illicit narcotics industry and the corruption it nurtures... . We cannot be complacent."
The five-year plan presented at the conference, dubbed the "Afghanistan Compact," laid out targets for President Hamid Karzai's government in areas including security, economic development and antidrug efforts.
They illustrated the scale of the task ahead and demonstrated how utterly ruined the Central Asian nation was by wars over two decades.
Afghanistan promised to build a professional army and police force, shut down all armed militias by the end of 2007, and teach its officials about human rights.
It vowed to provide electricity to 25 percent of rural homes and to 65 percent of urban residences by 2010, repair roads, and set up a system of land registration.
It also said that by 2010 it would reduce infant and maternal mortality rates that are among the worst in the world by 20 percent and 15 percent, respectively. Karzai said he also would focus on boosting economic growth to tackle widespread poverty.
"Afghanistan is proud to be once again a member of the family of nations," Karzai said at a news conference. "And Afghanistan would like to continue on this road toward more success, toward prosperity."
International donors vowed in the compact to provide money and other support to help Afghanistan meet its new goals.
President Bush planned to ask Congress for $1.1 billion in aid for Afghanistan next year, a figure similar to the allocation for 2006, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said.
Britain announced $800 million in new aid for Afghanistan in the next three years.

Load-Date: February 1, 2006


End of Document