65 Senators Urge Baker to Deny Arafat a Visa
The New York Times
September 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 413 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25
Body


More than 65 senators have signed a letter urging the Bush Administration to deny a visa to Yasir Arafat if he seeks permission to come to the United States to address the United Nations.
The letter is addressed to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and is to be delivered this week.
Officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization said today that Mr. Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., was seriously considering applying for a visa so he could present his Middle East peace proposals to the United Nations General Assembly.
The Administration has been trying, through diplomatic channels, to discourage him from applying. It is unclear whether the United States would deny him a visa should he seek one.
Since December, the United States and the P.L.O. have held four formal meetings and several informal sessions in Tunis. The contacts have produced a more sustained relationship than most people would have expected a year ago, but both sides say they are somewhat disappointed that there has not been more progress toward direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. Aides to Mr. Baker said he was not inclined to follow the example of his predecessor, George P. Shultz, who denied a visa to Mr. Arafat last November on the ground that he ''knows of, condones and lends support to'' acts of terrorism. But the aides said Mr. Baker would not decide unless Mr. Arafat requested a visa.
The letter to Mr. Baker, drafted by Senators Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, and Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, says, ''This is not the time for unearned concessions or rewards.''
The possibility of a visa application by Mr. Arafat has already touched off a vigorous debate inside the State Department. Granting the visa would oblige the United States to acknowledge publicly that it had, in effect, wiped the slate clean since beginning a dialogue with the P.L.O. in December. Denying the visa would probably prompt the General Assembly to convene a special session in Geneva, as it did last year, to hear Mr. Arafat.
Mr. Shultz said in November that Mr. Arafat had been ''an accessory'' to terrorist acts. But Mr. Shultz agreed to begin talks with the organization after Mr. Arafat renounced terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist.
In a separate letter to Mr. Baker, Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, said Mr. Arafat ''may himself decide not to make a request'' for a visa because Israel could request his extradition on terrorism charges.


End of Document