7 freed detainees returned to terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 18, 2004 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A02
Length: 579 words
Byline: MATT MOORE and JOHN J. LUMPKIN Associated Press writers Stephen Graham, Paul Haven and Jan M. Olsen contributed to this report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite gaining their freedom by signing pledges to renounce violence, at least seven former prisoners of the United States at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have returned to terrorism, at times with deadly consequences.
At least two are believed to have died in fighting in Afghanistan, and a third was recaptured during a raid of a suspected training camp in Afghanistan, said Lt. Cmdr. Flex Plexico, a Pentagon spokesman. Others are at large.
Additional former detainees have expressed a desire to rejoin the fight, be it against U.N. peacekeepers in Afghanistan, Americans in Iraq or Russian soldiers in Chechnya.
Some 146 detainees have been released from Guantanamo. They were freed after U.S. officials determined that the prisoners no longer posed threats and had no remaining intelligence value.
Pentagon officials acknowledged that the release process was imperfect but said most of the freed Guantanamo detainees had steered clear of Islamic insurgent groups.
The small number returning to the fight demonstrates the delicate balance the United States must strike between minimizing the appearance of holding people unjustly and keeping those who are legitimate threats, Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman said.
Human rights groups frequently criticize the Defense Department for holding the hundreds of prisoners at the naval base, largely without charges or legal counsel.
In addition, 57 Guantanamo prisoners have been transferred to the custody of their home governments: 29 to Pakistan; seven to Russia; five each to Morocco and Britain; four each to France and Saudi Arabia; and one each to Spain, Sweden and Denmark.
The Pentagon did not identify the seven detainees believed to have returned to fighting, although a few names have been made public. One released detainee killed a judge leaving a mosque in Afghanistan, Plexico said.
Those who have gone back to fighting come mainly from the upper echelons of suspected militant or terror groups, several counterterrorism officials in the Middle East said. One noted a trend that lower-echelon members tended to get on with their lives after they were released.
The former prisoners include Abdullah Mehsud, who oversaw the recent kidnapping of two Chinese engineers, one of whom was killed.
On Friday, Pakistani soldiers began a massive search for Mehsud, 28, who returned to Pakistan in March after about two years' detention at Guantanamo. Pakistan officials say he has forged ties with al-Qaida since then.
One of the two former prisoners killed is Maulvi Abdul Ghaffar, a senior Taliban commander in northern Afghanistan who was arrested about two months after a U.S.-led coalition drove the militia from power in late 2001.
He was held at Guantanamo for eight months, then released. He was killed Sept. 26 by Afghan security forces in a raid in Uruzgan province. Afghan leaders said they believed he was leading Taliban forces in the southern province.
In Denmark, Slimane Hadj Abderrahmane, who was released in February from the U.S. naval base on Cuba's southeastern tip, said he would go to Chechnya to fight with rebels there against Russia.
"The Muslims are oppressed in Chechnya, and the Russians are carrying out terror against them," the Dane, who has an Algerian father, told Danish television in September.
Abderrahmane, who was never charged in Denmark upon his return, later backtracked. After being questioned by Danish intelligence agents, he said he would stay in Denmark, hand over his passport and honor his pledge.

Notes

PAGE 2

Load-Date: October 18, 2004


End of Document