7 killed as Iraqi troops arrest Sunni lawmaker
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 29, 2013 Sunday


Copyright 2013 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 289 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


BAGHDAD - Iraqi troops detained a Sunni lawmaker sought on terrorism charges on Saturday and killed his brother and five of his guards after they opened fire on the arresting officers. The incident, which will likely to add to the nation's sectarian tensions, also left one Iraqi soldier dead.
The arrested lawmaker, Ahmed al-Alwani, has been prominent among the organizers of Sunni protests against Iraq's Shiite-led government over the past year. He is sought on terrorism charges for inciting violence against Shiites who came to power after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion that ended Saddam Hussein's Sunni-led regime.
As military and security forces arrived at his home at dawn Saturday in the western city of Ramadi, al-Alwani's guards and tribesmen opened fire, prompting a shootout that lasted nearly an hour, a police officer said. A spokesman of Iraq's counter-terrorism forces, Sameer al-Showaili, told state TV that al-Alwani surrendered after he ran out of ammunition.
Along with those killed on the scene - al-Alwani's brother, five guards and a soldier - 12 guards and five soldiers were also wounded in the shooting. Six other guards were arrested, the officer said. A medical official confirmed the casualty figures.
Al-Alwani's parliamentary bloc, Iraqiya, demanded his release and denounced the arrest as politically-motivated, saying it was intended to benefit the bloc's rivals in next year's national elections.
"The arrest of al-Alwani and the assassination of his brother are part of a campaign for the elections," said Sunni lawmaker, Salman al-Jumaili, who heads the bloc in the parliament. He said the Shiite-led government is "agitating sectarian tension regardless of the consequences on the future of the country."

Load-Date: December 29, 2013


End of Document