7 militants sentenced to death for Dhaka attack
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 27, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 343 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


7 militants were sentenced to death by a special tribunal in Bangladesh's capital Dhaka on Wednesday over Holey Artisan Bakery cafe terror attack inDhaka in 2016.
Judge Mojibur Rahman of Anti-Terrorism Special Tribunal has passed the sentence in a full courtroom in the presence of the 8 suspects. The decision brings to a close the year-long trial that followed a two-year investigation, which saw one accused being acquitted.
All five militants were killed when the military stormed the cafe. "The court gave them the highest punishment", public persecutor Golam Sarwar Khan told reporters after the verdict was announced inDhaka.
The eight militants were said to be members of the IS-inspired local militant group Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh, also known as Neo JMB.
The July 1 attack on the restaurant popular with foreigners inDhaka's diplomatic area shocked the nation of 160 million and unnerved businesses, including the vital garment exports sector, and foreign investors.
Chief of staff resigns over murder case, says Malta PM
Six months before her death, the two men said they would sue her for libel over allegations she made about their Panama concerns. His arrest followed that of a middleman in the murder, Melvin Theuma, who on Tuesday was given immunity to expose those involved.
Defence lawyer Dalwar Hossain said there would be an appeal, claiming police had extracted confessions through torture. The counter attack, however, killed an employee of the bakery and fatally wounded another who succumbed to his wounds two days later.
The verdict simultaneously observed that Chowdhury tried to drawIslamic State support to militant attacks in Bangladesh.
In July a year ago, police's counter-terrorism unit had submitted to the Anti-Terrorism Special Tribunal a charge sheet against eight members of banned Jama'atul Mujahideen Bangladesh.
"We are happy that justice has been served", said Shamsuzzaman Shams, whose policeman brother was killed when he tried to enter the cafe to foil the attackers, adding: "We want immediate execution of the ruling".

Load-Date: November 27, 2019


End of Document