7 NATIONS REMAIN ON U.S. TERRORISM LIST;
 STEPS TAKEN BY LIBYA, SUDAN DRAW PRAISE, BUT CENSURE REMAINS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 22, 2002 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 366 words
Byline: ALAN SIPRESS, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Libya and Sudan have moved to distance themselves from terrorism and cooperate in the American-led battle against militant groups but have not yet done enough to be removed from a U.S. list of seven governments sponsoring terrorism, according to an annual State Department report released yesterday.
 Iran, North Korea and Syria have also taken modest steps to join in the international effort against terrorism although they continue to host militant groups and take other actions supporting those groups, the report finds. Iran, in particular, remained "the most active state sponsor of terrorism in 2001," according to the findings.
The report noted no progress by Cuba and Iraq, the other two governments on the terrorism list. Indeed, the report beefs up the criticism of these two countries from last year.
 These conclusions were included in the State Department's survey of global terrorism for 2001. After the devastating attacks on New York and Washington in September and the subsequent launch of President Bush's war on terrorism, this annual report has taken on a new significance.
 It found that all seven governments "clearly heard the president's message" that every nation had to decide whether it was on the side of the United States or on that of the terrorists. "While some of these countries appear to be reconsidering their present course, none has yet taken all the necessary actions to divest itself fully of ties to terrorism," the report said.
 This was the second year in a row that the annual evaluation had noted positive actions by Sudan. The report said the U.S. discussions that began in 2000 with Khartoum about fighting terrorism intensified last year.
 Sudan also condemned the Sept. 11 attacks and stepped up its counterterrorism cooperation with the United States, investigating and arresting suspected militants, the State Department found. Administration officials have previously said Sudan has increased its sharing of intelligence about extremist groups with the United States.
 But the report said Sudan also remained a haven for militants aligned with several groups, including Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida organization and Egyptian and Palestinian organizations.

Graphic

 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Lee Hulteng, Judy Treible/KRT; U.S. State Department: (Terrorist attacks against U.S.)

Load-Date: May 23, 2002


End of Document