7 SAUDIS KILLED BY U.S. DRONES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 10, 2013 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 548 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


SANAA, Yemen -- At least seven suspected militants from Saudi Arabia were among the alleged al-Qaida members killed in Yemen in a recent wave of U.S. drone strikes, senior Yemeni officials said Friday, suggesting that Saudis are increasingly crossing the border to carry funds or seek terrorist training.
With several U.S. diplomatic posts closed temporarily in Africa and the Middle East this week amid a global alert about terrorism, Washington evacuated most of its personnel from Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city. The U.S., along with Britain, also flew diplomatic staff out of Yemen's capital of Sanaa this week.
Since July 27, drone attacks in Yemen's southern and central provinces have killed a total of 34 militants suspected of being members of the country's al-Qaida branch, known as al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, security officials have said.
Israeli drones strike Egypt
JERUSALEM -- An Israeli drone strike in the Sinai Peninsula -- carried out in coordination with Egypt's military -- killed five suspected Islamist militants and destroyed their rocket launcher, Egyptian security officials told Palestinian media Friday.
The attack comes as Egypt's military is launching another major crackdown in Sinai, where militants -- some angry over the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi -- have been accused of attacking government facilities and killing Egyptian police officers.
Gunmen kidnap 2 pilots
BEIRUT -- Gunmen intercepted a van carrying Turkish Airlines employees from Beirut's international airport to a hotel in the Lebanese capital Friday, kidnapping two pilots but leaving the four other crew members behind, officials said.
The abductions appeared linked to neighboring Syria's civil war, a conflict that has sparked repeated bouts of fighting in Lebanon between sectarian communities as well as a spate of tit-for-tat kidnappings over the past two years. Friday's attack prompted Turkey to issue a travel warning urging its citizens to avoid unnecessary travel to Lebanon and those already there to leave.
The state news agency said a group called Zuwaar al-Imam Rida claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.
Zimbabwe vote challenged
HARARE, Zimbabwe -- Lawyers for outgoing Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai said Friday they filed an appeal with the Constitutional Court of the July 31 election results that gave Zimbabwe's longtime President Robert Mugabe 61 percent of the vote.
Mr. Tsvangirai's attorneys said they discovered that 870,000 names were duplicated on the voters' lists.
The Constitutional Court judges are considered Mugabe loyalists.
Philippines, U.S. ties
MANILA -- More than 20 years after Philippine officials shut down U.S. military bases amid rising anti-American sentiment, the Manila government has announced that it will soon be negotiating with Washington to increase its military presence in the region as a counterweight to domineering China.
Tens of thousands of U.S. troops were stationed in the Philippines after it was liberated from Japanese occupation after World War II. But under a 2002 pact between the United States and the Philippines, several hundred U.S. counter-terrorism troops have been in the country to train Philippine soldiers for operations. The Visiting Forces Agreement also limits the troops' number and length of stay.

Load-Date: August 13, 2013


End of Document