7 SUMMIT LEADERS CONDEMN TERROR, CITING LIBYAN ROLE
The New York Times
May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1343 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TOKYO, May 5
Body


The leaders of the seven largest industrial democracies adopted a joint statement today that condemns terrorism as an international scourge that ''must be fought relentlessly and without compromise.''
The statement, adopted at the urging of the United States, pledged the seven to fight terrorism through ''determined, tenacious, discreet and patient action combining national measures with international cooperation.''
The pointed declaration fulfilled a main objective of the United States by singling out Libya as a source of state-sponsored terrorism. But the statement stopped short of endorsing the use of military action or economic sanctions such as those employed by the Reagan Administration.
 
Shultz Warns Qaddafi
Secretary of State George P. Shultz, discussing the implications of the statement for the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, said: ''The message is: 'You've had it, pal. You are isolated. You are recognized as a terrorist.' ''
The precise wording emerged after Mr. Reagan made a dramatic and highly personal appeal for such a statement. At a working dinner of the leaders on Sunday night, Mr. Reagan handed his counterparts an informal 10-page document detailing his ''thoughts'' on terrorism and asked that they read it.
Officials from the conference participants - Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the United States and West Germany, as well as representatives of the European Community -worked on the language through the night before presenting it to the leaders this morning.
American officials said France had tried to soften the wording of a British proposal, which served as the basis for the final statement, only to have the leaders decide when they reviewed it today that it should be stronger.
 
Statement on Nuclear Safety
The leaders, on the second day of their annual economic summit meeting, also issued a statement that was mildly critical of the Soviet Union for its failure to provide more information on the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
While expressing ''our deep sympathy for those affected,'' the leaders said each country engaged in nuclear power generation was responsible for the safety of installations and for prompt and complete disclosure in case of nuclear emergencies and accidents.
In addition, the group adopted a declaration on political issues, ''Looking Forward to a Better Future,'' that touched on international cooperation, arms control efforts and the fight against poverty, hunger, disease and drug abuse.
The adoption of the statements cleared the way for the leaders to concentrate on economic issues for the rest the three-day meeting. Plenary sessions and a final banquet for the leaders and their spouses are scheduled on Tuesday.
On economic matters, the leaders were headed toward an agreement on how countries should manage their economies to achieve healthy worldwide growth. The likely consensus includes measures to tighten control over exchange rates to prevent such difficulties as the rise of the dollar in the early 1980's and the recent rise of the yen.
The agreement on political issues underscored the harmony of the 12th annual gathering, which is being held under extremely tight security. The Tokyo police enlarged security perimeters around locations used by the dignitaries after homemade rockets were fired at the Akasaka Palace during welcoming ceremonies there on Sunday. No one was injured in the attack, which was carried out by a left-wing extremist group.
Tonight the leaders held their second working dinner at a Tokyo hotel, joined by their foreign ministers and finance ministers.
 
Reagan Finds Support
Mr. Reagan came to the meeting hoping for a statement on terrorism and was joined, from the start, by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada, knowledgeable sources close to Mr. Reagan said.
President Francois Mitterrand said France wanted a less combative statement, the sources said, while Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy took a position between France and the others.
Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan, the host of the conference, mainly sought to reconcile the varying points of view, the sources said.
Mr. Shultz, who has been a leading proponent of harsh measures against terrorism, spoke of the conference statement with uncustomary enthusiasm at a briefing arranged by the Administration.
''This has been a long and very good day for democracy, for freedom, for the fight against terrorism, and for cohesion of the West as we work toward sensible relations with the East and for radical reductions in nuclear armaments,'' he said.
 
Beyond a 1984 Statement
Mr. Shultz said the leaders had gone beyond a statement at the 1984 London meeting in which they expressed their ''resolve to combat this threat by every possible means, strengthening existing measures and developing effective new ones.''
''What we have seen over time, unfortunately, is an increase in the number of terrorist acts, and so we have seen a recognition of the seriousness of the problem and the need to get after it in a great variety of ways,'' he said.
''So I think if you look at the statements and compare the one with the other, you'll see thast they have broadened and become more pointed, and I think that's important.''
Acknowledging Britain's role here in supporting the American position, Mr. Shultz spoke warmly of Mrs. Thatcher, who allowed United States planes based in Britain to be used in the bombing raid against Libya last month.
''I think Mrs. Thatcher is a terrific leader,'' he said. ''And I can't imagine any way that we could give her more support; if somebody could point it out, we'd do it.''
 
'No Justification' for Terror
The statement adopted today said the Western leaders ''abhor'' the increase in terrorism, ''in particular its blatant and cynical use as an instrument of government policy.''
''Terrorism has no justification,'' the statement said. ''It spreads only by the use of contemptible means, ignoring the values of human life, freedom and dignity. It must be fought relentlessly and without compromise.''
Pledging themselves to a maximum efforts to fight ''that scourge,'' the leaders said they would intensify efforts to exchange information on potential terrorist threats and those who sponsor them.
''Terrorism must be fought effectively through determined, tenacious, discreet and patient action combining national measures with international cooperation,'' the statement said.
 
Steps Against Terror Sponsors
In naming Libya, the leaders proposed a series of measures to be applied against governments that support or sponsor terrorism. Such steps should be applied, the statement said, ''until such time as the state concerned abandons its complicity in, or support for, such terrorism.''
The measures include a refusal to export arms to countries backing terror-ism, strict limits on the size of the diplomatic and consular missions of delegations from such countries, restrictions on internal travel and the denial of entry by the other countries to a person expelled from one of them.
In addition, they called for stricter immigration and visa requirements, improved extradition procedures and cooperation among law enforcement authorities from their countries.
Administration officials confirmed that Mr. Reagan had decided to order American oil companies out of Libya by June 30 in an attempt to build his case here for concerted action.
Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d said that ''at some point, I think the United States has to be able to make the case to its allies, if we're asking them to take action, that there are no longer United States companies operating in Libya with the consent of the United States Government.''
 
Support for Nuclear Power
The statement on the Soviet nuclear accident, which reflected concern about the traces of radioactivity that have appeared in neighboring countries, said the leaders believed that nuclear power, if properly managed, would continue to be an increasingly widely used source of energy.


End of Document