7 Tied to Faction Of the I.R.A. Face Terrorism Charges
The New York Times
May 20, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 292 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


DUBLIN (AP) -- Seven Irish republicans were arraigned Saturday on terrorism charges after a security sweep against militants whom officials suspect of plotting to sabotage Northern Ireland's peace process.
Three were charged in a court in Lisburn, Northern Ireland, near Belfast, with ''directing terror,'' a charge never levied against anyone suspected of being Irish Republican Army members in Northern Ireland.
Use of the charge suggests that the police and Britain's domestic spy agency, MI5, believe they have caught senior members of the Real I.R.A. faction, an Irish Republican Army splinter group.
Three of those arraigned were relatives of Colin Duffy, who is said to be a senior Real I.R.A. figure. The three -- Mr. Duffy's brothers, Paul, 47, and Damien, 42, and his cousin Shane Duffy, 41 -- were charged with preparing acts of terrorism, conspiring to murder and conspiring to cause explosions. Paul Duffy also was charged with directing terrorism.
In Omagh, the Northern Ireland town where the Real I.R.A. committed its deadliest bombing, in 1998, four people were arraigned on charges of preparing acts of terrorism, possessing a rifle and ammunition, and attending a Real I.R.A. training camp.
Two of them, Sharon Rafferty, 37, and Sean Kelly, 46, were also charged with directing terror. The Real I.R.A. killed 29 people, mostly women and children, in an Aug. 15, 1998, car bombing in the center of Omagh, Northern Ireland. After lying low for almost a decade, the group resumed attacks in 2007.
Police officers testified they had recordings of Mr. Rafferty and Mr. Kelly discussing how to target officers and finance Real I.R.A. operations. Mr. Kelly is a former convicted member of the Provisional I.R.A., which renounced violence in 2005.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 20, 2012


End of Document