73 DIE IN THIRD MOSCOW BLAST;
YELTSIN: ' TERRORISM HAS DECLARED WAR'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 14, 1999, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 1237 words
Byline: MICHAEL R. GORDON, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


A cloak of fear descended on Russia's capital yesterday as the second major explosion in four days demolished an apartment building, killing at least 76 people as they slept.
While no group claimed responsibility for the 5 a.m. blast, Russian authorities insisted that it was the work of Islamic militants who had taken their war in the Caucasus to Russia's capital.
"Terrorism has declared war on the Russian people," President Boris Yeltsin said in a nationally televised address.
Seeking to reassure anxious residents, Yeltsin ordered tightened security at airports, nuclear power stations and other possible targets.
The authorities vowed to check each of Moscow's 33,000 apartment buildings, especially the storerooms and shops that are often on ground floors and in basements.
Mayor Yuri Luzhkov announced that all visitors to Moscow would have to submit to questioning and obtain new residency permits within the next three days, a decree widely interpreted as directed against people from the Caucasus, who are often treated with suspicion by the municipal authorities.
These measures provided little comfort, however, to the many Muscovites who live in unguarded and poorly constructed flats - and who doubt the government's ability to protect them. Their sense of vulnerability has mounted in the past month since fighting broke out in the southern Russian republic of Dagestan, when thousands of Islamic militants moved from Chechnya into Dagestan and vowed to turn the Russian republic into an Islamic state.
Natalya S. Saley, a psychotherapist who was counseling residents near the blast site yesterday, said Muscovites felt a new sense of vulnerability. "A lot of people,"she said, "are simply afraid to go back home."
Yesterday morning's explosion was an especially rude shock because Moscow had been largely exempt from terrorism. Russians face many hardships, but this is still a city in which random violence against defenseless citizens had been rare.
Then a mysterious blast occurred late last month at the upscale Manezh shopping center near the Kremlin, killing one person and injuring about 40 more. It was followed by an enormous explosion Thursday that leveled an apartment complex in southern Moscow and killed 94.
Yesterday, in fact, was supposed to have been a somber day of mourning for the victims of the Thursday bombing - and for 64 people killed at yet another blast earlier this month at an apartment complex in Dagestan for Russian officers in their families.
Instead, Muscovites awoke to wailing sirens and feverish rumors about who might have been responsible for the blast and why.
Vyacheslav Izmailov, an expert on Chechnya for the newspaper Novaya Gazeta and a retired military officer, stoked the public's anxiety by declaring that an informant had had alerted him that Moscow would be the target of more terrorist attacks. The bombings, he said, had been organized by Islamic militants and set by a band of Chechen, Russian and Ukrainian mercenaries.
Soon after yesterday's bombing, authorities circulated the drawing of a suspect with a Chechen-sounding name, Mukhit Laipanov, who they said had rented stores in the buildings blown up yesterday and in the one destroyed last week. But there also were reports that this was the name of a man who had died years ago, and that the renter had used a phony internal passport to disguise his identity.
Late last night, Luzhkov said two suspects had been detained. It was unclear, however, whether they were merely local Caucasians who had been rounded up or whether the announcement represented a major break in the case.
Shamil Basayev, the Chechen warlord who is leading the rebel offensive in Dagestan, insisted that he was not involved in the blasts, spawning a new set of conspiracy theories.
The building bombed yesterday was on Kashirskoye Shosse, one of the main thoroughfares leading out of southeastern Moscow. As many as 150 people are believed to have lived in the structure, which was adjacent to a public school and a kindergarten. Erected in 1958, the apartment block was made of brick.
Shoddier than the prefabricated apartment house blown up Thursday, the building hit yesterday had collapsed into a heap of cement, metal and dust. Rescuers said the two dozen or so people who survived appeared to have lived on the upper floors and ended up on top of the heap.
"This explosion is a carbon copy of the previous one, with one little difference," said Vadim Seryogin, chief of the Central Search and Rescue Service. "There it was reinforced concrete. Here it is brick."
Huge metal cranes hauled away the debris as a cold rain fell. A few possessions - books, a small icon - were placed on a blanket in a sea of mud.
As with most tragedies, luck played a role. Mikhail Kuznetsov and his family had stayed an extra day at their country cottage. They learned that their apartment house had been destroyed as they listened to the radio on their drive home.
The Chechurin family was less fortunate. They had been at home in their beds. One child survived but lost a leg. His siblings were missing, and his parents were reported to be among the dead.
When the blast occurred, teachers rushed to the school to try to comfort the pupils. The children were quickly transferred to a safer location and the school turned into an emergency headquarters for police, soldiers, fireman and bomb-sniffing dogs.
"I have the feeling that we are living in a war zone," said Valentina I. Petrova, a mathematics teacher at the school. "The only difference is that in Dagestan, people know that there is a war going on in their republic, while for us this came like a bolt from the blue."
Relatives prowled the corridors of the school, desperate for information about family members who had lived in the building.
Natalya Ivanov, who was looking for information about her niece, complained that Russia's enemies had taken advantage of the end of totalitarian controls. "Democracy is to blame," she said.
Allocating blame appeared to be especially important for Russia's politicians. Yevgeni Primakov, the former prime minister and a potential candidate to succeed Yeltsin, complained that the Yeltsin government was "completely unprepared" to deal with the threat of terrorism.
Luzhkov, a political ally of Primakov, cautioned Yeltsin against using the bombing as an excuse to declare a state of emergency and delay elections.
Less partisan voices observed that law enforcement authorities had contributed to Russia's vulnerability to terrorism by repeatedly assuring Muscovites that security forces had the situation in the capital under control. The aim of such statements had been to avoid panic, but instead they had made many citizens less vigilant than they should be, Izmailov said.
Last night, authorities reversed that stance by appealing to the public for help. Russians must maintain special vigilance, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said, and "take a careful look at what is happening around them."
Others reasoned philosophically that Russia, like other Western countries, had finally been touched by the scourge of terrorism and would have to prepare for a long fight.
Mikhail Zadornov, a former finance minister, warned last night that Russians should gird themselves for even more bombings, much as the British had to contend with terrorism over Northern Ireland.
"We're going to have to live with it - not for one year, but for 10 or maybe 20," Zadornov said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, MAP, PHOTO: IVAN SEKRETAREV/ASSOCIATED PRESS: FIREFIGHTERS AND EMERGENCY; PERSONNEL SEARCH THE RUINS OF AN EIGHT-STORY BUILDING DESTROYED BY A BOMB IN; MOSCOW YESTERDAY.; MAP: Rsearch/Elsebeth Nielsen; Graphic/Tim Barker/Knight Ridder Tribune;; Russian Embassy, news reports: (Explosions in Russia)

Load-Date: September 16, 1999


End of Document