80 arrested to thwart World Cup terrorism
USA TODAY
May 27, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 314 words
Byline: Fred Coleman
Dateline: PARIS
Body


PARIS -- Police detained more than 80 Islamic militants in five
European countries Tuesday in an effort to thwart terrorist acts
at this summer's World Cup soccer tournament in France.
The coordinated dawn raids followed tapped phone calls, police
said, indicating Islamic extremists were planning to move men,
funds and arms around Europe in a plot to disrupt the competition.
The French Interior Ministry said months of surveillance led police
to "suspect the preparation of terrorist activity in the run-up
to the World Cup."
French police said they detained 53 suspects at 43 different sites,
mostly in Paris, Lyon and Marseille. The World Cup competition
will take place in 10 different French cities between June 10
and July 12 and bring hundreds of thousands of fans to France.
Those detained for questioning in France were Algerian, Tunisian
and French nationals. They are suspected followers of Hassan Hattab,
head of the GIA or Armed Islamic Group, Algeria's most radical
Islamic guerrilla organization.
The GIA, which blames France for supporting Algeria's military
government, claimed responsibility for a 1995 bombing campaign
in Paris that killed eight and injured 170.
Police also detained about 10 suspects each in Belgium, Switzerland
and Italy, and five in Germany.
French raids confiscated documents, a computer, and about 900,000
francs ($ 150,000) in cash, but no arms.
German authorities said those held there had been suspected of
providing arms and explosives but none were reported found. False
documents and the equipment to make them were found in Italy.
In Italy, Milan prosecutor Stefano Dambruoso said "as we gradually
got closer to the World Cup, in phone calls between various members
of the (Islamic) groups, they talked more and more about arms
and false documents, passports and identify cards."
He also said the suspects had been constantly on the move between
the five countries.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, AP

Load-Date: May 27, 1998


End of Document