9 NATIONS CONFER ON TERROR DEFENSE
The New York Times
May 29, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 473 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, May 28
Body


Top law enforcement officials of the major democracies met here today in what a senior American official described as an ''important first step'' in higher-level cooperation against terrorism.
Attorney General Edwin Meese, speaking at a brief news conference after the three-hour meeting, described it as an initiative made, in part, to prepare for a meeting of the leaders of the seven major non-Communist industrial nations in Venice next month.
The meeting of interior and justice ministers of the seven nations, as well as Belgium and Denmark, was held amid some of the tightest security measures ever seen here as France continued a state of alert imposed after terrorist threats were issued this week.
Nearly 2,000 extra security policemen were brought into Paris in the last few days after a group believed responsible for a series of devastating bomb attacks here last year announced that it would mount new attacks during the summer unless France released three imprisoned terrorist leaders.
The written message, from the Committee for Solidarity With Arab and Middle East Political Prisoners, was in the same handwriting as notes last year taking responsibility for the bomb attacks and was being taken seriously by the French police, who said it showed that the group had apparently succeeded in getting some of its members into France.
 
Willingness for Cooperation
Participants said the major purpose of the meeting today, which was called before the new threats were issued, was not to formulate specific measures against terrorism, but to demonstrate a political willingness to extend the cooperation developed in Western Europe in the last year to the entire group of industrial democracies, including the United States, Canada and Japan.
Mr. Meese told reporters that the meeting marked a ''new dimension'' in the anti-terrorism fight.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua of France said at a news conference that the talks showed ''a willingness to take all the measures necessary'' to combat terrorism.
The meeting today, which was called by France and West Germany, was viewed in this country as a victory for American efforts to press the West Europeans to make the anti-terrorism fight a matter for cooperation at the highest levels of government.
Last year, the French resisted an American request to discuss terrorism at the meeting of the seven industrial nations held in Tokyo, though it did agree after long consultations to put the meeting on the agenda.
The French argument at the time was that the summit meeting should focus on economic questions and not be turned into a general conference on all international problems.
But France, which suffered the worst terrorist attacks of any major industrial country last year, has changed its policy, particularly under the conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac.

Graphic

 
Photo of a police officer on guard outside the Interior Ministry in Paris (AP)


End of Document