9-11 SCARES OFF INSURERS. CITY FIRMS NEAR TERROR TARGETS LOSING COVERAGE
Daily News (New York)
September 29, 2005 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 351 words
Byline: BY ADAM LISBERG
Body


JOSEPH RIZZO stuck it out after 9/11. He cleaned up his flower shop in lower Manhattan, kept his employees working in the empty neighborhood and slowly rebuilt his business.
His reward? His insurance company won't renew his policy - because it says his Langdon Florist shop on Reade St. is at risk of another terrorist attack.
"It's just crazy. It's not right," an exasperated Rizzo said. "Everybody says support your downtown business. But I've never heard of such an excuse."
Utica National Insurance Group sent Rizzo a letter two days before the 9/11 anniversary saying the federal courthouse a block away is a terror target.
"This proximity to the terrorism target increases the risk of damage and/or injury to or at the insured location from an attack on the terrorism target," the company wrote.
"We need to carefully control our total exposure," said Utica spokesman Michael Austin, who said he didn't know how many other policies had not been renewed. "We're still going to write business in Manhattan, but not near known terror targets."
The move may sound unfair, but insurance experts say it's legal - and it's going to happen to more and more businesses soon.
A federal law that helps insurers with terrorism coverage will expire at the end of the year, they say, making it harder - or even impossible - to insure some businesses.
"There are an increasing number of cancellations in Manhattan that we believe are related to the lack of terrorism coverage," said state Insurance Superintendent Howard Mills. "We're very concerned about this situation."
He said one business near Madison Square Garden lost coverage because the arena is considered a terror target.
Mills and the insurance industry are pushing Congress to renew the federal law. But if the law expires, the picture for business owners like Rizzo will be bleak, said Bernie Bourdeau, president of the New York Insurance Association.
"The economic recovery in the city has been slow and painful, but it's been happening," Bourdeau said. "But it'll be a shame if it stops completely because Congress won't renew the law."
alisberg@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
HOWARD SIMMONS DAILY NEWS Joseph Rizzo of Langdon Florist was told policy won't be renewed.

Load-Date: September 29, 2005


End of Document