9-11 REPORT QUESTIONS RICE'S STATEMENTS ON TERRORISM;
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS ALSO HAVE CHALLENGED SOME OF HER COMMENTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 29, 2003 Tuesday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 592 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The congressional report on pre-Sept. 11 intelligence calls into question answers that national security adviser Condoleezza Rice gave the public last year about the White House's knowledge of terrorism threats.
It's a fresh credibility issue for the adviser whose remarks about prewar Iraq information also have been questioned by members of Congress.
President George W. Bush's adviser told the public in May 2002 that a pre-Sept. 11 terrorism intelligence briefing for the president contained only a general warning of threats and largely historical information, not specific plots.
But the authors of the congressional report, released last week, stated the briefing given to the president a month before the suicide hijackings included recent intelligence that al-Qaida was planning to send operatives into the United States to carry out an attack using high explosives.
The White House defended Rice, saying her answers were accurate given what she could state publicly at the time about still-classified information.
On Monday, White House spokesman Scott McClellan said Bush had full confidence in Rice. "She is strongly committed with the president to making America safer," he told reporters.
The Sept. 11 congressional investigators underscore their point three times in their report, using nearly identical language to contrast Rice's answers with the actual information in the presidential briefing.
The president's daily briefing on Aug. 6, 2001, contained "information acquired in May 2001 that indicated a group of (Osama) bin Laden supporters was planning attacks in the United States with explosives," the report stated.
A footnote to that passage compares the information with what Rice told the public at a May 16, 2002, news conference.
Rice "stated, however, that the report did not contain specific warning information, but only a generalized warning, and did not contain information that al-Qaida was discussing a particular planned attack against a specific target at any specific time, place, or by any specific method," the footnote said.
At the same May 2002 news media briefing, Rice also said that "I don't think anybody could have predicted that these people would take an airplane and slam it into the World Trade Center, take another one and slam it into the Pentagon; that they would try to use an airplane as a missile, a hijacked airplane as a missile."
But the congressional report states that "from at least 1994, and continuing into the summer of 2001, the Intelligence Community received information indicating that terrorists were contemplating, among other means of attack, the use of aircraft as weapons."
The report says that Rice and other top officials, including President Bill Clinton's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, and Defense Undersecretary Paul Wolfowitz, seemed unaware of the intelligence and concludes the information must not have been widely circulated.
More recently, Rice's explanations about what the White House knew about Iraq also have been questioned by members of Congress and by Democrats seeking the presidential nomination. She told reporters several weeks ago that Bush's State of the Union message never would have included any mention of Iraq shopping for uranium in Africa "if we had known what we know now." But Stephen Hadley, Rice's deputy, disclosed last Tuesday that two CIA memos and a telephone call from CIA Director George Tenet had persuaded him to take a similar passage about Iraq and uranium out of a presidential speech three months before the State of the Union address.

Notes

PAGE 2; Note: a shorter version of this article ran in the FIVE STAR LATE LIFT Edition, page A4.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Condoleeza) Rice; National security adviser; Note: a color photo ran in the FIVE STAR LATE LIFT Edition, page A4.

Load-Date: July 29, 2003


End of Document