9-11 panel rips FBI, Ashcroft
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 13, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A,
Length: 977 words
Byline: LANCASTER NEW ERA
Body


By CURT ANDERSON Associated Press Writer WASHINGTON The FBI failed miserably over several years to reorganize and respond to a steadily growing threat of terrorism, and Attorney General John Ashcroft rejected an appeal from the agency for more funding on the day before al-Qaida struck, the commission investigating the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks said Tuesday.  On Sept. 11, the FBI was limited in several areas, the commission said in a staff report. It cited limited intelligence collection and strategic analysis capabilities, a limited capacity to share information both internally and externally, insufficient training, an overly complex legal regime and inadequate resources.  The commission released its unflinchingly critical report at the outset of two days of hearings from several current and former officials at the Justice Department and FBI.  Former FBI Director Louis J. Freeh was the first to take the witness chair. We had a very effective program with respect to counterterrorism prior to Sept. 11 given the resources that we had, he said.  That seemed a reference to internal bureaucratic wars covered in part in the commission staff report.  Former Attorney General Janet Reno said that while the FBI never seemed to have sufficient resources, Director Freeh seemed unwilling to shift resources to terrorism from other areas such as violent crime.  On Sept. 11, 2001, the commission staff said, about 1,300 agents, or 6 percent of the FBIs total personnel, worked on counterterrorism.  Reno was the days second witness, following Freeh.
#BC-SEPT11COMMISSION_557.TXT#Cofer Black, the former head of CIA counterterrorism center, former acting FBI Director Thomas Pickard and Ashcroft also were on the witness list for the day.  The report said the FBI had an information system that was outdated before it was installed, further hampering efforts to battle terrorism. The report also cited legal impediments the need to separate the fruits of intelligence from criminal prosecution as complicating anti-terrorism efforts.  Creation of a new Investigative Services Division in 1999 was a failure, the commission said, adding that 66 percent of the FBIs analysts were not qualified to perform analytical duties.  A new counterterrorism strategy a year later again fell woefully short, and a review in 2001 showed that almost every FBI field offices counterterrorism program was assessed to be operating at far below maximum capacity.  The FBIs counterterrorism strategy was not a focus of the Justice Department in 2001, the first year of the Bush administration, it said.  Ashcroft has testified previously that the Justice Department had no higher priority than protecting Americans from terrorism at home and abroad.  Yet the commission staff statement quotes a former FBI counterterrorism chief, Dale Watson, as saying he almost fell out of his chair when he saw a May 10 budget memo from Ashcroft listing seven priorities, including illegal drugs and gun violence, but not terrorism.  Additionally, on Sept. 10, Ashcroft rejected an appeal from Pickard for additional funding, the commission said.  Ashcroft aides said the attorney general hoped to use his appearance before the commission to rebut criticism that he was less focused on terrorism than other law enforcement priorities. In a statement released Monday, the current FBI director, Robert Mueller, said that since his tenure began on Sept. 4, 2001, he and Ashcroft have been in lockstep in working to secure adequate counterterrorism resources for the FBI. Mueller is scheduled to testify Wednesday.  According to a commission document obtained by the Associated Press, Pickard also raised questions about the presence of former Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick on the panel. The document said Pickard found her membership surprising because she and Reno had developed the policy to counter international terrorism primarily through the use of law enforcement techniques.  Commission members say it is critical to learn what law enforcement officials did to confront the rising threat of terrorism inside the United States.  The FBI is going to have to answer the question: Why didnt they deliver the information up? Did they get clear instructions from the top that it should be delivered up? said former Sen. Bob Kerrey, a Democratic member of the Sept. 11 commission.  The commission staff statement discussed a long list of FBI shortcomings on terrorism, including a culture in which agents got credit and promotions for making cases and arrests but not for intelligence work that resulted in fewer prosecutions. Counterintelligence and counterterrorism, the report said, were viewed as backwaters within the FBI.  Other problems included outmoded computer systems that prevented proper information sharing, lack of strategic analysis, a legal barrier called the wall that barred most contact between criminal and intelligence investigators, and a decentralized structure that kept terrorism cases in the 56 field offices instead of FBI headquarters.  It was almost impossible to develop an understanding of the threat from a particular terrorist group, the staff statement said.  Mueller and other officials were scheduled to testify about steps the FBI has taken to improve its counterterrorism programs since Sept. 11.  The law enforcement hearings follow sessions by the commission that featured allegations and rebuttals that the Bush administration did not consider al-Qaida an urgent priority before Sept. 11.  Over the weekend, the White House released a previously classified Aug. 6, 2001, intelligence memo that warned al-Qaida was operating in the United States and might be looking to hijack airplanes. The memo did not provide specific times or places for potential attacks.  ON THE NET: To read the commissions statement: wid.ap.org/transcripts/statement.htmlDeEd

Load-Date: April 14, 2004


End of Document