90 D.C.-area airport employees arrested;
None suspected of terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 24, 2002 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 415 words
Byline: EUNICE MOSCOSO
Body


Alexandria, Va. --- More than 90 employees at two Washington-area airports were arrested for falsifying criminal history records, Social Security fraud and immigration violations, Attorney General John Ashcroft announced Tuesday.
"What this investigation uncovered should be a wake-up call for every airport in America," he said at a press conference at the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Virginia.
Cox Washington Bureau
The sweep at Dulles and Reagan National Airport was the latest in an ongoing multiagency effort that Ashcroft described as a "large-scale, anti-terrorism, airport security initiative."
In Atlanta, five illegal immigrants were arrested at Hartsfield International Airport in February on charges of using false documents to get jobs with airport contractors, federal officials disclosed.
One was sentenced to time served and deported, said Patrick Crosby, public affairs officer for the U.S. Attorney's Office in Atlanta. Another has pleaded guilty, and the other three await court dates, he said.
As of April 19, 12 other Hartsfield workers remained in federal detention centers on charges of being in the country illegally, Crosby said. All face deportation.
In Tuesday's sweep in Washington, several employees, including two baggage screeners, lied on applications to get security badges, he said.
The most common violation was falsifying a Social Security number. Four employees at Dulles International Airport in Virginia were found to be "fugitives from justice," wanted on various state charges.
None of those arrested is suspected to be involved in terrorism, federal officials said.
"If convicted, many of these defendants face maximum penalties that range from two to 10 years in prison, plus up to a $250,000 fine," Ashcroft said.
U.S. Attorney Paul McNulty said more raids will likely be carried out across the country because uneven screening of airport employees presents a "potential for harm."
One baggage screener at both Reagan National and Dulles was arrested; both worked for Atlanta-based Argenbright Security, McNulty said.
One was arrested for falsifying a criminal history record and the other was arrested for providing a false Social Security number, he added.
John Magaw, head of the U.S. Transportation Security Agency, noted that the federal government is taking over airport security from private companies like Argenbright. A complete federal takeover is slated to be finished by November.
--- Mary Lou Pickel contributed to this report

Load-Date: April 24, 2002


End of Document