9;
11 spin creeps into campaigns;
The attacks' effects have proved too powerful for candidates to avoid, despite vows to do so.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 4, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 904 words
Byline: Steven Thomma INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Although they had promised they would not exploit the Sept. 11 attacks for political advantage, Republicans and Democrats are using them extensively in their presidential campaigns.
President Bush hinges his entire campaign on his response to the attacks. "I'm a war president," he says. He kicked off his campaign with a TV ad evoking the emotional images of 9/11.
Democrats protested; one anti-Bush group, MoveOn.Org, contended this week that Bush "shamelessly exploited 9/11 in his campaign commercials" - an accusation it made in its own campaign commercial, which all but blames Bush for letting the attacks happen.
It's impossible to predict how the debate over terrorism will affect the election. But Sept. 11 and the U.S. response will be a central, if not dominant, issue in the country's choice of a president, regardless of whether there are new attacks on the United States or Osama bin Laden is captured.
"For the majority of Americans, that single event was the most monumental, catastrophic event of their lifetime," said Susan McManus, a political scientist at the University of South Florida in Tampa. "It absolutely shapes their views of politics."
To think the campaigns could or would avoid the subject would strike the average voter as ludicrous, she said: "They have to talk about it."
Yet for a brief time after the attacks, it seemed unthinkable that any politician would exploit the tragedy. "I have no ambition whatsoever to use this as a political issue," Bush told congressional leaders in January 2002 as he sought quick approval for his antiterror and Iraq agenda.
Yet his chief political adviser, Karl Rove, told the Republican National Committee the same month that the war would benefit them.
"We can go to the country on this issue," Rove said, "because they trust the Republican Party to do a better job of protecting and strengthening America's military might and thereby protecting America."
Democrats howled that Rove's comment showed Republicans intended to seek advantage from the war on terrorism even though Democrats had rallied behind Bush after Sept. 11.
Two months later, when Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle (D., S.D.) questioned progress in the war on terrorism, Republicans all but accused him of treason. Rep. Thomas Davis of Virginia, the head of House Republican campaign efforts, said Daschle's "divisive comments have the effect of giving aid and comfort to our enemies by allowing them to exploit divisions in our country."
Debate over the war on terrorism has taken center stage in politics in recent weeks, first with the launch of Bush's reelection campaign, then with televised hearings of the commission examining the Sept. 11 attacks.
The President started his campaign with a one-two punch that left no doubt he would base it on his leadership of the war on terrorism.
First, on NBC's Meet the Press, Bush noted that the fight against terrorism influences every decision he makes. "I'm a war president," he said.
Second, his initial ad lauded his leadership after Sept. 11 and included a brief image of firefighters carrying a flag-draped coffin from the World Trade Center site.
Democrats called the ad inappropriate. The International Association of Firefighters, which backs Democratic Sen. John Kerry, called it disgraceful.
Although the Bush administration bars photos of caskets carrying dead soldiers from Iraq when they arrive at Dover Air Force Base, White House aides defended their political use of the image of a firefighter's coffin. They called the ad including the Sept. 11 images crucial to the story of Bush's presidency.
Bush is hardly the first president to invoke his wartime leadership when seeking reelection. President Franklin D. Roosevelt exploited his stewardship in World War II by accepting his 1944 nomination by radio from the San Diego Naval Station. "The war waits for no elections," said Roosevelt, a master of political theater.
Democrats ripped Republicans in 1944 for all but inviting Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor, much as Republicans blame Democratic President Bill Clinton's failure to eliminate bin Laden in the 1990s for Sept. 11.
Oklahoma Gov. Robert Kerr said in 1944 that Republicans "had no program in the dangerous years preceding Pearl Harbor to prevent war or to meet it if it came."
Such partisan attacks also have marked the Sept. 11 commission, particularly charges from Richard Clarke, Bush's former counterterrorism chief, that Bush failed to take terrorism seriously before Sept. 11.
In an ad urging Bush's defeat, MoveOn.Org uses some public comments Clarke made.
"George Bush shamelessly exploited 9/11 in his campaign commercials," it says. "Now his own counterterrorism expert, a man who has worked for every president since Ronald Reagan, says: 'Frankly, I find it outrageous that a president is running for reelection on the grounds that he'd done such great things on terrorism. He ignored terrorism for months when maybe we could have done something to stop 9/11.' "
With his integrity and motives under fire from Republicans, Clarke asked MoveOn.org to withdraw the ad. It declined.
Kerry accused the White House of character assassination in trying to tear down Clarke but has commented little on political use of Sept. 11.
Eli Pariser, MoveOn.org's campaigns director, said Bush invited criticism of the war when he started bragging about it.
Contact reporter Steven Thomma at 202-383-6042 or sthomma@krwashington.com.  

Notes

Campaign 2004

Load-Date: August 24, 2005


End of Document