9/11 at 15: Safer at home, but jihadist threat is greater abroad
Chicago Daily Herald
September 11, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NATION_; Pg. 13
Length: 592 words
Byline: By Joby Warrick and Greg Miller The Washington Post
Body


Nine days after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, President George W. Bush stood before Congress to outline a two-pronged response to history's deadliest terrorist act: dramatic improvements in security at home and an all-out assault against what he called a "fringe form of Islamic extremism" at war with the West.
Fifteen years later, the first goal arguably has been met, as Americans by almost every measure are safer today from another 9/11-scale attack than in 2001.
Yet the struggle to defeat the global network of violent, rabidly anti-Western jihadist groups has recorded fewer successes. Indeed, the problem appears to have grown bigger.
The al-Qaida organization once led by Osama bin Laden has been decimated and is no longer capable of orchestrating a sophisticated, trans-national plot on its own, terrorism experts say they believe. Al-Qaida's branches in North Africa and Yemen also have been weakened by Western military strikes and ongoing fighting with rival factions.
But al-Qaida's powerful and locally popular Syrian branch, Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, commands an army of thousands of trained fighters and now serves as a base for senior al-Qaida operatives experienced in making explosives and carrying out terrorist attacks, U.S. officials and terrorism experts say. The Syrian group recently announced it had split with al-Qaida, but U.S. officials say the claim is not credible.
Meanwhile, the Islamic State, despite military setbacks in Iraq and Syria, has demonstrated a growing capability to direct — or inspire — simple-but-lethal terrorist attacks around the world.
"The threat is actually worse: It has metastasized and spread geographically," said Richard Clarke, a top terrorism adviser to three presidents and the man who famously warned the Bush administration about the growing risk from al-Qaida in the weeks before 9/11. "Today there are probably 100,000 people in the various terrorist groups around the world, and that's much larger than anything we had 15 years ago."
Both the Bush and Obama administrations thwarted multiple terrorist plots and achieved significant military successes against specific terrorist factions and key leaders, including al-Qaida in Iraq founder Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in 2006, bin Laden in 2011 and the Islamic State's No. 2 commander, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, who reportedly was killed in a U.S. airstrike last month. Yet both administrations struggled to find a formula for blunting the appeal of violent jihadist groups or preventing thousands of young Muslims from enlisting in a global movement fueled by hatred and bent on destruction.
There is little to show for more than a decade's worth of U.S.-sponsored programs aimed at countering extremist messages, terrorism experts say, and U.S. officials have struggled to block the jihadists' use of social media or disrupt international funding and support for extreme interpretations of Islam. Meanwhile, U.S. policies, from the Iraq invasion in 2003 to the ongoing use of armed drones against suspected terrorists, have helped drive new recruits to al-Qaida and the Islamic State, former U.S. officials and analysts say.
"We generate more enemies than we are able to take out," said former congresswoman Jane Harman, D-California, a chairwoman of the House Intelligence Committee in the years after 9/11, who now is president of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. "Our military power remains extraordinary. But winning this fight requires projecting a narrative about American values and interests. And we have failed to do that."

Graphic

 
Washington Post photo by Bill O'Leary Midshipman Shawn Picciott places one of 2,996 flags on Stribling Walk, representing those lost in 9/11, at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland.

Load-Date: September 12, 2016


End of Document