9/11 remains a common topic
The Linfield Review: Linfield College
April 17, 2014 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 392 words
Body


Though the events of September 11, 2001 occurred 12 years ago, it has left what seems to be a mark that will last forever on the United States.
The current Program for Liberal and Civic and Engagement theme: Legacies of War discusses much of what happened during 9/11 and the repercussions of it.
Two events that have occurred at Linfield, one that is still going, speak to the different views of 9/11.
A lecture given by associate professor English Reshmi Dutt-Ballerstadt titled: The Anxious Cannon: Post 9/11 literatures made clear that the events on 9/11 have created an industry of books, magazines, and newspapers concerning the event.
It has also created much paranoia in the United States specifically at airports and the extra security that has been implemented.
Dutt-Ballerstadt mentioned in her lecture that the paranoia has created inequalities for the Muslim community in the United States.
If travelers that are bearded and dark skinned wish to board an airplane it is more than likely security will do more of a check on them because of the almost hysterical paranoia that has engulfed the U.S. government. Dutt-Ballerstadt expressed that "Terrorism is a phenomena, terrorism has no country."
Directly related to this idea is Wafaa Bilal's exhibition currently on display at the Linfield galley: "I Don't Know Their Names."
Bilal is an associate professor of art at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts.
The exhibit is one of kind as it was created on campus by Bilal painting 100,000 Iraqi who were killed in the Iraq war on the walls of the gallery.
Bilal also did another art project in New York, which featured him with a camera implanted on the back of his head to document how people in New York viewed bearded people of color.
Even though 9/11 occurred on the other side of the United States in New York City and Washington D.C. the events have had an impact on the country as a whole.
As part of Linfield's mission to be a liberal arts college it presents events through the PLACE theme to educate and shape the ideas of it students and to become civically engaged
Students who have attended some of the PLACE events and read Matthew Bogdano's book: Thieves of Baghdad have a more sound knowledge of the events of 9/11 and its repercussions. 9/11 remains an event that has shaped a nation and a generation.
-The Review
Editorial Board

Load-Date: April 17, 2014


End of Document