9/11: My pain and my journey since
Daily News (New York)
September 11, 2020 Friday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2020 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; CS; Pg. 23
Length: 641 words
Byline: Elizabeth Miller
Body


Life experiences, including tragic ones, shape who we are.
On Sept. 11, 2001, I lost my father, Douglas Miller, a New York City firefighter. I was six at the time. I could not understand in that moment, or in the months to follow, how the dynamics of my family would change forever.
In my house, there was a steady stream of visitors. They were always gathered around the television, focused on the red indicator of the threat advisory system reminding us that the terrorism threat was at its highest. In the following days and weeks, very little felt real.
We were told attending counseling might be a good idea, but at such a young age, I'm not sure how much it accomplished. During one session, myself and my siblings drew a large picture of Osama Bin Laden with spiders all over him. To this day, I am unable to make sense of the exercise. Was it our own form of vengeance? Were we supposed to understand any of it?
In the immediate aftermath and in the years that followed, some chose to demonstrate wrongful hate and prejudice against the Muslim community. As I was older and more capable of understanding the events, I chose not to resort to hatred. I chose to seek answers. Why did this happen? How do we move forward, to forgive?
I submerged myself in the study of terrorism and as I furthered my studies, I realized there was more to discover. I took advantage of opportunities to learn about the Middle East. I studied Arabic, and enrolled in cultural courses. I learned to accept, understand and love another culture, language and region, one that was often stereotyped because of the actions of a few.
I studied abroad in Morocco and although I was surrounded by a new culture and new people, I realized the culture and the people were no more "good" or "evil" than any other. Who evaluates what cultures and people are good and bad? Who decides what makes a person so different that they are not afforded the same treatment in our justice system?
In graduate school, I began to examine human rights abuses in the post 9/11 world, specifically torture and imprisonment. Although I knew about the existence of detainees at Guantanamo Bay, I couldn't comprehend that such abuses were in a sense stemming from something that I was deeply impacted by. I felt guilty. I felt complicit.
My father was killed and I felt like in the aftermath of his death and the death of 3,000 others, there were so many people speaking on our behalf, but without our consultation, and I was infuriated about all of the injustices.
I never believed that answering violence with violence was right. As I learned more about the abuses at Guantanamo Bay and at black sites, I felt like I needed to speak out.
That was how I met Mohamedou Ould Salahi, who had been wrongfully imprisoned, tortured and dehumanized at Guantanamo Bay, like many other detainees in the detention center. This treatment, whether the detainees are innocent or guilty, is cruel and unjust.
Salahi is an innocent man finally free from Guantanamo Bay, and knowing him has brought such light to my life.
When we only focus on the differences between cultural and religious groups, we begin to "other" them. In this case, Muslims or people from Muslim majority countries became the "bad other," which is what allowed for human rights abuses and dehumanization to occur.
There are still individuals at Guantanamo Bay Detention Center being held without judgment, or awaiting trial. All individuals should be given access to a fair and equal justice system.
Although not everyone will share my thoughts, there are many opportunities to learn where we can aim to understand and accept differences.
I share my personal story not to boast about my evolution, but because even after losing my father at the hand of terrorism, I have learned so much. I hope others can too.
Miller is a member of Peaceful Tomorrows.

Load-Date: September 11, 2020


End of Document