9/11 Families Join Groups Abroad to Put a Human Face on Statistics
The New York Times
March 20, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front; Pg. 33; Global Word to Terrorists: You Killed My Beloved
Length: 1585 words
Byline: By GLENN COLLINS
Body


They are still aggrieved. And they are not going away. 
 The families of the victims of the 2001 terror attacks have been a powerful force in Washington and New York. Their vocal persistence and moral suasion forced the White House to accept an independent investigation on the attacks of Sept. 11, and they doggedly monitored the subsequent hearings. Then, they helped overcome White House reluctance to appoint a national director of intelligence. 
 In Manhattan and Albany, the families have been important in shaping plans for a World Trade Center memorial and in preserving remnants of the site that were fated to be buried under a basement garage. 
 But now the families are taking on their newest and possibly most daunting challenge: to make common cause with thousands of other international victims, not only to foster mutual support, but also to discredit global terrorism itself. 
 Some have already proffered aid and expertise to victims' groups from other countries. Others believe that by doggedly continuing to tell their heartbreaking stories of pain and remembrance, they can put a human face on those who have died. 
 In this way, they say, they hope to challenge terrorists' attempts to stereotype victims as infidels, capitalist tools or ciphers lacking humanity. 
 Ultimately some of the families hope that in bringing their high-powered advocacy to a new level, they may make it more embarrassing, or even impossible, to romanticize or legitimize terrorist acts. 
 ''It would be the height of arrogance for the 9/11 families to think that our experience is so unique that it isn't connected to victims beyond our borders,'' said Thomas Roger, one of the founders of Families of September 11, whose daughter Jean was a flight attendant on the hijacked plane that hit the north tower.
 Mr. Roger said his group was interested in working with foreign victims of terrorism not only to provide assistance but also ''to support international initiatives which can slow down or stop the spread of terrorism.'' 
 Robert McIlvaine, whose son Robert was killed in the north tower, said he hoped for ''a link to other countries and other stories, so that ours can become an overwhelming voice.'' 
 He added, ''Telling our stories gives the victims dignity, and helps make real the pain of the survivors.''
 The family members are not unmindful of their past effectiveness. ''We have been given a special voice by virtue of the people who died,'' said Bruce Wallace, whose nephew, Mitch Wallace, a court officer, was killed in the collapse of the north tower. ''None of the congressmen or senators would let us into their offices if there weren't dead people marching beside us. So we feel some responsibility for using that voice to change this world.'' 
 And so, some victims even hope they might be Paul Reveres to the world. 
 ''Telling people what happened to us helps them realize that it can happen again,'' said Tony Rose, a retired United States Army sergeant major who was wounded when Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon. ''I think we'll be saying, 'You could be next.'''
 In Bogota, Colombia, last month, four members of Sept. 11 families' organizations -- as well as Mr. Rose and two representatives of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing victims' groups -- spoke openly about their losses at a conference attended by those who experienced terrorist attacks in Colombia, Indonesia, Israel, Spain, Northern Ireland, Chile, Argentina and Beslan, Russia. 
 Many at the gathering of 1,500 people, the second International Congress on Victims of Terrorism, had been maimed in attacks, and dozens walked with the assistance of crutches or canes. Some, blinded by bombs or land mines, attended with their guide dogs. 
 The scope of terrorism in Colombia alone ''really knocked me back,'' said Mr. Wallace, a science teacher at John Dewey High School in Brooklyn. 
 The Colombian president, Alvaro Uribe-Velez, who addressed the conference, estimated that 20,000 of his citizens a year are killed in terrorist attacks or kidnappings. ''That amounts to six times the number of people we lost on Sept. 11th every year,'' Mr. Wallace said. 
 Mr. McIlvaine, who attended the conference as a member of Sept. 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, said: ''I feel badly about losing my son. But here I was talking to a severely burned mother who lost her three sons, and I thought, what am I complaining about?'' 
 The dozens of sometimes fractious Sept. 11 groups are disparate in their politics -- some opposing, some favoring the Iraq war -- but, Mr. Wallace said, ''There is a bond between us that is beyond politics.'' 
 Many are opening global connections to other victims. Mr. McIlvaine said his family group hoped to organize an international victims' conference in the United States in the next year. Mr. Wallace, part of the same group, said the organization has reached out to a Northern Ireland group, Families Acting for Innocent Relatives, and has started a dialogue with the terrorism victims' group in Colombia, ''and we are asking them, very simply, 'How do you think we can help you?''' 
 At the Bogota conference, Mr. Roger had discussions with the former prime minister of Spain, Jose Maria Aznar, about ''moving from the national scale to the international scale,'' Mr. Roger said. Another organization, the World Trade Center United Family Group, has corresponded with victims of the March 11, 2004, train bombing in Madrid. 
 There is evidence that monetary settlements for the victims' families are being used to fuel some of the groups' international efforts. For example, the United Family Group and an allied organization, the Coalition of 9/11 Families, made contributions following the Asian tsunami. 
 ''We reached out to our families, and so far we've raised $142,000 for a hospital in Sri Lanka,'' said Anthony Gardner, executive director of the United Family group, whose brother, Harvey Joseph Gardner III, died in the north tower on Sept. 11. 
 Some in victims' groups said they hoped that they could help stop what they see as the news media's fascination with terrorists, who, they charged, are rewarded with attention for their attacks.
 Arnold Roth, whose 15-year-old daughter, Malki, died in a suicide bombing in Jerusalem, said he was appalled when television news producers wanted to pair him in interviews with the father of the bomber who killed his daughter. 
 ''It is an entirely bogus comparison, creating a false symmetry between the person who did the killing and the victim,'' he said. ''It betrays a factual and moral confusion in the media that leads to the dehumanization of the victims.'' 
 But in moving into a grander arena, the families are inevitably confronting issues involving the political use of victims and the debate over the role of state terrorism. 
 At the conference, Juan Pablo Letelier, whose father, Orlando Letelier, a former Chilean foreign minister, was killed by a bomb in Washington in 1976, set by Chile's military dictatorship, denounced his father's death as a ''case of state terrorism'' where ''the victims were called terrorists.'' 
 Certainly the American academic who was most in disfavor at the Bogota conference was one who was not invited to attend: Prof. Ward L. Churchill of the University of Colorado at Boulder, whose essay about the 2001 terrorist attacks said that the ''technocrats'' in the twin towers were ''little Eichmanns,'' referring to the Nazi leader Adolf Eichmann.
 His response to 9/11 families' criticism is perhaps a harbinger of the opposition they may face as they move into the international arena. 
 ''Sept. 11th was a natural and inevitable response to what the U.S. is doing in the world,'' Professor Churchill said. 
 ''I do not see theirs as an effective strategy,'' he said of the victims' groups. ''What they are doing is self-indulgent. They focus on the incredible value of 3,000 Americans while ignoring this mountain of corpses elsewhere. The United States has no right to bomb innocent populations.''
 Furthermore, Professor Churchill said, there ''are mitigating circumstances'' for terrorism. ''People can be driven mad by what is done to them,'' he said. 
 But Kenneth Thompson, whose mother, Virginia, was killed in the Oklahoma City bombing, said that terrorists do not have the patience to work for democratic change or the courage to fight under arms, attacking only unarmed, unsuspecting people, for which ''there is no excuse.'' 
 Donald R. Hamilton, vice president of the National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism in Oklahoma City, added, ''Gandhi and Martin Luther King proved that you can have a successful revolution without attacking the innocent.'' 
 William Frazer, director of the Northern Ireland group, said that ''there is no good terrorism or bad terrorism,'' adding: ''The activity itself must be labeled despicable. It is only about death.''
 Victims at the conference gave an abundance of testimony on this point, and the organizers' Web site, www.usergioarboleda.edu.co/congresovictimas, carries the text of its manifesto condemning global terrorism.
 Dozens of Colombians described killings and woundings by the country's narco-terrorists, paramilitary groups and bandits. And Colombian journalists described how their colleagues had been assaulted.
 The 9/11 family members acknowledge that they are in for a long struggle. ''For the rest of my life,'' Mr. McIlvaine said, ''I would like to give a voice and a face to the victims from the United States -- and from everywhere.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: In Russia, a woman and her son honored Beslan school siege victims. Beslan families were among those who spoke last month at a conference in Bogota, Colombia. (Photo by James Hill for The New York Times)
Terror attacks have left devastation and misery around the world, in Bali, left
in Northern Ireland, center, where a husband carried his wife's coffin
and in Madrid, where flowers were left on a platform after the train bombing. (Photo by Dylan Martinez/Reuters)
(Photo by Susana Vera/Reuters)
(Photo by Achmad Ibrahim/Associated Press)(pg. 33)
Thomas and Punky Roger support global initiatives against terror. Their daughter Jean was a flight attendant on the plane that hit the north tower. (Photo by Jodi Hilton for The New York Times)
 Bruce Wallace, whose nephew was killed in the north tower, outside his home in Brooklyn. (Photo by Michael Nagle for The New York Times)(pg. 36)           

Load-Date: March 20, 2005


End of Document