9/11 changes the way we look at life
The Brunswick News (Georgia)
October 9, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 422 words
Byline: Cody Trawick, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Body


Oct. 9--Just one month before, the idea of military service was as foreign to Dooley Miller as the thought that international terrorist would attack and kill thousands of Americans on U.S. soil, The News reported on Oct. 8, 2001.
After the unthinkable happened, Miller was worried the unimaginable would follow. Foremost in his mind was the idea of being drafted into military service and going to war with an enemy that doesn't fear death.
"I just hope they give me a gun that shoots bullets quick," said Miller, 27. "Give me machine gun. Don't give me a pea shooter."
An even more immediate concern to Miller was the economic impact the war would have on businesses like the one he worked for, a car sound system dealership in Brunswick.
Robin Love of St. Simons Island didn't think the market was doomed, nor that terrorists would ultimately win their war against America. But she said she wasn't taking any chances, either.
The wife of professional golfer Davis Love III had not traveled with her husband since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks occurred.
"I feel like I need to be home with my children," she said. "And the thing is, you watch and listen to TV and still don't know why it happened. You still don't know why they hate us so much."
Her 13-year-old daughter, Lexie, interrupted to say, "Because we're free and they're not."
Both mother and daughter believed America would ultimately prevail in the war on terrorism and that Americans would come out stronger in the end.
"I think there's going to be more upbringing in families of Christianity because I've started thinking how easily your life can be over and you need to get it right," she said.
U.S. Army veteran Tom Matyok of Brunswick, however, believed America's greatest response to terrorism was to go on living normal lives, something he said he would continue to do no matter what happened.
"The nature of terrorism is to make people afraid no matter where they are," he said. "There's a lot of danger out there. Driving on the highways, lightning striking. I don't believe we should play into the terrorists' hands by elevating their threat."
To see more of The Brunswick News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.thebrunswicknews.com/. Copyright (c) 2007, The Brunswick News, Ga. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: October 9, 2007


End of Document