9/11 OFF RECORD IN TRIAL OF CLERIC
Daily News (New York)
July 14, 2003, Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 389 words
Byline: By JOHN MARZULLI DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body

The specter of terrorism is hanging over a Muslim cleric going on trial in Brooklyn this week for allegedly trying to smuggle $659,000 in cash out of the U.S.
Prosecutors insist the case against Iman Alaa Alaa Al-Sadawi and his father, Hassan Al-Sadawi, deals only with laws that prohibit carrying more than $10,000 out of the country without declaring it.
"The government doesn't intend to bring up terrorism or argue terrorism," Assistant U.S. Attorney Tracy Dayton said at a hearing last week in Brooklyn Federal Court.
Alaa Alaa Al-Sadawi, 33, is an Egyptian national who has publicly denounced terror mastermind Osama Bin Laden and the pro-terror rhetoric preached at some area mosques.
But defense lawyers fear the possible selection of jurors who harbor bias against Muslims following the Sept. 11 attack.
The cleric's lawyer had hoped to tackle the problem head-on by questioning potential jurors about the bias issue.
"The events of Sept. 11 are crucial here," said lawyer Martin Stolar. "I don't want to duck them. He's an Egyptian. Some of the hijackers were Egyptian Muslims. If somebody has concerns over that, they shouldn't be here."
But the lawyer for Al-Sadawi's 71-year-old father didn't want the subject discussed at all.
"I'm trying to minimize as much conversation about 9/11 as possible because I don't think it is relevant here," said defense lawyer Thomas Ambrosio.
Federal Judge Nicholas Garaufis decided that when he selects a jury today, there will be no direct mention of Sept. 11.
Other precautions will be taken not to prejudice the jury against the defendants.
FBI agents who testify have been instructed not to say they are assigned to the Joint Terrorism Task Force. Prosecutors will omit the fact that wiretap evidence was obtained under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
Last July, federal agents seized the money that had been stuffed in a suitcase that Alaa Alaa Al-Sadawi's parents were taking aboard a Cairo-bound flight at Kennedy Airport.
After the money was seized, Hassan Al-Sadawi warned a co-defendant not to mention his son, fearing the feds will "say the money is to finance terrorism and he will be jailed," according to court papers.
The co-defendant has pleaded guilty and that taped conversation will be the only mention of terrorism, Dayton said. "That's his statement, not ours," she said.

Load-Date: July 14, 2003


End of Document