9/11 clues missed?
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 17, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 759 words
Byline: By Lee DavidsonDeseret News Washington correspondent
Body


WASHINGTON -- The revelation of confidential memos sent to Sen. Orrin Hatch well before the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks on America is raising questions about whether he and Congress should share some blame for failing to prevent the tragedies.
The newly leaked memos are being cited to maintain that Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and Congress failed to follow up on warnings about problems in federal law enforcement agencies that contributed to those agencies missing signs about terrorist attacks -- and therefore failing to stop them.
"There were egregious errors, in hindsight," Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Pat Roberts, R-Kan., told the Associated Press, to which a 1995 committee memo was leaked. Congress, he said, contributed to the failure "big time."
But Hatch, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, discounts the criticism.
Hatch says that after hearing such warnings he held numerous hearings on fighting terrorism. He also led passage of reform legislation in 1996, but some provisions he sought were left out, and they might have helped prevent the 9/11 attacks.
The who's-to-blame dispute was renewed after the AP was leaked a committee memo from December 1995. The public airing of private memos is rare, but it comes as some senators have recently criticized Hatch for not holding hearings on the FBI's handling of a case where it says an agent's lover passed secrets to China.
The memo shows, according to the AP, that committee investigators told Hatch they had uncovered evidence that federal agencies had prior hints about the first World Trade Center bombing in 1993 but failed to piece them together because they were not sharing information well.
Almost identical criticism came later after the 2001 attacks destroyed the World Trade Center on 9/11.
"The sharing of intelligence is lacking among federal law enforcement agencies," the memo to Hatch stated, AP reported. "We have information that some instances, like the World Trade Center (attacks of 1993), could have been prevented if the relevant agencies had worked in concert with each other," the investigators wrote. "Simply stated, several different agencies had a small piece of the puzzle.
Committee staff asked Hatch in 1995 to hold investigative hearings on the matter, and the memo shows that Hatch approved doing so in writing. But the AP said those specific hearings were never held, and therefore a chance was missed that may have helped prevent the 9/11 attacks.
However, Hatch spokeswoman Margarita Tapia told the Deseret News that Hatch did hold weeks worth of hearings on terrorism in general and on FBI operations in 1995 and 1996 and instigated legislation to help solve some of the problems uncovered.
"The memoranda make it clear that Sen. Hatch supported investigation and oversight of the matter. It is inappropriate to suggest in any manner that Sen. Hatch does not care about terrorism and oversight," Tapia said.
"In addition, Sen. Hatch led the fight to draft and pass the 1996 anti-terrorism bill in April of 1996, just a few months after the memorandum. That legislation was the most significant piece of anti-terrorism legislation to pass in two decades," Tapia said.
She said among Hatch hearings in 1995-96 was one titled "Terrorism in the United States: the nature of the threat and possible legislation." Others looked at the threat of terrorism at the Olympics, counterterrorism and federal law agency missteps at Waco and Ruby Ridge, both deadly events that stemmed from federal confrontations with perceived radicals.
Tapia said Hatch unsuccessfully fought for reforms that would have made information sharing among agencies easier. She said that they later became part of the anti-terrorism Patriot Act passed after the 9/11 attacks.
Meanwhile, the AP is reporting that some fellow senators are not happy to hear about the 1995 memo now.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., a longtime member of Hatch's committee, said he had been unaware of the just-revealed memo and said it shows that Congress must share the blame for failures of not seeing warning signs of the 9-11 attacks.
Kris Kolesnik, who worked on the Judiciary Committee for conservative Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, also told the AP that Hatch preferred not to air the FBI's problems in public.
"His solution to problems within the FBI is to send more money, create more bureaucracy and give them more authority to trample our civil liberties," he said. "That is not oversight. That is a knee-jerk reaction that has never worked."
E-mail: lee@desnews.com  

Load-Date: May 17, 2003


End of Document