"Dagger" Brigade soldier dies on Fort Riley
Junction City Daily Union, Kan.
September 22, 2017 Friday


Copyright 2017 
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 290 words
Byline: Junction City Daily Union, Kan.
Body


Sept. 22--A 1st Infantry Division Soldier died on Fort Riley Thursday afternoon.
Spc. Kashyap Bhakta, a combat engineer with Company B, 82nd Brigade Engineer Battalion, 2nd Armored Brigade Combat Team of the 1st Infantry Division, was found deceased in his car in the Warner-Peterson neighborhood on post.
"The soldiers, families and friends of the 1st Infantry Division are deeply saddened by the loss of Spc. Bhakta," said Col. Charles Masaracchia, 1st Infantry Division chief of staff. "This great division is only great due to the soldiers and families who comprise it. When we lose one of those fine soldiers, it strikes the heart of the entire formation. But what's more heartbreaking are the loved ones left in the wake of this tragedy. Our sincerest condolences go out to his family whom we'll continue to support as they move through this difficult time."
Bhakta joined the Army in March 2015 and arrived at Fort Riley in July 2015. He was 21 years old. He deployed to Kuwait from October 2015 to July 2016.
Bhakta's home of record is Prescott Valley, Ariz. He had received several awards, including the Army Commendation Medal, Army Achievement Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Army Service Ribbon and Overseas Service Medal.
The incident remains under investigation by the Fort Riley Criminal Investigation Command office. For questions about the investigation, please contact U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command Public Affairs Office at (571) 305-4041.
___ (c)2017 the Junction City Daily Union (Junction City, Kan.) Visit the Junction City Daily Union (Junction City, Kan.) at http://www.yourdu.net/ Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: October 3, 2017


End of Document