"FIGHT TERRORISM" PLATE CAN'T HITCH A RIDE IN MISSOURI
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 5, 2004 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. E1
Length: 1040 words
Byline: Lorraine Kee/ Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


With some fanfare, Missouri rolled out its "Fight Terrorism" license plates on the steps of the Capitol on Sept. 11, 2003 -- the second anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Attending were Gov. Robert Holden; Connie Stephens of Lee's Summit, Mo., whose brother-in-law was killed in the Pentagon attack; Vincent Rotundo, whose idea to remember the victims with license plates has gained national steam; and Sen. Harold Caskey, D-Butler, who sponsored the bill to get a special fight-terrorism plate.
Three months later, sales of the plate with the Pentagon-shaped logo are sputtering.
The state has received just three requests for the special, personalized plates. And one of those requests was rejected because the "configuration was already taken," said Jessica Robinson, a spokesman for the Missouri Department of Revenue. The department oversees motor vehicle and driver licensing. The remaining two applications are pending.
So far, the state has collected not one nickel of revenue from plate sales. A driver pays $40 annually for each plate -- with $15 toward a standard personalized plate fee and $25 donated to the state's two-year-old Office of Homeland Security.
"I'm just a little surprised," said Kim Green, a Caskey aide who attended the plate's unveiling. "We earmarked money for homeland security. We thought it would be a boon to that particular branch."
Stephens, who has one of the pending applications (her first choice is "FLT 77"), is surprised and a little disappointed. She figures she knows why the plates aren't selling - and it's not just that our memories of that tragic day are fading.
"No one knows it's out," Stephens said.
Special plates are created by legislative action and typically fall into three categories: organizations, the military and colleges. About 140 plates have been authorized in Missouri with subjects ranging from Alpha Kappa Alpha to Zeta Phi Beta, from Bible Baptist College to William Woods University, and from the U.S. Air Force to World War II Veterans.
Missouri's terrorism plate is prominently promoted on the homepage of the the state of Missouri's homeland security office (www.homelandsecurity.state.mo. us/). The promotion includes an explanation of how to secure one and what drivers' donations will be used for: "the prevention, detection and emergency response activities" by local and state governments.
Illinois unveiled its terrorism plate with an American flag, called "America Remembers," in September 2002. Proceeds from it will go toward grants to local governments for training, equipment and other initiatives to combat terrorism. About 1,225 of those plates are on the road in Illinois, a spokewoman for the secretary of state's office said.
The problem in Missouri, as Stephens sees it, is that there's no money set aside to advertise the terrorism plate. The revenue department's Robinson said that's left to the organizations, military groups and colleges on the plates to do.
The most recognized special plate belongs to the Children's Trust Fund - the plate with the green childen's handprints and reads "Prevent Child Abuse." About 8,800 of them - out of nearly 30,000 special, personalized plates in the state - have been affixed to motor vehicles since 1998. Caskey, who is a founding member of the fund's board of directors, has a plate.
Each plate has a $40 price tag, with $25 of it going to the child abuse fund. Plate sales generate about $220,000 annually, said Bill Heberle, executive director of the fund. Heberle credited its sales success to a grassroots partnership - between the fund and local child service organizations. Local agencies promote the plates and all donations from those sales go back to those groups, Heberle said.
"If that money comes through St. Louis, it's going back to St. Louis," he added.
Other plate sales, though, aren't in overdrive.
Thirty of the plate designs hadn't been issued as of Dec. 4. And some of those won't be until a minimum order of 100 plate applications are approved by the state. Some are awaiting final design approval.
The terrorism plates haven't been issued because they're still being processed. Promoting a plate is not the responsibility of the Department of Revenue, Robinson said. If the state promotes one plate, it would have to promote them all, and it doesn't have the resources to do that, she added.
Promotions aren't exactly Stephens' province either. She works for Kansas City-based Hallmark Cards Inc. in merchandising. Still, she's got a plan.
First, she wants a poster printed to send to all the state's license bureaus. Stephens hopes the posters will catch drivers' attention when they come in to renew their licenses.
Second, she is giving her friends applications. She figures those drivers are potentially the best form of advertising.
"That's true with anything," Stephens said. "You see someone in a nice coat, you start looking for that coat."
The plate sells itself, Heberle said.
"The license plates are a moving billboard out there with our message," Heberle said.
Stephens believes the donation for the state's homeland security office is just one way citizens can pay tribute to those who died, including her brother-in-law, Charles Burlingame III, a pilot aboard the plane that crashed into the Pentagon.
But first Stephens has to get the word out. When Stephens went in late November to her local license office, her request for Form 1716 (the application for Missouri's personalized and special license plates) was met by a "deer in the headlights look."
"We don't have one,'" Stephens said she was told. "'It's not in my book.' I told her, 'We have one. I shook hands with Gov. Holden over it.'"
= = = =
The most popular specialty license plates
In Missouri
1. Children's Trust Fund 8,808
2. Purple Heart 2,046
3. University of Missouri -- Columbia 1,827
4. Fire Department 1,612
5. St. Louis Cardinals 1,258
6. Amateur Radio 1,226
7. Conservation Heritage Bird 1,210
Source: Missouri Department of Revenue
In Illinois
1. Environmental 54,266
2. Prevent Violence 24,897
3. Firefighters Memorial 19,275
4. Collegiate 9,960 (Most: University of Illinois 6,044)
5. Sporting Series 9,661
6. Organ Donor 4,166
7. Mammogram 3,970
Source: Office of Illinois Secretary of State

Notes

Reporter Lorraine Kee/ E-mail: lkee@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 314-340-8255  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo - The state of Missouri has received just three requests for this plate.

Load-Date: January 5, 2004


End of Document