"Group Supporters Of Terrorism In America"
The Southerner (Welcome, North Carolina)
March 10, 2010


Copyright 2010 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2010 The Southerner


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 674 words
Byline: The Southerner staff
Body


The United States has been attacked several different times by Islamic and Jihad terrorists that state "Americans that don't believe in our god Allah must die." This is the belief of the radical Islamic terrorisis that attacked and killed over 3,000 people in the Twin Towers on 9/11. The American Civil Liberties Union states" no terrorist should be punished for worshiping their god Allah." The ACLU fights for these Islamic terrorists to be released from Guantanamo Bay Prison after killing over 5,00 3 people worldwide. The ACLU has stated that Guantanamo Bay Prison is a place of torture that no terrorist should be placed into and that every terrorist should be inside the U.S. Would not bringing these terrorists into the U.S. cause more attacks by Al Qaeda and deaths due to their worship of their false god?
 The ACLU states "every terrorist must be given the Constitutional rights of a U.S. citizen and a top lawyer to defend his action of worshiping Allah by killing the people that will not bow in Allah's name." The ACLU shows themselves to be supporters of Islam c and Jihad terrorists that attack this nation constantly in their false god's name. The ACLU also stated that Adolf Hitler and his Nazis had ths right to kill as many Jews as possible during the Holocaust, because cf their religious beliefs. The ACLU is an American terrorist group that su sports the killing of your children under the name of any false god like Allah, Buddha or any idol, but they will not stand for anyone praying unto God. The ACLU supports Barack Obama's demand for a civil trial for each terrorist in New York, but New York states that they will not have these terrorists tried in their state and bring another terrorist attack to New York. The ACLU states that New York does not have the right to deny these terrorists a civil trial. Should these four terrorists be given a civilrial in New York that'll cost our taxpayers over $5 million or should they be given a military trial that costs less than $100,000? The ACLU has stated "no terrorist should be put to death no matter how many peopls they have killed, but every terrorist has the right to kill innocent people tD worship Allah." The ACLU constantly says that every terrorist has the right to kill any person to honor and worship their false god Allah, but that no terrorist should be put to death. Would you want Osama bin Laden sentenced to death for killing over 10,000 people or use your tax dolars to feed him for the rest of his life? God said in (Leviticus 24-17) he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. This world has returned to the same days of Sodom and Gomorrah, in which the ACLU will fight for the rights of Satan, but they will not help America. The ACLU constantly fights to have the terrorists in Guantanamo Bay Prison releasied to Middle East nations with the help of Barack Obama, but the terrorists that have been released have attacked other nations again. How safe is America with the ACLU supporting terrorists to kill every person that will not worship Allah? The ACLU is a group of atheists and followers of Satan that hate the word of God. The ACLU supports Obama's words of recognizing America as a Muslim nation, but the ACLU won't stand for God's word that made this nation. The ACLU supports early and late term abortions. How can the ACLU support every form of abortion that kills over 5,000 children daily, but also state that no terrorist should be put to death for their actions? The ACLU says that the terrorists that attacks our nation are more important than any child. The ACL J has killed more people thru abortion than these terrorists have hurt our nation. The time has come for God's children to rise up against the ACLU and say "there's only one God and your worshiping of many false gods is killing too many people." The ACLU that supports the terrorists that kills everyone that will not worship Allah should be destroyed by the hands of God's children and-the laws of America. Are you a child of God?
Boyd W. Thomas Welcome, N.C.

Load-Date: August 11, 2010


End of Document