‘He was put on this earth to be a soldier'
Chicago Daily Herald
November 22, 2011 Tuesday
ND1 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBOR; Pg. 1
Length: 532 words
Byline: By Kat Zeman, Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


It was in his blood. He'd been born a soldier.
Those who knew him well said Paul Latourney lived to serve his country.
He grew up on military bases, learned to speak four languages and never doubted that one day he'd be a soldier.
By the time he graduated from Lake Park High School in Roselle, he'd already survived boot camp and joined the Army reserves.
"He wouldn't have it any other way. It's what he loved to do," said Travis Nebel, who had been friends with Latourney since childhood. "It's what he wanted to do for the rest of his life."
That wish came true, but it ended much too early. Army Staff Sgt. Paul M. Latourney, 28, was killed Friday in Baghdad when an improvised explosive device detonated near his vehicle while on combat patrol.
"He was one of the most decent human beings in the world," said Nebel, of Roselle. "I know that if there's a heaven
he's definitely there."
Latourney, who graduated from Lake Park in 1997, was with the 2nd Battalion, 5th Cavalry Regiment, 1st Brigade Combat Team of the 1st Cavalry Division, based in Fort Hood, Texas. He was born in Atlanta and then grew up at a military base in Germany where his father worked. The family moved to Roselle around the time he entered high school. Last year, they moved to Texas.
At Lake Park, Latourney made the honor roll and belonged to the school's ski club, German club and the cross country team.
"He was a very good kid," said Andy Livingston, Latourney's German teacher in high school. "A quiet kid, but strong in character. … He had very good language skills."
By the time of his death, Latourney had been fluent in English, Spanish and German, and spoke decent French.
He enlisted in the Army full-time immediately after high school. During his career, he'd traveled all over the world including Saudi Arabia, Germany and several times to Iraq.
He will be buried March 14 at Arlington National Cemetery in Washington.
"It's tough. He was a great guy," said Erica Paveza, who befriended Latourney about four years ago. "I'm not sure if he believed in what he was fighting for, but he did it anyway. It was his job."
Latourney's friends describe him as a kind and honest person who would offer a stranger his last penny if needed and who read every single "Star Wars" book and saw every movie.
"He said he even had sympathy for the people over there (in Iraq)," Nebel said. "I said, ‘Are you kidding me? These people are trying to kill you.'"
During his military career, he'd been decorated with nearly a dozen medals and ribbons. They include the Army Commendation Medal, Army Achievement Medal, Army Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism (Expeditionary) Medal, Global War on Terrorism (Service) Medal, Humanitarian Service Medal, Non-Commissioned Officer Professional Development Ribbon and the Army Service Ribbon.
Latourney left behind a young son named Isaiah, who friends said is around 4 or 5 years old and lives with his grandparents in Texas. His family couldn't be reached Monday, but his friends said Latourney will be remembered as a hero.
"He wouldn't have had it any other way," Paveza said. "He was put on this earth to be a soldier."

Graphic

 
Paul Latourney

Load-Date: November 22, 2011


End of Document