‘In the Fade' paints grief-soaked portrait of terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
January 26, 2018 Friday
WEB Edition


Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: TIMEOUT; Pg. 0
Length: 545 words
Byline: By Jake Coyle Associated Press
Body


"In the Fade" - ? ? ? 1/2 It's startling how few filmmakers have tried to tackle terrorism with anything beyond a standard procedural account. It's less surprising that one of the few to really grapple with a response is Fatih Akin, the German-born filmmaker of Turkish descent, whose thorny, probing dramas traverse borders as a matter of course. 
His latest, "In the Fade," is the Golden Globe winner for best foreign language film. It deservedly earned its star, Diane Kruger, the best actress award at last year's Cannes Film Festival. And like the best of Akin's films, it's a muscularly lean and emotionally raw film. At turns a tragedy, a courtroom drama and a revenge thriller, "In the Fade" is a shape-shifting quest through a terrorist tragedy, as outraged as it is compassionate. Kruger, a native German acting in her first German film, plays Katja Sekerci. She lives in Hamburg with her husband Nuri (Numan Acar), who's Turkish, and their 5-year-old son Rocco (Rafael Santana). In the movie's opening preamble, Nuri, clad in a white suit, is walked from his prison cell directly into his wedding with Katja. It's the kind of incongruity Akin delights in. The film flashes forward to their happy family life five years later. When Katja returns to Nuri's office one evening, she encounters a road blocked by police. Her initial horror is soon confirmed: Both Nuri and Rocco have been killed by a nail bomb exploded just outside his tax office. Katja descends into a nightmare of grief and disorientation. The police are immediately suspicious of Nuri's background. Was he religious? Was he "politically active?" Was he dealing drugs again? But Katja remembers a fleeting encounter when she left her husband's office where a woman left an unchained bicycle outside the office. She was, as Katja says, white and blonde, "as German as me." Only once investigators have looked into dormant criminal connections and nonexistent Turkish mafia ties do they realize Katja was correct. The bombing was the work of neo-Nazis. Akin was inspired to make "In the Fade" after a rash of Neo-Nazi terrorist attacks in Germany, where a flood of refugees from Syria has also raised anti-immigration tensions. But "In the Fade" resonates on other shores, including here in the United States, where neo-Nazism is also present, and where the ethnicity of a perpetrator sometimes seems to determine which mass killings get labeled terrorism. Told in three distinct chapters, the film is alternatively wrenching, gripping and a little perplexing. The middle chapter, the courtroom drama, is expertly done, and aided by fine attorney performances by Denis Moschitto and Johannes Krisch. But the lines of good and evil are blurred in the final chapter. To say that the many parts of "In the Fade" are held together by Kruger would be an understatement. As a cocktail of grief, fury and regret, she's a remarkably original protagonist — a chain-smoking, tattooed mother who, in her trauma, is always a breath away from drowning. * * * Starring: Diane Kruger, Numan Acar, Rafael Santana, Denis Moschitto, Johannes Krisch Directed by: Fatih Akin Other: A Magnolia Pictures release. Rated R for disturbing images, drug use, language and sexual situations. In German with subtitles. 106 minutes

Graphic

 
This image released by Magnolia Pictures shows Diane Kruger in a scene from "In the Fade." (Magnolia Pictures via AP) Courtesy of Magnolia Pictures A bombing tears a mother's (Diane Kruger) world apart in the German film "In the Fade." Courtesy of Magnolia Pictures A bombing tears a mother's (Diane Kruger) world apart in the German film "In the Fade."This image released by Magnolia Pictures shows Diane Kruger in a scene from the film, "In the Fade." (Magnolia Pictures via AP) Courtesy of Magnolia Pictures Katja (Diane Kruger) struggles with grief and anger when her husband and son are killed in the German film "In the Fade."

Load-Date: January 26, 2018


End of Document