‘Just common sense'
Chicago Daily Herald
July 1, 2016 Friday


Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8
Length: 369 words
Byline: By Alan Fram Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON — With Democrats applying election-year pressure to act on gun control, Republican Speaker Paul Ryan said Thursday the House will vote next week on a GOP proposal aimed at keeping suspected terrorists from obtaining firearms.
Democrats indicated that by itself, Ryan's plan would not quell the partisan showdown that has intensified since the June 12 mass shooting in Orlando, Florida, that killed 49 people. Two Republicans said the House is expected to vote on legislation resembling a National Rifle Association-backed bill that the Senate rejected last week and was opposed by most Democrats.
In a conference call with GOP lawmakers, Ryan, of Wisconsin, said the House will consider broad legislation also aimed at preventing extremist groups from radicalizing and recruiting sympathizers. He said lawmakers will also vote on buttressing mental health programs.
Ryan called it "just common sense" to keep firearms from terrorists, but said it must be done while protecting the right to own guns, according to an official on the call. Ryan said Democrats were trying to change the focus of the debate about the Orlando killings from terrorism to guns "because they cannot stand on their terrorism record," he said.
Last week, Democrats staged a nearly 26-hour sit-in on the House floor demanding votes on firearms curbs. With the House in recess this week, many held home-district events publicizing their effort.
Rep. Steve Israel, a New York Democrat and a member of the House Democratic leadership, called Ryan's announcement "a step forward" but called for votes on expanding gun buyers' background checks and denying firearms to people on two terrorist watch lists.
Drew Hammill, spokesman for House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California said a vote on an NRA-written bill "just isn't going to cut it."
Ryan's office provided no details about the House bills.
Rep. Peter King, a New York Republican, said the House measure will be similar to one by Sen. John Cornyn, a Texas Republican, that the Senate defeated. It would let authorities block gun sales to suspected extremists, but only if prosecutors could prove in court within three days that the would-be purchaser was likely involved in terrorism.

Notes

Eds: Adds Democratic comment.

Graphic

 
Associated Press Speaker Paul Ryan said Thursday the House will vote next week on a GOP proposal aimed at keeping suspected terrorists from obtaining firearms.

Load-Date: July 1, 2016


End of Document