"Patriots Day" Review
The Avion: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
January 23, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 1
Length: 333 words
Body


Our Rating
8 Our Score
8.0
Keenan Thungtrakul/Senior Reporter
If you are looking to witness the unknown extent of the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, then this movie will give show you. Patriot's Day is a story of courage in the midst of hate. An event that is originally intended to be a unifying experience for the Boston community is turned into a war zone in only a matter of seconds. I will warn you now if you cannot handle graphic content, do not watch this film. Some scenes will make you want to cover your eyes. This is what terrorism leaves in its wake, and it is a hard truth to accept. That is why we fight this global war against terrorism; we do not want tragedies like this to happen again. Yet in the years following the bombings the world has seen more terror acts. This film serves to show that we need to keep the effort strong and work to stem terrorism.
The police manhunt that followed the bombings shows that acts of terror do not go unnoticed. You will be found, and you will be brought to justice. If you are looking for someone to blame, then you will find out who that person is in this film. The head protagonist, a police officer, joins with his fellow officers and fulfills the call of duty: a call that will bring a murderer to his knees. At the same time, he experiences the emotions that most of us would feel if one of our loved ones were involved in the disaster. You wish for a quick recovery and vow to do whatever you can to help track down the perpetrator and make him pay for his crimes.
In summary, this film is a tale of a true story, one that will remain with us for a long time. While justice has been served, there is still a lot to be done before the war on terror is over. The film recreates the event as accurate as the producers can, but that means some graphic content that some will find disturbing. Make sure to think twice before deciding to see this film. The plot may serve to retell the tragic story, but it does so in a manner that makes it very real.

Load-Date: May 14, 2019


End of Document