"Presumed Guilty"
Chips: Luther College
September 27, 2018 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 505 words
Body


Associate Professor of Religion Todd Green gave the first Religion Forum of the year, presenting information from his new book, "Presumed Guilty: Why We Shouldn't Ask Muslims to Condemn Terrorism," on Sept. 20 in Olin 102.
During the forum, Green cited the three main arguments from his book, which all answer the title's prompt of "Why We Shouldn't Ask Muslims to Condemn Terrorism." First, Green argued that Islam - or any religion - is not the driving force behind terrorism. According to Green, there are other political, cultural, and social factors that move people to violence.
Green spent a shorter amount of time on his second point: We should not ask Muslims to condemn terrorism because they already are. He demonstrated how a quick Google search brings up countless examples of Muslims condemning terrorist acts and extremism.
Green's third reason of why we should not ask Muslims to condemn terrorism is that asking this question allows many people, namely people of European descent, to avoid confronting their own violent pasts; notably the lynchings, murders, and rapes that have occurred throughout Western history.
"We try to forget events like the lynching of Jesse Washington," Green said during the lecture. "We need to come to terms with our own terrorism."
After his presentation, Green answered audience questions and signed copies of his book. Attendees reflected on his lecture, citing points such as education of terrorist attacks, racial perspectives, the importance of interfaith, and awareness of Islamophobia.
Andrea Hernandez Delgado ('22) | Chips
Associate Professor of Religion Todd Green gives the first Religion Forum of the year.
"My main takeaway comes from an interfaith perspective as I see this as an interfaith problem," Elizabeth Wiebke ('19) said. "This is an issue that requires allies from other religions who need to be educated on the topic. We can start right here at Luther with intentionally being more inclusive of religious identities."
Secondary education minor Payton Knutson ('19) received Green's topic through the lens of a future educator.
"What are we teaching the next generation?" Knutson said. "I want to educate on our own past, who we are, because there is more to that story than we are telling."
In an interview before the lecture, Green also emphasized the importance of education in understanding religions. After Green left his position as advisor to the U.S. State Department on Islamophobia in Europe, he put further stress on the positive influence of religious study at Luther.
"The average Luther student who leaves Luther College with two religion courses under their belt is far more advanced in their thinking of religion as a social and political phenomenon than those who I found are career-oriented government officials," Green said.
The next Religion Forum is titled "Ras og Rasisme: Reflections on Luther's Racial History and Legacy" with guest speaker Maggie Hagen ('15). It will take place on October 25 in the Center for Faith and Life Recital Hall at 7:00 p.m.

Load-Date: September 27, 2018


End of Document