“Somebody has to do something about antifa and the left. This is not a right-wing problem. This is left wing.”
The New York Times 
September 29, 2020 Tuesday 22:37 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 256 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: President Trump’s own law enforcement officials have said “racially motivated violent” extremists have been the most lethal domestic terrorist threat in recent years.
Body


President Trump’s own law enforcement officials have said “racially motivated violent” extremists have been the most lethal domestic terrorist threat in recent years.
— Mr. Trump
This is misleading.
Some members of antifa, a loose movement of “anti-fascists,” have committed acts of violence. Michael Forest Reinoehl, a self-proclaimed supporter of the movement, was also suspected of fatally shooting a right-wing activist who was part of a pro-Trump caravan in Portland, Ore. Mr. Reinoehl was shot and killed by law enforcement agents before he could be taken into custody.
But Mr. Trump’s own top national security officials have said the movement has not represented the most lethal threat to the United States in recent years. Just this month, the F.B.I. director, Christopher Wray, said “racially motivated violent extremism,” mostly from white supremacists, make up a majority of domestic terrorism threats. Mr. Wray and other top law enforcement officials have expressed alarm about antifa, but also armed militia groups that tend to be aligned with right-wing ideology.
The Trump administration often cites the killing of a Federal Protective Service officer in Oakland, Calif., as an example of the violence within demonstrations protesting police violence. But that fatal shooting was not committed by a protester but rather a member of the anti-government group the Boogaloo, an extremist ideology that seeks to bring about a second civil war. Members of the movement have sought to exploit the demonstrations to commit violence.

Load-Date: September 29, 2020


End of Document