‘This hatred is our common enemy'
Chicago Daily Herald
July 24, 2011 Sunday
ML2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 392 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


BERLIN — The deadly twin attacks in Norway were greeted with an outpouring of sympathy and disgust across Europe and beyond on Saturday, and generated calls to counter the far-right intolerance that may have motivated the assailant.
A massive bombing Friday in the heart of Oslo was followed by a horrific shooting spree on an island hosting a youth retreat for the prime minister's center-left party. The same man, a Norwegian with reported Christian fundamentalist, anti-Muslim views, was suspected in both attacks.
While the background isn't yet entirely clear, "it is said that hatred was a motive," German Chancellor Angela Merkel told reporters in Berlin. "Hatred of others, hatred of those who look different, of the supposedly foreign — this hatred is our common enemy.
"All of us who believe in freedom, respect and peaceful coexistence, we all must confront this hatred," she said.
Neighboring Sweden's prime minister said Norwegian society "now faces a tough challenge. But the questions will also reach us here in Sweden.
"Remember that what an extremist does can very often be used by other extremists. Our task is to show another way," Fredrik Reinfeldt said in Stockholm.
President Obama called Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg to express personally and on behalf of the American people his deepest condolences for the dozens of innocent Norwegians killed and injured in what he called the "senseless attacks" in Oslo and Utoya Island, the White House said Saturday.
The U.N. Security Council members also issued a statement in which they "condemned in the strongest terms the terrorist incidents in Norway, calling "terrorism in all its forms and manifestations ... one of the most serious threats to international peace and security."
Germany's top Jewish leader also highlighted the need to fight extremism.
"As a group that itself is always threatened by hatred, fanaticism and terrorism, we can identify particularly with the terrible loss of Norwegian society," Dieter Graumann said, German news agency dapd reported.
Pope Benedict XVI said in a condolence message to Norway's King Harald V that he was "profoundly saddened" by the great loss of life caused by the "senseless violence" in the bombing and the following massacre.
The pope invoked God's peace on the dead and offered "fervent" prayers for the victims and their families.

Graphic

 
Associated Press The flags of Scandinavian countries fly at half-staff Saturday in front of the Scandinavian and Nordic Embassies’ building in Berlin, Germany.

Load-Date: July 24, 2011


End of Document