‘WE WILL PREVAIL,’ OBAMA VOWS; He says nation will be ‘relentless’ in fighting terror
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 7, 2015 Monday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2015 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: USA TODAY; Pg. Z1
Length: 335 words
Byline: Gregory Korte USA TODAY
Body


WASHINGTON President Obama sought to reassure the nation amid renewed fears of terrorism Sunday night, saying, “The threat from terrorism is real, but we will overcome it.”
“We will prevail by being strong and smart, resilient and relentless,” the president said in a prime-time televised address. 
Obama said the terrorist threat has “evolved into a new phase” of attacks hatched at home by extremists “poisoning the minds” of killers already on American soil. 
Obama called on Americans not to allow fear to dictate the response to the shootings last week in San Bernardino, Calif.  or the broader fight against terrorism. He said the FBI has no evidence that the killers were directed by terrorist overseas or were part of a broader conspiracy. 
The speech was the third Oval Office address by Obama and came three weeks after a terrorist attack in Paris killed 130 people and four days after husband-and-wife shooters  apparently inspired by a similar ideology  killed 14 at a holiday party. 
The White House did not preview any new policies or strategies that the president would announce in his speech, and Obama has consistently resisted any large-scale ground troop presence in Syria or Iraq, where the Islamic State militant group has its stronghold. 
The United States has been ramping up its campaign against the Islamic State over the past few weeks. More special operations forces have been dispatched to advise and assist Syrian opposition forces and Iraqi forces. Since the San Bernardino attacks, Obama has emphasized combating the extremist ideology that has inspired terrorist attacks by enlisting the help of the Muslim-American community to provide an alternative. 
Obama has asked Congress to approve a new use-of-force authorization that would update the global war on terror resolution Congress first approved in 2001. He has proposed specific changes in the visa waiver program, and he’s floated a measure that would prohibit anyone on the “no-fly” terrorist watch list from purchasing a firearm.

Graphic

 
POOL PHOTO BY OLIVIER DOULIERY">President Obama

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document