A 'Get Shorty' aproach to welfare;
 By targeting little children, act is hardly short of terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 25, 1996, Metro Edition


Copyright 1996 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 23A
Length: 1097 words
Byline: Robert J. White; Staff Writer
Body


Like Chili Palmer, Bill Clinton terrorizes punks. Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich do the same. Palmer is fictional, the central character in the Elmore Leonard book and 1995 movie "Get Shorty." Since the other three characters seem to be real, their terrorizing tactics carry greater weight.
 Unlike Palmer, a mob enforcer who goes after grownups, the politicians' latest targets are young children - according to the Urban Institute, about 1 million of the poorest, who will no longer have the federal guarantee of cash assistance that has been in place since 1935. Chili uses guns, muscle and wit. The real-life enforcers use a weapon called welfare reform, extolled by its most pious backers as a benefit to the presumed minipunks who will be its victims.
House Speaker Gingrich led in getting the bill through Congress. Republican presidential nominee Dole endorsed it. Last week President Clinton signed it.
 Comparing politics to movies is not as frivolous as it might seem. Dole captured attention early in his campaign with a blast at Hollywood for low-morals pictures; later, with succinct praise for "Independence Day" ("We won. The end. Leadership. America."). Gingrich for years has used movies as object lessons: "Boys' Town" for social policy, a character in "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation" as Clinton-like, Sgt. Stryker (John Wayne) in "Sands of Iwo Jima" as a model of tough-minded leadership. Welfare reform is "Get Shorty" with a vengeance.
 If branding the legislation vengeful, even terroristic, is too strong for you, consider the more elegant analysis by Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Democrat as scathing in his critique of liberals in his own party as of Republicans for whom he once worked.
 By their resistance to other change in a failing welfare system, Moynihan argues, liberals invited the draconian measure now enacted. And he says that politicians who expect the penalties in the new legislation to alter people's behavior disregard the findings of conservative scholars.  Validating that assertion, Boston University's Glenn Loury said a few days later that he knows of no evidence to support the claims made by the bill's advocates.
 Pointedly and bitterly, Moynihan summed up the advocates' claims this way: "The premise of this legislation is that the behavior of certain adults can be changed by making the lives of their children as wretched as possible." Or as Minnesota's Paul Wellstone asked in Senate floor debate: When legislation not only ends the federal guarantee for poor children but slashes nutrition assistance to those who need it most and cuts essentially all aid for legal immigrants, "How dare you call that reform?"
 Terrorism, however, calls up images of something even more sinister than purposeful deprivation, something more directly deadly. Terrorism is the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 over Scotland and the suspected bombing of TWA Flight 800 last month off Long Island. It is sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, a suicide bomber in an Israeli bus, a car bombing of a U.S. military compound in Saudi Arabia.
 Terrorism is horrifying, as its perpetrators intend it to be. But even though the plague has crept into the United States - Oklahoma City's federal building, the New York World Trade Center - for most of us terrorism remains comfortably remote.
 That sense of immunity is changing, however, as terrorism becomes global and more diffuse. The historian Walter Laqueur points out in a Foreign Affairs magazine essay that terrorism today includes not only the kind backed by rogue countries, but acts by ethnic militants, international crooks and apocalyptic visionaries who see in destruction the route to salvation.
 Laqueur offers a definition. Terrorism, he says, is the "application of violence or threatened violence intended to sow panic in a society, to weaken or even overthrow the incumbents, and to bring about political change."
 Welfare "reformers" would be aghast at the notion that they are threatening violence or sowing panic. Many of them believe they are merely trying to stop the scourge of welfare dependency by substituting a work ethic (though it's worth remembering that three-fourths of AFDC recipients leave the program voluntarily within two years). All the welfare legions have to do to feed their kids is find work.
 This is the Chili Palmer incentive. Asked how he will persuade a famous star to play in his movie, Chili replies, "I put my gun to his head and tell him to sign."
 With the gun of imminent deprivation at their heads, welfare recipients certainly have an incentive to find jobs. But as William Julius Wilson notes, "There is harsh talk about work instead of welfare but no talk of where to find it." Wilson, now at Harvard after many years at the University of Chicago, is among scholars who cite the disappearance of core-city job opportunities as a horrendous social problem.
 There are solutions. None of them are guaranteed, but together they are certainly more promising than a policy of social terrorization.
 Since job growth across the country has moved to the outer suburbs, one remedy is urban-suburban cooperation (in the New York Times magazine Wilson cites the example of Twin Cities tax-base sharing). Other solutions are familiar, urged by many for years: training and transportation, early childhood education, income support for low-paying jobs, assurance of child care and medical care, maybe even public-service jobs like those provided in the 1930s.
 The handicap hobbling such programs is not so much philosophical as fiscal. They cost money. And since any national leader who suggests spending more money is considered loony - unless the spending is for something like countering foreign terrorism - current prospects for these remedies are bleak.
 The real prospect is outlined by Isabel Sawhill of the Urban Institute. Over the next six years, she says, welfare reform will take about $ 60 billion away from low-income families. Sawhill sees no move to put the money into better antipoverty programs; instead, it will probably be used for a middle-class tax cut to protect middle-class entitlements.
 Bipartisan reformers would protest. We are helping low-income people, they would say. They would repeat the fashionable mantra about ending welfare as we know it. The pronoun is significant: We know better than you welfare punks what works.
 If this isn't terrorism, it's a first cousin. As Chili Palmer said to the movie punks, "I'm the one telling you how it is."
 - Robert J. White, retired editorial page editor, writes a monthly column on foreign affairs.

Graphic

 
Photograph

Load-Date: August 27, 1996


End of Document