A Battle Won; With The Death Of Bin Laden, The War On Terrorism Is Not Over, But It Shows That America Does Not Lack Resolve In This Struggle.
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
May 8, 2011 Sunday


Copyright  2011   Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.   All Rights Reserved 
Section: P; Pg. 2
Length: 645 words
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


editorial
So did we cut off the head of the snake, or just one of the heads of the Hydra?
In Greek mythology, when the Hydra lost a head, two more grew to replace the missing one. In the wake of Osama bin Laden's killing, Americans must be hoping the terrorist leader's death won't result in a similar multiplication of Islamist jihadists.
Almost a decade after bin Laden's minions brought down the World Trade Center towers, America was jolted last Sunday night by news bulletins announcing that a U.S. military operation had succeeded in killing the head of al-Qaida in Pakistan - where he'd been hiding in plain sight, right under the noses of the Pakistani army.
Bin Laden wasn't holed up in a spartan cave in the mountainous, lawless tribal areas along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. He was living in a mansion in a well-to-do garrison town near Pakistan's capital, Islamabad. So much for another kind of mythology: the myth of bin Laden's heroic, self-sacrificing way of life.
And so much for the illusion that Pakistan is a partner in the war on terrorism, despite local Congressman Joe Pitts' assertion that Pakistan was helping in the operation to get bin Laden.
When the news broke that a team of Navy SEALs had choppered into bin Laden's compound and killed al-Qaida's mastermind with two shots - to the chest and the head - some Americans reacted with jubilation. But the overall national response seemed more muted, which was both appropriate after the removal of an enemy and wise, considering the circumstances.
Americans know the death of bin Laden isn't victory in the war on terrorism. Not yet.
But eradicating bin Laden is an important step, and a necessary one. Bin Laden had declared war on America. He was responsible for the deaths of nearly 3,000 innocent people on Sept. 11, 2001 - not counting other al-Qaida terrorism, like the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, and the 2000 attack on the USS Cole in Yemen.
Justice was served in that mansion in Abbottabad.
Credit the CIA and other national security agencies for sniffing out bin Laden's hideaway, and credit the administration of President Barack Obama for making the decision to raid the mystery mansion despite the potential for international fallout had the operation failed. (Memories of the disastrous 1980 attempt to rescue American hostages in Iran and the 1993 "Black Hawk Down" debacle in Somalia die hard, don't they?)
And salute those Navy SEALs who carried out their mission despite obstacles like the breakdown of a helicopter that had to be destroyed and left behind in bin Laden's compound.
We also think the administration made a sound choice to bury bin Laden's body at sea, and we can't say we're worried about some Muslim authorities' objections that burials at sea aren't in accordance with Islamic custom.
Bin Laden's body was prepared in traditional Muslim fashion before being dropped into the sea, and that's a lot more consideration than any of the victims of the 9/11 attacks got. How many families never even recovered a bit of their loved one's body to bury?
The mythological Hydra had just one immortal head. The hero Heracles chopped off that head, killing the Hydra. So perhaps the death of bin Laden, the spiritual and financial wellspring of al-Qaida, means the death of his organization as well, but let's not count on that.
Instead, let's renew our resolve to live without fear in an amorphous age of terrorism. The 9/11 attacks brought down the World Trade Center, but they didn't bring down America. And as long as we stand firm, no terrorist ever will.
Ten years later, our national commitment to bring Osama bin Laden to justice has been fulfilled. And perhaps, as Winston Churchill once said, while this is not the end, or even the beginning of the end, it might be the end of the beginning - the end of the beginning of the war on terrorism.

Load-Date: May 9, 2011


End of Document