A bottom line in war on terrorism: How to best spend the money
USA TODAY
May 4, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 527 words
Byline: M.J. Zuckerman
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- As the federal government ratchets up its campaign
to combat terrorism, some lawmakers and officials are questioning
whether the money dedicated to that effort is being spent wisely.
"Am I concerned about how we're spending all this money? Yes,"
said Rep. Ike Skelton, D-Mo. "Am I alarmed? I don't know yet."
Skelton has commissioned four General Accounting Office (GAO)
studies over the past 12 months. The studies have been critical
of the Clinton administration's counterterrorism coordination
and expense.
As the federal government shrinks to its smallest size since the
early 1970s, federal spending to battle terrorism here and abroad
is steadily rising, to about $ 7 billion in 1999.
Some say the level is justified.
"We're spending a lot of money on this now just as a form of
insurance . . . to build the necessary infrastructure," Sen.
Judd Gregg, R-N.H., said.
But GAO and administration officials said it's hard to say how
much spending really is needed.
A State Department report last week found that terrorist activity
worldwide fell to one of its lowest levels since 1971: There were
221 people killed in 1997, compared with 314 in 1996.
While no one suggests ignoring terrorism, there is concern that
some agencies may use the threat as a justification for growth.
"There are a lot of agencies out there now saying, 'Oh, yeah,
we have a terrorism role.' But two years ago, they didn't talk
about having a role," said Bob Blitzer, supervisor of the FBI's
Domestic Terrorism/Counter-Terrorism Planning Section.
In fact, it's unclear which departments are involved. A report
by the White House's Office of Management and Budget (OMB) found
that 17 agencies have counterterrorism roles. But the GAO, Congress'
auditing arm, reported in December that 43 agencies fought terrorism,
including the Department of Commerce and the U.S. Postal Service.
An unclassified version of the OMB report detailed 1999 counter-terrorism
budget requests:
-- $ 4.4 billion sought by the Pentagon and CIA in the largest
effort to track, contain and respond to terrorist acts. The Pentagon
recently requested $ 49 million to train and equip 10 National
Guard units to respond to attacks involving chemical or biological
agents.
-- $ 725 million sought by the Justice Department and FBI, a four-fold
increase since the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. Justice is the
lead agency on any domestic attack.
The FBI has 2,600 agents assigned to counterterrorism, up from
about 500 in 1995. The FBI won't say how many of those agents
are assigned overseas. About $ 30 million is for the FBI's new
National Infrastructure Protection Center, responsible for safeguarding
the nation's vital services from terrorist attack.
-- $ 688 million sought by Treasury, the majority of which is
for the Secret Service to provide security to the president and
dignitaries.
-- $ 190 million sought by State, which responds to acts of terrorism
overseas involving Americans.
-- $ 295 million sought by Transportation. About a third of that
money would pay for the purchase of technology to detect explosives
and inspect luggage.
-- $ 303 million sought by Energy, mostly for physical security
at nuclear labs and other protected facilities.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Bob Daemmrich, AFP

Load-Date: May 4, 1998


End of Document