A Break from Washington; Federal Program Assists Sheriffs Office With Surplus Items
The Meriwether Vindicator (Greenville, Georgia)
July 20, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 The Meriwether Vindicator


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 313 words
Byline: The Meriwether Vindicator staff
Body


The Meriwether County Sheriff's Office is actively participating in the Law Enforcement Support Office 1033 program.
The 1033 Program allows Law Enforcement Agencies nationwide to receive Department of Defense surplus property at no cost.
The equipment gathered through the program helps law enforcement agencies perform counter-drug and terrorism activities as well as standard law enforcement duties.
"We have obtained thousands of dollars' worth of property using this free program. For example, every deputy now has a tool box in their vehicle full of tools that can be used to assist motorists in the county who are broke down. We have received 4 military HUMVEE's that we can use during a bad weather situation, marijuana eradication, search and rescue, or getting to calls for service that are not accessible by a regular vehicle." Said Sheriff Steve Whitlock.
The sheriff's office has received several computers that have been installed in the administrative offices, training division, and jail offices.
Much needed personal protective gear such as safety glasses, knee and elbow pads, and boots have also been received for sheriff's office employees.
"This program is very valuable to our employees and our citizens. If not for this program our employees would not have these resources that protect them and help to keep our citizens safe. By using this program we are saving the citizens of this county thousands of dollars because we do not have to purchase the equipment with tax dollars. We have been participating in this program for over a year now and will continue to utilize it as long as it's available to us," said Whitlock.
"I want to personally thank Don Sherrod, David Peyton, and TFC Alan Willingham at the Georgia Department of Public Safety Excess Property Division for their service to us in maintaining this program for the State of Georgia," Added Whitlock.

Load-Date: November 23, 2013


End of Document