A Call to Broaden Fincen Role in Anti-Laundering
The American Banker
September 23, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1
Length: 547 words
Byline: By MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


An influential Republican on money laundering wants to use fast-moving terrorism-response legislation to give the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network more control over bank compliance with anti-laundering requirements.
On Wednesday, Rep. Sue Kelly called for giving Fincen "a well-equipped force" of audit and compliance officers. Doing so would help it "ride herd over the front-line regulators -- to literally look over their shoulder when necessary."
The New York Republican floated the proposal at a House Financial Services hearing that took recommendations for a bill aimed at deterring and responding to the financial aspects of terrorism.
According to Rep. Kelly's spokesman, the Fincen compliance and audit officers would work in conjunction with bank examiners, though the exact details of the coordination would be left up to the Treasury Department, Fincen's parent.
Rep. Kelly, who chairs the House Financial Services oversight subcommittee, said she views such an expansion of Fincen's powers as a first step toward the creation of a single office to enforce the Bank Secrecy Act.
Establishing such an office, which would not necessarily be housed in Fincen, is a long-term project Rep. Kelly does not expect to complete this year, her spokesman said.
A Treasury Department official was noncommittal about the idea.
"What we are trying do is figure out the right way" to enforce the Bank Secrecy Act by "leveraging what the IRS does as well as leveraging the capabilities of our front-line bank regulators," Stuart A. Levey, the Treasury under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, told reporters after testifying at the hearing. "What we don't want to do is create something that is large and expensive unless it is necessary to get the right level of compliance."
The terrorism response bill, which House Financial Services is scheduled to vote on Wednesday, is expected to be incorporated into a broader bill implementing recommendations the 9/11 Commission made this summer. Congressional Republican leaders hope to enact the measure before lawmakers adjourn for the year.
House Financial Services Chairman Michael G. Oxley, R-Ohio, said he expects the panel's contributions to the terrorism bill "will enjoy broad, if not unanimous, support in the committee and on the House floor."
Rep. Kelly and Rep. Luis Gutierrez, D-Ill., said the legislation should incorporate their bill to require bank examiners to observe a one-year "cooling-off" period before taking a job with the company they supervise.
Rep. Ed Royce, R-Calif., called for using the measure to toughen the USA Patriot Act's "know your customer" requirements to prohibit banks from accepting customer identification without biometric technology.
The Treasury endorsed some of the 13 core provisions of a bill that Rep. Oxley had floated last week. The provisions include letting creditors "net out" their losses on derivatives contracts with companies that have filed for bankruptcy.
"The Treasury strongly supports the enactment of contract netting legislation," Brian Roseboro, the Treasury under secretary for domestic finance, testified.
 
Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Kelly

Load-Date: September 22, 2004


End of Document