A Center for Constitutional Rights First Wednesday About the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act
The WORD: Hunter College
May 26, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: THE WORD; Pg. 1
Length: 1268 words
Byline: Jennifer Atalla
Body


"All This Terrorism Stuff Is Bullshit" - Lauren Gazzola, picture courtesy of directactioneverywhere.com
::
Applause eventually dissipated in the basement of Von Bar, 3 Bleeker St. after Lauren Gazzola, 35, finished talking about the Green Scareand the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, AKA AETA. Reggae and classic rock soon filled the room and some in the audience for the Center for Constitutional Rights First Wednesday meeting went to the bar to order a next round while others surrounded Gazzola.
Animal rights activists, lawyers, and, as Executive Director for CCR Vince Warren put it, story tellers were in attendance for this get-together on AETA in early March. CCR organizes such meetings the every month for discussions of topical civil liberties and constitutional rights issues.
At the start, the audience members settled into seats at tables and finalized food and drink orders before the Gazzola started her lecture. Music, reggae and classic rock, stopped shortly before Gazzola spoke about her personal story with the Green Scare and AETA, the former an act broadly defined as prohibiting any person from engaging in conduct for the purpose of damaging or interfering with an animal enterprise, thus allowing the targeting of animal activists protest efforts against companies that use or sell animals.
Any protest against these companies, ranging from candlelight vigils to digital disobedience, can be punishable as a terrorist act, allowing the labeling and indictment of animal rights activists as terrorists. Civil libertarians like CCR say this act conflicts with the First Amendment's freedom to peaceably assemble.
In 2006, Gazzola was part of the grassroots campaign SHAC, Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty, a divestment campaign aimed at taking down the foundation of support for this company by reaching out to the investors who sponsored Huntingdon. Gazzola, along with many others, were indicted under the AETA on allegations that their actions were a violation against an animal enterprise, she said.
Gazzola spent 40 months in prison because of AETA. The Center for Constitutional Rights lead the appellate efforts in the case and hired Gazzola after she was released from prison. Gazzola works in communications department and her tasks include writing press releases and opinion pieces and management of CCR's social media.
CCR challenged AETA in a case in which animal rights activists were accused of releasing thousands of animals in mid western fur farms, such as minks and foxes. An extra argument that CCR added to its motion to dismiss this case was on the grounds that there was no rational reason to call this protest terrorism.
After Gazzola spoke, an air of camaraderie blanketed the room. Gazzola took several questions, ranging from First Amendment law to how CCR plans to combat ad-gag laws that prohibit civilian undercover investigations of Animal Enterprises or agriculture forms.
Gazzola answered one question by speaking about her life before being charged under AETA and how she was logistically able to work full time on SHAC. Gazzola also spoke about how her sentencing was affected by the terrorist charge. Gazzola, pointing out the inanities of penal life, said that the prison system prohibited her use of computers while a co-defendant ended up in a communications management unit of the same prison.
It was difficult to get animal rights activists other than Gazzola to agree to an interview for an article to be published. Two audience members, however, agreed to be interviewed. Dfane Jarvish, 49, a tenants rights lawyer, said he came to this particular meeting for two reasons, one becauseshe lives three blocks from the bar. The other reason was because she wanted to work with a person who has a real interest in animal rights and may consider hiring her as an associate.
Jarvish, who was wearing a purple turtleneck, black slacks and brown shoes, said she also believed in animal rights. "Although as I always tell my cat, it should not just be animal rights, it should be animal responsibilities," she said.
This was not the first time for Jarvish at a CCR First Wednesday event. Jarvish said she expected to learn insights or new information regarding animals rights. According to Jarvish, animal rights is a concentration where the law is rapidly changing partly because of recent studies that support animal enterprises as contributors to large carbon footprints affecting society as a whole.
Rob Jensen, 30, an environmental scientist of the engineering consulting firm Parsons Brinckerhoff, said he came to this CCR First Wednesday meeting, his first, after coming across a flyer for the event at NYU Law School where he attended a lecture for animal intersectionality.
Jensen, dressed in black attire of jeans, a T-shirt, and a hoodie, spoke animatedly when he told how he ran an animal rights group, Collectively Free, and about AETA's chilling effect on activism in general, from animal rights to environmental activism. Jensen said AETA could possibly silence and intimidate voices of people who would otherwise be interested in getting involved in activism.
Jensen lives in Park Slope but came to Von Bar to hear Gazzola's story on her interactions with Green Scare tactics.
Jensen said he got a few updates on the status of challenges regarding AETA since he has not been up to date with the cases. Other than that, Jensen said that he knew all of the background and long tail information of the Green Scare but was interested in hearing Gazzola's story.
Jensen said that CCR needs to bring more awareness to other activists to alert them that their constitutional rights could be affected by this act. Jensen said that society was fundamentally based on the exploitation of animals and once it's clear that accessible food choices are run by gigantic corporations, it's for the benefit of giant corporation's benefit for activists to give up their right to free speech.
After the lecture and Q&A, Jarvish said she was pleased to learn that animal activism was in a larger scope than her understanding. Jarvish said that she believed the AETA would not affect her in her personal life since it's the animals that are being intersected, not her.
Gazzola, who wore a light blue striped button-down with a black skirt and tights, said after the oral argument, that the presiding judge considered a dismissal of the charges. "All this terrorism stuff is bullshit," said Gazzola, meaning that if the government wins this case, it would feel more free to use this law to target animal rights activists.
During her interview, Gazzoia spoke about international free speech politics regarding ad-gag laws in places such as in Australia where protection tantamount to the First Amendment does not exist. She drew contrasts between other countries, the flawed American governmental system and her experience and said that although the First Amendment sometimes does not work, it is stronger protection for civilians than the absence of the First Amendment.
As the music got louder in the room, the chatter increasedd. Many interrupted the interview to take Gazzola aside to speak about their experiences with AETA or to say that they supported her story.
Gazzola said that it will take a mass mobilization of the people to change this act and change the way the government's encroachment on free speech. Gazzola has been a vegan, just like many members of the audience expressed, for 18 years. Although many in the audience were vegans, Gazzola said that veganism is a minority in the global scope of things.
Jennifer Atalla can be reached at jennifer.atalla@gmail.com

Load-Date: May 26, 2015


End of Document