A costly anti-terrorism mistake
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
June 20, 1995, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 536 words
Body


In its rush to pass an anti-terrorism bill, the Senate has made a mistake that could prove very costly to consumers.
Instead of studying the wisdom of adding microscopic chips to explosives, the Senate, urged on by President Clinton, decided just to do it. The idea is to add pieces of tiny, indestructible material to dynamite and many other explosives in the hope that police investigating a bombing will find these identifying materials and be able to trace the origins of the explosive material. Police do expect the additives, called taggants, to provide clues that could help them solve a bombing crime.
The Senate, eager to show the public it is tough on terrorism, didn't want to be slowed down by details, such as whether the idea makes sense or whether it is worth the cost.
The House version of the bill still has the provision to study the use of taggants, and that version is the one that should become law.
Explosive makers estimate taggants could increase the cost of explosives by about one-third. If you think that doesn't matter to you because you don't use explosives, think again. Stone and gravel used to make roads, and coal used in power plants, must be mined. Mining companies use 90 percent of the explosives sold in this country.
No one seems sure how much taggants would cost, but Bobby Jackson, a vice president of the National Mining Association, tells us they could add $ 1 billion or more to the cost of mining. Those costs would be passed on to consumers - taxpayers who build roads, consumers of electricity and everyone who uses mined materials.
In the five-year period from 1989 through 1993, all bombings in America, including firebombings, accounted for an average of $ 128 million in property damage each year. Police, by the way, did an excellent job catching bombing suspects without the use of taggants.
But even if the cost-benefit ratio were more balanced, the question remains as to how effective taggants would be. All blasting material would contain taggants, so every time mine workers blasted rock, taggants would be scattered throughout the material being mined. Over time, various taggants would find their way into the bricks, concrete and stone used to construct buildings. Taggants in coal may even drift through the air in emissions from power plants.
Initial reports suggest taggants would also be added to fertilizers that can be made into bombs, such as the one that destroyed the federal building in Oklahoma City. If so, expect the cost of farming to increase, and expect to find taggants everywhere fertilizer is used, and everywhere fertilizer dust is blown.
If taggants are used on the scale envisioned, it won't be long before they can be found everywhere, which would seem to defeat their purpose.
Also arguing against their effectiveness are the ease with which terrorists could smuggle untagged explosives into the country and the irrational, fearless attitude many terrorists share. Some even blow themselves up to make sure the job is successful.
Members of Congress are right to want to fight terrorism. They also have other responsibilities, such as being careful about adding costly regulations that, like fireworks, look impressive but don't do much good.

Notes

EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS

Load-Date: July 19, 1995


End of Document