A conditional response to terrorism
SUNDAY NEWS (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 4, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: P,
Length: 530 words
Byline: SUNDAY NEWS
Body


Following is the text of a letter sent Wednesday to Thomas H. Kean and Lee H. Hamilton of the September 11 commission from Alberto R. Gonzales, counsel to President Bush.  While we continue to hold to the principles underlying the constitutional separation of powers, that the appropriate and patriotic action for the commission is to shut down and stop pestering us, the president is prepared, in the interest of comity and popularity, to testify, subject to the conditions set forth below.  The president at all times, even on trips to the mens room, will be accompanied by the vice president.  The commission must agree in writing that it will not pose any questions directly to the president. Mr. Bushs statements will be restricted to asides on Dick Cheneys brushoffs, as in Just like he said, Roger that and Ditto.  As an additional accommodation, the president and vice president have now agreed to take a pinkie oath, looping little fingers with each other, while reserving the right to cross the index and middle fingers of their remaining hands and hide them behind their backs.  We must deny your request that Mr. Cheney bring along a PowerPoint presentation depicting who was in and out of the loop, in accordance with separation-of-PowerPoint principles. The vice president has decreed that the loop of influence is under the cone of silence.  The White House is taking the extraordinary step of bowing to public opinion even though Mr. Cheney states that he doesnt give two hoots about public opinion.
#DOWDA4#Therefore, the vice president will only entertain questions about negligence in fighting terrorism concerning the critical period between Jan. 21, 1993, and Jan. 20, 2001. As President Bush stated on Tuesday, March 30, the commission must gain a complete picture of the months and years before September 11.  The vice president will not address any queries about why no one reacted to George Tenets daily hair on fire alarms to the president about a coming al-Qaida attack; or why the president was so consumed with chopping and burning cedar on his Crawford ranch that he ignored the warning in an Aug. 6, 2001, briefing that al-Qaida might try to hijack aircraft; or why the president asked for a plan to combat al-Qaida in May and then never followed up; or why the president was never briefed by his counterterrorism chief on anything but cybersecurity until September 11; or why the president went along with the vice president and the neocons to fool the American public into believing that Saddam had a hand in the 9/11 attacks; or why the administration chose to undercut the war on terrorism and inflame the Arab world by attacking Iraq, without a plan to protect our perilously overextended forces or to exit with a realistic hope that a democracy will be left behind.  The commission must not, under any circumstances, ask the vice president why American soldiers and civilians in Iraq are being greeted with barbarous infernos rather than flowery bouquets.  Finally, we request that when the president finishes with this painful teeth-pulling visit, the commission shall offer him a lollipop.  Maureen Dowd is a columnist for The New York Times.DeEd

Load-Date: April 10, 2004


End of Document