A cool look at the world's hot spots
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 10, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 367 words
Byline: BEKAH PORTER TH staff writer , bporter@wcinet.com
Body


GALENA, Ill. - News reports crackled from Art Ricker's car radio. The retired light-fixture salesman absorbed every word as correspondents presented the problems plaguing the Middle East. 
Ricker did more than listen, however. He also cared. "How can you not when it comes to terrorism?" he asked. In 2006, the Galena resident paused his cross-country road trip to focus on the radio reports detailing the Lebanon War, also known as the Israel-Hezbollah War. "As I listened, I realized I have a severe hate for terrorists," he said. On the heel of that revelation came the discovery that he wanted to learn more about the issue. "To do that, I had to go there," he said. "There" has since come to include Iraq battlefields, Minutemen lookout stations on the U.S.-Mexico border and, most recently, the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. Admission on these excursions required more than a plane ticket and willing attitude. To enter these security sites, Ricker first obtained a press pass. "Not that I'd ever written an article before that point," he said. Ricker contacted the Galena Gazette and asked to submit articles about his trips. With its permission, he began chronicling his journeys. "I never thought I would do these kind of things, since I was always a conservative type of person before," he said. Yet there he was, descending from a military plane, wearing body armor and conversing with Reuters' reporters. In Iraq, he slept in a military camp and evacuated with soldiers when sirens sounded. With the Minutemen, he witnessed methods of preventing illegal immigration. And in Guantanamo, he viewed the root of worldwide controversy. "I went to Guantanamo to see if it was as bad as everybody says," he said. The self-proclaimed Republican returned from his August tour impressed. "I have been into the Jo Daviess County jail, and if I had my choice, I'd go to Gitmo, hands down," he said. "I saw no sign of abuse there whatsoever, and I was surprised at how well they were treating their detainees." With another answer obtained in the pursuit of terrorism knowledge, Ricker thinks ahead to his next self-decided assignment. "I'm thinking about Afghanistan," he said. "We'll see what happens."

Load-Date: September 10, 2009


End of Document