A CONSULTANT'S ROLE IN THE IRAN AFFAIR
The New York Times
February 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1044 words
Byline: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1
Body


In October 1985, when the Reagan Administration was forcing down a jetliner carrying the hijackers of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, it turned in desperation to a part-time consultant to reach Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy by telephone.
The consultant, Michael A. Ledeen, worked on terrorism issues for the National Security Council, and he was able to reach Mr. Craxi, a personal friend, at a hotel in Rome. The security guard insisted Mr. Craxi was unavailable, and Mr. Ledeen recalls that he threatened in his finest vulgar Italian to hold him personally responsible for the operation's failure.
The guard relented, and later that evening Mr. Craxi spoke by phone with President Reagan and Mr. Ledeen helped with the translation, giving him a small role in what was seen as one of this country's victories over terrorism.
Months earlier in 1985, the Administration had called upon Mr. Ledeen's skills and contacts in initiating the dealings with Iran. That program has been considerably less well received, and Mr. Ledeen's part in the pivotal early discussions between Iran, Israel and the United States has stirred questions from Congressional investigators about the wisdom of relying on officials outside the State Department in a diplomatic initiative.
Indeed, disputes over Mr. Ledeen's activities, and disagreement about precisely what he said to officials in Israel and the United States, have become a part of the unfolding controversy over the Iran affair.
To his defenders, Mr. Ledeen is an articulate expert on terrorism whose contacts in Western Europe and Israel give him valuable insights that have frequently eluded the bureaucracies.
To his detractors, he is a self-promoter whose relationships with foreign officials and willingness to exceed his authority make him a liability.
Even his critics acknowledge, however, that Mr. Ledeen, an author, a journalist, a scholar on the history of fascism, a one-time international bridge coach, and a former aide to Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., is one of the more distinctive figures in the grey flannel world of foreign policy.
Mr. Ledeen's outspoken views, including public support for covert operations aimed at assassinating terrorists, and his disdain for the institutional biases of Government agencies have assured that few respond neutrally when his name is mentioned.
''He's much too close to the Israelis,'' complained one Congressional investigator who has looked into the Iran affair. ''He's an amateur when it comes to the Middle East,'' an Administration official said.
''He's a source of information you can't get through other channels,'' retorted a senior Administration official who added, ''In Washington, an amateur is someone who's for something you're against.''
Mr. Ledeen, a bearded man with a fondness for good cigars and acerbic asides, says he has frequently been investigated, both by Government agencies and journalists.
Italian press reports and subsequent articles in The Wall Street Journal last year linked him to a shadowy Italian intelligence official who is now in jail. Mr. Ledeen is pursuing a libel suit against the Italian newspaper. Additionally, he noted that he has repeatedly been granted high-level security clearances.
Senate sources said the intelligence committee closely questioned Mr. Ledeen under oath about whether he had ever been affiliated with Israeli intelligence in any way. He denied it, and said in an interview that he resents the repeated allusions to his relationship with the Israelis.
''There is absolutely no evidence of closeness; the number of Israeli officials I know is really quite small,'' he said. ''There's nothing there.''
 
Editor of Washington Quarterly
After being denied tenure at Washington University in St. Louis in 1972, Mr. Ledeen became a visiting professor at the University of Rome. In 1977, he was invited to become the editor of The Washington Quarterly, a foreign policy journal published by a conservative research institute.
There, he met Mr. Haig, later the Secretary of State, who hired him as a special adviser reporting through the State Department Counselor, Robert C. McFarlane. His work involved maintaining liaison with members of the Socialist International then in opposition, such as Mr. Craxi of Italy or Shimon Peres of Israel.
After Mr. Haig left government, Mr. Ledeen was eventually hired as a consultant by Mr. McFarlane, who had since become the national security adviser. He said his job involved analyzing intelligence on terrorism and writing occasional papers. He also maintained a private business consulting for European concerns.
Mr. McFarlane said he regularly asked Mr. Ledeen to report on his private travels to various parts of the world. He said Mr. Ledeen was assigned to gather information, not represent the Government.
A somewhat different picture emerges from the Senate report and an interview with Mr. Ledeen.
In the spring of 1985, Mr. Ledeen said, he told Mr. McFarlane he was going to Israel and would be willing to raise the issue of Iran with Mr. Peres.
Mr. McFarlane agreed, and Mr. Ledeen said he met with Mr. Peres and asked whether his country had any solid intelligence on Iran's internal politics. The issue of developing contacts, he said, never came up.
The trip touched off a bureaucratic turf fight when Secretary of State George P. Shultz complained to Mr. McFarlane, who replied that Mr. Ledeen had been acting ''on his own hook.'' Mr. McFarlane said he recalls telling Mr. Ledeen that ''you were not authorized to say I was sending you.''
Mr. Ledeen says he does not remember this conversation and notes that the White House paid for all but one of his trips involving the Iran program.
In late July, Mr. Ledeen went to Israel and met with Mr. Ghorbanifar. He said he was not a negotiator and merely pointed out ''obvious'' aspects of the Iran-American relationship.
Mr. Ghorbanifar told the group that if relations were to improve, both sides would have to have a clear signal. On the Iranian side, that could be a cessation of terrorism and a release of the hostages; for the Americans a shipment of arms.
After the shipments were approved, Mr. Ledeen met several times more with Mr. Ghorbanifar and the Israelis to work out a logistical plan for a hostage release.

Graphic

 
Photo of Michael A. Ledeen (NYT/Paul Hosefros)


End of Document