A dam in Pakistan Our view • A river, a dam and the fight against terrorism. OPINION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 22, 2011 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12
Length: 523 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


Last week, the McClatchy newspapers reported that the Obama administration is considering providing seed money for a $12 billion hydroelectric dam on the Indus River in northernmost Pakistan.
Just wait for Congress to get back from vacation. A lot of them, Republicans and Democrats alike, are going to hate this idea.
It may be too late; the money would come from a $7.5 billion, five-year civilian aid authorization that Congress passed in 2009. Sponsored by Democrat Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts and Republican Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana, the money is intended to shore up America's reputation among the Pakistani people.
No doubt that won't stop some in Congress from screaming. Just because the spending is authorized, it doesn't mean it has to be spent. And since the Kerry-Lugar fund was passed in 2009, U.S. relations with Pakistan steadily have gone downhill.
In fact, the total project footprint of the proposed Diamer-Bhasha Dam begins on the Karakoram Highway just outside of Abbottabad - where Osama bin Laden was hiding, right under the noses of the Pakistani military, before he was killed on May 1.
The United States would provide about $200 million to get the ball rolling. The Pakistani government hopes that would attract private investors and help from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
Money isn't the only problem facing the Diamer-Bhasha Dam. Its location is in the mountainous Gilgit-Baltistan region, adjacent to the Jammu-Kashmir state that India administers and claims as its territory. The entire border area, including Gilgit-Baltistan, has been in dispute since the India-Pakistan partition of in 1947. In any discussion of where a nuclear war might start, Kashmir is always a contender.
And then there is China, India's not-so-friendly neighbor to the north. China is investing heavily in Pakistan. For India, the only thing worse than having the United States and the World Bank helping to build a dam in Pakistan would be for the Chinese to build it.
There's little doubt that had the Diamer-Bhasha Dam been in place two years ago, it would have mitigated flooding that killed an estimated 2,000 Pakistanis. Nor is there any doubt that energy-starved Pakistanis could use the 4,500 megawatts of power that the 890-foot-tall dam would generate.
Ninety percent of the $20.7 billion that the United States has sent to Pakistan to buy its cooperation in the War on Terror has gone to the Pakistani military, though military aid lately has been suspended.
Meanwhile, the Chinese buy friends in Pakistan by building nuclear power plants. The Saudis build mosques and sell them cheap oil. The United States sends them F-16s and bombs them from drone aircraft. We could use some good PR in the civilian population.
But here's the rub: Pakistan could build its own dam if it reformed its tax structure. The Carnegie Endowment has estimated that 10 million Pakistanis earn more than $3,488 a year and thus should pay income taxes. Only 1 in 4 does. Tax-dodging is the national pastime, particularly among the elite, particularly among the members of Parliament.
That's an issue we'd like to see Congress debate.

Load-Date: August 23, 2011


End of Document