A DEBATE ON ETHICS AND WORLD VIOLENCE - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11CN; Page 4, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk
Length: 1264 words
Body


THE United States must take steps to thwart terrorism and develop a longterm policy founded on moral principles, a Connecticut expert on international terrorism says.
''A lot of foreign policy initiatives are lost on the homefront because we fail to justify our intentions,'' said Dr. Robert L. Phillips. director of the Program for War and Ethics at the University of Connecticut. ''We need to think carefully before plunging ahead.''
''We're in for a long, long haul. The American people are, by nature, problem solvers, but this is something for which there is no quick fix.''
Dr. Phillips will be among those discussing terrorism at an all-day conference on Friday. The conference, which will focus on the ethical issues of international violence, will also feature Moorhead Kennedy, a former hostage in Iran, as well as other academic, civilian and military experts. The ethical implications of the Strategic Defense Initiative, popularly known as ''Star Wars,'' will also be debated.
In debating the ethical implications of terrorism, Dr. Phillips will be joined by Mr. Kennedy, who was held captive in Iran for 444 days and who is executive director of the Council for International Understanding in New York, and Dr. Martha Crenshaw, chairman of the government department at Wesleyan University. The debate, entitled ''Terrorism and Insurgency: Welcome to World War III,'' will be moderated by William Wholean, executive director of the government department at Wesleyan.
Debating the ''Star Wars'' program will be Dr. Frank Kirkpatrick, chairman of the department of religion at Trinity College, Dr. James Sterba, professor of philosophy at Notre Dame, and William C. Bodie, research assistant with the National Strategy Information Center in New York. Entitled ''Star Wars (S.D.I.): Making Nuclear Weapons Obsolete or Close Encounters of the Worst Kind,'' it will be moderated by Dr. Russell Farnen, director of the University of Connecticut's Greater Hartford Campus.
Also at the conference, Col. Anthony Hartle, head of the philosophy program at the United States Military Academy at West Point, will head a discussion entitled ''Toward a Professional Ethics for the Military.'' The discussion will be moderated by Maj. Dan Bullinski, a philosophy instructor at the United States Military Academy.
Dr. Phillips is the author of ''War and Justice for Unjust Wars: Terrorism, Assassination and Insurgency'' and is a consultant to governments and private organizations on the problem of terrorism. Most recently, he spoke at a conference hosted by Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which was attended by delegates of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The conference is a major undertaking for the center, which was established four years ago by Dr. Phillips for discussion of the legal and ethical considerations of world violence. It is located at UConn's campus in West Hartford, said Jean T. Castagno, the center's administrator.
''This is the first conference of this magnitude that the policy center has organized,'' she said. ''This is very, very big for us, and the fact that we're taking a whole day to discuss terrorism stressed the importance of the issue.''
The center's goal is to encourage the discussion of such issues within the university's curriculum. In addition to research, the center holds seminars and plans to publish a newsletter and a journal, Mrs. Castagno said.
Dr, Phillips, who is an associate professor of philosophy, said he believes the United States has been consumed with the problem of reacting to terrorists, but has ignored some of the moral and ethical problems. The result has proved damaging, even when an operation is a success, he said.
For example, Dr. Phillips said he believes that the United States bombing of Libya was morally justifiable, but that the positive results of the operation were damaged by what he called the confused and contradictory accounts offered by the Administration after the raid.
''I think we have to be prepared for preemptive strikes,'' he said. ''We have the right to be the hunter if we are the ones being hunted. We have the right to do so, but it does require a clear explanation. We can't be caught wrong footed, as we have been so many times, with implausible or contradictory accounts.''
He said that after the raid government officials gave differing accounts as to the reasons for it and whether or not there had been civilian casualties. This showed ''that the Administration had not done its homework and did not make clear what had happened,'' he said.
''We need to say, look, it's one thing to directly target innocent people; that's terrorism. But it is another thing to aim at a military target and accidentally hit a civilian. That is another thing, and we have consistently failed to explain that.''
Ethical implications also come into play when deciding how terrorist incidents should be handled, he said.
Recently, Dr. Phillips became a topic of controversy himself when he criticized the decision of the pilot and cockpit crew aboard Pan American World Airways flight 73 to flee the aircraft after it was taken over by terrorists in Karachi, Pakistan, on Sept. 5 He said that when the crew left the aircraft, there was no one in authority to deal with the terrorists, and that this could have led to the confusion that resulted in the terrorists opening fire. Passengers on the plane and officials have said they believe the hijackers decided to open fire when the lights on the aircraft suddenly went out. Twenty-one passengers died and more than 100 were wounded before the hijackers were captured.
''What surprised me was the way everybody in the airlines locked arms,'' he said, referring to the consensus of airline officials that the crew had been right to escape when they could and that the move helped to keep the plane on the ground.
''I just raised some questions,'' Dr. Phillips said. ''I believe for the captain to leave raised very serious moral questions and required very convincing arguments and I didn't see that they were there, given that there were other ways to keep the airplane on the ground,'' he said.
On a positive note, however, he said he felt there have been successful inroads made in the fight against terrorism.
He said that there has been increased international cooperation between the United States and its European allies, and that government intelligence has been increasingly effective in preventing terrorist attacks.
''Interpol and our European allies have been cooperating more and more. The F.B.I. has done splendid work. One of the reasons there have been no major terrorist outbreaks in the United States is that the F.B.I. has been on top of it. A lot of good things have occurred. These are things that cannot be publicized, but we have been successful in thwarting terrorists.''
Even so, the Administration must take the ''long view'' and work toward the creation of an anti-terrorist policy, he said.
''The other day, Mr. Shultz said some day we would live in a terror-free world,'' Dr. Phillips said, referring to Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
''That's naive,'' Dr. Phillips continued. ''It's like saying that we can stop all crime. We can never stop all crime. Measures can be taken to reduce crime but crime itself is impossible to stamp out.''
The conference is being co-sponsored by the Division of Extended and Continuing Education at the University of Connecticut.
The public is invited to attend. The cost is $35, which includes lunch, and $17 for students enrolled in any institution. For more information, call 486-3231 or 241-4844.
Correction

An article on Sept. 21 about a confrence on international violence misidentified William J. Wholean. He is the executive director of the Connecticut Catholic Conference.
Correction-Date: October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


End of Document