A decade later, not all Americans are safer
The New Hampshire: University of New Hampshire
September 15, 2011 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 672 words
Body


President Bush was 100 percent correct when he claimed his policies - essentially continued by President Obama - prevented another large-scale attack on the U.S. homeland.
Whether you agree with President Bush's decisions following the tragic events of September 11, 2001 - including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq - you can't dispute the claim's truth.
But does a safer homeland also mean Americans are safer than prior to 9/11? It depends. Many Americans know that nearly 3,000 people perished on 9/11, but far fewer know that 6,200 Americans have perished and 42,000 have been wounded during wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The initial air strikes aimed at eliminating Al Qaeda were necessary to protecting Americans, but the necessity of the ensuing wars are questionable? Enhanced intelligence cooperation and covert military operations- the type that killed Bin Laden- may have been just as effective and put far fewer American lives at risk.
Domestic security measures have made U.S. soil a tougher target for terrorism, but the decision to go to war has sacrificed the safety of Americans in the armed forces. It's an undisputed fact that avoiding the Iraq war and pursuing a smaller operation in Afghanistan would have sharply reduced American military casualties.
Deploying thousands of Americans to hostile territories has made it easier for terrorists to kill Americans. This week's Taliban bombing of a U.S. military base in Afghanistan - wounding 75 Americans - is another prime example. Without permanent targets in Afghanistan, those attacks never happen. Neither would the numerous Improvised Explosive Device attacks - a simple and cheap weapon to construct - that have killed thousands of Americans. The Taliban fostered a safe haven for Al Qaeda, but had little interest in executing terrorist acts on Americans; that is, not until a heavy U.S. presence created new targets and a new enemy.
Despite the deaths of thousands of American soldiers, public response is minimal. Americans appear desensitized by war casualties, accepting the sacrifice taken by a small percentage of the voluntary force population. The lack of a military draft, unlike Vietnam, has left most Americans - at least those with financial and political power - unaffected by war. But, would Americans and the media pay more attention if an equal number of Americans perished in attacks here on U.S. soil at the same rate they are in the Middle East? If so, does that mean Americans believe civilian lives are worth more than military members?
Whether the public is engaged or not, the truth remains that more than twice as many Americans have died fighting terrorism intended to prevent another 9/11. But, can it be assured the sacrifice of 6,200 overseas saved at least that many lives on U.S. soil? Or that the enhanced intelligence and covert military operations approach would have been as effective in saving lives? And has the enormous cost in both lives and debt aimed to defeat terrorism been worth it?
It is clear that President Obama is hamstrung by his predecessor's decisions and mission creep. He knows that if he withdraws troops faster and the U.S. suffered a homeland attack, the blame would be squarely on him; even though it most likely would have no relation to troop withdrawal.
A decade later, the answer to "are we safer?" depends primarily on who is included in the definition of "we." Hindsight is 20/20, and after a decade of experience, it's time to focus on the safety of all Americans. Even though some Americans willingly raise their hands to protect the country, their safety should still be top priority. At the end of the day, isn't it true that whether or not an American wears the uniform, each American life has the same value?
Brooks Payette is a non-traditional student, senior political science major and a 2011 National Truman Scholar Award Recipient. His goal is to see past typical Conservative and Liberal rhetoric and pose alternative questions and solutions aimed at addressing challenges in American society.

Load-Date: September 18, 2013


End of Document