A DIPLOMATIC, ECONOMIC, AND MILITARY APPROACH TO TERRORISM;
Message of Talmud
The New York Times
December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 12, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 288 words
Body


To the Editor:
George Ball criticizes Secretary of State Shultz for using Israel (''a small, insecure, beleaguered country surrounded by enemies'') as a model for the United States (''a huge nation living in secure borders'') on how to respond to terrorist attacks. And Mr. Ball, once again, strongly attacks Israel's policy in Beirut during the Lebanon war in 1982.
What I find most disturbing, however, is Mr. Ball's gratuitous quotation of one sentence of Talmud. He cautions Mr. Shultz against adopting ''as national policy the Talmudic injunction, 'If one comes to kill you, make haste and kill him first.' '' Such a quotation, lifted totally out of context and doubtless rifled from some handy desk-book reference, displays nothing more than Mr. Ball's profound ignorance of Talmudic sources.
What Mr. Ball fails to report is that the preservation of all life is a central commandment of Jewish law and the overriding principle against which the proposition he cites should be understood. Thus one who preserves the life of a single human being is deemed to have saved the entire world (Mishnah, Sanhedrin 4:5). A Jew has an affirmative obligation to preserve the lives of others and a cognate duty to preserve his own. Surely, as a lawyer, Mr. Ball will recall that our own criminal law recognizes self-preservation as an absolute defense to a capital charge.
The Talmud is a work of vast scope, profound depth and practical wisdom, all of which are clearly irrelevant to Mr. Ball's tendentious purposes. Selective quotation, particularly by a very amateur Talmudist, should be done with great caution, a caution that Mr. Ball frequently abandons in matters concerning the Jewish State.
 
GEORGE DARGO
Brookline, Mass., Dec. 20, 1984


End of Document