A DIVIDED ISRAEL
The New York Times
July 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk; ANALYSIS
Length: 3201 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Modern Israel, now 36 years old, is moving from the generation of its founding into the generation of its maturity without having resolved the most fundamental questions faced since its creation.  In essence, they are the issues of what kind of a society this will be: religious or secular, nationalistic or humanistic, Western or Middle Eastern, absolutist or pluralistic. The struggles between these diverse qualities are intense; they are determining the nature of democracy and Judaism, the two key elements of Israel's fate.
The writer of this dispatch has just completed a five-year assignment as bureau chief of The New York Times in Jerusalem.  Some social thinkers believe that clear resolution of the conflicts is impossible and perhaps not even desirable because the varied population of Jews from throughout the world has remained intact partly because of the society's ambivalence. Its ability to sustain tension between opposing impulses has made room for variety. If the state became unequivocally religious, for example, the secular Jews would be alien, and if it became wholly secular, the religious would feel apart.
Analysis of basic questions in Israel on religion, nationalism and other attitudes, which are intensifying as country moves from founding generation into maturing one 36 years after its creation; issues revolve around what kind of society it will be: religious or secular, national or humanistic, Western or Middle Eastern, absolutist or pluralistic; illustrations (L)Israel's Sense of Itself
But the past five years have tested Israel's sense of itself and its place in the world, forcing ruthless self-examination. Egypt signed a peace treaty with Israel, bolstering false hopes that the Middle East was on a new path. Israel gave free rein to militant Jewish nationalists in the occupied West Bank to build settlements and consolidate Israeli control over the territory and its largely hostile Arab population.
The peace treaty, divisions in the Arab world and Israeli military prowess shifted the balance of regional power decidedly in Israel's favor, leading to expressions of confidence by military leaders. But the war in Lebanon proved Israel's most divisive and least successful, damaging the country's image of invincibility with the Arabs and forcing a mood of strategic humility.
Israel retains, nevertheless, an affection for toughness.
''A Jew, whenever he came to a country, checked the exits,'' said Rabbi David Hartman, a philosopher in Jerusalem. In Israel, by contrast, ''a new generation has grown up of Jews who can act,'' he observed. ''They can't stand an obsequious nation. They hate it. Dignity. You hear them all the time saying, 'Why can't you stand up to the world?' ''
 
Intoxication With Power?
Yet Rabbi Hartman and many other Israelis are deeply concerned that the land, as an object of the Zionist dream, has become an idol, and that the understandable obsession with survival after the Holocaust, and in the midst of Arab hostility, has grown into an intoxication with newly acquired power.  ''The country requires a totally new channeling for its romantic passion,'' Rabbi Hartman said as he sat in his book-lined study. ''We're here not to reclaim the land. We're here to reclaim Judaism. What's at stake is the soul of a people. Do openness and love mean suicide? Do openness and love mean you have to lose your cultural particularity?''
Israel faces these questions today in a confused, corrosive mood that mixes complacency with self-doubt, materialism with moral debate and conflicting sensations of vulnerability and security in the military and economic arenas. After more than three decades, the varied Israeli population of 3.3 million Jews has found no consensus on the deeper issues, no common ground except the elementary notion that there should be a Jewish state. What kind of state is still an open question.
The result is an apprehension among some Israelis that the country could be pulled apart by centrifugal force, that the extreme right and the extreme left, the militant Orthodox and the secular liberal, the Western Ashkenazim and the Middle Eastern Sephardim, the rich and the poor, the racist and the tolerant share too few values to keep them from drifting into enclaves of separateness.
The worries may be exaggerated, but they are given substantial voice during elections, as in the current campaign leading to the voting July 23 for a new Parliament. Some politicians, especially on the right, are using extreme terminology, describing their challengers not as opponents but as traitors, and implying that the Labor Party, a moderate group, favors the destruction of the state.
''The Jews are becoming like the Arabs,'' said a leading Palestinian in the West Bank, noting that his fellow Arabs also call Arabs who disagree with them traitors.
 A Chauvinistic Tone In the Campaign
In mid-June, for example, supporters of the governing Likud bloc put a full-page advertisement in the newspaper Maariv showing a picture of Yasir Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, under the headline, ''He Wants Maarach.'' Maarach is the Labor Alignment, which includes the Labor Party and the Socialist Mapam Party.
Beneath the Arafat picture was the caption: ''Hussein, Elias Freij, Abu Iyad, Kreisky - They Want Maarach Too.'' The references were to King Hussein of Jordan; Mayor Freij of the Arab town of Bethlehem; Abu Iyad, another P.L.O. leader, and former Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria, who has expressed sympathy for the Palestinians.
 
'The National Camp'
The chauvinistic tone has been reinforced by Likud's practice of calling itself the National Camp, with the implication that others are unpatriotic.
''It's divisive, and it's dividing the people between those who are 'national' and 'committed' and those who are not,'' said Yaron Ezrahi, a political science professor at Hebrew University. ''It's not even an election gimmick. It is very consistent with the entire attitude they have had toward policy. They are building their entire conception of foreign policy and national priorities on the notion that we are here to engage in a war of survival. We are in a war of survival against enemies. You don't trust the enemy, and anyone who trusts the enemy is at best an innocent, naive man, and at worst a traitor. They put their opponents on this spectrum.'' ''It is extreme,'' Ehud Olmert, a Likud Member of Parliament, conceded. But he argued that the tactics were necessary to counter Labor's effort to ignore the differences of opinion over the future of the occupied West Bank. Likud, led by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, regards the territory, with its 750,000 Palestinian Arabs, as integral to Israel; the Labor Party, led by Shimon Peres, advocates relinquishing some of the West Bank in exchange for peace. Labor is not emphasizing this conciliatory position during the campaign.
''I don't think anyone has to understand these ads as a way of saying the Labor Party is cooperating in some way with Israel's enemies,'' Mr. Olmert said. ''They are patriots, as we are. But their positions are more acceptable to the enemies of Israel than ours are.''
 
More Extremism in Israel
Polls show that there is more extremism in Israel these days and more apprehension over its potential. In an expression of the growing concern, the elections commission, composed of representatives of established parties, barred two fringe groups - one on the right, the other on the left - from running for Parliament. The ban was overturned by the Supreme Court on June 28.
On the right, the Kach Movement, led by Rabbi Meir Kahane, which advocates the expulsion of Arabs from Israel and the West Bank, ran unsuccessfully in 1981 but this year appears to be drawing enough support, according to public opinion polls, to give Rabbi Kahane a seat in Parliament.
On the left, a new Arab-Jewish party called the Arab-Jewish Progressive List advocated a Palestinian state in the West Bank alongside Israel. Because it also endorsed the P.L.O. as the legitimate representative of the Palestinians, it was regarded as too radical by the right wing of the elections commission, which banned it on a vote split along partisan lines.
 'There Is No Peace, And There Is No Unity'
''The capacity of Israeli society to retain its cohesion has, from the very beginning of the state, often been subject to question,'' The Jerusalem Post said in an editorial recently. ''How would a nation, with so many internal divisions, keep itself together?'' The conventional answer held that the external threat bound the society, whose fissures would open wide once the danger of defeat disappeared.
''Reality has long since eclipsed this argument,'' The Jerusalem Post declared. ''There is no peace, and there is no unity. On the contrary, never has the society been threatened from within as it is today.''
This gloomy view was focused on the 25 Jews who, as leaders of Gush Emunim, the religious-nationalist settlement movement that had close support from Likud governments, had been charged with terrorism against Arabs in the West Bank.
The Jerusalem Post echoed the worries of a significant segment of Israelis when it called the phenomenon a ''wholly committed ideological movement which has been driven, by its own momentum, to reject its accountability to the laws of the land.'' It added, ''It marches to the call of a higher imperative and, therefore, fundamentally rejects the legitimacy of the values and constraints etched in the state's democratically promulgated law.'
There is evidence that the intent of Jewish terrorism has been to scare the Arabs away, since some settlers favor their expulsion. Other militant nationalists, however, believe that the Arabs could remain if they accepted Israeli rule. And Defense Minister Moshe Arens, an avid supporter of settlements, has said that if the West Bank is annexed, the Arabs should be given the option of becoming Israeli citizens with voting rights. Opponents of settlement are generally fearful of the political impact of incorporating large numbers of Arabs into what would then be a binational state.
 
Some Sympathy for Terrorism
About 32 percent of Israelis polled in one survey expressed some degree of sympathy for the Jews' terrorists acts, which involved placing bombs on Arab buses, machine-gunning an Arab college campus, bombing Arab mayors and plotting to blow up the Dome of the Rock, one of Islam's holiest shrines.
Other Israelis denounce the Jewish terrorists as no better than Arab terrorists.
But the tone is not the same as the groundswell of outrage over the massacre in 1982 by Israel's Lebanese Christian allies of Palestinian men, women and children in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps of Beirut. Then, even without leadership from the political and religious establishments, broad masses of Israelis demanded that the Government appoint a commission to investigate the Israeli role. Menachem Begin, Prime Minister at the time, had to reverse himself and set up the panel, which ultimately found ''indirect responsibility'' on the part of Israeli officials, including Mr. Begin himself.
Now, as if the sensibilities have been numbed by the years of violence, there is not quite the same shock over the Jewish terrorists.  The Israeli press has chosen the word underground to describe the terrorist band, a word with complex connotations here, reminiscent both of the heroic partisans who fought the Nazis in Europe and of the right-wing Irgun and Stern Gang Jews who used terror tactics against the British before Israel's independence in 1948.
The ensuing debate over the settler- terrorists has been similarly tangled, weaving both self-righteousness and soul-searching into a powerful fabric of guilt and anger. The settlement movement itself is seriously divided between those who support and those who condemn acts of violence against Arabs.
 Some See a Litmus Test For Israeli Society
Even though the state is prosecuting those accused, there remains a resonance of sympathy in the population at large for Jews who are seen to be fighting back, rather than submitting. And many see the settlers as having fought back in response to Arab terrorism against Jews. Some Israelis regard the public response to Jewish terrorism as a litmus test for Israeli society.
''The way in which this terrorist movement will be handled will have profound political and constitutional implications for the shape of this democracy,'' Professor Ezrahi, at Hebrew University, said.
''Explosions of nondemocratic movements and even violence are not unknown in democracies. The issue is how the polity is going to respond to it and how it is going to define it and deal with it. Not only judgments in the court but the public response to it: what is the political definition of the status of violence in Israel, in Israeli democracy?''
Still, he noted, in Israel, as in the United States, there can be ''a significant gap between what people believe according to public opinion polls and actual constitutional practice.'' The gap may exist here not only because Israel is still in a formative stage, he observed, but also by virtue of the population's complexity.
Liberal Israelis have long been worried by the militant messianism of the settlement movement that nurtured the organized terrorism. But few on the left are willing to blame themselves or the entire society, preferring to make a narrowly political condemnation of the right-wing Likud.
 
Traced to Masada
Meron Benvenisti, a former Deputy Mayor of Jerusalem with close ties to the Labor Party, traces the roots of the problem to the early Zionist elevation of Masada as a symbol of a revived Jewish state. Masada was a mountaintop stronghold overlooking the Dead Sea, where Jewish warriors in A.D. 73 killed themselves rather than be captured and enslaved by the Romans.
''We are responsible,'' Mr. Benvenisti said. ''We are responsible for the psyche of this nation, not the Likud. We were in charge for two or three generations. We created the symbol of Masada because it was a secular symbol and one that a Czech or an Italian or an American could understand. We created a secular cult.''
After the 1967 war gave Israel East Jerusalem and its Temple Mount, where the Jewish Temple of Herod was destroyed in A.D. 70, ''the secular myth of Masada was fused together with 2,000 years of Jewish history,'' Mr. Benvenisti said. ''We thought we could take that genie out of the bottle, and we thought that whenever we wanted we could put it back. No sir. Once you create symbols like Masada and the Temple Mount you can't control them.''
He continued: ''The secular people gave up. They themselves understand that the nationalist symbol is liberating. The secular people now feel that they're inadequate.'' Speaking of the religious right, he added: ''These people just took the torch from us. They're now the ones who fight for national values.'' Many of them would make Israel a more religious and less secular state.
 
The Essence of Judaism
Officially, Israel recognizes Moslem control over the Temple Mount and its mosques. But in the last few years, the yearning to remove the mosques and build a Jewish temple there has begun to spread from a few religious fanatics into more established right-wing political groups.
One moderate Arab leader from the West Bank, a man who has watched Israel closely for years and who supports peaceful coexistence, predicts that within two decades Israel will tear down the Dome of the Rock and Al Aksa Mosque - which now stand on the Temple Mount - and build a new Jewish temple on the site.
Thus, for many in the religious community, the debate over the Jewish terrorists now focuses on the essence of Judaism.
''Our image of the Torah personality until not so very long ago was of someone who had in his heart room for tolerance,'' said Rabbi Chaim Pearl, a Conservative rabbi in Jerusalem.
''He was always advised to be one of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace, the sort of person who was inwardly at peace with himself and at peace with his fellow man and is constantly striving to build bridges.''
This contrasts dramatically with the religious settlers, he said.
''Many of them, if not most of them, tend to read the Bible like fundamentalists,'' the rabbi said. ''The promise is there, God gave us the land and this is our stake. It would be a rejection of God's promise, which would be a religious sin, after '67 now that we have the opportunity, to give in to the Arabs to give them a piece of the land back again that was conquered in the '67 war. It is a kind of literalist, fundamentalist reading of the text of the Bible, which, incidentally, is not traditional, is not historical, is against all common sense.''
 'Respect Fellow Humans Created in God's Image'
Rabbi Pearl maintained that the religious settlers distorted the teachings of the first Chief Rabbi of Palestine, whom they cite as their ideological mentor.
''They are misreading and misrepresenting the teaching of Abraham Yitzhak Kook,'' he said.
''He preached love of the land, but not to the extent that the love of the land becomes virtually an idolatry, and that it is the primary value in Jewish life. I don't think that Rabbi Kook would have wedded religion and nationalism to such an extent that these people are prepared to do.''
Similar thoughts were expressed at a crowded meeting recently of Netivot Shalom, a religious peace organization. There, Prof. Aviezer Ravitzky of Hebrew University warned, ''More than education to love the country, education to respect fellow humans created in God's image needs cultivation.''
Shlomo Riskin, rabbi of the West Bank settlement of Efrat, declared himself ''a man who believes in the right of every Jew to live wherever he wants in this country, but also as a Jew who believes that our most important goal in the Torah is peace.'' He said, ''The vital challenge is to be sensitive when the government is in our hands, to be humane when we are strong, to be neither murdered nor murderers.''
Rabbi Hartman sees the problem as much broader than the individuals accused of the terrorist crimes. ''The problem is that they resonate in the hearts of the majority of the population,'' he said.
 
The Romantic Revolution
''The underground people should not be tried,'' he continued. ''What should be tried is all of Judaism. I really believe that the kids of the underground are the finest of the Judaic tradition, of the romantic revolution.''
The trouble is that Israel has not renewed Judaism, he contended.
''I deeply love Judaism, but I can't stand any chauvinism,'' Rabbi Hartman said. ''I don't see chauvinism as grounded in arrogance or conceit. I see it grounded in the fact that the country has not yet found the dignity of its own identity. And therefore the passion has not been the passion of creating a new idea, but it's been creating a new land. Settling the land was the container of the whole passion, not rebuilding Judaism.''
Crucial to the future of Israel, according to Rabbi Hartman, is the question: ''Can we find a myth which is not utopian, which doesn't lead to the great risks that all utopian myths have done? Can there be passionate sobriety?''

Graphic

 
photo of militants (page 4); photo of demonstrators (page 4)


End of Document