A DIPLOMATIC, ECONOMIC, AND MILITARY APPROACH TO TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 12, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 351 words
Body


To the Editor:
In his Op-Ed piece of Dec. 16, George Ball attacks Secretary of State George Shultz for urging the use of force to prevent terrorism. Mr. Ball is misguided on several counts.
It is invidious to compare the use of force by Israel to protect itself against P.L.O. terrorism with the cowardly acts of the terrorists.
It is fallacious to commend Britain for restraint in not bombing Belfast or Dublin in reprisal for I.R.A. terrorism. Belfast is, after all, part of the United Kingdom. And Dublin has never been charged with complicity for I.R.A. terrorism.
And Mr. Ball overlooks all the lessons of modern history in relying exclusively upon collective diplomatic and economic sanctions as the means of preventing international state-supported terrorism.
The former Under Secretary of State fails to address what happens when these options do not work. Efforts have been made to isolate two of the worst offenders, Libya and Iran. Yet this has not stopped either country from condoning or directly participating in terrorist activity.
Let us not so easily dismiss, as Mr. Ball seems to do, the slaughter of 350 marines and diplomatic personnel in Beirut as mere ''lunatic fervor.'' Has he so soon forgotten the death squads of Colonel Qaddafi and their threats on the life of President Reagan and leading members of his Administration, including ambassadors - some of whom have been assassinated in recent years? And what of the recent hijacking in Iran where two Americans were murdered?  Mr. Ball misses the point completely. International state-supported terrorism is a totally new form of warfare against the values of Western civilization and responsible democratic governments everywhere.  It is precisely because America is the leader in setting international standards that it must take the initiative and construct a viable antiterrorist policy. The worldwide proliferation of terrorism demands a comprehensive solution combining diplomatic, economic and military measures.
 
JOHN L. LOEB JR.  St. Moritz, Switzerland, Dec. 26, 1984
The writer was United States Ambassador to Denmark in 1981-83.


End of Document