A dose of rationality on terrorism needed needed needed
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
September 07, 1997, Sunday sunday sunday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P7B P7B P7B
Length: 950 words
Byline: Trudy Rubin Knight-Ridder Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Body


AFTER THURSDAY'S terrorist outrage in Jerusalem, it's easy to get
emotional.
When three suicide bombs rip through the Ben Yehuda pedestrian mall,
where youngsters flirt at McDonald's and oldsters gossip at sidewalk
cafes, calm thoughts about the peace process fly out the window. I've
often stopped on Ben Yehuda Street for coffee. Who can be rational
about corpses under cafe tables, especially when this carnage is
added to the casualties of the July 30 bombs that shattered a
Jerusalem vegetable market? market? market?
But unless someone gets rational about how to stop these horrors,
terrorist bombs will proliferate in Israel. The open warfare between
Israelis and Palestinians that we thought had ended forever will
resume with a vengeance. And the peace process will fade to a memory.
The obvious place to dump your anger is at Yasser Arafat's door. The
Palestinian leader has defied Israeli and American demands that he
crack down on radical Islamists.
Arafat has danced a dangerous minuet with Hamas radicals, alternately
arresting them, releasing them and trying to buy them off. After the
last bombing, Arafat publicly embraced a leading member of the
militant Hamas group, Abdel Aziz Rantisi, and a photo of their kiss
was splashed over America's front pages.
There is no question, none, that Arafat's forces must resume close
security cooperation with Israeli intelligence to try to prevent
future bombings (there are no guarantees in the terrorism prevention
business). Otherwise, the very term "peace process" loses its meaning.
But achieving such cooperation is much more complicated than just
putting the squeeze on Arafat.
For starters, no one is quite sure how to deal with the Islamists.
Israel doesn't know whether the July 30 bombers even came from the
West Bank or Gaza. And Israelis, too, have played strange games with
Hamas in efforts to defang it: The current government let Arafat's
kissing partner, Rantisi, out of jail earlier this year.
If you check your emotions for a moment, you might ask yourself why
Arafat hasn't been eager to help the Israelis. This latest terrorist
attack, like the last one, struck him a blow.
Palestinians were pinning their last hopes for the peace process on
next week's Mideast visit by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright,
her first to the region. This bombing undercuts hopes that Albright
will plead the Palestinian cause with the Israelis. The whole visit -
assuming it still happens - will no doubt focus on Israeli security
concerns.
But Arafat, a flawed leader if there ever was one, is in a trap when
it comes to security cooperation with Israel. That cooperation was a
key part of the 1993 bargain between Israel and the Palestinians. But
it was only half of the deal.
In return, Israel would give back West Bank and Gaza territory that
would eventually become an unarmed Palestinian state. Labor Party
leaders Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres saw Arafat as a peace partner
with whom they shared common objectives.
But since his 1996 election, Benjamin Netanyahu has viewed Arafat as a
bitter adversary. Netanyahu has tried to shape the terms of any
agreement reached at the bargaining table by making changes on the
ground, such as building a controversial new Jewish settlement on the
edge of Jerusalem.
And Netanyahu's vision of a final agreement, as leaked to the press,
offers only about half of the West Bank's land, which he wants broken
up into four disconnected pieces. Such leopard spots could never add
up to a functional economic or political state.
Despite all this, Netanyahu might have kept the partnership going had
he thrown the Palestinians a few economic bones, like permitting them
to open an airport and a port, as called for in the Oslo peace pact.
Instead, he made the Palestinian economy worse.
Netanyahu's response to terrorist attacks like that of July 30 was to
close off already limited access by Palestinian workers to manual jobs
in Israel. He also prevented their goods from reaching markets, and
stopped payments of tax money owed to the Palestinian authority
this, despite repeated warnings from Israeli intelligence that nothing
undercuts Arafat's ability to attack terrorist infrastructure more
than making Palestinian poverty worse.
Netanyahu's policies leave Arafat with no good choices.
If he cracks down on the Islamists, his own people will turn against
him - unless the crackdown is part of the old package deal. If Arafat
acts alone, Palestinians believe that Netanyahu will simply pocket
their concessions without giving anything in return. They ask why
Palestinians should act as Israel's policemen unless both sides are
working once again for common aims.
This impasse may bring about Israeli security experts' worst fear:
that having lost hope in the peace process, the Palestinian police
will start shooting at Israelis. (It already happened once last fall.)
Netanyahu will then send Israeli troops back into heavily armed
Palestinian cities, and Israel will be stuck again with a long-term,
bloody occupation - and more terrorist bombs.
The nightmare doesn't have to happen. Netanyahu could recommit to the
old package deal, pledging a contiguous state in most of the West Bank
and Gaza if Arafat delivered. Israel could signal its bona fides by
freezing the new Har Homa settlement and keeping past commitments for
further West Bank pullbacks; Arafat could renew and redouble security
efforts.
But these things aren't likely to happen. Netanyahu wants Palestinian
security cooperation first and only, and Washington doesn't have the
stomach to challenge him. Here's where I get really emotional:
watching both sides speed toward the abyss with no one ready to apply
the brakes.
Rubin is a columnist and editorial-board member for the Philadelphia
Inquirer.  inquirer.  inquirer.

Load-Date: September 8, 1997


End of Document