A FAILURE OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 10, 1990, SATURDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 320 words
Body


The terrorist attack on an Egyptian tour bus that killed nine Israelis and twoEgyptian guards on Sunday has failed. It failed to divide the Israelis and the Egyptians as they move toward face-to-face negotiations with Palestinians to implement Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's election plan for the occupied territories. It failed to cause Mr. Shamir to lay outraged blame on the Palestine Liberation Organization, as he has in the past under similar circumstances.  It failed to win praise - or even silence - from PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat, who condemned the attack. And it has failed to deter the United States and Egypt from continuing to work to bridge the gaps between the Israelis and the Palestinians to resolve their differences as talks enter ever more delicate phases.  This restraint is the way Israeli, Egyptian and Palestinian officials should respond. They should work together, if possible, as Egyptian and Israeli officials have, to solve the crime. They should do the basic police work necessary to defeat terrorism. They should understand they have a higher goal: to resolve the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians over the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. If they do that, they will have blunted the intent of the terrorist attack, now credited to Islamic Jihad. The extremist terrorist group, operating in the name of Islam, has struck at a spectrum of human targets in the last several years.  Where the terrorists have succeeded is on a more superficial level: Israeli tourism to Egypt dropped markedly, which is not surprising.
Tourism in general may drop in Egypt, but the peace process must go on. As the work continues, more terrorist attacks are likely because radicals abhor the prospect of peace. Having Israelis, Egyptians and Palestinians work together, as they have this week, has shown that fanatics with guns and bombs should have no leverage as talks take shape.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document