A few words to the Dubuque school bus vandal; Whether you realize it or not, this was an act of terrorism against children
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 18, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a4
Length: 311 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


It is not often that we make the assumption that a criminal reads this editorial page. But, today, on the off chance that there is a reader with a guilty conscience, we address that person:
Across loading docks, in boardrooms and at lunch spots Wednesday and Thursday, you were the center of conversation.
What kind of a person would cut the brake lines on school buses, endangering the lives of so many people - especially children? If you have an ax to grind against someone - or perhaps a school or the school district - why put children at risk?
The potential for tragedy caused by your actions was enormous, and the gravity of the tragedy, unthinkable. As it was, you disrupted the lives of thousands of families and deprived students of a day of education. All that is minor compared to the catastrophe you might have caused.
If this were Tel Aviv, we would be calling your actions terrorism. How is rigging school buses for a certain accident different from planting a roadside bomb? Yet even terrorists sometimes have the conscience to warn their potential victims. Sometimes, they bomb buildings when they know they will be empty. Not you. You sat silent.
Perhaps you did not think through the consequences of your actions. Perhaps you did not think about putting hundreds of children's lives at stake. If such an outcome was your intention, you possess an evil that is hard to fathom.
Law enforcement will bring every tool in its crime fighting arsenal to bear on this case. You will be identified. You will experience the consequences. Then you will be thankful that, as bad as your punishment is, it is not as severe as it would have been had your actions resulted in injuries or fatalities.
Editorials reflect the consensus of the Telegraph Herald Editorial Board: Jim Normandin (Publisher), Brian Cooper, Ken Brown, Monty Gilles, Amy Gilligan and Sharon Welborn.

Load-Date: November 18, 2005


End of Document