A French Surrender on Terrorism
The New York Times
January 14, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 341 words
Body


When governments speak of "reasons of state," look for a squalid act that offends common decency. France won't explain why it brushed off a Swiss extradition request and released two Iranians wanted in Switzerland for the murder of an Iranian dissident. According to the right-of-center Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, the reasons are "linked to the national interest." When the Clinton Administration protested this breach of anti-terrorism policy, France's Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, refused to respond because "I am not an employee of President Clinton."
One has to sympathize with Mr. Pasqua, since the likely explanations for France's action are embarrassing. The possibilities are (1) that France has violated the European Charter on extradition to secure a market in Iran for its high-tech exports; (2) that it has yielded to Iranian threats of terrorism, and (3) that the Balladur Government, with an ear to anti-immigrant sentiment, places less value on human life if the victim is a non-European, like the Iranian dissident who was slain in Geneva.
France's release of the suspects in that killing is especially deplorable since their trial was expected to yield new clues about scores of murderous assaults in Germany, Greece, Austria, Turkey, Italy, Norway, Japan and six other countries. Fortunately, Mr. Pasqua and his Prime Minister do not speak for all of France. "Appearing to cave in to the threat of terrorism," Le Monde editorialized, "is certainly not the best way to fight it." The opposition Socialist Party has assailed the Balladur Government's "deplorable inconsistency."
Yet the Socialists practiced the same appeasement in 1990, when President Mitterrand pardoned an assailant who a decade earlier tried to murder former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar. A year later Mr. Bakhtiar's throat was cut. Two Iranian suspects were arrested in Switzerland and extradited to France. A trial is supposed to take place this year -- if Mr. Pasqua does not discover reasons to free those Iranians as well.

Load-Date: January 14, 1994


End of Document