A glimpse of terrorism's 'global reach'
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 1, 2001 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A11
Length: 1001 words
Byline: John Dorschner INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The worldwide terrorist network that President Bush has vowed to eliminate is a vague, ill-defined, shifting target.
"This is a very gray world where these groups intersect," said Dan Byman, a Middle East expert with the RAND Corp. think tank.
Byman and other experts are debating what Bush meant in the Sept. 20 speech in which he laid out his long-term plan. "Our war on terror begins with al-Qaeda," the President said, referring to Osama bin Laden's loose network of terrorist groups, "but it does not end there. It will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped and defeated."
Most experts believe the administration has no intention of launching military campaigns against local guerrilla groups, such as the Shining Path, which operates in Peru, the Basque separatist groups that terrorize Spain, or Colombia's left- and right-wing guerrilla groups.
"I assume the definition of global terrorism means those groups striking out at the United States," says Vincent Cannistraro, a former chief of counterterrorism operations at the CIA.
These are some of the most prominent organizations and nations that sponsor terrorism:
Al Jihad (Holy Struggle) and the Islamic Group. These two terrorist organizations, both closely allied with bin Laden, have largely been stopped, at least for the moment, in their Egyptian homeland. Ayman al-Zawahri, a doctor and leader of al Jihad, spent several years in jail and is believed to be bin Laden's top aide in Afghanistan. The Islamic Group was subject to massive arrests after it killed 58 foreign tourists at Luxor in 1997.
Hezbollah (Party of God). By almost any definition, this Lebanese-based group seems to have "global reach." The State Department report titled "Patterns of Global Terrorism - 2000" says Hezbollah gets its funding from Iran and Syria and has cells in North America, South America, Europe and Asia.
"This is a very, very dangerous group," said L. Paul Bremer, a former State Department antiterrorism chief and chairman of the National Commission on Terrorism.
U.S. court testimony has revealed that Hezbollah training camps were used to train al-Qaeda fighters, and that its chief of operations, Imad Mughniyah, has met with bin Laden. U.S. intelligence officials also believe Hezbollah provided bin Laden's operatives with explosives and training for the suicide attack on the destroyer USS Cole in Yemen, which killed 17 American sailors. Among experts, Mughniyah has a reputation that rivals bin Laden's. He is believed to be responsible for, among other crimes, the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, which killed 241; the hijacking of TWA Flight 847 in Beirut in 1985; the kidnapping of American hostages in Lebanon; the 1992 bombing of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires; and a 1994 attack on a Jewish community center there, in which 65 were killed.
Magnus Ranstorp, a terrorism and Hezbollah expert at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, said the formal Hezbollah organization is focused on southern Lebanon and Palestine. "It has seldom, if ever, targeted defenseless people."
U.S. intelligence officials believe Mughniyah is living in Iran.
Iran. The State Department's most recent terrorism report says Iran "remained the most active state sponsor of terrorism in 2000," with most of its effort going to support Hezbollah and Palestinian groups.
The Iranian government's support for attacks against Americans has subsided since 1994, and President Muhammad Khatami is trying to chart a more moderate course for the Islamic Republic. But elsewhere in the government and in a variety of semiprivate foundations, radical officials and clerics continue to support a number of terrorist groups.
At one time, the Foreign Ministry had its own terrorist operation, known as "Department 210," and some Western intelligence officials believe Iran commissioned the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland to retaliate for the accidental downing of an Iranian jetliner by a U.S. Navy warship.
Iraq. Most experts say they have seen only circumstantial evidence that Iraq helped sponsor the Sept. 11 attacks, but evidence keeps cropping up that makes U.S. officials wonder.
One example: Intelligence officials who requested anonymity said Mohamed Atta, one of the 19 hijackers, met with a low-level Iraqi intelligence agent in Prague before he came to the United States to begin his flight training. But the officials said they weren't sure what happened between the two.
Among experts, Iraq is known primarily for botched terrorist efforts, such as the attempted assassination of former President George Bush in Kuwait. "There's been an almost cartoonish character to the Iraqi attempts," said Larry Johnson, a counterintelligence expert for the State Department in the early 1990s. "Maybe somehow they've gotten very good, but we have not seen them aggressively involved with terrorism."
Iraq also has provided shelter to some notorious Palestinian terrorists, but what worries some administration officials most is Saddam Hussein's pursuit of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, which they fear he might give to a terrorist such as bin Laden to use against the United States or Israel.
Pakistan. America's new ally in the war against the Taliban almost made last year's State Department list of nations that sponsor terrorism.
U.S. intelligence officials said Pakistan's Inter Services Intelligence agency (ISI) has provided technical assistance and security to bin Laden. The Pakistanis installed a security system around one of bin Laden's terrorist training camps, and in return, bin Laden's operatives used it to train members of a Kashmiri terrorist group that is seeking to replace Indian rule of Kashmir with Pakistani control.
Syria. Syria still provides safe haven to Palestinian terrorist groups, such as Hamas, according to the State Department's latest terrorism report. These groups raise money in the United States and Europe, but their targets are all in Israel and Palestine.

Notes

America in the Aftermath

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
MAHMOUD TAWIL, Associated Press
Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, leader of the Hezbollah guerrilla group, speaks during a rally in Beirut. His appearance Friday marked the first anniversary of the Palestinian uprising against Israel. U.S. court testimony has revealed that Hezbollah training camps were used to train fighters in Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda network.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document