A great big waste
Daily News (New York)
October 4, 2012 Thursday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 26
Length: 494 words
Body


The Department of Homeland Security has from its very inception done a bang-up job of wasting money on harebrained anti-terror programs.
Infamously and sometimes at the order of Congress, the agency doled out funding based on political formulas rather than on the threat of attack. New York got shortchanged so that, to cite two examples, North Pole, Alaska, could get $557,400 and a Virginia volunteer fire department could buy a $350,000 custom-made boat.
Now, such boondoggles seem like bargains in the light of a Senate permanent subcommittee on investigations report on DHS' nationwide network of so-called fusion centers. Haven't heard of them? Here's why: They are hardly doing anything worthwhile.
After 9/11, there was widespread recognition that numerous arms of the federal government had failed to share vital information and that state and local authorities were far out of the loop in the war on terror.
Thus was born a program of having Homeland Security finance, on a state-by-state basis, centers in which authorities would keep watch, gather local intelligence and report up to the feds.
However valid that concept was, its pathetically comical execution has been far outpaced by the work of the National Counterterrorism Center in Washington and Joint Terrorism Task Forces in many cities and states.
Secretary Janet Napolitano's department isn't even sure whether it has spent $289 million or $1.4 billion or another amount on the centers since they opened. Nor could her troops account in any serious way for how the money was used.
Subcommittee investigators further found that the centers have a tendency to produce useless or bogus information. For example, a report by the Arizona operation falsely tied Jared Lee Loughner, the gunman who shot Rep. Gabby Giffords, to an anti-government, anti-Semitic group.
The Senate report also cited instances of money wasted grotesquely on SUVs for local officials, 55 wide-screen TVs for "open source" intelligence gathering - meaning watching cable-TV news - and $6,000 laptop computers for a morgue.
Though New York continues to be the main focus of terrorist attempts, with more than 100 terrorism-related convictions since 9/11, the state's fusion center in Latham, near Albany, does not appear to have played a major role in any of them. Put it this way: The operation is not high on the NYPD's source list.
Homeland Security did once cite New York's center for good work. After the NYPD busted would-be Times Square bomber Faisal Shahzad, DHS trumpeted that the office had discovered fresh info about him.
Here it is: The day before he was arrested for parking a car bomb at the Crossroads of the World, Shahzad had locked his keys in his getaway car and called AAA for help. Precisely no one had reason to care.
At $289 million, $1.4 billion or any other rate, Napolitano is blowing a lot of taxpayer money to no effect on anybody's security. She needs to find a real mission for the centers or shut them down.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: October 4, 2012


End of Document