A Hijacking Sanction That Works
The New York Times
June 11, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 304 words
Body


A major move against international terrorism lies buried deep in the sonorous Venice declaration. The leaders of the seven industrial powers pledged to impose aviation sanctions when a country refuses to extradite or punish hijackers.
If the leaders mean what they quietly promise, commercial air flights should cease ''immediately'' to offending states.
That's a lawful weapon with a cutting edge. Unsheathing it helps atone for the failure at Venice to renew last year's call for banning arms sales to states supporting terrorism. Washington violated that policy with its covert arms sales to Iran, which surely explains why Secretary of State Shultz chooses to shrug off the missing renewal.
Iran flagrantly scorns civil aviation treaties adopted at The Hague and Montreal, which call for a total embargo of countries sheltering hijackers. Teheran has not extradited or punished those who hijacked a Kuwaiti airliner to Iran, where two Americans were killed in December 1984. Yet the same mullahs piously invoke international law in protesting the arrest in Britain of an Iranian diplomat charged with shoplifting. High time to enforce international aviation treaties and suspend all flights by European and Japanese carriers to Iran.
The embargo weapon works. At their Bonn meeting in 1978, the seven also adopted a tough statement on aviation sanctions. They then privately threatened enforcement unless Libya ceased sheltering hijackers. At least for a while, Libya stopped. But Europeans have been reluctant to put lucrative air routes at risk, and allied solidarity vanished last year when the Reagan Administration pleaded for air sanctions just before its strike at Tripoli.
An air embargo is easy to impose. It is a widely endorsed penalty that fits the crime. The Venice seven can now show they mean business by using it.


End of Document