A look at issues in debate on CIA tapes; Justice Department, CIA, Congress are conducting inquiries
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 10, 2007 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-14
Length: 431 words
Body


 The U.S. Justice Department and CIA have announced a preliminary investigation into whether CIA officials obstructed justice or engaged in an illegal cover-up by destroying videotapes in 2005 that showed interrogations of two terrorism suspects.
What are the CIA tapes?
 Beginning in 2002, the CIA held terrorism suspects in secret locations and interrogated them, using highly controversial techniques that critics said are tantamount to torture. In at least two cases, the CIA videotaped the interrogations, compiling images of American agents sometimes engaging in harsh treatment of foreign prisoners. One such prisoner was Abu Zubaydah, the CIA's first terrorism detainee. The second has not been identified.
Why did the CIA destroy the tapes?
 The CIA's director, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, told the CIA work force last week that the tapes were destroyed because they were "not relevant to any internal, legislative or judicial inquiries" and, if made public, could identify CIA employees who then would be vulnerable to retaliation by militants.
Was that rationale accepted?
 No. Members of Congress said the tapes had potential value to ongoing congressional proceedings and critics said they could have had a high degree of relevance to the Sept. 11 commission and in terrorism trials. Critics also said the CIA could have obscured any images of Americans in the tapes. In addition, critics said the tapes could have settled questions about whether torture was used on detainees.
Did the CIA provide adequate notice that it was going to destroy the tapes?
 Hayden said the CIA told Congress about the tapes and its plans to destroy them and that it consulted with appropriate agency officials, including the CIA general counsel and inspector general. But lawmakers said the CIA provided only cursory information about the tapes and did not detail the plans to destroy them.
Are the tapes germane to trials of suspected terrorists?
 Possibly. Attorneys in the case of Zacarias Moussaoui want the judge to review the issue. Jose Padilla faces sentencing in the near future. More important, the CIA initially told U.S. prosecutors that no such tapes existed, an assertion provided to judges in sworn legal documents that later had to be corrected.
What happens next?
 The Justice Department and CIA will determine whether a full investigation is warranted. In Congress, members of Intelligence and Judiciary committees will have to decide how deeply to investigate. In courts, judges might be asked to rule whether the CIA acted improperly and whether they might have affected the outcome of trials.

Load-Date: December 15, 2007


End of Document