A Massacre's Political Reverberations
The New York Times
June 16, 2016 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; LETTERS
Length: 685 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Obama Condemns Trump's Response to Florida Attack'' (front page, June 15): President Obama's remarks condemning Donald Trump's hateful rhetoric and dangerous mind-set were a welcome relief and a badly needed reality check to the frenzy that has followed the horrible events in Orlando. As I watched him lay out his case I thought: ''This is real leadership. How grateful I am that he is our president.'' 
  His clarity, compassion, empathy and righteous anger all rang true. May his example reassure those who are uncertain in these troubled times that even in the worst of times there are always hopeful ways forward.
  MAREA SIRIS WEXLER
  Northampton, Mass.
  To the Editor:
  President Obama is correct that Donald Trump's rhetoric is dangerous, but Mr. Trump is right about one thing. After every terrorism act with Islamic roots, Mr. Obama's immediate reaction is to spend more time chastising Republicans and conservatives about what he sees as their demonization of and discrimination against all Muslims than he does denouncing the terrorists themselves.
  Even as Mr. Obama takes great pains not to define Islam with sweeping labels, he stereotypes the American political right as filled with actual and potential discriminators. In historical terms, Mr. Obama implies that Republicans are always just one incident away from rounding up Muslims the way Franklin D. Roosevelt, a Democrat, once rounded up Japanese-Americans, while Mr. Obama himself and his fellow Democrats of today are of course far more enlightened than that.
  It is true, as Mr. Obama says, that some terrorists have used Mr. Trump's words as a recruitment tool, as does the Democratic Party for that matter. One wonders if continually linking Mr. Trump's talk to terrorist recruitment only goads the terrorists into exploiting it further. 
  MARK R. GODBURN
  North Canaan, Conn.
  To the Editor:
  Re ''Old Political Tactic Is Revived: Exploiting Fear, Not Easing It'' (front page, June 15):
  Donald Trump fulminates repeatedly against President Obama's and Hillary Clinton's reluctance to use the terms ''radical Islam'' or ''extremist radical Islam'' in the national conversation on terrorism. We know that for many decades the Ku Klux Klan burned homes and churches and brutalized and murdered black Americans. They often did this under the sign of burning crosses and in the name of Christianity.
  I wonder if Mr. Trump and his supporters feel it would be accurate, politically appropriate and socially helpful to designate the Klan as ''radical Christians'' and their hateful ideology as ''extremist Christianity.''
  ANDREW LEAF
  Rockville Centre, N.Y.
  To the Editor:
  My wife and I, visiting Paris, were watching a CNN panel covering the Orlando tragedy. The final panelist observed that if there were to be a second terrorist attack, it would have ''a profound effect on the presidential election.'' Really?
  Here in Paris there have been two attacks carried out in the last year and a half by highly coordinated, multiple gunmen directly ordered by Islamic terrorist groups. While the French are highly critical of their overwhelmingly unpopular president, François Hollande, blaming him for almost everything else, no one blames him for these attacks.
  Will the actions of a single, likely disturbed, self-radicalized lone wolf actually determine whom we will elect to be our next president?
  MAURICE NELSON Jr.
  Paris
  To the Editor:
  ''How Trump Stands to Gain by Focusing on Gun Control'' (The Upshot, nytimes.com, June 15) should be a warning to Hillary Clinton about treading carefully, as there's a land mine in her path. One possible direction for her would be to talk about gun control only in the related contexts of national security and terrorism.
  Mrs. Clinton needs to reassure law-abiding gun owners that she's on their side when it comes to being strong on national security and protecting Americans against ''the bad guys.'' She needs to lay her own land mines along Mr. Trump's path, letting him walk into the terrorism trap and show that he will make things far worse.
  MARK BLOCK
  Maplewood, N.J.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/16/opinion/the-orlando-massacres-political-reverberations.html

Load-Date: June 16, 2016


End of Document