A Man Under Watch, but Not Under Wraps, in a Terrorism Case
The New York Times
October 9, 2009 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 1267 words
Byline: By KAREN ZRAICK; Majeed Babar contributed reporting.
Body


They are easy to miss at first glance, but they are there, every day. Late Tuesday afternoon, the two law enforcement agents sat in a gray sedan, parked in a bus stop, steps from a seven-story apartment building on 41st Avenue in Flushing, Queens.
  ''I'm happy to see the security, the protection,'' said Hector Castillo, 66, a retiree who has worried a bit since the building where he has lived for 35 years became part of a terrorism investigation. ''I hope God helps the authorities resolve this situation.''
  The ''situation'' for the building, and for the F.B.I. agents outside, is what to make of Naiz Khan, the Afghan immigrant who lives on the fifth floor. He is a former coffee cart vendor, a prospective cabdriver looking for work, and for the past few weeks, a person under constant surveillance. 
  Last month, when Najibullah Zazi, a man the authorities have charged with planning a Qaeda-connected terrorist attack, came to New York, he spent a night at Mr. Khan's apartment. In two subsequent raids of the apartment, the authorities seized a scale, a calculator and nine backpacks, suggestive, they say, of a possible bomb plot.
  Mr. Khan, 26, says it is all a matter of misunderstandings and coincidence: He is not a terrorist, just a man who happened to lend a hand to an old friend. But in addition to the searches, he has been questioned several times by the authorities, and when he traveled to ABC News several days ago for an interview, one of many he has given, the agents trailed him and waited  downstairs, the network reported.
  Additional arrests in the case are expected, the authorities say, perhaps soon, though it is unclear whether investigators consider Mr. Khan a suspect in that regard. If they do, he presents, as Mr. Zazi did, something of an unlikely profile: a voluble man who salutes America in his remarks and who has volunteered several times to talk with the F.B.I. 
  For many Afghan immigrants who live on the tree-lined streets around Masjid Hazrat Abubakr, the Queens mosque that Mr. Zazi attended, this has been a time for tight lips. Attendance at the mosque plummeted after the Joint Terrorism Task Force stormed four apartments in the neighborhood on Sept. 14, searching for evidence of a bomb plot. People in the already insular community expressed fear of being associated with Mr. Zazi.
  Mr. Khan, on the other hand, has stood out in his openness. With the Mets gone, he may be the most interviewed person in Flushing these days.
  ''Our homes have been destroyed,'' he said recently, sitting in the living room of the apartment he shares with four other men. ''If we go back to Afghanistan, Taliban will kill you for being American. In Pakistan, we don't have a good life. Now they say we are terrorists here? Where should we go?''
  Mr. Khan is likely to remain in some kind of limbo while investigators untangle the strands of what officials have called one of the most serious domestic terrorism cases in years. The others generally unfolded as more discreet affairs: Agents were not in full view; people of interest were seldom known and did not routinely appear on television; and there was seldom the same lull as appears to have emerged in this case, which ripened rapidly at the outset when, some federal officials contend, an imam's phone call to Mr. Zazi forced investigators to move quickly.
  Mr. Khan, who said he had not noticed the surveillance, said in an interview that he had postponed an annual three-month trip to visit his wife and two children in Pakistan in case the F.B.I. had further questions. He cannot get his old coffee cart job back -- it was filled in anticipation of his departure -- so he is looking for work and spending a lot of time with reporters. 
  The scale, he tells them, he never saw before. The backpacks, he says, are not evidence of plans to build portable bombs, as in the Madrid and London attacks, but had been given to his uncle, who hoped to take them to relatives in Pakistan.
  The provenance of the bags is far from neat: The uncle, by Mr. Khan's account, got them from a relative, who got them from a friend, who is a business partner of a man who used to be the driver for a Midtown wholesaler, who went out of business with hundreds of extra bags. They were delivered en masse to Lincoln Auto Repair in the Bronx more than a year ago, according to the shop's operator, Jalat Khan.
  ''We were giving them out in the street here,'' said Mr. Khan, who said he was no relation to Naiz Khan. Carlos Mota, 41, who works at the car wash next door, said: ''There were a lot of people there who took bags. They gave me one and I said, 'Give me two more, because I have three kids in Santo Domingo.' ''
  Jalat Khan, who lives in Flushing, said his wife had given some of the backpacks to Naiz Khan's mother, who then gave them to her brother, Faiz Mohammed, who lives with Naiz Khan in the 41st Avenue building. The authorities found them in a closet, packed in a green suitcase.
  Mr. Mohammed and Mr. Khan share the two-bedroom unit with three other men from Pakistan or Afghanistan. Another man, a Pakistani, Mr. Khan said, had been staying on the couch since Sept. 1 but was taken away by immigration authorities after the raids.
  On Tuesday, one roommate chopped vegetables for a salad and tended to a simmering pot of dal, or lentil stew, while Mr. Khan addressed his situation. His roommates are angry that his decision to allow Mr. Zazi to stay with them has brought such upheaval to their lives. 
  SWAT teams with guns drawn swooped in on their home as well as that of Mr. Khan's father and two homes of men whom Mr. Khan said he recognized from the mosque but did not know personally. Mr. Khan's father is still angry about the search: His wife and children were made to stand on the street in the middle of the night for hours as investigators ransacked his home, he said.
  Mr. Khan said he had his own regrets.
  ''I wish he went someplace else,'' he said of Mr. Zazi. ''God knows the truth.''
  Mr. Khan and Mr. Zazi have led somewhat parallel lives, according to their accounts. They each left war-torn eastern Afghanistan as children and migrated to Pakistan -- Mr. Zazi to Peshawar, and Mr. Khan to Karachi, 700 miles south. Both arrived in Queens as teenagers, where they met at Flushing High School. They later dropped out of school and went on to run coffee carts in Manhattan. They kept in touch intermittently as they entered adulthood, running into each other at the mosque or in the neighborhood. Mr. Zazi lent Mr. Khan $2,000 in 2007, Mr. Khan said, for a trip to Karachi to visit his wife.
  They had spoken only once, Mr. Khan said, since Mr. Zazi moved to Colorado in January. Then Mr. Zazi showed up at the mosque on the evening of Sept. 10, needing a place to stay.
  When he came to New York, the authorities say, Mr. Zazi had already experimented with making homemade explosives that he probably learned to manufacture during terrorism training in Pakistan in 2008. Mr. Khan said he was in Pakistan for some of the same weeks that year. But he said he went to visit his family and never saw Mr. Zazi. He produced a passport showing his arrival in Karachi in November, several months after Mr. Zazi.
  The two men did fly home to New York on the same day, Jan. 15, 2009, but not on the same flight, Mr. Khan said. Mr. Khan said he flew from Karachi on Emirates, with a connecting flight in Dubai. Mr. Zazi flew from Peshawar on Qatar Airlines. 
  ''I told the F.B.I., I said, 'Please, help me bring my wife here,' '' Mr. Khan said. '' 'And then I won't need to go to Pakistan anymore.' ''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Naiz Khan of Queens has been questioned about his connections to Najibullah Zazi, below, a fellow Afghan immigrant whom the authorities have charged with planning a terrorist attack. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BARTON SILVERMAN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
  Mr. Zazi visited Mr. Khan last month in Flushing. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC PISCOTTY/AFP--GETTY IMAGES)      

Load-Date: October 9, 2009


End of Document