A Million Protesters in Spain Denounce Terrorism's Return
The New York Times
January 24, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 601 words
Byline: By The New York Times 
Dateline: MADRID, Jan. 23
Body


A million people marched here today in a protest against the Basque separatist group E.T.A., government officials said, two days after the government blamed the rebels for a bombing that killed an army officer and appeared to reignite separatist violence after a lull of 18 months.
Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar and three former prime ministers led the long march that capped a weekend of demonstrations nationwide after two car bombings on Friday in Madrid. No one has claimed responsibility for the attacks.
The weekend protests almost uniformly scorned the rebels, underscoring the popular anger and fear touched off by the resumption of terrorism, apparently by the Basque group. But a pro-rebel march attracted 10,000 people on Saturday in the Basque city of Pamplona.
The government blames the rebels for causing 800 deaths in their 31-year struggle for Basque independence. Mr. Aznar said today that the fight against the rebels "will be difficult, tough and long."
But, he added, "although we'll suffer, we'll end up winning."
The government and rebels have blamed each other for failing to negotiate a lasting peace during the rebels' 14-month unilateral cease-fire. The Basque group called off the cease-fire late last year, raising fears of renewed violence.
A poll published today in the Madrid newspaper Diario 16 found that half of the 400 people surveyed wanted new peace talks, while 29 percent said that the police alone could defeat terrorism.
The march in Madrid, behind a banner that read "For Peace and Liberty. No to Terrorism," was the largest in the capital since July 1997, when an estimated 1.5 million people demanded an end to violence after the rebels killed a Basque town councilman.
E.T.A., whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom, had not made a fatal attack since June 1998.
The first of the two car bombs last Friday killed a lieutenant colonel in the Spanish army, Pedro Antonio Blanco Garcia, 47.
The Interior Ministry today distributed photographs of two suspected rebels -- young men with close-cropped black hair -- who were reportedly seen at the site of the bombings.
Speaking in St. Peter's Square in Rome today, Pope John Paul II said, "I wish to express my deep pain over the news of the recent terrorist attack," in Spain, news agencies reported. The Vatican has previously condemned Basque violence.
Mr. Aznar marched today next to his opponent in the March 12 general elections, the Socialist opposition leader, Joaquin Almunia. They said little to each other, but they have agreed that stopping separatist violence should transcend politics.
But the political fallout from the bombs on Friday continued in the northern Basque region, where the leader of the moderate Basque Nationalist Party, Xabier Arzalluz, accused the Madrid-based national parties of unfairly blaming him for the fatal attack.
"It seems as if we ourselves placed the bomb," Mr. Arzalluz complained, after his party was criticized for merely suspending on Friday, and not fully breaking, its parliamentary deal for the support of a leftist Basque coalition, Euskal Herritarrok, that is widely considered to be the political wing of the rebels.
The march in central Madrid was so long that thousands of protesters reached the official destination in the Puerta del Sol square more than an hour after the political leaders had already left, after issuing a statement condemning the rebels.
"I'm not discouraged," said Esther Fernandez, 25, a Madrid lawyer who has been to many protests against the rebels. "You have to have the desire and hope that this violence will end."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: A million people rallied yesterday in Madrid to protest a fatal bombing on Friday. The government blamed Basque separatists for the attack. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: January 24, 2000


End of Document