A Muslim Marine's testimony; There's nothing Islamic in this act of terrorism in Chattanooga, Tenn.
USA TODAY
July 20, 2015 Monday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 653 words
Byline: Tayyib M. Rashid
Body


I still remember why I enlisted in the Marine Corps. I wanted to be part of a brotherhood of men dedicated to the service of our country. I was 19 and in college. I was a good student -- but I knew this wasn't going to cut it.
At the time, many told me it was a foolish decision, but in January 1997 I enlisted anyhow. My father, who is a Muslim missionary and theologian, fully supported and approved of my decision. As an Islamic scholar, he well knew prophet Mohammed's commandment to all Muslims, "Loyalty to your country of residence is part of your faith."
Thus, in enlisting in the Marines, I was fulfilling my obligations as a U.S. citizen, and as a Muslim. I felt empowered knowing that no contradiction existed between the two.
Today, I am an honorably discharged Marine who proudly served five years active duty in the Marine Corps. Serving my country remains among the highest honors I've been blessed with. Thus, I was that much more horrified, angered and saddened at the loss of life of four Marines and a Navy sailor in Chattanooga, Tenn.
Sick and twisted
This senseless loss of life became even more incomprehensible when I learned that the alleged shooter appears to have been a Muslim.  But I see nothing Islamic in this act of terrorism. I see only the actions of a sick and twisted individual. No difference exists between the Chattanooga terrorist;  Dylann Roof, who allegedly killed nine innocent black Americans at a church in Charleston, S.C.; or James Holmes, the terrorist convicted of murdering 12 people in a Colorado movie theater several years ago.
And as I reflect on the Chattanooga attack, I can only wonder how anyone who is Muslim, especially one living in the United States, can even think about such despicable acts? Islam leaves no room for terrorism and only permits fighting in self-defense to protect freedom of religion for all people. What this terrorist committed represents his own personal barbarity -- nothing else.
In fact, individuals like this shooter have no religion. Islam holds human life sacred at the highest level. The Holy Quran has likened the killing of an innocent life to the killing of all mankind. Rather than holding loyalty to country as part of his faith, this terrorist engaged in violence against the very people sworn to protect him from harm. He attacked my fellow human beings, my fellow Americans, my fellow Marine and Navy brothers.
What Quran teaches
While this terrorist might have been inspired by the so-called Islamic State, I follow the true Khalifa of Islam, His Holiness Mirza Masroor Ahmad, who loudly declares, "From cover to cover, the Holy Quran teaches love, affection, peace, reconciliation and the spirit of sacrifice. Hence, if anybody portrays Islam as an extreme and violent religion filled with teachings of bloodshed, then such a portrayal has no link with the real Islam."
My message today is not to non-Muslims living in America. They know where I stand, and I still have my Marine Corps dress blues to prove it. My message is to my fellow American Muslims. I say to you that we know better than anyone that the Chattanooga terrorist does not represent any of us. We know the frustration we feel when people label us for his act of terrorism. I say to you to keep your head up and walk proud. Continue to follow prophet Mohammed's example of compassion, service to humanity and love for all, hatred for none.
And I have one final message. That is, my thoughts and prayers go out to the Marine and Navy brothers' family members and friends. This indeed is a sad day for our country. While I mourn, I am also proud and honored to be associated with the same brotherhood as those brave souls who departed from us today. And I'm reminded once more why I joined the Marines.
Semper Fi.
Sergeant Tayyib M. Rashid served in the United States Marine Corps from 1997 to 2002, when he was honorably discharged. Follow him on Twitter @MuslimMarine. 

Graphic

 
photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images

Load-Date: July 20, 2015


End of Document