A National Anti-Voting Movement
The New York Times 
October 25, 2018 Thursday 09:34 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 435 words
Byline: David Leonhardt
Highlight: Also: Making sense of the terrorism directed at top Democrats.
Body


This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.
First, I try to avoid drawing immediate conclusions from acts of terrorism, like the bombs mailed to Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, other prominent Democrats and CNN. It’s unclear who sent them or what the motive was. 
But I will say this: President Trump and his allies continue to talk about violence in completely irresponsible ways. That will remain true regardless of what we eventually learn about this incident. Jeff Zucker, the president of CNN, made this point in a statement yesterday. My colleagues            Charles Blow and            Bret Stephens have also made it.
Some of Trump’s allies were quick to claim that the attacks were “false flag” operations, carried out by Democrats. “It’s obviously fine to withhold judgment on the attacks until law enforcement addresses more of the public’s questions,” writes Tiana Lowe in the conservative Washington Examiner. But “the rush from some on the Right to use a lack of facts to justify promulgating ridiculous conspiracy theories is both fallacious and irresponsible.”
[Listen to “The Argument” podcast every Thursday morning with Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David Leonhardt.]
Voter suppression. Republicans are engaged in an aggressive effort to prevent Americans from voting:
I find this anti-voter campaign to be an outrageous injustice, and it’s the main subject of the new episode of our podcast, “The Argument.” During the conversation, Michelle Goldberg puts voter suppression into the larger context of            “minority rule,” and Ross Douthat argues that progressives like Michelle and me are overly focused on voting rules. The Democrats’ bigger problem, he says, is persuading people to want to vote for them. 
Next week’s episode will be our last one before the midterm elections. Send us suggestions for  topics at argument@nytimes.com
For more on voter suppression, read Daniel Nichanian on NBC’s website; read            HuffPost’s Sam Levine; listen to            Terry Gross interview Ari Berman; listen to            “The Daily” episode on voting in Georgia; or read            Vann R. Newkirk II in The Atlantic. “Proactive national measures to prevent disenfranchisement have all but been eliminated in the past five years,” Newkirk writes. “The effort needed to reestablish a guarantee of voting rights and put the disenfranchisement genie back in the bottle will be massive.”
PHOTO: Republicans have purged voters from the rolls, enacted voter identification laws and closed polling places in states across the country. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Justin Sullivan/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 26, 2018


End of Document