A NATION CHALLENGED: THE F.B.I.; From a Makeshift Base, Trying to Run a Smooth Terrorism Investigation
 The New York Times
September 24, 2001 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 897 words
Byline:  By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM 
Body


Hours after hijacked jetliners hit the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the New York F.B.I. office in Lower Manhattan, home base to the bureau's most experienced terrorism investigators and its New York-area command center, was out of action.
     The collapse of the trade center towers disabled telephone service in the area, making the two Lower Manhattan buildings that house the F.B.I.'s New York office largely useless, officials said. At the same time, officials feared the buildings, including 26 Federal Plaza, eight blocks from the trade center, could become targets. 
 Almost immediately, the New York office began relocating. By nightfall, a Manhattan garage where the F.B.I. stores and services its cars had been transformed into a makeshift command post, averting what could have been a disabling blow in crucial, early days of the inquiry.
Within 48 hours, more than 300 phone lines -- routed through a satellite hookup -- had been installed in the blocklong garage by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and laptop computers were up and running, officials said.
"Considering when the event occurred and losing everything down at 26 Federal Plaza, this became a pretty good alternative," said Barry W. Mawn, the assistant F.B.I. director heading the bureau's New York office and overseeing the investigation in the city. But Mr. Mawn, who supervised the Joint Terrorist Task Force when it was formed 20 years ago, acknowledged, "We've had a lot of things to overcome." The task force is a cooperative effort between the F.B.I. and the New York Police Department.
The garage quickly became the hub from which Mr. Mawn and federal prosecutors, working beneath a latticework of temporary lighting and telephone and electrical lines suspended from the ceiling, coordinated the work of nearly 2,000 investigators. It has become home to officials from more than two dozen federal, state and local agencies, including officials from the C.I.A.
The cavernous space is filled with a constant roaring din from large fans to move the still air and hundreds of investigators and supervisors talking on telephones. Nothing but cream-colored concrete walls absorbs the noise. Men and women sit shoulder to shoulder on tan or cranberry-colored folding chairs, hunched over phones, along both sides of eight rows of folding tables, some stretched end-to-end across roughly 50 yards. The tabletops are covered with paper, boxes of files, computers and fax machines.
Several agencies have put up makeshift signs over their work stations. The National Transportation and Safety Board's initials are scrawled on a piece of yellow paper taped to a hanging wire. The Immigration and Naturalization Service has penned its letters a white page, and a manila file folder spread open bears the abbreviation N.Y.P.D. H.I.D.T.A, for the city Police Department's High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area task force. On a back a wall, side by side, hang an American flag and a black flag bearing the terrorism task force's logo, a cloaked spy with a bomb, its fuse burning, held in one hand and a gun in the other.
The basic investigative work in the case -- covering leads, in F.B.I. parlance -- has been coordinated from the garage, officials said. But during most of the last two weeks, the agents and detectives actually doing the legwork were dispatched from another set of makeshift quarters at the Intrepid Sea Air and Space Museum, the former aircraft carrier permanently docked on the West Side, and other satellite F.B.I. offices in the area. Late last week, the agents working from the Intrepid were also moved into the garage, where they are dispatched from a separate floor from the command center.
The terrorism task force, which is at the forefront of the investigation, includes F.B.I. agents and detectives and investigators from nearly a dozen other law enforcement agencies who have worked together on the major investigations, including the 1998 bombings of two American Embassies in East Africa. The team also conducted the inquiry that led to the conspiracy indictment of Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who is the prime suspect in the trade center and Pentagon attacks.
Key federal prosecutors from the Southern District of New York, including United States attorney Mary Jo White, and Alan Vinegrad, the acting United States attorney in Brooklyn, and prosecutors from their offices have also been working out of the garage, writing court papers, seeking search warrants and conferring with investigators, officials said.
The current investigation, code-named PENTTBOM, has reunited the team of Manhattan-based prosecutors from Ms. White's office who handled major cases in the 1990's. Patrick J. Fitzgerald, who recently left New York to become interim United States attorney in Chicago, has been working on the case in Washington with David N. Kelly, another senior terrorism prosecutor from New York.
In the garage, the business of repairing cars seems to have ground to a halt, with disabled and damaged vehicles parked at one end. But one, which was apparently outside the trade center when the planes hit, was a striking reminder of the lives lost. 
Caked on the car's trunk in a layer of ash and concrete dust, was a blank trading slip from the brokerage firm Cantor Fitzgerald, which lost more than 700 workers. The slip was intact but for a wrinkle and a few small holes. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document