A NATION CHALLENGED: DOMESTIC SECURITY; Color-Coded System Created To Rate Threat of Terrorism
 The New York Times
March 13, 2002 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 807 words
Byline:  By PHILIP SHENON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 12  
Body


The White House unveiled a system of color-coded rankings today to warn the nation of terrorist threats and said that the current alert level was yellow, meaning the threat of new terrorist attacks was "significant" but not "severe."
     The ranking system was developed in response to complaints from state and local law enforcement agencies that the public had been confused -- and often terrified -- by a series of vague terrorism alerts issued by the Bush administration after the Sept. 11 attacks. 
 Under the ranking system, the highest-level warning is red, which signifies a "severe risk" of a terrorist attack, followed by orange, yellow, blue and green.
In announcing the new system, Tom Ridge, the White House director of homeland security, said he hoped the national threat level could someday be reduced to green, which under the White House definition would mean there was a low chance of terrorist strikes.
"But I certainly think it's years away," Mr. Ridge said, adding that the United States faced the "permanent potential of terrorist attack" by the Qaeda network and other groups.
The new five-level warning system was developed after consultations with state and local governments, and with police chiefs around the country.
The International Association of Chiefs of Police, which represents major police departments, welcomed the system, saying it would bring some order to their efforts to respond to terrorist threats and to advise the public on how to respond.
"This is a good, simplistic method to get the message through," said the group's president, William B. Berger, who is the chief of police in North Miami Beach.
On Capitol Hill, the ranking Democrat on the House intelligence subcommittee on terrorism and homeland security, Representative Jane Harman of California, praised the new warning system but said the federal government still needed to do more to share intelligence about terrorism threats with local police.
"Homeland security is not as simple as red light, green light," Ms. Harman said. "The federal government must guide first responders so they know what to look for and what to do."
Under the new Homeland Security Advisory System, a red alert would mean there was a "severe risk" of attack and that immediate shutdown of nuclear power plants and airports might be required.
An orange alert would signify a "high risk" of attack. A yellow alert would reflect an "elevated condition" and "significant risk" of a terrorist strike. Blue would signify a "general risk" of terrorism.
The White House said Attorney General John Ashcroft, in cooperation with Mr. Ridge's office, would make the final decision on where to set threat levels, which can be applied nationally, locally or to particular industries or facilities. Changes to the threat levels are to be made public immediately.
Mr. Ridge said the current alert level was yellow because of evidence suggesting that Al Qaeda was trying to regroup after the American attacks on Afghanistan and the likelihood that terrorists trained by Al Qaeda were still in the United States. 
"Because of all the information that we know, we believe that we are in an elevated level -- we have a significant risk of terrorist attacks," Mr. Ridge said in a meeting with reporters.
The administration had been criticized on Capitol Hill and by state and local police agencies for the vagueness of the terrorism warnings issued since Sept. 11. The warnings, the critics said, have tended to create panic while doing little to inform the public of the degree of the perceived threat and the appropriate response.
In early January, for example, the F.B.I. told law enforcement agencies around the country that they needed to remain on high alert for terrorism at least through the first week of March. But the warning to 18,000 police agencies did not identify any specific threat, which the administration said was based on general intelligence information of a continuing terrorist threat.
Mr. Ridge said threat levels would be set on the basis of information suggesting new attacks. 
"A number of factors will be used to analyze the threat," he said. "Is it credible? Is it a credible source? Have we been able to corroborate this threat? Is it specific as to time or place or method of attack? What are the consequences if the attack is carried out?"
Mr. Berger, of the police chiefs' association, said the new system would function like the hurricane warning system used in Florida, with color-coded flags to alert the public to the shifting threat.
The new system would allow local police departments and disaster-relief agencies to establish plans for how to respond to each shift in the alert level.
"It would be automatic," Mr. Berger said. "You'd automatically respond to the new alert. I think it's a very workable system. Law enforcement certainly wanted more specificity."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Tom Ridge explained the terrorism advisory system yesterday. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) Chart: "IN BRIEF: Levels of Threat"The five levels of terrorism alerts outlined by the Office of Homeland Security and the recommended responses by government and the private sector under each level: GREENRisk of terrorist attack: LOW Refine and exercise preplanned protective measures.Ensure that emergency personnel receive training on protective measures.Regularly assess facilities for vulnerabilities and take measures to address them. BLUERisk of terrorist attack: GENERAL Check communications with designated emergency response or command locations.Review and update emergency response procedures.Provide the public with necessary information. YELLOWRisk of terrorist attack: SIGNIFICANT Increase surveillance of critical locations.Coordinate emergency plans with nearby jurisdictions.Assess further refinement of protective measures.Implement contingency and emergency response plans as appropriate. ORANGERisk of terrorist attack: HIGH Coordinate necessary security efforts with armed forces or law enforcement agencies.Take additional precautions at public events.Prepare to work at an alternate site or with a dispersed work force.Restrict access to essential personnel only. REDRisk of terrorist attack: SEVERE Assign emergency response personnel and pre-position emergency response teams.Monitor, redirect or constrain transportation systems.Close public and government facilitiesIncrease or redirect personnel to address critical emergency needs.      

Load-Date: March 13, 2002


End of Document