A NATION CHALLENGED: LESSONS; Terrorism Widow Sees Frightening Cycle
 The New York Times
October 18, 2001 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 788 words
Byline:  By FRANCIS X. CLINES 
Series: AMERICAN JOURNAL: Miami 
Dateline: MIAMI, Oct. 17  
Body


The children were only 3, 4 and 6 years old when they began shaping the most harrowing questions: What is terrorism, and how was it able to take their father away forever?
     "Terrorism was hard for us to fathom as adults, so how could I possibly explain it to the kids?" asked Victoria Cummock, looking back to the dreadful answers she had to try more than a decade ago. Mrs. Cummock lost her husband, John, and her children lost their father when a bomb blew apart Pan Am Flight 103 above Scotland on Dec. 21, 1988. Mr. Cummock, one of 270 victims, was making a surprise return from London a day early for his daughter's birthday. 
 In the years since, Mrs. Cummock has learned better than most Americans what terrorism is.
"Oh yes I have," she said. "On Sept. 12, the day after the terrorists crashed into the World Trade Center, I made sure I got a doctor's prescription for Cipro for me and my kids."
Mrs. Cummock, years ahead of most of the rest of the nation in her anxiety about bioterrorism, first heard of Cipro, the anthrax antibiotic, only months after Pan Am 103 exploded. Then, grief-stricken but resolved, she began evolving into the nonstop watchdog, lay expert and gadfly on airline passenger security that she is now. Waiting her turn to testify at a wearying Capitol Hill hearing in 1989, she listened closely when scientists warned of the variety of other "venues" easily available to terrorists, germ warfare among them.
"This time, the terrorism cost me a friend, Sonia Puopolo, aboard Flight 11," Mrs. Cummock said, referring to one of the two planes that crashed into the World Trade Center. 
"It's all heartbreaking," she said, surveying the state of anxiety and unpreparedness she finds gripping the nation 13 years after Pan Am 103. Beyond the panicky search for Cipro, public reaction amid the government's fresh hunt for terrorists is most palpable here in Florida in the tripling of gun license applications in the last month; citizens are reaching for something more personal than government reassurances.
"It's as if there weren't enough Americans killed, there weren't enough voices," she says of Pan Am 103 and the blue-ribbon study recommendations on terrorism that were gathering dust on Sept. 11. "People were able to say that was something that happened somewhere else to somebody else. We did not have the courage or the will to hear what those voices were trying to say."
Asked if enough Americans, a critical mass, were killed this time, Mrs. Cummock paused as she worked at home, seated before a wall of photos of disaster inquiries she has taken part in. She noted how quickly the government "cut a $15 billion bailout check" for the airlines, while the costs of extra safety for the public are now being debated far more slowly and tightfistedly, in her view. 
"What scares me this time is we're going through the same rhetoric, the same process," she said, recalling furious government denunciations of "evildoers" back in 1988, too.
Mrs. Cummock is a woman who prides herself on her management skills as a general contractor and interior designer. But she describes a cycle of disappointment in her special field of expertise after participating as a family survivor representative on a series of government disaster and terrorism commissions.
The best security ideas across the years, from screening baggage for explosives to professionalizing airport guards, eventually got shelved, she noted. Initial national resolve after disaster dissipates, she said, in a complex Washington routine of intense lobbying and artful procrastination. Eventually, fresh sensations distract the nation.
Can that possibly happen this time, after the obliteration of thousands of lives? 
"My nephew, Rob Jones, is an ambulance driver in New York still working 18-hour shifts down at the trade center," Mrs. Cummock said. "He calls me all the time and he still can't believe it. He goes in after the cranes gingerly hoist bits of debris and he picks up body parts. 
"I'm very proud of him," she said.
Mrs. Cummock said she "got back 40 percent of John's remains" after Pan Am 103. She firmly counsels families of the latest victims that, if they are ever to recover, they must demand the bluntest of truth from officials, not "make it nice" messages about heroism and patriotism.
"Rob asks why, after all that happened to Uncle John and all the others murdered by terrorists, things don't change," she said.
"I said things could have changed if we had the courage and will of the country," the terrorism widow insisted, brandishing the Cipro tablets she now carries in her purse.

Articles in this series are reporting on places around the country as they adapt to life after the terror attacks and to the prospect of war.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Victoria Cummock has learned a lot about terrorism since 1988, when her husband was killed in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. The flag she holds was given to her by the State Department. (Alex Quesada/Matrix, for The New York Times) 

Load-Date: October 18, 2001


End of Document