A NATION AT WAR: DETAINEES; Denver Judge Releases 2 Men Investigated for Terrorism Ties
 The New York Times
April 10, 2003 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 675 words
Byline:  By CHRISTOPHER DREW
Body


In a rebuff to the government's detainment policies, a federal district judge in Denver has ordered the release of two Pakistanis held on immigration-related charges while the F.B.I. investigates them for possible links to terrorism.
     The judge, Lewis T. Babcock, ruled on Tuesday that the government had failed to show that the men, Irfan Kamran and Sajjad Naseer, were dangerous. Judge Babcock also played down the F.B.I.'s concerns that Mr. Naseer had briefly attended a paramilitary training camp in Pakistan run by a terrorist group called the Army of Muhammad. 
 Noting that an F.B.I. agent testified that Mr. Naseer had told him that he left the camp after four or five days, the judge said, "It has the ring of credibility to me that he was trying it out, didn't like it and left it."
The ruling stands in contrast with the recent case in Lackawanna, N.Y., in which six men were charged with attending a Qaeda camp in Afghanistan. Four of them have pleaded guilty to charges that attending the camp was tantamount to providing "material support" to a terrorist group, and they have agreed to sentences of 8 to 10 years in jail.
Prosecutors in Denver said at a hearing on Tuesday that Mr. Naseer could be open to the same charge. They also said they were investigating allegations from unidentified sources that Mr. Kamran, a naturalized American citizen, and Mr. Naseer, who is a legal resident, might have broader links to terrorism.
Jeff Dorschner, a spokesman for the United States Attorney's Office in Denver, said yesterday that the authorities were discussing whether to appeal the judge's ruling that the men were entitled to bail.
But Donald Knight, Mr. Kamran's lawyer, said yesterday that like many immigrants who have been detained since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, the men were the victims of overzealous investigators.
Mr. Knight also said that the secrecy surrounding the case made it difficult to respond to some of the allegations, which the F.B.I. says have come only from confidential informers. "If they wanted to make a book out of this, it would be a best seller -- in the fiction aisle," Mr. Knight said.
Authorities said the case began in mid-March with criminal charges that Mr. Kamran, Mr. Naseer and four others had conspired to harbor an illegal alien by lying about his identity. Mr. Naseer's lawyer, David Lane, called those charges absurd, and Mr. Knight said yesterday that Mr. Kamran did not tell any lies.
One man in the conspiracy case, Haroon Rashid, was ordered held without bail after the authorities testified that he had claimed to have fought for the Taliban and Al Qaeda.
A federal magistrate granted bail to the other five. But the government appealed that decision for Mr. Kamran and Mr. Naseer, prompting Tuesday's hearing. 
At the hearing, an F.B.I. agent, Michael Castro, testified that in August Mr. Kamran told a "confidential source" that he had made plans to go to Pakistan and Afghanistan to join Al Qaeda and fight the United States. 
Mr. Knight, the defense lawyer, countered that Mr. Kamran did not make the trip and added that he "had no connections whatsoever with any terrorist organization of any kind."
Mr. Castro testified that Mr. Naseer had attended the training camp run by the Army of Mohammed in the summer of 2001. He quoted Mr. Naseer as saying that he had left the camp because he thought the activities were too strenuous.
Mr. Lane has said that at that time, the Army of Mohammed had not yet been listed as a terrorist group by the United States. And while Washington now says that the group has been linked to Al Qaeda, Mr. Lane said the group had been focused on battling India for control of Kashmir rather than on opposing the United States.
The government and Mr. Naseer are so at odds that they have even put forth different versions of how his brother died. The authorities have maintained that he was killed fighting American-backed forces in Afghanistan. But The Denver Post has quoted Mr. Naseer's wife as saying that his brother drowned at a family picnic in Pakistan. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 10, 2003


End of Document