A NATION AT WAR: THE COURTS; Chilling Testimony and Questions About the Man Offering It at a Detroit Terrorism Trial
 The New York Times
April 12, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 941 words
Byline:  By DANNY HAKIM 
Dateline: DETROIT, April 11  
Body


Three weeks into the trial of four men accused of plotting terror attacks, the testimony has veered from chilling to confusing. 
     The government's main witness, Youssef Hmimssa, 32, a Moroccan who said he once agreed to provide the four defendants with fraudulent identification documents, has described the men as an ambitious terror cell with plans that included obtaining Stinger missiles to shoot down commercial airplanes and staging attacks in Las Vegas, which he said one defendant, Ahmed Hannan, called the "city of Satan." 
 Mr. Hmimssa said that the defendants communicated in a code that substituted members of the 1986 Moroccan national soccer team for addresses, calling-card numbers and phone numbers, and that they wanted to survey O'Hare airport in Chicago and the Detroit Metropolitan Airport for potential security weaknesses.
One defendant, Abdel-Ilah Elmardoudi, told him that "pretty soon, what is happening in West Bank and Gaza is going to happen here," Mr. Hmimssa said. 
But defense lawyers, who began their cross-examination of Mr. Hmimssa today, emphasized his dislike of the defendants -- he referred to some of them with epithets in his cellphone directory -- as well as his itinerant criminal past. Mr. Hmimssa testified that he had changed aliases and countries so many times that he did not consider giving fraudulent identities to court officers to be lying.
"None of them are a lie to me," he said of his aliases, which covered nationalities as diverse as Puerto Rican and Palestinian with names like Patrick Vuillaume and Edgardo Colon. Last week, Mr. Hmimssa pleaded guilty to 10 felony charges, including credit card fraud and possessing fraudulent documents, and will spend up to 46 months in prison. 
"All of the facts are going to come from a man who has never told the truth in his life," said William Swor, the lawyer for Mr. Elmardoudi, in his opening statement last month, adding that "the evidence is conjured or bought and paid for." 
While other terrorism suspects, like Zacarias Moussaoui, have received more publicity, the Detroit trial is the first significant courtroom test for the Justice Department since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. 
Four men have been charged with document fraud and conspiracy to provide material support of terrorism: Farouk Ali-Haimoud, 22, of Algeria, and three Moroccans, Karim Koubriti, 24, Mr. Hannan, 34, and Mr. Elmardoudi, 37. 
"This is not a case about young Arab males coming to the U.S. to live the American dream," said Richard Convertino, an assistant United States attorney, in his opening statement. "It is not about being in the wrong place at the wrong time. This is a case about dedication, deceit and deception."
The government has described Mr. Elmardoudi, who lived in Chicago and previously in Minneapolis, as the leader of the cell. He is the only defendant who listens without a translation headset. According to court records, he has had numerous aliases and a history of trouble with the law, including arrests for domestic assault and for stealing telephone card numbers from people using pay phones at the Minneapolis airport. Officials said Mr. Elmardoudi was carrying $83,000 when he was arrested last November in North Carolina.
The other three men were detained after being found in an apartment in Dearborn, Mich., that federal agents raided on Sept. 17, 2001. The apartment was thought to have been occupied by someone on the government's terror watch list, but agents instead found the three men and a cache of forged passports and identification papers, more than 100 audiotapes preaching extremist views or jihad and a day planner.
Aside from Mr. Hmimssa's testimony, the first three weeks of the trial have focused on the planner, which contains crude sketches with Arabic inscriptions. Government witnesses have testified that one of the sketches represents a United States air base in Incirlik, Turkey. The planner also contained sketches of a military hospital in Amman, Jordan, government witnesses testified, and notes referring to the "American foreign minister."
Lt. Col. Mary E. Peterson, an Air Force counterterrorism expert who is stationed at the Turkish base, said of one of the sketches that "it was apparent to me upon looking at it that it was depicting airfield operations."
"The senior officer who oversees all flight operations actually made modifications to all departures and arrivals as a result of receiving this," Colonel Peterson said. Another witness, a Turkish official, said that a man using one of Mr. Elmardoudi's aliases had been in Turkey in 1996. 
But defense lawyers then compared a part of the map that Ms. Peterson had suggested was a hangar with a map of the Middle East, and the two appeared to be similar. 
Colonel Peterson said that "there are similarities here and some that cause me concern," referring only to that particular part of the map, but said she still believed it was a hangar. Defense lawyers have also tried to suggest that the planner belonged to a mentally ill Yemeni man, now dead.
Mr. Hmimssa testified that the defendants praised Osama bin Laden and Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who was convicted in the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center. The three Dearborn-based defendants worked at the Detroit airport, and Mr. Hmimssa said that Mr. Koubriti, who worked at an airline catering company, once threatened to poison the food. He also testified that Mr. Ali-Haimoud wanted "to slit the throat of infidels" and that Mr. Hannan held Las Vegas in contempt because Arabs he considered corrupt went there to gamble. 
The trial, which will resume on Monday, is expected to last several more weeks.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Youssef Hmimssa, the chief witness for the government. (Associated Press) 

Load-Date: April 14, 2003


End of Document