A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ELECTIONS; Local Candidates Everywhere Focus on Terrorism
 The New York Times
November 5, 2001 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 1043 words
Byline:  By RICHARD L. BERKE 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 4  
Body


In Pennsylvania, David Wecht, a candidate for State Supreme Court judge, laments in a television commercial that his baby son's "world changed forever" on Sept. 11.
     In Detroit, Gil Hill, a candidate for mayor, is running a commercial in which a local citizen says, "We live in a different world now -- safety can no longer be assumed." 
 And in Virginia, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York solemnly recalls having lunch with Mark L. Earley, a candidate for governor, just a day before the Sept. 11 attacks. Mr. Giuliani says that if he could vote in the governor's race there on Tuesday, "I would vote for Mark Earley."
Seeking to reach voters who have been numbed by terrorism, candidates in more than 25 media markets have produced roughly 50 commercials that directly or indirectly refer to the events of Sept. 11. Rather than highlight local matters like whether to increase highway tolls or what to do about waste treatment, candidates are emphasizing their qualifications to protect the public. They are lacing their advertisements with American flags and the faces of firefighters and police officers.
For Republicans running for governor in New Jersey and Virginia and for mayor of New York, it is not President Bush but Mayor Giuliani, still enjoying adulation for his response to the attacks, who has become the politician of choice to endorse their candidacies. 
In all, candidates in Tuesday's elections have spent more than $10 million on commercials related to terrorism, according to a study by the Campaign Media Analysis Group, a research company in Alexandria, Va.
"After Sept. 11, people hit the reset button on what their campaigns stood for and went to messages on domestic security," said Evan Tracey, president of the Campaign Media Analysis Group. "Even at the City Council level, a lot of these candidates felt the best way to connect with voters was to piggyback on current events."
The risk is that voters may question whether the candidates are exploiting the tragedy for their own gain. They might also wonder what relevance terrorism has in contests for City Council in cities far from the attacks, including Baton Rouge, La., Knoxville, Tenn., and Birmingham, Ala.
"If you can link yourself to the flag and respect for firemen and policemen and all these symbols of Sept. 11, it is to your benefit," said Ken Goldstein, a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin who is conducting a study of political advertising. "On the other hand, it's pretty close to bad form to explicitly tie yourself to these symbols without people thinking you're taking advantage. Are people going to resent politics being brought into what happened seven weeks ago?"
In Illinois, Corinne Wood, a Democratic candidate for governor next year, was criticized as insensitive by Republicans for broadcasting a commercial that showed images of the flag and of the World Trade Center erupting into a fireball, followed by an image of the Sears Tower in Chicago. Campaign officials said they had decided to use a commercial that did not feature those images. They insisted that the more inflammatory version ran only by mistake several times in Springfield.
In the version that was intended for broadcast, Ms. Wood says, "I won't give in, not to terrorists, not to a struggling economy."
Most other campaigns around the country have stayed clear of videotape of the World Trade Center or the Pentagon.
Shirley Clarke Franklin, a Democrat who is running for mayor of Atlanta, points to endorsements from the police and firefighters unions in a commercial that features the flag interspersed with faces of local fire and police officers. The words "courage," "valor" and "trust" pop up on the screen. Ms. Franklin appears only at the end. "I am honored and humbled to be endorsed by our police and firefighters," she says. "They make us proud."
Ms. Franklin's campaign manager, Kasim Reed, said he had agonized over whether to invoke Sept. 11 even implicitly. "We did give it a first, second and third thought," he said. "Anyone who's running a campaign in this time would agree that it's very challenging to be focused on electoral politics. We decided that rather than use the endorsements in a traditional sense, our ad would be a tribute to the men and women who keep us safe."
But before the Franklin campaign broadcast the advertisement, Mr. Reed said, he sought feedback from more than 50 voters around the city. "We asked them very frank questions, if they felt the ad was appropriate or whether a line of propriety was being crossed," he said.
In his race for the Supreme Court in Pennsylvania, David Wecht was also careful not to go overboard. There are no images of terror in his advertising -- just the candidate holding his baby son in his lap and standing in a marble courtroom.
"On May 19, 2001, Alexander Wecht was born," Mr. Wecht tells viewers. "On Sept. 11, 2001, his world changed forever. The battles to make Alexander's world safe won't only be fought in faraway lands; they'll be fought in courtrooms, like this one in Pittsburgh."
In New Jersey, the campaign of James E. McGreevey, the Democratic candidate for governor, has included a commercial featuring images of police officers and firefighters. "For all of us, the terrorist attacks were incomprehensible," Mr. McGreevey says, adding that "in these tough times, we're also seeing America at her best."
A few candidates have dared to refer to the terrorism as part of attack advertisements. In the New York mayoral race, Michael R. Bloomberg, the Republican, ran an advertisement quoting his opponent, Mark Green, saying, "I actually believe that if, God forbid, I had been the mayor during such a calamity, I would have done as well or better than Rudy Giuliani." The advertisement ends with the word "Really?" filling the screen.
Not all politicians, particularly incumbents, have been timid about invoking the images of terror for constituents.
"The opportunity to get publicity is overwhelming," said Representative Mark Souder, an Indiana Republican. "I have not been up to New York, but many members did live feeds back when they were there. There's an insatiable demand from the public, and unless you're saying off-the-wall things or can't speak well, it gives you a bounce."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: An endorsement from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York is prominently displayed on the campaign Web site of Mark L. Earley, the Republican candidate for governor of Virginia. 

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document