A NATION CHALLENGED: THE LEGISLATION; Bill Greatly Expanding Surveillance Power in Terrorism Fight Clears the Senate
 The New York Times
October 12, 2001 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1044 words
Byline:  By ROBIN TONER and NEIL A. LEWIS 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11  
Body


The Senate voted overwhelmingly tonight to give the government expanded surveillance and investigative powers intended to combat terrorism, with lawmakers citing the urgency of the threat and the need for a swift response.
     Just three weeks after the Bush administration demanded wider authority in its battle against terrorists, the Senate voted 96 to 1 to approve a 243-page bill changing the laws on wiretapping, money laundering and conducting computer surveillance. 
 Civil liberties advocates said the legislation was a dangerous power grab by the government, and warned that law enforcement authorities had repeatedly abused their surveillance powers in earlier times of national crisis and upheaval.
But the bill had broad and deep support in a Congress eager to do its part one month after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. The Senate voted after a few hours of debate. The House was scheduled to vote on its version of the legislation on Friday. Approval of the House bill was also considered a virtual certainty, but differences between the two bills would need to be resolved.
In opening debate, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, asserted that the bill, while not perfect, was an effort to balance the needs of national security and individual freedom.
"I've remembered the words of Benjamin Franklin when he literally had his neck on the line," Mr. Leahy said. "He said that a people who trade their liberty for security deserve neither."
But Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, sought to amend the bill tonight to insert what he argued were important safeguards to civil liberties. "We will give the F.B.I. new and better tools," Mr. Feingold said, "but we must also make sure those new tools do not become instruments of oppression."
Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the majority leader, countered with a chilly lecture on the need for immediate action and urged that the amendments be shelved. "We've got a job to do," Mr. Daschle said. "The clock is ticking. The work needs to get done, we had to make our best judgment about what is possible."
Mr. Feingold was clearly furious, asking "What have we come to?" when such a truncated debate is considered too much.
The Senate bill was produced after intense negotiations over the Bush administration's original proposal, which was sent to Congress within days of the terrorist attacks. Civil liberties advocates found it far more objectionable than the House bill, which puts a time limit on many of the new powers. The administration and its allies said the Senate bill simply provided essential tools to combat an extraordinary threat.
Both bills would give the government new authority for wiretapping, monitoring Internet communications and sharing information about suspected terrorists and their supporters. The Senate bill includes provisions to fight money laundering, which lawmakers say is an important source of support for terrorists.
The Senate bill would expand, in several ways, the authority for wiretapping foreign citizens suspected of involvement in terrorism. The authorities would be able to obtain a so-called roving wiretap for a terrorism suspect, regardless of the telephones used, rather than authorization for wiretapping only a specific telephone, as currently required. Officials have complained that current laws, written when all telephones were wired, do not provide for terrorists using and discarding cellphones.
The legislation would also expand the government's powers to track e-mail. It would allow the authorities, with an easily obtainable subpoena, to get records of when e-mail messages were sent or received by a suspect and the e-mail identity of the correspondent. 
The Senate bill would also give government agents more flexibility to exchange information about suspects, including information obtained in grand jury proceedings. And the bill would require universities to disclose information about foreign students to investigators who asserted a reasonable need for it.
It would also strengthen the authorities' ability to detain terrorism suspects, although it would not provide the indefinite detention the administration originally sought. The Senate bill would allow a foreign citizen to be held for up to seven days before being charged if the authorities had "reasonable grounds" for suspecting terrorism. Still, civil libertarians said the language of the bill did not rule out indefinite detention.
The legislation would also broaden the definition of terrorism and increase penalties.
The Bush administration prefers the Senate bill. It particularly objected to a sunset provision in the House bill, under which many of the surveillance powers granted to the government would expire in two years unless Congress decided they were still necessary and were not being misused by the government.
But the House bill is a careful compromise with strong support on the left and the right. It passed the notoriously polarized House Judiciary Committee by a unanimous vote. And members including Representative Barney Frank, a liberal Massachusetts Democrat, and Representative Bob Barr, a conservative Republican from Georgia, resisted major changes to it. 
By today, it was apparent to all involved -- including the administration -- that some middle ground would have to be negotiated between the House and Senate bills.
It was also clear that some sort of sunset provision -- perhaps five years -- was an essential ingredient of any final legislation, House staff members said. 
Attorney General John Ashcroft pushed hard for immediate action on the bill, even as civil liberties groups pleaded for more deliberation and hearings. The American Civil Liberties Union and its allies warned that the government has often asked for broader surveillance powers in times of crisis, only to misuse them against law-abiding citizens, like the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Laura W. Murphy, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union, complained that the Senate bill was "a power grab on the part of the attorney general and the administration" that would not make the nation any safer. "This would give the administration permanent powers to violate civil liberties." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 12, 2001


End of Document