A NATION CHALLENGED: ALLIES; Europe Agrees To Share Data On Terrorism With the U.S.
 The New York Times
December 6, 2001 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 666 words
Byline:  By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr. 
Dateline: PARIS, Dec. 5  
Body


Opening the door just a crack to a new era of cooperation in fighting crime, the United States and the European Union are to sign an agreement on Thursday to exchange information on terrorism and other serious offenses.
     Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is expected to attend the ceremony to emphasize its importance. 
 But the agreement, to be signed at a meeting of the union's justice and interior ministers in Brussels, does not allow Europol, the fledgling pan-European police agency, to share "personal information" with American investigators. That excludes names, photographs and addresses of suspects, criminal records, names of associates, names of witnesses and many other facts that any detective would find crucial to investigating a crime. 
It allows the sharing only of "technical information" on serious crimes: tips about threats, crime patterns, weapons or smuggling routes used by criminals, lists of assets that might be frozen and so forth.
Nonetheless, personal data is already exchanged between the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the individual police forces of most countries, so all that is legally missing for the moment is the bureau's ability to do one-stop inquiries in Europe by calling Europol.
In fact, in a special exception that treats the Sept. 11 attacks as a "life-threatening situation," Europol has been sharing personal information in that investigation with the F.B.I. by, for example, helping it cross-check telephone numbers in Europe called by the hijackers.
"My sense is that this is institutionalizing a practice that de facto exists anyway," said Jonathan Stevenson, a terrorism expert at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
To be able to do that regularly on all the crimes Europol has jurisdiction over -- trafficking in arms, drugs and people, money-laundering, counterfeiting of the euro and terrorism -- a legal agreement must be formed.
Talks on a secondary agreement to legalize the sharing of personal information are to begin immediately. 
"That will be, not difficult, but a careful exercise," said Willy Bruggeman, the deputy director of Europol, "because our data-protection standards are higher than those of individual countries." For example, information gleaned from undercover work must be carefully sanitized to protect both the undercover officer and the people being watched.
Under the new agreement, the two sides may also put liaison officers in each other's offices.
Europol is not an investigative agency like the F.B.I.; it is only two years old and has about 350 employees, none with arrest powers. The F.B.I. has 29,000. Europol is a clearinghouse for information from the police of the European Union's 15 member countries. It is supposed to spot trends and encourage the formation of joint investigative teams.
Thus far, a Europol official said, Germany, Britain and Belgium have shared with the agency all their information on investigations into the Sept. 11 attacks. France, Spain and Italy, where there have been other roundups of suspects, have not yet done so, he said.
Also under discussion this week at the Brussels meeting of justice and interior ministers is the development of arrest warrants that would be valid anywhere in Europe. 
Those discussions are going slowly, an American official said. Some countries are balking at the idea of giving up their own citizens to other European countries, though they would honor a warrant for a citizen of a third country. Others are hesitant to make their laws defining various crimes exactly congruent with those of other European countries.
But the justice ministers were ordered by their heads of state in September to have the warrant in place by Dec. 31, and the American official said, "I think you'll see by the end of December something that passes for a European arrest warrant, but you may have opt-outs." As an example, he cited the refusal by Britain and Denmark to join the agreement by European countries to drop all border controls. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 6, 2001


End of Document