A new way to train Afghan police
USA TODAY
March 15, 2010 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 22A
Length: 372 words
Body


It  is no surprise that the State Department is having trouble training law enforcement authorities in Afghanistan ("Black eye for U.S. Embassy in Kabul," News, Wednesday).
We have a standing army that trains foreign military forces, but no equivalent organization to train their police. This critical job has at times been turned over to our military, which operates under quite different "rules of engagement." In other cases, the job has been outsourced to contractors overseen by the State Department, an agency with no law enforcement expertise. Training police forces in allied countries to combat terrorism is critical because the long-term security of countries like Afghanistan rests with them, not with their military.
In the Western world, police forces have the responsibility to combat terrorism. In the developing world, in the interests of expediency, we have focused much of our effort on training and equipping their military forces to do so.  And in doing so, we are strengthening the very forces that have historically been the greatest threat to these fragile democracies.
What we need is a standing law enforcement organization that can be deployed, like our military, to advise and assist in situations requiring a security response.  The organization would assume the responsibility for what is now a disjointed array of international law enforcement and judicial training being overseen by the State Department.
Charles Lutz
Salem, S.C.
Ethics in Congress
Thank you for keeping corruption in government on the radar. I was stunned by the comments of  Rep. Michael Capuano, D-Mass., about where  progress is being made ("The ethics process is working," Opposing view, Honesty in government debate, Wednesday).
I'd venture that the congressman  has succumbed to inside-the-Beltway disease, which makes  lawmakers feel entitled because of their public service. The  Office of Congressional Ethics is a sham because the ethics committee can and has disregarded  its findings. All you have to do is look at the health care debacle and the deals that have been cut, and are today still being cut, to purchase votes. Ethics is a word that these people can not even spell, let alone comprehend.
Howard Haddock
Rockwall, Texas 

Load-Date: March 15, 2010


End of Document