A new reality: America wakes up to homegrown terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 23, 1995, Metro Edition


Copyright 1995 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 20A
Length: 784 words
Byline: Wayne Washington; Staff Writer
Body


The Middle Easterners did it.
 That's what many Americans seemingly assumed in the horrific aftermath of Wednesday's bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
 A random target, blasted with a car bomb. It had all the ingredients of the terror once thought to be far away that we now fear has slithered onto our shore. It seemed so much like what happened to the World Trade Center. Or like what happens too often in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
And so Americans, venting on radio talk shows and in computer discussion groups, focused their unfounded fury on Middle Easterners. They did it. They had to be the culprits.
 But now, with the release of Middle Eastern men questioned in Dallas and seized in London and the arrest of one white man and the questioning of two others in connection with the blast, Americans are faced with a new reality: They just might be white.
 "It's disgusting," said Omar Amad of Minneapolis of the quickly accepted notion that those responsible for the bombing were of Middle Eastern descent.
 Amad, a member of the Arab-American Anti-Discrimination Committee, a nationwide Arab-American association, said the national news media made snap judgments, unnecessarily airing the views of experts on Middle Eastern terrorism.
 "Before they found out who did it, they get experts on terrorism in the Middle East on the television," Amad said, the scorn clear in his voice. "Any act of terrorism, Palestinians or Arabs are blamed for it."
 Leaders of Middle Eastern associations across the country reported receiving threatening calls.
 Locally, WCCO-AM radio talk show personality "Dark Star" focused his Friday night program on jumping to conclusions. He apologized for stirring racist feelings earlier in the week about those initially thought to be responsible.
 Other radio show hosts had been quick to blast U.S. immigration policy, saying current laws don't work.
 Still, Mustafa Siddiqui, communication director of the Islamic Center of Minnesota, said Minnesotans were restrained.
 "During the World Trade Center [bombing in New York City in 1993], we had hundreds of threatening calls," Siddiqui said. "Over the last 48 hours, we only had a couple, and we get a few of those all the time anyway."
 Siddiqui said he was proud of Minnesotans for not letting their frustration force them into lashing out.
 In a statement released Friday, he thanked Minnesotans for being " 'Minnesota smart' in not jumping to unfair finger-pointing and stereotyping of people of Middle Eastern descent."
 But not all local people of Middle Eastern descent were so confident that anger wouldn't spill over.
 Lina Dajani, of Edina, who leads a Palestinian folk dancing group, said she feared for the safety of herself and her family, particularly her 13-year-old daughter.
 "Even today, I asked her, 'Did anybody mention this to you? Did anybody say anything to you?' " Dajani said.
 William Brustein, a sociology professor at the University of Minnesota, said he was not surprised that many Americans were quick to point fingers at Middle Easterners.
 "It was a collective thought to find some type of resolution, to target that rage," he said. "It's this cathartic feeling."
 Brustein said Americans will now struggle to separate themselves from the men who have been arrested and questioned in connection with the bombing.
 "It's so much easier when the target is a cultural outsider," he said. "The normal thing now will be to distance ourselves from them, maybe put them in a drug culture or somehow place them outside of the American mainstream."
 No matter what happens to the men who have been arrested, local people of Middle Eastern descent are simply glad Middle Easterners apparently were not involved.
 "Even as someone who studies the Middle East, I kind of felt relief," said Dina LeGall, an Israeli native who teaches history at Macalester College in St. Paul. "When something like this happens, it does enhance the stereotypes."
 It also enhances fears that Middle Eastern terrorists are infiltrating the United States.
 Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., on Thursday criticized an antiterrorist bill pending in Congress as "goofy." Hyde said the bill, introduced in the House and the Senate this year at the request of President Clinton, doesn't go far enough to bar those who belong to terrorist groups from entering the country.
 Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said the Oklahoma City bombing would be the catalyst that would push a tough bill to passage.
 LeGall said she understands why many Americans immediately blamed Middle Easterners.
 "I think the assumption was made because of the technology involved," she said. "What we now know is that, I'm sorry, but anybody can do it."

Load-Date: April 25, 1995


End of Document