A NEW VIEW: Ending lives for pro-life values isn't pro-life
The Parthenon: Marshall University
November 30, 2015 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 391 words
Byline: Nancy Peyton
Body


A gunman opened fire at a Colorado Springs Planned Parenthood clinic Friday, killing three and wounding nine.
Acts of violence happen against Planned Parenthood clinics every day. We may not always see them on the news, but they're always there.
Even if you don't agree with abortion, there is no way to see these attacks as justified.
A former employee of Planned Parenthood, Bryn Greenwood, took to Twitter to share stories about her experiences while working at a Planned Parenthood clinic in Kansas for three years. Greenwood described the actions taken against her and her fellow employees as acts of terrorism.
"Our clinic offered free and low cost services in a low income neighborhood, but every day the 'pro-life' movement tried to frighten us," Greenwood tweeted. "The goal was to make us afraid to come to work, to make us quit, to make us close the clinic. That's terrorism. That's how terrorism works."
Most of the pro-life movements cite their beliefs to be based in religion. If they're driven by religion, then why do they feel that it's okay to harm other people? Why do they think that it's okay to frighten women who may already be terrified and confused because of the choice that they're making?
I am pro-life in most instances because of my religious views. Despite that fact, I think that Planned Parenthood is a wonderful program that should continue for those who need it. I don't think that the workers should be harassed or attacked.
Other pro-lifers cite the fact that they feel abortion is murder as their reason for being opposed to it. If that's so, where do they get the feeling justified for taking other people's lives?
There are countless numbers of cases in which abortion-providing doctors have been killed by pro-lifers. If you're "pro-life," then you should not condone death under any circumstances. If you're "pro-life," you certainly shouldn't be taking the lives of others simply because they're doing something that's against your beliefs.
Whether you agree with the actions of Planned Parenthood or not, there's no doubting that they provide excellent services to women in need.
There's no need to terrify employees and volunteers of an organization who feel like they're doing what is right. In most instances, they are doing what's right and helping others.
Nancy Peyton can be contacted at peyton22@marshall.edu

Load-Date: December 1, 2015


End of Document