A NEW SILENCE ADDS TO FEAR OF TERRORISM: WHAT DO THEY WANT? < IN WHAT MAY BE A BASIC CHANGE, TERRORISTS OFTEN NO LONGER< IDENTIFY THEMSELVES. THE GOAL: TO HEIGHTEN CHAOS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 4, 1996 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A24
Length: 854 words
Byline: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


There was a time when faxes and phone calls preceded terrorist strikes. The people who sabotaged buildings or blew up planes were shadowy, but they made their motives clear by parading their causes.
But the destruction of TWA Flight 800 - if caused by a bomb, as many people speculate - is like the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland; the bombings against American servicemen in Saudi Arabia; and the explosion in Olympic Centennial Park.
The questions are continually asked: Who did this? Why don't the terrorists claim responsibility for their mayhem?
To be sure, groups trying to profit from a tragedy often call law enforcement and the media in an effort to stake a claim to the havoc, but investigators in these recent cases believe the real perpetrators are staying silent.
"What we're seeing is a fundamental change in the nature of terrorism," said Debra Van Opstal, a security expert in Washington. "It used to be that you wanted to show how much leverage you could bring to bear, that you could make governments look powerless. You took credit."
"What point have they made now?" she asked. "What can we do or stop doing or change? Terrorists used to want to bring down a government or change policy. We don't even know now what we can do to capitulate."
Anonymous terrorism works under different rules. The terrorists may be seeking to create instability in a society or punish someone they consider an enemy, but they might not have a specific political goal in mind. And keeping quiet about what they have done gives them a certain protection from retaliation.
Terrorism experts say one goal of anonymous strikes is to create a feeling of helplessness at not being able to hit back, or even to focus anger.
"By not claiming responsibility, you only increase terror," said Donald Abenheim, a scholar at the Stanford University's Hoover Institution. "It increases chaos and shows the weakness of the United States. I'm not surprised someone says: 'You think you are so clever? Here, take that.' "
"One cannot destroy the U.S. Air Force in the air and cannot destroy armored battalions on the ground," he said, "but you can knock passenger airplanes out of the sky."
By such logic, somewhere in the world today a group of people is celebrating at the sight of the world's only military superpower reduced to the status of a ferocious guard dog snarling at the darkness.
Indeed, the United States' military power and the willingness of targeted states to hunt down terrorists could be a strong incentive to remain anonymous.
Strike-and-vanish tactics go back to the origins of terrorism and guerrilla soldiers - the tactic of small groups fighting a state, or small countries battling bigger ones.
"Terrorism is the weapon of the weak," said Maria Moyano, a security expert at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. "It's the weapon of people who can't achieve their objectives in other ways."
Martha Crenshaw, a political scientist at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn., who has studied the history of terrorism, said, "What might be pointless in our view might be very successful to them."
Terrorism experts say the real "target" of terrorism is not the people who die in plane crashes and building explosions. It's the rest of us, the people who are watching.
"In physical terms, terrorism doesn't do very much," Abenheim said, "but its political impact and psychological impact is quite considerable."
Although the mentally unstable individual who mails bombs or sabotages buses is an increasing risk, most experts agree that the greatest danger is still terror that is ideologically and politically motivated.
"It's becoming unconventional warfare, the weapon and tactic of choice," said Frank Cilluffo, an analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "It allows small nations, sub-nationals and groups - even individuals - to achieve power."
Few nations openly applaud terrorist acts anymore, but many terrorists receive support from governments. State-sponsored ter-rorism is no longer as straightforward as it sounds.
"Does the state have to send someone out themselves?" asked Crenshaw. "In most cases they avoid that connection. They say, here is money; go and cause as much trouble as you can."
And while the families of those on TWA Flight 800, in the Oklahoma federal building, at Centennial Park and of U.S. servicemen in Saudi Arabia mourn their dead and injured, the best explanation for the killing of innocents might be that terrorism "works."
Certainly, there are examples from the recent history of terrorists who made their causes known.
"The British government is sitting down to negotiate with the IRA because of the bombs," Moyano said. "At the peace talks, the armed wing of the PLO can say: 'If it wasn't for our armed struggle for 20 years, we wouldn't have reached this point.' "
"Today's terrorist is tomorrow's statesman," Moyano said. "At one point, Yasir Arafat was the man we all loved to hate. Suddenly, he was received by all the governments of Europe and even in this country.
"We don't like to admit this publicly, but violence pays."

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document