A PALESTINIAN PROFESSOR UNQUALIFIED TO BE CALLED A 'MODERATE'
The New York Times
January 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 308 words
Body


To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis is ''astonished'' to find his friend Walid Khalidi in ''The Campaign to Discredit Israel,'' a book published by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.  Lewis's case for Khalidi is essentially that, compared with others associated with the P.L.O., he is a ''moderate.'' This may be true, if the standard of comparison is Abu Nidal and Abu Musa. But Khalidi demands that there be an armed P.L.O. West Bank state, with 250 tanks, that Jerusalem be turned over to Arafat and that Moscow be a party to the arrangements. Nor can we find a place where he calls on the P.L.O. to renounce terrorism.
As we note in the book, P.L.O. ideologists have ''presssed so long for the destruction of the Jewish state that, by now, any goal (some) may have short of the sheer physical liquidation of the Jewish State is called 'moderate.' ''
Khalidi may be less radical than Jebril, but as a sophisticated agent of the campaign against Israel in the U.S., he cannot be immune from criticism. According to Al-Majallah, a London- based Arab journal, and United Press International, for example, a secret 1982 Palestinian planning conference deputized Khalidi to establish an Arafat-endorsed lobby to advance the ''Palestine battle'' in the U.S., and provided money for this purpose.
BBC and others say Khalidi serves at times as an emissary for Arafat. Not just we but Reuters, BBC, the Associated Press, The Washington Post, Tass and Radio Riyadh have described him as a member of the P.L.O.'s policy-making Palestine National Council.
Lewis extols Khalidi, and aims his rage instead at the organization trying to protect U.S.-Israel relations from attack. This suggests that he may be Khalidi's friend, but he may be his victim as well.
THOMAS A. DINE, Executive Director, American Israel, Public Affairs Committee, Washington, Jan. 3, 1984


End of Document