A price for security
University Wire
September 10, 1998


Copyright 1998 The Post via U-Wire
Length: 310 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Post
Dateline: Athens, Ohio
Body


In the wake of bombings at United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, the White House and the State Department have petitioned Congress for money to help rectify the crisis.
 The money, between $ 1 and $ 3 billion, will be used to build new embassies in place of those damaged by the bombing and to increase security at other embassies thought to be in danger of attack.
 While this effort shows progress, it simply isn't enough. The administration has fallen short of the necessary steps needed to effectively deal with terrorism at U.S. embassies.
Ohio U.
The administration must go further to eliminate the root of the problem. Instead of simply taking defensive actions and preventative measures, the administration needs to put more of this money toward an offensive stance.
 In the days following the embassy bombings, the White House declared a new "war on terrorism," but this has failed to materialize. Using this new money from Congress to add security is only the tip of the iceberg in this "war."
 Security was in place in Kenya and Tanzania and terrorism still took its toll. Security, at any level, can only do so much. Until the terrorists themselves are eliminated, the problem will remain, in some form.
 If the direct elimination of terrorists is not prioritized and this congressional loan is used only for security purposes, isn't the administration just running in circles?
 We feel this move by the White House and the State Department is a step in the right direction. Security is a priority and a necessity in protecting U.S. embassies and the Americans that work there.
 But the administration needs to solve the problem entirely. By focusing on the elimination of the terrorists responsible for the embassy bombings and other terrorist groups, this problem can be done away with permanently.
(C) 1999 The Post via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 8, 1999


End of Document