A RADICAL BEYOND YASIR ARAFAT
The New York Times
July 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 20, Column 3; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 472 words
Body


To the Editor:
A highly significant but largely overlooked development in the current phase of the Middle East conflict is the re-emergence of George Habash, head of the terrorist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (P.F.L.P.), supposedly a part of the P.L.O.
Despite half-promising steps to bring about a truce in Lebanon, it is now evident that the prospects are not good and that it is primarily not Yasir Arafat, the putative head of all the Palestinians, but Habash and his followers who intend to have the last word.
Habash has at least twice in the past week announced to the news media that he and his organization will not negotiate with the Israelis. They will fight in Lebanon to the end. Moreover, that position is not new.
A highly significant but largely overlooked development in the current phase of the Middle East conflict is the re-emergence of George Habash, head of the terrorist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (P.F.L.P.), supposedly a part of the P.L.O.
Habash has taken this line from the very formation of his organization in 1967, and he has maintained, in contradiction of the ''moderate'' position of the P.L.O., that a political solution to the Palestinian question, including the fate of Israel, is impossible.  There can be only a military solution which will include the destruction of Israel.
It thus becomes clear again that the P.L.O. is an umbrella organization with fatal holes in it. This umbrella will not stop the reign of terrorism.
Even if Arafat should acquiesce to U.S. diplomatic demands and give lip service to U.N. Resolution 242, nominally recognize Israel's right to exist and take a pledge against terrorism, such a pronouncement would naturally not be taken seriously by Israel.
Moreover, it should be evident to everyone, in view of the recent statements by Habash, that he, with his huge radical following, would not be included in any such avowal by the P.L.O. And should the P.L.O. ever achieve its objective of a sovereign state on the West Bank, the next inevitable step would be an early takeover of that state by Habash, followed by the decimation of Israel.
The present Administration in Washington, with the vigorous support of Senator Percy and Secretary of Defense Weinberger, refuses to acknowledge these circumstances. The American public is being softened up for a shift from the previous strong American support for Israel toward something like the Saudi peace plan, which strongly favors the Arabs and the P.L.O. with a sovereign state to be created on the West Bank.
This change in U.S. policy will doubtless be masked by saying P.L.O. and ignoring P.F.L.P. But the public deserves to be better informed about the actual situation so that Israel's unwillingness to accept that new position will not be misjudged.
SAUL ROSENZWEIG, St. Louis, July 13, 1982


End of Document