A REALISTIC FILM STIRS NBC DEBATE;
BY SALLY BEDELL
The New York Times
March 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 529 words
Body


A fictional film about nuclear terrorism scheduled to be shown on NBC next Sunday night has raised a protest from Reuven Frank, the president of NBC News, prompting the network to insert an unusual number of disclaimers to prevent viewers from being alarmed.
The film, ''Special Bulletin,'' depicts in a highly realistic manner how a network news division might cover nuclear blackmail by terrorists, in this case, in the city of Charleston, S.C. It is scheduled for 9 P.M. Sunday.
Although a representative of NBC News, Arthur Lord, director of special news operations, served as a consultant on the film, which was produced for NBC's entertainment division, it was not until this week that executives of NBC News saw the film and raised their objections.
A fictional film about nuclear terrorism scheduled to be shown on NBC next Sunday night has raised a protest from Reuven Frank, the president of NBC News, prompting the network to insert an unusual number of disclaimers to prevent viewers from being alarmed.
Mr. Frank asked that the number of advisories stating that the film is fictional be increased. Originally they were to be made only after commercial breaks. Mr. Frank has asked that they be repeated before commercial breaks as well, and that visual disclaimers be superimposed on the film a number of times during the movie as well.
 
Seeking to Prevent Confusion
''The only concern of NBC news was that 'Special Bulletin' might have been confused with a news program,'' Mr. Frank said. ''We agreed on various steps to insure that the average viewer will not be misled in that way.''
However, NBC's action has drawn criticism from the film's executive producer, Don Ohlmeyer, who was formerly executive producer for NBC Sports, and the program's writer and director, Edward Zwick. They contend that the insertion of visual disclaimers will negate the dramatic tension of the program, which was shot on videotape like a network news broadcast to increase its realism.
''Unfortunately what the picture is about is going to be destroyed by putting these things over the top,'' said Mr. Ohlmeyer. ''NBC News has had the script for three months. It was approved by NBC's broadcast standards and practices. Why this occurs at the 11th hour, I don't understand.''
M.S. Rukeyser, a spokesman for NBC, said that only on viewing of the actual film was its realism apparent. ''It duplicates the frantic action you would see in an ad hoc news special,'' said Mr. Rukeyser.  ''Things like wavering cameras and voices breaking up that could cause confusion among viewers. We felt that this is such a realistic production that NBC has to go an extra mile.''
The film's plot revolves around a group of antinuclear protesters who seize five hostages, including a local television news reporter.  The final determination of how viewers will be advised will not be made until Friday by top executives at NBC, including Grant Tinker, chairman of NBC, and Robert E. Mulholland, president of NBC. Mr.  Ohlmeyer said there was a possibility the program could be withdrawn from the air. ''I think before we saw it materiallly destroyed I would look at what all our options are,'' Mr. Ohlmeyer said.


End of Document