A real argument against occupation
University Wire
April 18, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Brown Daily Herald via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 766 words
Byline: By Michal Zapendowski, Brown Daily Herald; SOURCE: Brown U.
Dateline: PROVIDENCE, R.I. 
Body


There is no real need for anyone to denounce Anti-Racist Action and Democratic Solidary Committee; they do a good enough job denouncing themselves. However, there is a substantial risk that with all their inflammatory rhetoric ARA-DCC could damage the cause they claim to represent. To counter this, I'm going to do my best to explain why I oppose the Israeli occupation in Palestine, and why this stance is pro-Israeli.
In 1948, the British withdrew from Palestine and a war immediately broke out between Palestinian Jews -- who were mostly immigrants, many let in by the British colonial administration -- and Arabs who were native inhabitants. As tends to be the case in ethnic conflicts, both sides committed atrocities and hundreds of thousands were forced from their homes. To this day, it is illegal for an Arab and a Jew to marry in the state of Israel, while if you're Jewish, you enter an Arab nation at your own risk.
In all its conflicts with the Arabs, beginning in 1948, the Israeli Army has been better organized and better led -- and, in recent decades, it has had massive military and financial support from the United States. Thus, despite being colossally outnumbered, it won numerous wars against the surrounding Arab states and occupied large stretches of Arab territory on the West Bank of the River Jordan, the Golan Heights and around the city of Gaza. Many Israelis view this as the culmination of a "Greater Israel." Many Palestinian Arabs, affiliated with terrorist organizations such as the Al-Aqsa Martyr's Brigade (named after a Mosque where Arab civilians had been massacred by a Jewish gunman) have decided that blowing themselves up in Israeli shopping malls, killing women and children, is the best way to respond to this occupation.
In 2003, Israeli Commander-in-Chief General Moshe Yaalon spoke out publicly against the occupation of Arab territory, saying that it contributes more to terrorism against Israel than it prevents. This caused some serious soul-searching in Israel, where General Yaalon is a highly respected figure, but it passed under the radar here in the United States, where support for the Israeli occupation is stronger than ever. If General Yaalon's assessment is correct, then the occupation not only denies the human rights of Palestinian Arabs, but is a major cause of terrorism against Israelis. Thus, a unilateral Israeli withdrawal from territory that is majority-Arab would not only improve Israel's standing in the international community, but its security situation as well. Supporters of the Israeli occupation have no business calling themselves pro-Israeli -- they're just pro-occupation.
A growing peace movement has begun to gain momentum within Israel itself, with a number of young conscripts in the military refusing to serve in the occupied territories. It is alongside this, as well as the Palestinian peace movement, that Brown communities opposing the occupation should stand.
However, while it is important to acknowledge that the occupation is bad for both Jews and Arabs, Israel cannot simply be left at the mercy of terrorist attacks. Withdrawal from the occupied territories would reduce terrorism against Israel, but there would remain many terrorists motivated by anger against the existence of Israel itself on what was once Arab land. There is likely no way for this type of terrorism to be "nipped in the bud." The creation of a "security wall" separating majority-Jewish from majority-Arab territory in Palestine is therefore a positive, practical step to prevent terrorism. The problem with the wall the Israeli government is currently building is that it runs through the middle of Arab territory, so that some Arabs will find themselves on the outside and others on the inside (still under occupation). Thus, it will end neither terrorism nor the occupation.
Rather than posting provocative slogans like "Israel=White Supremacy" and harassing the Brown administration, which has nothing to do with the conflict in Palestine, groups at Brown that oppose the occupation ought to leave extremism to their opponents, try to win over people in the middle and focus on explaining to Brown's large pro-Israeli community that the occupation hurts Israel. If the United States were to take on the role of a neutral arbiter in the conflict, pressuring the Israeli government to end its occupation and construct a security wall along ethnic lines, peace in Palestine could become a reality. As long as that does not happen, human life will continue to be wasted -- both Arab and Jew.
(C) 2005 Brown Daily Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 18, 2005


End of Document