A Round for Civilization
The New York Times
March 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 324 words
Body


No one can say what political sunspots affect the climate for terrorism, but for the moment it has turned inclement. The news is of failed kidnappings, foiled hijackings and multiple arrests as defectors betray comrades.
Editorial discusses terrorism around the world and the way democratic governments are handling the terror networkFor a change, the terrorists are in angry disarray, not the democratic governments they would demoralize and destroy.
In Britain, 15 guerrillas of the Irish Republican Army were rounded up the other day after the defection of a high-ranking leader. The arrests follow the seizure of I.R A. arms dumps and bomb factories at six locations and the capture of about 100 suspected guerrillas. Before that, five alleged I.R.A. gunrunners were arrested by U.S. authorities as they tried to cross the border from Canada.
In Italy, penitent ex-members of the Red Brigades, or ''pentiti,'' have testified in the case of the kidnapping of Brig. Gen. James Dozier. They include the young Italian who masterminded the abduction.
By breaking the code of silence, the defectors shatter the myth of the Red Brigades' invincible discipline.  Although there are exceptions - the continuing slaughter of Turkish officials by Armenian gunmen - terrorism in Spain, France and West Germany appears to have ebbed. Thwarted hijackings now seem more common than successful ones. Besides disciplined police work and better security measures, all this surely reflects a shift in popular attitudes. It is no longer fashionable to idealize and indulge violence-prone radicals.
Notably, democracies have not been goaded into tearing up their own laws to unravel the terror network. Charges of police torture - as in Italy and Northern Ireland - have been the focus for aroused debate and inquiry. For the most part, the forces of civilization are managing to keep savagery at bay without succumbing to it themselves. That is a point to celebrate.


End of Document