A safe future requires that we defeat terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 26, 2003 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 15A; LETTER
Length: 1863 words
Series: LETTERS
Body


How ridiculous was it for liberals to suggest that President Bush not make his trip to England to bolster support with our ally in our quest to defeat al-Qaida and all terrorists?
To those unpatriotic Americans and Brits who protest and continue to deny the threat of Saddam Hussein, al-Qaida and every other form of terrorism, I say: Wake up before you suffer the ignobility of Neville Chamberlain, who told us Hitler was no threat to peace in our time.
As President Bush so aptly remarked, "Free nations failed to recognize, much less confront, the aggressive evil in plain sight. And so, dictators went about their business, feeding resentments and anti-Semitism, bringing death to innocent people in this city and across the world and filling the last century with violence and genocide."
If we do not defeat Hussein, Osama bin Laden and the rest of these terrorists, there will be no future for American children safe from terrorist acts in our cities and schools. Our national debt, no matter what its proportions, will become moot if we lose this battle against terrorists and forfeit our freedoms, our laws, and our society.
We Americans will not live under the constant threat of bombings, hijackings and murders the way the Israelis suffer today. Our way of life cannot survive weapons of mass destruction spreading biological, chemical, or nuclear terror on American soil.
Robert C. Gotshall Jr., Palm Bay
 
The people are getting fed up
Re: Democrats take aim at Bush ad touting terror fight, Nov. 24.
Democrats are outraged at a television ad depicting Bush as a fighter of terrorism as Democrats retreat from the fight in the first Republican ad of the 2004 presidential race. The Democratic Party should settle down and start concentrating on a serious platform of their own and backing one candidate they feel will have the best chance to unseat Bush.
I think the American people are getting fed up with the situation in Iraq as Bush is making no headway in stopping terrorism or fighting it. All he is accomplishing is spending billions of our needed tax dollars while we watch our troops and innocent people die each day from terrorist attacks in Iraq, Afghanistan and Turkey. All this state-of-the-art American weaponry costing billions, and terrorists can kill from "donkey carts."
Enough is enough on the war against terrorism. This war is a no-win situation and even makes Vietnam look like a victory. The Democratic Party as well as the average voter may well allow this to be a factor in Bush's re-election. Let the Republicans tout Bush and his fight against terrorism all they want. It's time the American people think about America first unless they wish another four years of unemployment, budget deficits, skyrocketing cost of living and further tax breaks for corporate America. Just keep in mind what future our children will have at this pace.
 
Jack Burlakos, Kenneth City
 
Don't comfort the terrorists
During my years in the Navy, I believed that giving aid and comfort to the enemy during time of war was a treasonous thing to do, and I still believe that. Many of the statements made on the campaign trail today do indeed give aid and comfort and encouragement to the terrorists, and our soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan are paying for this with their lives. How encouraging it must be to the terrorists when they hear Democrat candidates say, "Let's pull the troops out." Is this treason? The voting public will answer that question loud and clear on Election Day.
Criticizing the president's economic and social policies is perfectly valid, but to publicly criticize the way a war is being conducted during time of war increases the peril that our troops face.
Increasing the peril that our troops face for political gain is wrong, and the Democrat candidates need to recognize this. Democrat Sen. Zell Miller, a true patriot, said we must not allow the terrorists to break our will. I agree, and I would add that we must not let the left-wing radicals in this country break our will either. Support our troops, support our president.
 
Jack Lillis, The Villages, Fla.
 
Playing politics
Re: Plan has Iraqis at helm by summer, Nov. 15.
As a lifelong Republican who voted for George Bush for president, I am appalled that he is playing politics with the lives of our young men and women in the armed services. Newspaper articles reveal on a daily basis his blatant schemes to have everything look rosy by election time.
It wasn't coincidence that his puppet, Paul Bremer, attended a meeting at the White House, then immediately returned to Iraq and announced that the timetable to transfer sovereignty of the country has been suddenly advanced and will be transferred to a local government by next summer - even though there will be no written constitution, nor elected officials, in place by then.
Reading further, we find the Iraqis want to elect their local government officials and not have them selected by town meetings "conducted" by Bremer and his staff. Can a local government function without a constitution? Answer: No, unless it is dictated by a higher power! - and he says we went there to show them how democracy works! Rest assured we will get reports on the great improvement in conditions there when it is time to campaign for president; but here is one lifelong Republican who won't forget!
P.S.: Hidden on a back page: "The Pentagon plans to launch a 24-hour satellite channel from Baghdad to make it easier for U.S. TV stations to air government-authorized news about Iraq."
So, that's how democracy works!
 
Virgil Sweet, Belleair Bluffs
 
Take a break from criticism
At this critical juncture in Iraq, would it be too much for the pundits and the politicians to give our troops a 90-day break from second-guessing and criticism? The criticism conveyed by the mass media gives terrorists and Saddam Hussein-loyalists hope that America will withdraw if enough negative public opinion is expressed.
The administration is not going to pull out in the next 90 days, and therefore every American's first desire is to bring as many troops home as possible with the greatest chance of long-term stability in Iraq and the Middle East. So, let's not give psychological aid and comfort to our enemies. Let us give a Christmas present of peace and quiet to our troops.
 
Kerry H. Brown, Tampa
 
Get out of the Middle East
Bush says Mideast must be free, too, Nov. 7.
Here we see President Bush's further adventurism in the Middle East, or his trying to "democratize" the entire region.
As his "road map to peace" in Palestine has been doomed to failure, so is his "slog," as Donald Rumsfeld refers to the quagmire in Iraq, so is whatever new interference President Bush dreams up to undertake in the region.
Whoever thinks differently or states that this administration is "doing the right thing," regardless of injured, maimed, dying or dead American soldiers, knows nothing about the people or culture of the Middle East. I do.
My advice is to get out of the Middle East now. The U.S. presence there will only lead to more hatred, attacks against U.S. interests and further abso-
 
lute determination in the Middle East to be free of President Bush's idea of "freedom."
 
Muriel L. Herington, Clearwater
 
The president is right
Earlier this year I was the only American on a cruise ship sailing in Asian waters. All the other passengers were French, and I found myself defending President Bush. Several of the French (who admitted they spoke English) said to me, "I love zee American people, but I do not like your Meester Bush." They were, of course, referring to Iraq.
I said to them, "I do not like Mr. Bush either. I did not vote for him. But this time he is right. If your people (the French) would have done in 1935 to Germany what Mr. Bush is doing now in Iraq, perhaps your country would not have been occupied by the Nazis for five years."
They reacted as if they never thought of this. It is interesting that these conversations took place off the coast of Vietnam.
 
Robert Topper, St. Pete Beach
 
An exercise in futility
 
Each morning I eagerly open my newspaper to see what further tragedies are committed on our brave young men in Iraq. There on the front page was a large picture of overweight, overpaid football heroes while the constant tragic new deaths of our sons and daughters are buried among the advertisements.
Why do the media try to hide the tragic truth? I feel so sorry for our brave young men who sacrifice life and limbs for their misled heroic leader. This invasion will be an exercise in futility as the world looks on silently.
We will never defeat terrorists. There ain't no Berlin, Nagasaki or Hiroshima, packed with men, women and children to be slaughtered. All our weapons of mass destruction are useless. For every terrorist we kill, 10 more are waiting in the wings for the chance to sacrifice their lives for their cause.
Frank Branca, Hudson
 
Look at reinstating the draft
Re: When we go to war, it should hit home by Janine Davidson, Nov. 21.
I needed to read this column twice to see if I understood Davidson's thought. I believe that the intent was to make "going to war" more difficult, to make people think before they act. As stated, "the Total Force had another goal as well: to act as a check on indiscriminate or capricious uses of military force."
Well, I half concur. No one wants to "go to war" for the hell of it. We want leaders who "go to war" because of the need to protect our country and us from real enemies. But this also means to have a military that is large, mobile and skilled enough to do its job. Forcing our military to be just big enough to require more than 35 percent dependence on National Guard and Reserves won't be sufficient in time of a crisis.
To maintain, as Davidson says, a Total Force military and not look to replace the Reserves with civilian contractors and/or just the active force, we need to maintain a sufficient active force. This, I believe, requires that our leaders look seriously at reinstating a military draft to fill the voids that are occurring because of the reduction in volunteers.
I, for one, do not like the idea of our military deployed all over the world and for extended time. Look at Germany. We have had military personnel, myself included, deployed there since 1944. That is 59 years. If a country like Germany, as well as all of Europe, can't defend itself by now, it never will.
We need to maintain a large enough Army of regular troops and reservists at all times and if that means reinstituting the draft, then we have to look at it. Our way of life is being threatened and I, for one, am ready to defend it. Are you?
 
Attilio Corbo, Palm Harbor
 
Get the troops out of harm's way
 
Re: Turkey gets presidential pardon, Nov. 25.
Thanks so much for publishing the picture of the president pardoning the turkey. It was hard for me to tell them apart. The presidential pardon we really need is of our troops. It's time to bring them out of harm's way in this phony war being fought to avenge an alleged attempt on the first President Bush's life.
I support our troops! Stop having them killed for nothing that will ever have anything to do with national defense.
 
Maynard J. Hirshon, Seminole
 

Graphic

 
CARTOON, DON ADDIS; An elderly man walking with a cane and with bandages covering his arms says, "Careful . . . he bites," as his dog barks "AARP, AARP, AARP."

Load-Date: November 26, 2003


End of Document