A SCHOLAR URGES STUDY OF TERRORISM'S CAUSES
The New York Times
July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 580 words
Byline: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH
Body


Although incidents of terrorism are increasing, only a ''tiny fraction'' of the academic community is examining the causes and prevention of violence, according to a leading behavioral scientist who heads the Carnegie Corporation.
''We live in a world rampant with terrorism, but we take no time to reflect on the underlying causes of violence,'' the scientist, Dr. David A. Hamburg, wrote in the annual report of the Carnegie Corporation, one of the country's oldest and wealthiest foundations.
''This is almost a nonsubject,'' Dr. Hamburg wrote. ''It is not being examined in education, the media, in government or business and certainly not in the broad community.''
Dr David A Hamburg, behavioral scientist and head of Carnegie Corporation, claims that only 'tiny fraction' of academic community is examining causes and prevention of violence, even though incidents of terrorism are increasing (M)
Dr. Hamburg, elaborating on his remarks, said in an interview at his Manhattan office that the development of new weaponry and enhanced communications had added new dimensions to terrorism.
''The subject of violence is old wine,'' Dr. Hamburg said. ''The new bottle is the technology enabling the contagion to spread easily, such as the notion of spitting in the eye of the most powerful nation in the world.
''Also the possibility for destruction is so much greater - that is what is new. The issue must be faced now in a way it has never been before.''
He is urging university presidents to look at their programs and judge if they adequately examine the causes of violence and terrorism. He also urged business leaders to promote the study of terrorism.
Terrorism appears to have increased markedly, according to the RAND Corporation, which said it counted 180 incidents of international terrorism resulting in nearly 300 deaths in the first five months of this year. Fatalities from the Air-India crash off Ireland last month, suspected of having been caused by a bomb, would raise the death toll to more than 600. Last year, there were 390 reported incidents and 251 deaths.
Dr. Hamburg has had personal experience in dealing with a hostage situation. In 1975, as a Stanford University professor, he obtained the release of four Stanford graduate students abducted from an African research station by a guerrilla group along the border of Zaire and Tanzania.
The students, who were held hostage for two months, were freed as a result of protracted negotiations Dr. Hamburg carried out.
In the Carnegie report, Dr. Hamburg said: ''Small-scale terrorist episodes may not seem to present a formidable capability to wreak havoc. But they do. If they continue to spread, aided by more powerful weapons and more publicity, they have the potential eventually not only of injuring a great many innocent victims but also of arousing repressive responses by powerful governments in democratic societies as well as totalitarian ones.''
The Carnegie report was sent to a number of university presidents and evoked favorable responses, several saying they hoped it would lead to discussions among academic leaders.
Dr. Donald Kennedy, the president of Stanford University, said in a telephone interview that universities should do more research, but that ''the blunt fact is it is extremely difficult and they may not know how.''
Dr. Harold T. Shapiro, president of the University of Michigan, said he welcomed Dr. Hamburg's ''provocative'' suggestion to universities to look at their current studies.


End of Document