A scholarly approach to fighting terrorism;
Institutions offer homeland security courses
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 16, 2004 Tuesday MONTCO EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL NEWS MONTGOMERY COUNTY & THE REGION; Pg. B01
Length: 860 words
Byline: Bonnie L. Cook INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


When machinist Kevin T. McDevitt lost his job last September, he went right into crisis mode. With luck, he'll stay there until he retires.
McDevitt, 50, enrolled in a terrorism-response curriculum offered for the first time this term at Montgomery County Community College in Blue Bell.
He hopes to market himself as a public-safety official at the local level. If a crisis comes, man and municipality will be ready.
"I know they're out there," McDevitt said of terrorists, "and I know it's a field that's going to expand."
Academia's answer to 9/11, the coursework is a collaboration of six institutions that have banded together as the Collegiate Consortium for Workforce and Economic Development.
Students can work toward a certificate or degree in the emergency-response field by taking courses at Drexel University, Bucks County Community College, Delaware County Community College, Montgomery County Community College, Community College of Philadelphia, or Camden County College in South Jersey.
The courses are aimed primarily at police, fire and emergency medical workers, but aren't limited to them, said Benn Prybutok, the Montgomery County Community College professor who worked on the curriculum.
Students learn to recognize dangerous situations; how to plan for and respond to attacks; how to marshal resources; and how to work with local, state and federal agencies, Prybutok said.
First responders who want to enhance their skills can choose a 31-credit nondegree certificate. Those aiming higher can work toward a 63-credit associate's degree in emergency management and planning. The degree folds seamlessly into two more years of study for a bachelor's degree at Drexel University in Philadelphia.
McDevitt, an East Norriton father of five, is going for his associate's degree in emergency management and planning. In January he became one of the first two emergency-management majors at Montgomery County Community College. He's moonlighting as a Realtor.
It's not easy for a 50-year-old to return to school, McDevitt said, but he hopes the payoff will be a starting salary of $32,000. With experience, those wages could double, Prybutok said.
McDevitt, a 20-year volunteer firefighter in East Norriton, said that until Sept. 11, 2001, he always considered terrorism something that happened to other people.
"In the 1990s, I took hazardous-material and terrorist training," McDevitt said, "but it was always about Germany and Japan. I never thought it would happen in the U.S."
Prybutok, 56, said the curriculum grew out of an increasing awareness that there are people working to "do us harm."
Another trigger, Prybutok said, was the realization among academics and public planners that homeland security really does begin at home.
"Overwhelmingly, a lot of the burden has fallen on local government to marshal resources and fight the battle," he said.
One who is sharing her knowledge toward this end is Gina Bradley, chief of operations of Springfield Ambulance Association Station 311 in Wyndmoor. A paramedic for 19 years, she holds a master's degree in public safety.
Bradley, 39, teaches emergency planning and incident management at Montgomery County Community College.
In the past, she said, training for first responders focused on patient evaluation and resuscitation. Now it means managing the disaster scene, developing leadership skills, and ensuring the safety of emergency workers.
"Now we have to be familiar with anthrax, ricin," Bradley said. "We're taught to be a little more observant. We're taught to use the area, contain it so no one gets hurt."
About $500,000 for curriculum development began flowing to the consortium two years ago from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry. Students can choose among courses offered by all consortium members. Jason Cohen, an official with the Community College of Philadelphia, said the details of what courses can be taken at each school are being worked out.
So far, 18 students have signed up for the classes at Montgomery County Community College.
Sixty-four are enrolled at Delaware County Community College, and the first of these graduate in May.
Bucks County Community College will offer an associate's degree in emergency management starting this fall. The Community College of Philadelphia offers no such degree but may later. Camden County College gave noncredit certificates in emergency management to eight students last spring.
Christopher J. D'Ascenzo, director of business development and homeland security systems for Lockheed Martin Corp., is pursuing a certificate in emergency management at Montgomery County Community College. He will use the material in his work, creating computer systems to protect the public.
D'Ascenzo, 44, said he saw antiterrorism training as a timely, valuable tool for professionals, and a good career move for young job-seekers.
"I'd like to see them pursue these careers," he said. "We're going to need them."
Contact staff writer Bonnie L. Cook at 610-313-8232 or bcook@phillynews.com.  
For Information
The collegiate consortium Web site is www.collegiateconsortium.org. For other information, contact the individual colleges in the consortium.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Gina Bradley, a paramedic for 19 years, teaches an emergency planning and incident management class.
BOB WILLIAMS, Inquirer Suburban Staff
Kevin McDevitt (left) of East Norriton and William Clark of North Wales take notes during a class at Montgomery County Community College. Six institutions in the region have collaborated to offer a terror-response curriculum.
BOB WILLIAMS, Inquirer Suburban Staff
John Hearn of Philadelphia listens during class. The courses are aimed at police, fire and emergency workers but are open to all.
Benn Prybutok worked on the homeland security curriculum.

Load-Date: August 23, 2005


End of Document