A scientific look at terrorism;
'Enormous vulnerabilities' cited
 Philadelphia Daily News
June 25, 2002 Tuesday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: N; Pg. 08; news
Length: 490 words
Byline: Daily News Wire Services
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States must take steps to protect nuclear plants and the power grid against attacks and may need to reorganize the way government agencies work together, senior scientists said yesterday.
The country also has "enormous vulnerabilities" to a chemical or biological attack, made clear after the Sept. 11 attacks, says the report from the National Academy of Sciences, an independent organization that advises the government.
"We now face a much more sophisticated threat than we could have imagined before September 11th," said Lewis Branscomb, co-chair of the committee that wrote the report.
One top priority will be working with Russia to keep track of nuclear weapons and radioactive material that could be used either in a nuclear attack, or in a "dirty bomb" that would spread radioactive toxins using a conventional blast.
"Planning has been minimal at the federal or local levels for responding to either class of attack," said the report, written by a 24-member committee of experts.
Recommendations from the Academy are usually acted on by Congress and the committee briefed lawmakers on their findings yesterday.
Another major vulnerable area is the nation's huge power grid, which could affect not only lights and industrial power but the water and fuel supply.
"The attacks of Sept. 11 and the release of anthrax spores [in October] revealed enormous vulnerabilities in the U.S. public-health infrastructure and suggested similar vulnerabilities in the agricultural infrastructure as well," the report reads.
It said new drugs and vaccines need to be developed to protect against biological attack, but simple defenses also need to be set up to keep weapons from ever being used in the first place.
The report lists seven urgent priorities, including developing treatments for and vaccines against potential biological weapons; strengthening the power grid; finding better ways to use information technology in analyzing threats and protesting against cyber-attacks; developing better gear and communications for emergency responders; building attack-resistant buildings; developing sensor and surveillance systems; and finding ways to filter and decontaminate air.
The scientists said they were sensitive to accusations that they may be telling attackers what to do. "We didn't describe any vulnerabilities that were not well-documented," Branscomb said.
There were these other developments yesterday:
* The Army is preparing to send 2,000 Pennsylvania National Guardsmen of the 28th Infantry Division to Europe for up to one year as part of Operation Enduring Freedom, America's war on terrorism.
* The United Nations and the New York City Fire Department conducted a joint exercise Sunday - tackling a mock explosion and fire in the 39-story U.N. headquarters building.
* The FBI is visiting libraries nationwide and checking the reading records of people it suspects of having ties to terrorists or plotting an attack, officials say.

Load-Date: June 25, 2002


End of Document