A SET BACK TO TERRORISM AND MORE: REAGAN'S PROGRAMS STAND TO BENEFIT
The New York Times
October 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk; ANALYSIS
Length: 1127 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11
Body


In a single stroke, President Reagan has altered the impression held by many, including some within the White House, that the American Government is virtually helpless in the face of terrorism, aides and political analysts asserted today.
Of almost equal importance was the lift that Mr. Reagan's advisers expect to gain for the Administration's agenda in domestic and foreign affairs.
The White House is counting on a ripple effect from Mr. Reagan's decision to do more than lift his already high personal popularity and provide a shot of pride for the American public.
Key Reagan aides say the President has stengthened the perception of his leadership just as he enters one of the most critical periods of his Presidency.
They are particularly optimistic about the chance that Mr. Reagan can use the dramatic events this week to recharge his flagging drive for tax revisions and regain some lost ground in the public relations battle leading up to his summit meeting with with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
''This was a God-sent opportunity,'' said a senior Reagan aide, who described the mood in the White House today as ''exhuberant.''
Several officials said that, although it would be premature to predict the long-term implications of intercepting the hijackers, the rise in popularity could add to Mr. Reagan political muscle at a time when his critics have been predicting a decline. White House officials have long counted on of a strong Reagan Presidency to drive their initiatives through Congress.
''I think it will been seen as very courageous, but very appropriate and I think the public wants both,'' said Mitchell E. Daniels Jr., the President's assistant for political and governmental affairs. ''This confirms the quality the President's supporters have always admired in him and to that extent should strengthen his hand generally.''
Edward J. Rollins, the former chief White House political strategist and now a Washington political consultant, said that the operation against the pirates came at a critical time in that it will lift Mr. Reagan's popularity and erase any notion that he was ''tough on rhetoric, but short on action'' in the international arena.
''I think it puts him in a point of very strong leadership going into the summit,'' Mr. Rollins said.
Because the successful operation comes on the heels of the Senate's passing a bill supported by the President requiring a balanced Federal budget in five years and some other legislative achievements, officials said it provided a sense of momentum for the White House.
''My judgment is that the last two weeks have been the best two weeks we've had since the President announced he'd run for reelection in Jan. 1984,'' said Richard Wirthlin, Mr. Reagan's longtime pollster and a Republican political strategist.
Another political strategist took a larger view of the successful mission in making a similar point.
''If this proves a single thing, it proves to me that Ronald Reagan is not going to be a lame duck, because he always has the ability to act bold and decisively and that's what he did in this situation,'' said Lee Atwater, a former White House political operative.
The President, as he has throughout criticial periods in his political life, took a gamble when he ordered American fighter planes to intercept an Egyptian airliner carrying four hijackers, who had seized an Italian cruise liner Monday. As so often has been the case in his career, the gamble paid off.
''I can't think of many people, whether partisan Democrats or Reagan Republicans, who don't feel better about the Presidency today, than they did yesterday,'' Mr. Wirthlin said.
By capturing the hijackers, the officials agreed, Mr. Reagan showed that the Presidency as an institution can respond to an act of terrorism, even though the drama is still unfolding as attempts are underway to begin legal proceedings against the hijackers.
One White House aide, who accompanied Mr. Reagan on a trip to Chicago Thursday, said the President himself had voiced the frustration of being unable to strike back against terrorist aboard a helicopter flying him to Air Force One.
''The President has been hesitant to retaliate against terrorism because Ronald Reagan doesn't want to kill innocent civilians,'' the official said. ''In the previous cases, its been a case of how to go about hitting those hard who have been involved without doing extensive damage to other people. This was a beautiful piece of work.''
Mr. Attwater said: ''For the first time since the whole hostage era began, the American people have been able to see a concrete action and that's reassuring. It's a major turning point in the whole hostage era.''
But beyond the institutional aspect, Mr. Reagan also addressed a nagging criticism of his own Presidency in the second term related to assertions that it has been floundering amid uncertain leadership. Senior White House aides have been particularly sensitive to such assertions, which have surfaced as they and the President have come under attack for such issues as Mr. Reagan's trip to the Bitburg cemetery, the Congressional stalemate on the budget and the campaign to overhaul the Federal tax system.
In this instance, the Administration showed that it could skillfully carry out a delicate military operation. Moreover, it came in the same week that the proposal endorsed by Mr. Reagan to balance the budget in five years prevailed in the Senate and a textile bill dubbed as protectionist by Mr. Reagan passed in the House by a margin inadequate to sustain a threatened Presidential veto.
Officials say those developments are evidence that the problems that greeted Mr. Reagan when the White House staff changed as he began his second term are now behind him and that he has the ability to move successful on several fronts at the same time. Since August, they said, the staff has managed to alter what appeared to be potentially damaging situations in terms of the Administration's policies on South Africa, the deficit, the trade area and, with the military operation Thursday night, terrorism.
While aboard Air Force One as he returned from his August vacation at his ranch near Santa Barbara, Calif., Mr. Reagan had asked that a plan be developed to generate a balanced budget, a senior aide said. Less than three month later, the aide said, that had been accomplished, with the ''Democrats going from an offensive position to a defensive position.''
Mr. Reagan's popularity rose to more than 50 percent from the high 30's following the October 1983 military assault on Grenada, which the Administration called a foreign policy plus. Several pollsters said that the approval rating, now in the mid-60's, would probably climb several points as the result of the operation on Thursday.


End of Document