A shock because it's so exceptional
USA TODAY
April 16, 2013 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 466 words
Body


Steve Chapman, Chicago Tribune: "Explosions that occurred on the Boston Marathon course are a reminder of our vulnerability. But they are also a reminder of how extraordinarily rare terrorism is in this country. What happened in Boston would hardly warrant news coverage in Iraq, which Monday saw 37 people die in at least 20 attacks across the country. It's a shock to Americans because it's so exceptional.  Fortunately, America is just not fertile ground for violent religious or political extremism. In a free, democratic society, the sympathy for expressing one's views through murder is very low. That's our greatest protection against terrorism."
, National Review: "First, it is a mistake to get too far out in front of the initial reports, which are almost always wrong in some details -- sometimes, in some major details.  Second, the government and the media have demonstrated a disturbing tendency to withhold and massage facts in these incidents.  We will know who did this soon. It is counterproductive to do much speculation."
Bill Goodykoontz, The Arizona Republic: "An event like this is incomprehensible. How do we wrap our heads around it? We talk about it, we work it out with our friends, with whoever will listen. Social media gives us an opportunity to try to sort things out, but it comes with a heavy responsibility, particularly those in the media (who, by the way, have just as hard a time making sense out of the incredible as everyone else). The media coverage was by no means perfect. But if anything related to such a senseless situation can be called encouraging, it was the attitude among those on social media toward reporters and news outlets that they could wait for the information, thanks. Just make sure it's accurate when you deliver it."
Leslie Barker, The Dallas Morning News: "Life and perspective and memories can change in an instant. What started out as a day with perfect weather for a marathon -- perfect weather for the simple act of living and breathing -- turned into one that even a nightmare could hardly conjure up. But what also seems to be coming out of this -- at least from the back-and-forths I'm reading  -- is the power of caring, and how we humans tend to look after each other."
Melanie Tannenbaum, Scientific American: "When faced with unimaginable tragedy, in a terrifying situation where people did not know how to respond or behave, when no one could know if there would be any more bombs being detonated or any more people being harmed, in a set of circumstances that, by all logic and reason, should have discouraged most people from lending a hand, people still jumped into the crowd and helped. In droves. They stepped up, pitched in, helped strangers. They put themselves in potential danger to make sure that strangers were OK." 

Load-Date: April 16, 2013


End of Document