A shadowy pillar of terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 19, 2004 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 566 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- Ayman al-Zawahri, an Egyptian-born surgeon, has been an intellectual inspiration and a hands-on planner for Islamic extremists throughout the world.
At 52, the bearded al-Zawahri is also among the most wanted men on earth, with a dozen aliases ranging from Ustaz, or revered teacher, to The Doctor. The United States has a $25 million reward awaiting his captors. He faces a string of convictions and indictments in many countries.
AJC
And while he often is described as ranking just below Osama bin Laden in the al-Qaida terror organization held responsible for the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, some rate his significance higher.
"He is the guiding man of the whole movement," said Mamoun Fandy, a senior fellow at the United States Institute of Peace. "It would be a major blow to al-Qaida if they get Zawahri."
Al-Zawahri grew up in Cairo in a family of privilege. His father was a university professor of pharmacology, and the family had distinguished ancestors and prominent contemporaries. The boy's path to prominence became one of resistance and violence.
"He's like the black sheep they don't want to talk about," said Ed Blanche, a writer in Beirut who has chronicled al-Zawahri's exploits.
Al-Zawahri's first significant encounter with the law apparently came when he was arrested at the age of 15 for belonging to the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood.
He earned his medical degree, and by the 1970s, according to numerous accounts, was heavily involved with Islamic Jihad, whose members were accused of assassinating Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in 1981. Al-Zawahri was arrested, though his involvement in the killing could not be proved. He served three years on a related conviction.
Not long after his release, al-Zawahri left Egypt and headed to Afghanistan, then the spearhead for Islamic extremists fighting the occupying Soviets.
When he and bin Laden joined forces to create al-Qaida --- Arabic for "The Base" --- it was al-Zawahri who is credited with providing the strong philosophical underpinning.
"Generally, he is seen as being the eminence grise behind the whole formation of al-Qaida and the international fundamentalist front that emerged from that," said Blanche.
Author Peter Bergen, who interviewed bin Laden in 1997, agreed with others that al-Zawahri's effect on bin Laden was significant: "It was Ayman who radicalized bin Laden and suggested that he start attacking the United States."
Bergen also noted that al-Zawahri has continued to issue tapes and exhort his followers. Last summer, for instance, he spoke out about the detainees being held by the United States at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
"The true battle has not begun yet, and the American people, whose armies killed our women and children, if they were keen on their future, and on their future generations, they'd better follow reason and logic quickly, as regret will no longer help," he said, according to a transcript.
Al-Zawahri has written floridly and extensively about his philosophy, including a memoir, "Knights Under the Prophet's Banner: Meditations on the Jihadist Movement," said to have been completed while he was hiding after the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001.
Al-Zawahri also has traveled extensively, including fund-raising trips to the United States in the 1980s.
"He came to California and Pittsburgh," Fandy said.
Since fleeing Afghanistan, al-Zawahri has escaped capture and death.

Graphic

 
Photo: Some analysts believe Ayman al-Zawahri (left) is as important to al-Qaida as the better-known Osama bin Laden. / Al-Jazeera via Associated Press

Load-Date: March 19, 2004


End of Document