A Shocking Confrontation With Terror on Home Turf
The New York Times
March 15, 2004 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13; BOMBINGS IN MADRID: THE EUROPEANS
Length: 844 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Dateline: BERLIN, March 14 
Body


This weekend, many Europeans suddenly confronted the prospect that full-scale attacks by Islamic terrorists were no longer somebody else's problem, as they might have thought, but an immediate and mortal threat.
 After Sept. 11, and especially during the fierce debates leading up to the Iraq war, many analysts say that the Europeans, though deeply sympathetic to the Americans after Sept. 11, did not really believe that they faced the same danger. 
 But now after the Madrid bombings it seems likely that the differences will narrow, perhaps substantially, if Islamic militants are found responsible.
 If so, Europeans will also watch how politics plays out, both among the countries that backed the war in Iraq, like Britain and Italy, and those that did not, like Germany and France.
 The come-from-behind victory of Spain's Socialist Party in the elections on Sunday may be a first sign of that. The Madrid bombings may bring a renewed sense of unity within the Western alliance.
 That does not appear to be what happened Sunday in Spain, however, where the success of the Socialist candidate, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, suggested that the attacks had jolted the Spanish public into deep dissatisfaction and irritation at the incumbent government of Jose Maria Aznar, who, in supporting the Iraq war, seems now to many Spaniards to have subjected Spain to a revenge attack.
 Reports that Al Qaeda bore responsibility, inconclusive as they were, overshadowed the final days of the campaign. Because the Socialists were well behind in the polls before the attack, and Mr. Rodriguez was harshly critical of Mr. Aznar for his support of the Bush administration's policy on Iraq, it will probably appear, at least at first, that the terrorist attack and public reaction to it swung the election results.
 But other factors could be at work, including widespread discontent with the government's handling of the crisis, including what seems now a too hasty effort to blame Basque separatists and to rule out the possibility of Islamic responsibility.
 Over time, if the attacks do prove to have decided the election, that could fulfill the fears of some analysts, who were saying even before the vote count began that a victory by the Socialists would be seen as a triumph for the terrorists, whoever they are.
 ''If Aznar loses, it would encourage terrorists to strike again, because they'll believe they brought about his collapse,'' Guido Olimpio, a terrorism expert at the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera said in an interview on Sunday, a few hours before the Spanish election results became known. ''Other countries that supported Bush, like Italy and Poland, could be next in line.''
 Meanwhile, Europeans were assessing how different their world looks different from before the synchronized bomb attacks in Madrid on Thursday.
 The German government held an emergency meeting on Sunday of its security cabinet, which includes Chancellor Gerhard Schroder, several cabinet ministers, and senior security and police officials. Afterwards, the interior minister, Otto Schily, said Germany was asking for an emergency gathering of European interior ministers and their police and security chiefs to form what he called a ''common assessment'' of the terrorism danger and to ''coordinate how to respond.''
 Mr. Schily spoke of ''a new quality of threat from Islamic terrorism in Europe'' if Muslims are found to be responsible in Madrid.
 Europeans are not strangers to terrorism, having experienced it many times in past decades, perpetrated both by homegrown radicals, like the Italian Red Brigades or the German Red Army Faction, as well as by Middle East militants. 
 But the sort of mass attacks on civilian targets seen by security experts as a new threat, larger in scale and more religiously inspired than previous terrorism, did not strike Europe with full force until last Thursday.
 Italy, like Spain, was among the strongest supporters of the Iraqi invasion, and both countries have contributed troops to the postwar occupation. Indeed, 19 Italians were killed in Nasiriya, Iraq, last November in an attack that American officials have attributed to Al Qaeda.
 If Islamic groups did cause the bombings in Madrid, Mr. Olimpio said, Italians could put more pressure on their prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, to withdraw the Italian contingent.
 While the general public in Europe may not have felt at direct risk before the Madrid attacks, European security officials and terrorism experts saw a greater vulnerability.
 ''Maybe public opinion will catch up with government and expert opinion in having a realistic appraisal of the extent to which Islamic Jihadists pose a threat to Europe,'' said Gary Samore, a terrorism expert at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
 He said Germans should not feel exempt from terrorism because their government opposed the war in Iraq; the Germans do station troops in Afghanistan, for instance.
 ''If Al Qaeda had the opportunity to blow up a train in Berlin,'' he asked, ''why would they hesitate?''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Spanish soldiers in Diwaniya, Iraq, at a memorial service yesterday for the victims of the Madrid bombings. The Spanish flag flew at half-staff. (Photo by European Pressphoto Agency)                                                                         

Load-Date: March 15, 2004


End of Document