A Slaying Inflames Chilean Rightists
The New York Times
April 3, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Column 4;
Length: 568 words
Byline: By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to The New York Times

By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile, April 2
Body


Angry demonstrations erupted here today after the killing of a prominent Chilean Senator and close adviser to Gen. Augusto Pinochet.
Calling for a return to power by the military and shouting insults at the democratically elected Government of President Patricio Aylwin, hundreds of supporters of Chile's far-right political party, the Independent Democratic Union, flocked to a memorial service in downtown Santiago for the adviser, Jaime Guzman, who was killed on Monday evening.
"Pinochet, Pinochet!" the crowd called. "Aylwin killed him! Aylwin killed him!"
Mr. Guzman was gunned down as he left the Catholic University Law School in Santiago, where he was a professor. Though doctors at the Military Hospital tried to save him, he died three hours later.
 
A Crisis for Government
 Mr. Guzman, 44 years old, was legal adviser to the Pinochet military junta and played a central role in writing the new Constitution that the general established in 1980.
Though acts of political violence have been on the rise for a number of weeks, the shooting of Mr. Guzman is by far the most serious and politically explosive to date, since it is the closest that terrorists have reached to General Pinochet's inner circle of current and former advisers.
It also creates a crisis for the year-old Aylwin Government, which many Chileans accuse of being soft on terrorism and unprepared to cope with the rise in terrorist attacks. Moreover, it complicates an already touchy political climate for Mr. Aylwin, who plans to leave on an 18-day tour of Europe on Saturday.
A month ago, Mr. Aylwin made public a human rights report that essentially blamed General Pinochet for the killing or disappearance of more than 2,000 Chileans during his 17-year rule, which began with a coup in 1973. But while blaming the army commander, it went no further. It could not force investigations or prosecutions of police, top army commanders or General Pinochet himself.
 
Nation Deeply Divided
 General Pinochet and others on the right had warned before the release of the report that it would incite violence from the left.
The killing of Mr. Guzman and the demonstrations that followed showed how this country, just having returned to a democratic Government a year ago, remains deeply divided in its sentiments about General Pinochet's rule. While many Chileans acknowledge that under military rule there were abuses of human rights, they nevertheless add that the military Government restored law and order, which many now fear is being threatened.
And while only a minority seem to want a Pinochet comeback, the general's presence as army commander serves as a constant reminder of the fragility of the democratic process.
Today, two left-wing groups claimed responsibility for the killing, the Patriotic Front of Manuel Rodriguez and the Rebel and Popular Forces of Lautaro.
General Pinochet refused to talk to reporters today, saying only that he considered the killing an assassination rather than a random killing. Military officials said that their patience was wearing thin.
Mr. Aylwin, at a brief news conference, rejected charges by opposition political parties that his Government was unprepared to deal with terrorism and rejected calls that he cancel his European trip.
"If I suspended this mission because of a terrorist act, that would be the equivalent of saying that the Government is at the mercy of the terrorists," Mr. Aylwin said.

Load-Date: April 3, 1991


End of Document