A small measure of justice
Daily News (New York)
December 26, 2015 Saturday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 24
Length: 424 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


Justice took 14 years, far too long, for the heroic first responders who sacrificed their health - and sometimes their lives - amid the toxic air during rescue and recovery efforts at the World Trade Center. Fourteen years before Congress at last passed a law guaranteeing these heroes the medical care and financial assistance they deserve, without cruel bureaucratic deadlines.
For the 52 Americans held hostage for 444 days after Iran seized the U.S. embassy in Tehran, from 1979 to 1981, it has taken 35 years. But now, as part of that same omnibus bill that included the Zadroga Law, Congress passed - and President Obama signed - the Justice for United States Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Act.
A new victims compensation fund will disburse millions to the Iranian hostages or their families - as well as to other Americans who suffered from acts of foreign terrorism.
That would include the victims of the Beirut bombings of U.S. outposts in 1983 and 1984 and their families, as well as the twin 1998 U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. It should also cover victims of the deadly 1993 World Trade Center attack.
The money for the fund is, appropriately, coming from $1 billion of the $9 billion penalty paid by French bank BNP Paribas for violating sanctions against Iran, Sudan and Cuba, as well as from proceeds from the auction of the 650 Fifth Ave., the $500 million office building owned by Iran and confiscated by the courts to pay terror victims.
Prosecutors from the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan led the charge to seize that property in 2008; thanks go to them. Finally, some of those who profited from terrorism will be the ones paying the bill.
A special master to be appointed by Attorney General Loretta Lynch will decide how much to allot to victims killed or injured by terror. Written into the law is a special schedule of damages for Iran embassy hostages - who were not physically injured or killed, as others were: $10,000 for each day of confinement, coming to $4.4 million per man, plus $600,000 for each wife and child.
The money won't erase the terror or bring back the time spent in captivity, but it will be a measure of compensation denied over the decades by their government. Terrorism came into many American living rooms for the first time during the Iran hostage crisis. Through the 1980s to Sept. 11, 2001, to the present, it's been part of national life ever since.
The Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund is to last 10 years. We hope and pray there will not be a need for another fund.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: December 31, 2015


End of Document