A STATE DEPT. PURGE
The New York Times
November 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 875 words
Byline: By Carla Anne Robbins
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Robert White, the former ambassador to El Salvador, recently accused the Administration of purging the State Department's Latin American bureau. Senior officials who normally would have received ambassador-level appointments are being passed over for promotion or forced to retire.
What is worse, according to Mr. White, is that the Reagan appointees have almost no experience in Central America or Latin America: ''The Reagan team has gotten rid of all of them in a vengeful way. It is like what happened in the State Department after we lost China. Only this time it is quieter.''
Carla Anne Robbins op-ed comment discusses Reagan Administration's "purge" of State Department's Latin American bureau
Mr. White isn't the only one who thinks these changes are unusual.  Hewson Ryan, professor of public diplomacy at Tufts University's Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy and a former Ambassador to Honduras, said: ''This is the first time at least since World War II that there has been a total purge without anybody in the front office getting the normal onward assignment - an ambassador-level appointment.''
While ''purge'' may be too strong a word, there have been drastic changes in the front office of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs.  Of the four career Foreign Service officers responsible for Latin American policy under Jimmy Carter, all with extensive experience in the region, none has received an onward posting. Two have retired, one has gone on academic leave, and the fourth has not as yet received an onward assignment. Only three positions have been filled, and only one appointee has had significant experience in Latin America. The new Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs, Thomas Enders, is a highly qualified career diplomat but has never held a post in the region and speaks neither Spanish nor Portugese.
The department denies that there has been a purge, pointing out that personnel changes are normal in any new Administration. As for the lack of regional experience among the new administrators, officials reply that it is the Secretary of State's prerogative to appoint whoever has his confidence. The Administration's rejection of the Carter human rights policy is apparently so vehement that no senior Foreign Service officer in the bureau was able to earn that confidence.
The effects of the purge will be costly and could be felt worldwide. In Washington, the purge undoubtedly will damage the Foreign Service. A career Service should assure our policy makers of a ready supply of experienced administrators. Sacrificing career officers because of their association with a previous Administration's policies sends a signal to other Service officers: They must concern themselves with the vagaries of politics rather than implementing policies. This Administration will deprive itself, and future administrations, of a nonpolitical Foreign Service corps.
The purge has also been felt in Latin American capitals. The Administration says it has not abandoned human rights, only that it has broadened the policy focus to include a concern for international terrorism and Communist subversion. But by removing every major diplomat associated with the rights policy, the Administration has in effect signaled a complete retreat on human rights, and sacrificed any hopes of moderating the domestic policies of the ''friendly authoritarians'' in the region. Because the Administration has placed Latin America at center stage, a purge of so-called human rights advocates in the bureau has implications that go beyond events in Washington or Latin America.
The purge will hurt all aspects of our Latin American policy. The Administration is top-heavy with globalists. This myopia already was apparent when the Administration issued its apocryphal white paper on El Salvador in February. Today, as a result of the purge, the Administration has almost completely sacrificed regional expertise in the upper echelons of the bureau. There is no one left to temper the White House's globalism with a regional perspective.
Of course, even having regional expertise is no guarantee of regional sensitivity in this Administration, as evidenced by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick's remarks in Costa Rica. Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who first caught Ronald Reagan's eye with her writings on Latin America's friendly authoritarians, angered Costa Rican leaders when she suggested that the only way for Costa Rica to defend itself against international terrorism was to revive its military. The Costa Ricans are proud that their country is Central America's only surviving democracy. They believe they have managed to avoid the region's chronic military authoritarianism precisely because they disbanded their military 33 years ago.
If the Administration wishes to be a major influence for democracy in Latin America and to maintain the respect of its allies worldwide, it cannot continue to make such mistakes. It cannot afford to sacrifice regional expertise and specialized knowledge. No matter how much its foreign policies differ from its predecessor's, a sensitivity to regional realities continues to be indispensable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Carla Anne Robbins is finishing a book on Cuban foreign policy.


End of Document