A STRONG NATION IS REASSURED; THE FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM IS FAR FROM OVER. YET GETTING BIN LADEN IS A PROFOUND VICTORY.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A13
Length: 346 words
Body


American courage and determination won in the end against the cold heart and mad mind behind the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Good riddance to Osama bin Laden.
President Barack Obama's dramatic announcement late Sunday about the discovery and demise of bin Laden at a secret compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, should reassure our nation that it is strong - that the United States will persevere for justice against the dark forces of senseless violence.
Navy SEALs completed the risky night mission with a firefight at the compound leading to a bullet in bin Laden's head.
The SEALs lost a helicopter to mechanical problems - but not a single man - before taking custody of bin Laden's body, which was buried at sea.
Credit all of our men and women in uniform for their bravery and expertise. They have fought - and some have died - for nearly a decade since 9/11 to hunt down bin Laden and weaken his al-Qaida network.
This includes many dedicated and daring young people from Wisconsin. Not all made it home. And some who did still suffer from the physical and psychological wounds of combat.
Those sacrifices will not be forgotten.
Neither will the thousands of victims from 9-11 who died at the World Trade Center in New York, at the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and in the Pennsylvania field where the last of the hijacked planes crashed - thanks to heroic passengers who forced it to the ground to spare a final target.
The fight against terrorism is far from over. Yet getting bin Laden is a profound victory for America and its many allies. It also is good for the Middle East, nudging this troubled region closer to peace.
Bin Laden's death has revived a strong sense of unity in America that's similar to what we felt after the 9-11 tragedies. But this time, our common bond is based on the confidence of accomplishment.
Let's cherish this moment and the progress it represents toward a better world - both here in the United States and around the globe.
Let's use our passion for freedom and sense of purpose to advance the forces of good toward true peace and prosperity.

Graphic

 
JACQUELYN MARTIN - Associated Press The White House in Washington is seen through an American flag being held by visitors on Monday, the day after Osama bin Laden was killed.

Load-Date: May 5, 2011


End of Document