A Surprising Cause for the Surge in Terrorism
The Forward
June 7, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Editorial; Pg. 8
Length: 1044 words
Byline: 
Contact J. J. Goldberg at goldberg@forward.com or visit his blog at www.forward.com
Body


Could Osama bin Laden  be right?
President Obama's big May 23 policy  speech on terrorism was one for the history  books, but not for the reason you  think. It was one of those rare moments in  the life of a nation when people rise to debate  their future and we discover that everyone   but everyone  is full of baloney .
I say this in all seriousness.
The president's essential argument is that  the war on terror must be rethought because  it's wreaking havoc on the Constitution. At  some point the urgency of defending ourselves  against terrorists must be weighed against the
urgency of defending our  freedoms in an open society.  We've done a pretty  good job so far, but every  war must end at some  point, even if victory isn't  total. Neither I nor any  president can promise the  total defeat of terror.
Critics have followed  two lines of thought.  Liberals say he hasn't
gone far enough. Preserving our freedoms is  more important than another battlefield coup.  Republicans say he's giving in to the terrorists.  We need to fight on to victory.
The question is, how far along are we in this  war? How much safer are we now than we  were before we started?
The answer: We are much, much worse off  than we were when we started. Whatever it  may have done to the Constitution, the war  on terror has been great for terror.
In plain terms, the number of terrorist incidents  per year around the world has more  than quadrupled in the decade since we  declared war on terror. Fatalities have doubled.  To be specific, there were 982 terrorist  incidents worldwide in 2002, resulting in  3,823 deaths. In 2011, the latest year for which  numbers are available, there were 4,564 incidents  resulting in 7,493 deaths. Simply put,  the war on terror has made terror worse.
The good news is that deaths have been  declining since 2007, when they peaked at  10,000.
The numbers come courtesy of an Australianbased  think tank, the Institute for Economics  and Peace, which published its first-ever  Global Terrorism Index in December 2012. It  works with a terrorism database maintained  by the University of Maryland.
I found them by sheer accident. After listening  to Obama's speech, I went looking  for some real numbers on how the war has  succceeded since 9/11. I quickly discovered  that numbers on global terrorism aren't easy  to come by.
The main source used to be an annual  report, Patterns of Global Terrorism, compiled  for Congress by the State Department starting  in 1985. It stopped in 2004, however, after  congressional Democrats charged that the  numbers were being cooked. The 2002 report  had shown a worldwide total of 198 incidents  and 725 deaths. The 2003 total dropped to  190 incidents and 307 deaths. Democrats cited  independent sources showing figures in  the thousands, not hundreds, and that 2003  marked an all-time high, not a decline.
Beginning in 2004 the State Department  replaced Patterns with a new publication,
Country Reports in Terrorism. It gave data for  dozens of countries but no worldwide totals.  The Obama administration resumed publishing  worldwide totals in 2009. Incidents now  topped 10,000. There was no way to compare  current figures with earlier ones.
The Australian institute stepped in last year  with its own study, the Global Terrorism  Index. It examined trends in 158 countries  over the course of a decade, starting with  2002, immediately after the 9/11 attacks.
The Index uses a University of Maryland definition  for terrorism, casting a somewhat narrower  net than the Obama State Department.  Terrorism is defined as threatened or actual  use of illegal force and violence by a non-state  actor to attain a political, economic,  religious or social goal through coercion and  intimidation.
Actions by governments are not included.  Neither are individual acts of passion that  could be defined as hate crimes, even when  seemingly motivated by religious or political  fervor.
The report lists 15 groups responsible for the  most incidents or deaths. The Afghan Taliban  is far in the lead in both categories, followed  by other Islamic groups including Al Qaeda  in Iraq and the Somali Al Shabaab. Other  highly prolific groups include the Colombian  Marxist group FARC, the Communist Party of  India-Maoist and the Sri Lankan nationalist  Tamil Tigers.
The report doesn't mention right-wing  Christian and anti-abortion groups that are  responsible for roughly half of all terrorists  deaths in the United States in the past decade.  However, given that U. S. fatalities total fewer  than 60 over the decade, the number is statistically  insignificant in the global pattern.
Examining the statistics by country, the  vast majority of incidents and deaths prove  to involve Islamic insurgencies in a handful  of countries. Iraq, Pakistan and Afghanistan  are responsible for fully half of all the world's  64,000 terrorist deaths over the decade. Iraq  alone accounts for more than one-third.
Next in line, in order, are India, Yemen,  Somalia, Nigeria, Thailand, Russia and  Philippines. Together, the top 10 hot spots  account for 87% of all terrorist fatalities since  2002. Of those, only India and Philippines  have significant insurgencies that aren't  Islamic-related.
Of the 158 countries surveyed, only 31 had  no terrorist incidents at all. Terrorism in North  America was virtually negligible. Europe had  19 times as many deaths as the United States.
Perhaps the report's most striking bit of news  is the timing. Most non-Islamic terrorism has  declined precipitously over the decade. But  each of the most troubled countries, Iraq,  Pakistan and Afghanistan, saw its numbers  rise explosively after the United States military  moved in. Also striking, the numbers  plateaued in 2007 and began to decline as  American involvement began to scale down.
We tend to search for a great many reasons  to explain the rise of Islamic terrorism, but  the message most often recited by the terrorists  themselves is the simplest: We want you  out of our countries. Even Osama bin Laden  began his anti-American war after America  set up a permanent military presence in his  native Saudi Arabia.
The conclusion is sobering: It could be that  the most important single cause of terrorism  is  the war on terror.

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: June 9, 2013


End of Document