A SURFEIT OF WEST BANK LAW
The New York Times
September 24, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 734 words
Byline: By Jonathan Kolatch ; Jonathan Kolatch writes on the Middle East and Far East.
Body


The trial that resumed last week in Jerusalem against 27 Jews accused of acts of terror against the Arab population of the West Bank raises one question: can a country that claims to be a democracy apply different laws to people living side by side?
The defendants are charged with killing and intimidating Arabs; bombing the cars of two Arab mayors, shearing off their legs; killing three Arabs at the Islamic College in Hebron; and wiring five Arab buses for explosives.
The accused talk not of terrorism but of fear and frustration. They were foot soldiers sent to establish a Jewish presence in biblical Israel. They say they were provided with the amenities - roads, houses, water, electricity - yet largely left to fend for their own security. ''We felt ourselves being abandoned by our Government and army,'' said one of the accused. ''We decided to respond.''
Jonathan Kolatch Op-Ed Article on Jerusalem trial of 27 Jews charged with anti-Arab terrorism on West Bank warns democratic Israeli legal system must not tolerate dual system of justice (S)
There is an Arab side to the story. A report prepared by the Deputy Attorney General of Israel, Judith Karp, asserts that most complaints filed with Israeli authorities by West Bank Arabs against Jews were shelved because of a systemic lethargy in pursuing alleged offenses by Jews. Much of Israel took issue with the report, calling it another instance of self-righteousness by self-hating Jews - the
 diaspora complex. But an Israeli official in a position to know told me that it is accurate.  Beyond the question of guilt or innocence, the Jerusalem trials underscore a maze of legal and quasi-legal inconsistency, overlapping, confusion and inequity that, if allowed to continue, will preclude the smooth co-existence of two populations that seem destined to live together for a long time.  West Bank Jews today are governed under Israeli law; West Bank Arabs under ''West Bank law'' - a mishmash of Jordanian, Israeli military and international law. If a West Bank Jew steals from a West Bank Arab, he is tried according to Israeli civil law before a civilian court. If the situation is reversed, the Arab is tried according to ''West Bank law'' before an Israeli military court. Yet, in the discovery phase, the Jew is investigated by the military police, the Arab by the civilian Israeli police. Where both Arabs and Jews are involved in a crime, two systems of justice have to be called upon.  Israeli law and West Bank law provide for extreme remedies in security situations. Yet, different norms of application have evolved. Using West Bank law, the Israeli policy of curfew, detention without formal charging and demolition of houses before trial has proved effective.  Israeli law provides similar avenues. When suspected members of the Jewish underground were held incommunicado, however, a loud cry was heard in Israel. This same cry will now be heard from Arabs, who will not forget to ask why, if the houses of Jewish terrorists known to be guilty of murder were not demolished, this same punishment should be applied to Arabs. And the Israeli High Court of Justice will be hard pressed to dissent.
The Book of Leviticus describes two classes of inhabitants in God's land: residents and resident aliens. Israelites would enjoy the privileges of full citizenship. Resident aliens - non-Jews who lived in the community - would be protected by law, much like Israelites, but could not govern, could not marry a Jew and would find it hard to own property. There are Israelis who will tell you that the resident alien of biblical times defines perfectly the Arab living today in Judea, Samaria and Gaza - protected by law, but by a different set of laws and legal standards than apply to Jews.
The democratic Israeli legal system of today will not tolerate second- class citizenship. Since it is now clear that the West Bank has become an integral part of Israel, the Israeli Government must stop taxing the moral standards of the area's inhabitants by prepetuating a dual system of law and justice. Arab and Jew should live under one law, equally applied.
Then it will be for the Arabs to decide whether to claim their rights, apply for citizenship and seize the opportunity to mold their own futures. Or whether they wish to abdicate, letting time and others decide their fate and risk regressing 3,500 years to the status of resident alien.B


End of Document