A tactical victory for terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 31, 1987, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 12A; EDITORIAL
Length: 568 words
Body


Attorney General Edwin Meese III, under pressure from the National    Rifle Association, is obstructing legislation to restrict the spread of    plastic guns that can't be detected by current security screening    devices.
 
     That's strange conduct for the man who once called the American    Civil Liberties Union a "criminals' lobby." It puts Meese at odds    with virtually the entire law enforcement community and on the side of    every terrorist who ever dreamed of hijacking an airliner or    assassinating a president.
     A proposed bill concerning plastic guns already had the support of    other top officials at the Justice and Treasury departments and had    been sent to the Office of Management and Budget for final    administration clearance. Meese withdrew it, however, after NRA    lobbyists got to him. Congress is considering its own legislation but    the chances for passage are poor without an administration endorsement.
 
      Plastic firearms are a clear and present danger. One Florida    manufacturer has testified that he expects to be able to produce a    prototype machine gun in a year or so. While he intends to sell only to    the military, nothing but a new law can guarantee that other    manufacturers will be as scrupulous. The arms industry, meanwhile, is    hailing plastics as a "material of the future" that will make    existing weapons obsolete. Plastic firearms will be cheaper, lighter,    easier to maintain and rust-free, or "dishwasher safe," in the words    of one prospective manufacturer.
 
     Weapons that are lighter, cheaper, simpler and almost foolproof    would have an obvious appeal to the military and the police as well as    to citizens who profess an interest in self-defense. They would also    find an eager market among criminals and terrorists, since there are no    screening devices presently capable of detecting a gun that contains    little or no metal. To make the point, a member of Congress had an aide    smuggle a dismantled Glock 17, which is part plastic, past one of the    Capitol's metal detectors last year. The Secret Service testified    several months ago that the threat from such weapons is "significant    and could have a devastating impact on our protective mission."
 
     The new plastics technology also magnifies the threat of accidental    death to children. A study reported in the June Journal of the    American Medical Association said that such firearms "may resemble    toys even more closely than do those now on the market."
 
         The proposed legislation would prohibit the manufacture of    plastic guns for civilian use for no longer than it takes to perfect    screening devices capable of detecting them. But the NRA and other gun    lobbies are opposing any delay regardless of the new threat to public    safety. They claim that the right to own such a gun transcends any    other consideration. It is an argument long since disparaged by the    Supreme Court.
 
        The gun lobby is unassailable in its belief that there is no    such thing as an acceptable gun law. John M. Snyder, spokesman for the    Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms, went so far at    one congressional hearing as to declare, "The cause of terrorism is    terrorists, not plastics." Haven't we heard that one before?
 
     Members of Congress are expected to know better. So are attorneys    general.   

Load-Date: November 19, 1992


End of Document