A Terrorism Fueled by Inspiration
The Forward
June 7, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Forward Forum; Pg. 9
Length: 1049 words
Byline: 
David Hazony is the editor of The Tower Magazine and is a contributing editor at the Forward.
Body


After Boston and London, we  need to redraw boundaries.
Let's assume that everything we think we know  about the recent terror attacks in London and  Boston turns out to be true. That the people who  carried them out were not actually part of a formal,  organized international effort to kill Westerners  that  they were not paid a salary by a terror group, or given  an explicit order to go operational. They attacked  because they believed in it, but they were not part of  a command chain. They murdered because they were
inspired.  If this is true, then the Western
world might be facing a totally  new kind of terrorism  one that  is highly confusing to our liberty-loving  hearts.
People in policy circles have  known for a long time about the  concept of inspired or leaderless  terrorists, who act in the  name of an ideology and not an  organization. Indeed, unlike groups  like Hezbollah and Lashkar e-Taiba (of the Mumbai  attacks), which maintain massive organizational  capabilities, bank accounts, budgets, supply chains  and training bases  unlike these, a large part of Al  Qaeda's efforts lately have gone to reinventing itself  as an inspirational, rather than organizational, form  of terror. Its goal is to teach like-minded individuals  around the world not only how to make bombs (as  the Tsarnaev brothers did from the aptly named magazine  Inspire), but also how to organize locally, how  to raise their own funds, how to cover their tracks   in short, how to make terrorism happen without the  benefit of old-school organizations.
The effect of this, from America and Europe's perspective,  is to move terrorism into an entirely new  place  one that takes greatest advantage of Western  society's biggest legal, cultural and political blind  spots.
For the second time in a decade and a half, we may  now need to rethink the nature of our struggle against  terror. After 9/11, Western policymakers woke up to  the realization that they faced a new kind of war, organized  by a non-state enemy who could not function  without the sponsorship of states. Because terrorists  defied all the regular laws of war, you could legitimately  operate militarily against their bases, their  leaders, their camps and inside of countries that harbored  them, and you could hold those states directly  accountable, as well, destroying the terror groups'  ability to organize.
The downside, of course, was that Western countries  found themselves blurring the lines between domestic  and foreign enemies, deploying tools of surveillance  against their citizenry, taking down walls that had separated  intelligence gathering from law enforcement.  The war on terror tested the boundaries of freedom.
Now, however, the terrorists have developed a new  approach, one that does not depend so much on their  ability to organize, and one that hits democracies in  their most vulnerable spot. Now their warfare is even  more asymmetric than before. By using the Internet to  disseminate teachings and methods, they have found  a way to effect violence.
Once again we need a new set of conceptual and  policy tools. Because if terrorists can be inspired  without being organized, what makes them any different  from other crazy, violent people on the left and  right, from Neo-Nazis and abortion clinic bombers to  Branch Davidian and Sirhan Sirhan and the Weather  Underground? You cannot single out Islamic violent  fanaticism from all the rest without raising the specter  of prejudicial hatred of Muslims more broadly.  Because ideology is opinion, and having a right to  your own unpopular opinion is the very core of our  civilization, you can't ban inspiration without turning  democracy against itself.
On the other hand, we also know that jihadism  is a little different. None of these other crazies is  inspired by sophisticated, well-funded global enemies  bent on attacking Westerners in any way possible   people who have deliberately developed this  new leaderless method as part of their war. Like the  old kind of terrorism, this, too, is a premeditated violent  assault on our civilians from outside our borders.
So, what do we do?
First of all, we need to reaffirm the basic distinction  between domestic and international that became  blurred after 9/11  the line between our internal,  coherent civilization in which the rule of law obtains,  force is legitimately monopolized by government, and  people have not just human rights, but also civil rights,  and the rest of the world, in which enemies need to  be defeated through might and diplomacy rather than  policing and courts. This is crucial because the more  our enemies go after the foundations of our freedom,  the more we have to defend those foundations, showing  both our citizens and our foes that that we will  never let our government turn on its own people the  way so many bad regimes do.
And so: The Tsarnaevs and London attackers are  not foreign combatants but domestic criminals who  should be given a fair trial in a civilian criminal justice  system, just like any other alleged mass murderer.  They may be monsters, but they are our monsters.  And we should continue to be proud of a system that  preserves order and rights even when there's a war  going on. Because if there's anything that living in  Israel taught me, it's that you can't upend your whole  domestic reality because of terrorism, or you're giving  the terrorists the very prize they seek.
At the same time, the people who inspired the  Tsarnaevs and the London killers are not just teachers,  but also a foreign enemy, actively trying to kill  Westerners, and they should be destroyed. We don't  need domestic-judicial standards of proof in order to  nail them. It's enough to trust our intelligence, our  military and our diplomacy. Moreover, these enemies  are located in countries with governments that must  be held accountable if they allow such people to keep  inspiring. We don't owe them anything.
Both of these ideas  reaffirming the inviolability of  domestic rights while going ballistic against foreign  enemies who inspire murder on our streets  can be  true if we make them true. They both have to be true  if democracy is to remain democracy while effectively  fighting its enemies. Inspired terror should elicit  an inspired response.

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: June 9, 2013


End of Document