A TERRORIST MYTH IS EXPLODED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 28, 1989, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C
Length: 324 words
Body


Investigators from Western Europe and the United States have pieced together ahorrifying, fascinating tale of pure evil in the year since a four-pound bomb exploded aboard Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 269 passengers and crew and 11 people on the ground. Police now know much about the saboteurs - Palestinians living abroad who are members of the extremist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, and the Palestine Popular Struggle Front - and their activities. That so much has become public knowledge is the result of a relentless investigation by Sco ttish, British, Swedish, West German and U.S. security agencies.  Such cooperation is crucial if international terrorism is to be exposed to the public in all its ugliness. It also helps explode the sometimes popular myth that terrorism, with its high cost in innocent lives, is the justified action of aggrieved people. Those believed to have planned and committed the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing are outcasts even among mainstream Palestinian movements, which have generally endorsed direct negotiations with Israel to achieve an independent state in the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  Some members of the underground international network of terrorists are now in prison on other, lesser charges. Their damage was done, however, on Dec.  21, 1988, when the bomb, contained in an unaccompanied suitcase, exploded at 31,000 feet. The forensic research needed to nail down that fact is truly astounding. It revealed shamelessly lax security for baggage and passengers at a time when the threat of terrorism in air travel was high - and the chilling fact that a small group of organized fanatics can strike anywhere if they are willing to kill innocent people.
No political settlement can change that fact, but the efforts of cooperating security agencies show that the guilty parties can be exposed, tried and punished.

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document