A Terrorism Scare That Wasn't as the Olympics Near
The New York Times
July 6, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 992 words
Byline: By JOHN F. BURNS; Alan Cowell contributed reporting.
Body


LONDON -- The security scare lasted seven hours, closed one of Britain's major intercity expressways and drew in an armed counterterrorism unit, police helicopters, fire engines, ambulances and scores of emergency workers. For a good part of Thursday, it was headline news on the country's major broadcast networks.
And all because a man traveling on a bus to London tried to light up an electronic cigarette that smokers use as an aid in quitting, causing another passenger who spied vapor spiraling from the device to alert the police by cellphone.
By the time of the evening newscasts, the episode had taken on a somewhat comical edge, but behind it lay far more serious concerns that will be on the minds of millions around the world three weeks from now as thousands of athletes converge on London for the Olympics.
The risk of a terrorist attack on the Games has been a major concern for British officials -- and for the nearly 200 nations and territories that will be competing -- since the Olympics were awarded to London in 2005. The concern was amplified when Islamic militants bombed London's transit system the day after the Games were awarded. The bombing killed 56 people, including the four bombers, in what was Britain's worst terrorism attack.
Ten days ago, Jonathan Evans -- the director general of MI5, Britain's domestic security service -- offered a heavily qualified statement of reassurance. He said officials with Britain's terrorist-alert system had estimated the threat of a terrorist attack as ''substantial,'' the third-highest rating on a scale of five, meaning that a strike was ''a strong possibility.''
But in a rare public address, Mr. Evans said, in effect, that years of experience in monitoring terrorism threats and rounding up potential attackers since 7/7 -- as the attacks of July 7, 2005, are known -- and a much-improved system of international cooperation had vastly improved the chances of heading off a terrorist attack on the Olympics.
''There is no such thing as guaranteed security,'' he said. ''But I think we shall see a successful and memorable Games.''
In briefings during the prelude to the Games, senior MI5 officials have elaborated on that theme. Their message has been that an international counterterrorist team involving agents from MI5 and its sister agency MI6, Britain's secret intelligence service -- and from the F.B.I., the C.I.A. and other Western intelligence services -- has built as effective a shield against an attack as is practically possible.
Still, events on Thursday appeared to signal the fine balance of the preparations. The bus episode, which occurred near Birmingham, Britain's second-largest city, and the arrests at dawn of five men and one woman in London for what the police have described as ''suspicion of the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism'' suggest that Britain, for all its efforts, remains deeply apprehensive about the terrorist threat.
Scotland Yard said the London case was not linked to the Olympic Games, even though three of the suspects were arrested in a house less than a mile from the main Olympic stadium and the athletes' village in the Stratford district of East London. A business and eight homes spread widely across the capital were being searched, according to a statement from Scotland Yard.
The statement said no attack was imminent, which appeared to align with what MI5 officials have said about a succession of terrorism-related arrests in Britain this year involving at least 23 suspects, most of whom, like those arrested Thursday, have been British citizens.
Officials say that the imminence of the Games has caused security agencies to move earlier to arrest suspects than they would have otherwise. This has meant, they said, that many suspected plots have been interrupted at an early stage, before any bombs have been built, weapons acquired or targets selected.
In recent years, British officials have warned that a wide network Islamic militants' cells have been established across the country. Some of them, the officials say, are actively plotting terrorist attacks, often benefiting from the cultural, political and religious alienation that has been common among Britain's one and a half million Muslims.
Recent police raids have included the arrest of two men last week on the suspicion that they were plotting an attack on the Olympics canoeing site on the Lea River, on London's outskirts. In May, seven men were arrested on suspicion of financing terrorist plots with money earned from the smuggling of the stimulant qat, which is widely used in Somalia and countries on the Arabian Peninsula, to users in Canada and the United States. A few weeks earlier, three men from Birmingham were arrested at London's Heathrow Airport after a flight from Oman and accused of possessing ''articles and documents'' for use in international terrorism plots.
''In back rooms and in cars and on the streets of this country, there is no shortage of individuals talking about wanting to mount terrorist attacks,'' Mr. Evans said in his speech. ''The threat is real.''
Mr. Evans's aides say the security force of 27,500 people that will be deployed to protect the Games, and a security budget of nearly $1 billion, should make it difficult for attackers to reach the athletes, spectators and Olympics sites. Any would-be terrorists, the aides said, may calculate that they have a better chance of success by attacking elsewhere in Britain.
Concerns of that kind appeared to have played a part in the bus scare near Birmingham. After the highway was reopened, the police issued an awkwardly bureaucratic explanation. They said the decision to treat the episode as a potential attack came after a passenger reported ''vapor escaping from a bag'' containing a device that they thought might be a bomb.
''On investigation,'' the police said, the device turned out to be ''a health improvement aid,'' meaning the electronic cigarette.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Six people in London were accused of plotting an attack and arrested. The police said the Olympics were not a target. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL HACKETT/REUTERS)        

Load-Date: July 6, 2012


End of Document