A TOUGHER RESPONSE TO CYBER-ATTACK A N.J. LAWMAKER PLANS A BILL TO EXPAND PENTAGON JURISDICTION IN CASES OF COMPUTER TERRORISM. ONE EXPERT IS URGING CAUTION.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 27, 2000 Thursday CNEW JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B01
Length: 447 words
Byline: Aamer Madhani, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF
Dateline: GLOUCESTER CITY
Body


U.S. Rep. Robert Andrews announced here yesterday that he will introduce legislation next week to expand the Department of Defense's jurisdiction in cases in which American computer networks are attacked.
The proposal would let the department, from the outset, enter investigations of cases that state and other federal authorities usually handle.
Andrews (D., N.J.) said such legislation was important to prevent the "digital equivalent of Pearl Harbor."
Currently, attacks against U.S. networks that are committed by people within the nation's borders are, at least initially, treated simply as criminal acts rather than as computer terrorism.
"The present law says that the Defense Department has to wait until the federal law enforcement officers sort that out," Andrews said. "Only after they have concluded that it is not a law enforcement problem and that it is a defense or intelligence problem can they act. I find that troubling. By the time that the decision is made, there could be 65,000 people without power."
Andrews argued that cyber-terrorism can come from within the U.S. borders, and that geographic borders can be easily blurred on the Internet.
He cited a case in which two youngsters in the United States gained access to secure defense information with the tutelage of an Israeli.
"In real time, we had three individuals acting, one of them clearly in the jurisdiction of our defense and intelligence capabilities. The other two were within the jurisdiction of state and federal law enforcement authorities," Andrews said.
He made his comments at the Public Service Electric & Gas Co. switching station in Gloucester City, which is part of regional power grid that is connected online.
The legislation also will include a provision to provide grants to help private and public companies that provide essential public services, such as PSE&G, develop better defenses against computer infiltration.
Les Morton, the security information officer for PSE&G, said that "being out there online makes the chance of attack real."
But Aharon Friedman, the founder of Fortress Technologies in Tampa, Fla., which works with government and corporations to protect computer systems, expressed some concerns about the legislation.
"While the Department of Defense is technically better equipped than most organizations to fulfill the role of Internet monitor, troubling questions arise when our military is required to take on a domestic law enforcement responsibility," he said. "Any such adventure should be undertaken with the utmost caution."
The legislation will be introduced as part of a bill reauthorizing the defense budget.
Aamer Madhani's e-mail address is amadhani@phillynews.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 30, 2002


End of Document