A U.S. FRIEND'S VIEW FROM FLORENCE
The New York Times
January 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1065 words
Byline: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: FLORENCE, Jan. 4
Body


Guard boxes that look like telephone booths have sprouted in the olive groves around Giovanni Spadolini's hilltop villa. Men in gray fatigues lead big black dogs on patrol through a landscape that served as a backdrop in many hundreds of Renaissance paintings.
For Italy's Defense Minister, terrorism is not an abstract threat, and like many European leaders Mr. Spadolini has responded rather personally to the news that the Reagan Administration secretly sold arms to Iran.
''Disillusionment'' is the way he described his initial response, and now his thoughts focus on the need for remedial action.
''The strength of American democracy is its ability to correct its mistakes,'' he said dryly during an interview over the weekend.
 
'A Sentiment of Censure'
Since the first disclosures in November, Mr. Spadolini has been blunt and outspoken in stating that the affair has seriously damaged the West's anti-terrorism efforts, and he has coldly analyzed its effect in the Middle East, particularly on the moderate Arab governments.
But there is another aspect to his reaction. Mr. Spadolini was Prime Minister when the Italian Government gained the upper hand over domestic terrorism in 1981 and 1982. He is often depicted as a forthrightly pro-American politician.
The Iran arms affair seems to have left him feeling a bit betrayed. ''All Europeans who have fought against terrorism and have suffered many personal threats, as I have, could not avoid a sentiment of censure towards the American initiative,'' he said, speaking slowly and staring down across the countryside at Florence's domes and towers.
It was on another hill not far away that one of Mr. Spadolini's close friends and colleagues was machine-gunned by the Red Brigades terrorist group less than a year ago.
That colleague, Lando Conti, a former Mayor of Florence, was the only person to die in a terrorist attack in Italy in 1986, and Mr. Spadolini is certain the killing was meant to punish him for his hard-line positions on terrorism, particularly during the Achille Lauro crisis in the fall of 1985.
 
A Hopeful Outlook
Having suffered both privately and politically over the years for refusing to accept deals with terrorists, Mr. Spadolini says he is hopeful because of the way American public opinion has caused the Reagan Administration to recognize mistakes.
Despite the ''great confusion demonstrated by White House aides, who thought they could fight extremism by fortifying the Iranians,'' Mr. Spadolini said, he believes Europeans can again join forces with the United States because ''the American people are so deeply committed to fighting terrorism that in a few days they destroyed or at least fundamentally compromised the popularity of the most popular postwar President.''
Early this year, when the Reagan Administration demanded action against Libya, Mr. Spadolini pushed hard for sanctions, and he was ahead of Washington in demanding action against Syria.
 
'A Very Great Negative Effect'
Each of these stands had a price for Mr. Spadolini and those like him, and so he has no hesitation in saying that the recent revelations have had ''a very great negative effect in Europe'' among those who thought they had an ally in the Reagan Administration.
After the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro, Mr. Spadolini, like President Reagan, denounced Prime Minister Bettino Craxi for freeing Mohammed Abbas after United States Navy jets forced the airplane carrying the Palestinian and five other hijackers to land in Sicily.
Mr. Spadolini even resigned in protest and brought down the Government. Although Mr. Abbas was later convicted in an Italian court of masterminding the hijacking, the Achille Lauro affair is generally regarded as a political loss for Mr. Spadolini.
Mr. Craxi portrayed himself as defending Italian sovereignty against American arrogance, and his popularity soared. Mr. Spadolini, finding himself alone, eventually agreed to rejoin the Government.
 
Prompting a Response
The Achille Lauro episode, with all its overtones, still prompts an excited response from him. Most of Mr. Spadolini's answers to questions are carefully formed and delivered in complete sentences, sometimes with the punctuation included, as if he were dictating to a stenographer.
But when he was asked how he felt about having supported the United States during the Achille Lauro crisis once he knew about the secret deals with Iran, Mr. Spadolini interupted, bellowing ''No!''
Catching his breath, he added, ''I acted out of principle,'' and recalled his longstanding opposition to negotiations with terrorists.
''There was no connection directly or indirectly with the United States,'' he said, and then, with just a hint of sarcasm in his voice, he recalled that the Reagan Administration had moved quickly to patch up its relations with the Craxi Government.
 
Room for 55,000 Books
In the 1960's Mr. Spadolini, a lifelong bachelor, built his villa next door to his family home in order to accommodate a book collection that he started as a teen-ager and that continued to grow through subsequent careers as a history professor and newspaper editor.
Most of the 55,000 volumes he owns are about Italian history over the last 200 years. Some of the shelves are filled with his own works.
One of the subjects that Mr. Spadolini, 61 years old, has been writing about since he was a student is his hometown's political history.
In a book published 10 years ago, he wrote, ''Florence has been marked out in every period by its sense of the real, by an aversion to fairy-tale-like or metaphysical fantasies.''
The same passage noted that the many governments of Florence, ''in the attempt to adapt themselves to human reality, put their own inadequacies to the test every time and never aspire to the categories of the absolute.''
It is with this same awareness of limits and of reality that Mr. Spadolini assesses the Iran arms furor. There is little recourse to moralizing; good sense provides criteria enough.
He worries that the next few months could prove dangerous, with United States suffering diplomatic paralysis. But Mr. Spadolini, an admirer of Benjamin Franklin, said, ''The American political system with its checks and balances should be able to find a way out that allows the Administration to take the initiative again.''
Then, with a true Florentine's sense of realism, he added, ''This is a wish -not a certainty.''

Graphic

 
photo of Giovanni Spadolini (Agence France-Presse)


End of Document