A Verdict Against Terror
The New York Times
March 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 291 words
Body


New Yorkers and all Americans have reason to be satisfied with the successful prosecution of four men who bombed the World Trade Center a year ago. The Government has not supplied all the answers to this frightening act of terrorism. But yesterday's verdict demonstrates that authorities caught at least some of the culprits and delivered a compelling case for convicting them.
The Justice Department's achievement caps several effective responses to the explosion that killed six people, injured 1,000 and came close to accomplishing its apparent purpose of tearing up a mighty symbol of New York City's skyline.
The heroism of survivors and their rescuers on that bleak and frightening day helped to keep casualties low. Law enforcement agents collared suspects and painstakingly combed the rubble, distilled its clues and connected them to a rented van and ultimately the conspirators. Then came the overhaul of security measures around New York's major buildings, an effort that must still be considered a work in progress.
But the trial left several crucial questions unanswered. The precise source of the plot -- was it domestic or foreign? -- its financing and its design remain a mystery. Nor is it clear whether Federal agencies bungled in failing to stop a gang they had infiltrated or in letting some prime suspects escape. Or whether U.S. counter-terrorist intelligence is fully equipped even now to deal with imported violence.
More answers may appear when 15 other defendants go on trial this fall, charged with a larger conspiracy to bomb the United Nations, the F.B.I.'s headquarters building and three Hudson River crossings. But yesterday's convictions are a satisfying response to the worst act of terrorism to hit American shores.

Load-Date: March 5, 1994


End of Document