A Vow Disavowed - Correction Appended
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
December 3, 2012 Monday


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2012 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 10
Length: 459 words
Byline: In Our View
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


The Inside-the-Beltway crowd is finally beginning to buck Grover Norquist's "pledge" to never raise taxes.
It's about time. Norquist, who heads the conservative Americans for Tax Reform organization, came up with his pledge in 1986. Introduced during President Ronald Reagan's second term in office, it was Norquist's way of holding lawmakers accountable for spending.
The Pledge predates the world wide webb, cell phones, DVDs, hybrid cars, phone apps, Viagra, two wars on terrorism and the Great Recession.
And Beltway Republicans are finally waking up to that fact.
In the past few weeks, Republican Sens. Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, Bob Corker of Tennessee and Lindsay Graham of South Carolina, have said they will consider raising taxes to avoid the fiscal cliff facing the country as of Jan. 1, 2013, and the deficits that loom in the future.
Sessions said he cares "more about my country than I do about a 20-year-old pledge."
Rep. Peter King, a New York Republican, said, "The world has changed, and the economic situation is different."
It's encouraging to hear that some federal lawmakers actually care about their country.
Last year, House Speaker John Boehner walked away from a deal with President Barack Obama that would have included $10 in spending cuts for every $1 in new taxes.
That's Washington's version of a "Black Friday" best buy. Boehner thought enough of the so-called "Grand Bargain" that he was prepared to accept the deal and bring it before the House until tea party members vowed to undercut him.
Congressional Republicans are not alone in their view that there are times when the pledge impedes progress.
Pennsylvania state Sens. Dominic Pileggi and Joseph Scarnati proposed placing a severance tax on natural gas in 2011. They were warned by Norquist that to do so would break their pledge.
Pileggi's initial plan was to place a severance tax on natural gas to relieve taxes on Pennsylvania's elderly. It was a sensible idea that ran into opposition from Gov. Tom Corbett, another pledge signee, who opposes a severance tax.
There are times taxes should not be raised. And there are times when taxes should be raised - such as when a nation is simultaneously fighting two wars on terrorism or when the other political party is offering to cut spending by $10 for every $1 in new taxes.
Former U.S. Sen. Alan Simpson, R-Wyoming, who helped craft a deficit reduction plan with former Democratic U.S. Sen. Erskine Bowles, said violating Norquist's pledge can reduce an incumbent's chances for re-election. But, he said, when politicians put a party's ideology above what is right for the country, they should not be in office.
It sounds like that bit of common sense is finally gaining traction in Washington, D.C.
Correction


A quote in Monday's editorial "A vow disavowed," regarding the Grover Norquist no-tax-hike pledge was misattributed. It was Sen. Saxby Chambliss, R-Ga., not Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., who said: "When I said I care about my country more than I do about a 20-year-old pledge, that's what I'm talking about."
Correction-Date: December 5, 2012 

Load-Date: December 4, 2012


End of Document