A war on terrorism won't stop it - U.S. policies help fuel the rage directed at Americans
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 27, 1998, Thursday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 860 words
Byline: GRAHAM E. FULLER SPECIAL TO THE LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


THE deadly terrorism in Kenya and Tanzania and the U.S. military
response in Sudan and Afghanistan threatens to draw the United States
deeper into a strategic no-win bind.
On the one hand, the outrageous twin attacks on U.S. embassies in
Africa, with their massive killing of innocent bystanders, could not
go unanswered, especially when reportedly good intelligence made it
clear who the perpetrators were and that further attacks might be
imminent. Under such clear circumstances, no one could argue for
inaction or a failure to respond.
The problem is that the issue does not end here. Sooner or later,
retaliation is probable from a variety of radical and zealous groups -
even individuals - who have little to lose and much to gain by
pursuing the confrontation. Now, even administration officials speak
of a possible "coming war" against terrorism.
But these terrorist attacks have not taken place in a vacuum. It is
dangerous to divorce terrorism from politics, yet the U.S. media
continue to talk about an abstract "war against terrorism" without
mention of the issues or context that lie behind them.
If a war against terrorism is coming, we had better start discussing
and understanding more clearly the depth and range of impulses that
drive people in the Middle East - a discussion so far stunningly
absent from our public discourse. Why so?
There is no monolithic Muslim bloc, but deeply held attitudes among
the public are quite evident.
Broadly speaking, most Muslims feel helpless, weak and resentful in
the face of external power at work in their region: The Middle East -
the center of world civilization for several millennia - is now beset
with masses of poor citizens (apart from the oil states), with bad
social services, poor education, absence of democracy, constant abuse
of human rights, widespread corruption, police states, often brutal
rulers and no voice over their own fates; they are victims of truly
bad governance in most states of the region.
And what do they perceive?
U.S. support for almost any ruler willing to protect U.S. interests -
routinely identified in Washington as oil and Israel. They see a
Washington unwilling to act evenhandedly in the Arab-Israeli peace
process and infinitely tolerant of a hard-line government in Israel
that denies Palestinians land, dignity and statehood.
They perceive double standards that allow Israel to violate U.N.
resolutions, but not Iraq; that Israeli nukes are OK, but not nukes in
Muslim hands.
They see routine use of U.S. unilateral military power against Muslim
targets that is unparalleled elsewhere in the world. They see
themselves routinely humbled by use of overwhelming Israeli military
power. They see U.S. military forces in the Gulf as being there to
protect ruling families and not populations - the essence of Osama bin
Laden's charge.
Muslims are concerned that there are no Muslim Americans involved in
high-level U.S. policy-making in the Middle East but that Jewish
Americans occupy nearly every single senior position relating to U.S.
Arab-Israeli policy.
They perceive no interest in Washington in pushing any kind of
democratizing agenda in the region and they hear casual talk of Islam
as "incompatible with democracy."
They see Iraqi children dying of disease and starvation as a result of
U.S. sanctions. They perceive widespread caricaturization and
demonization of Islam in Western media and films. They point to
colonial regimes in the past seeking to weaken Islam and traditional
Muslim culture.
They point to Muslims under siege in Palestine, Chechnya, Russia,
Xinjiang (Chinese Turkestan), Bosnia, Kosovo, Kashmir, Eritrea,
Philippines and India, and often treated as second-class citizens in
Europe. The list goes on. These perceptions obviously do not fully
reflect reality. Counterarguments can be made in many cases.
But perceptions matter mightily, since they form the increasingly
poisonous psychological backdrop against which distraught and angry
Muslims end up championing those who overcome their impotence, stand
up to the West and assert Muslim dignity.
Sadly, most Muslims in the region feel ambivalent about the embassy
bombings; while rejecting terrorism in principle and sharing human
sympathy for the loss of life, many also feel a touch of satisfaction
that the United States partly got what it deserved.
We don't have to buy their rationale. Realistically, the kind of
terrorists bin Laden represents would probably never be satisfied with
any kind of U.S. policy change. Their angers, fears and resentments
lie deep and beyond debate.
But the dangers of getting drawn into an escalating war against
terrorist groups who enjoy some public sympathy are very real. These
attitudes form the backdrop that facilitates violent acts.
Yes, terrorism has no place in our world. But we had better ensure we
have prepared a more sympathetic environment for our campaign than we
now have.
The United States is quite isolated in the Middle East today.
Let's start by facing the full reality of the region's problems. Or is
it more convenient just to talk of an isolated "war against
terrorism," even when it is really just the tip of the iceberg?
- Fuller is former vice chairman of the National Intelligence Council
at the CIA.

Load-Date: August 29, 1998


End of Document