A Witness Overshadows A Terrorism Defendant
The New York Times
June 8, 2011 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 873 words
Byline: By GINGER THOMPSON; Emma G. Fitzsimmons contributed reporting from Chicago, and Barclay Walsh contributed research from Washington.
Body


CHICAGO -- Over four days in a federal courtroom here, a Pakistani-American man named David C. Headley opened a window onto the inner workings of some of the world's most feared terrorist organizations when he testified in vivid -- and sometimes gory -- detail about how he helped plot the 2008 attack on Mumbai.
Perhaps even more riveting was the window Mr. Headley, a former drug trafficker turned terrorist, opened on the law enforcement agencies charged with protecting this country from people like him. After previous arrests in the 1980s and 1990s on drug charges, he was able to secretly secure agreements with agents and prosecutors that allowed him to avoid serious punishment.
This time in court, however, jurors were allowed to see scenes of a palpably nervous Mr. Headley groping for one last deal. And as lawyers presented closing arguments on Tuesday, that deal seemed as much at the center of attention as the case being tried against a man Mr. Headley called his ''best friend.''
The deal was the culmination of 13 days of interrogation by federal authorities, and is likely to shield Mr. Headley from the death penalty while potentially sending the defendant in this case, Tahawwur Rana, to jail for the rest of his life.
One of the prosecutors, Victoria Peters, an assistant United States attorney, asked the jury: ''What would you have your government do -- tell Mr. Headley, 'I'm sorry, you're a despicable person and we're not interested in what you have to say to us'? Or sit down and find out what David Headley knows?''
The case against Mr. Rana has been watched around the world, mostly for what Mr. Headley had to say. His testimony included accusations that Pakistani intelligence agents provided support for the Mumbai attacks, threatening to exacerbate tensions among Pakistan, India and the United States that were already inflamed by the discovery that Osama bin Laden had been hiding out in a Pakistani garrison town for years.
Mr. Headley's testimony offered glimpses behind the scenes of his long relationship with American law enforcement. Although he became an operative for the Islamic militant group Lashkar-e-Taiba after moving back to Pakistan at the beginning of 2002, Mr. Headley testified that he was also at that time working as an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration to get out of prison.
Over the following years, Mr. Headley acknowledged under questioning, he so successfully manipulated or evaded federal authorities that they failed to adequately investigate multiple warnings from his friends and relatives that he was plotting with Lashkar-e-Taiba.
But in October 2009, when the authorities caught up with him carrying plans for a terrorist attack against a Danish newspaper that had published cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, Mr. Headley appeared both comfortable with the drill of interrogation and worried that this time he might be in way over his head.
For his first two weeks in custody, Ms. Peters said, Mr. Headley mapped out the hierarchy of Lashkar-e-Taiba, provided information on several high-ranking terrorist leaders and identified more than two dozen terrorist targets around the world. Defense lawyers described how Mr. Headley worked the phones and the Internet in an attempt to draw major terrorists out from hiding -- moves he compared during interrogation sessions to ''hitting a home run'' or throwing a ''Hail Mary pass.''
At one point during his interrogation, Mr. Headley testified, he offered to return to Pakistan to try to plant a chip on Ilyas Kashmiri, a senior Al Qaeda leader, so American authorities could attack him using drones.
Last weekend, Pakistani authorities reported that Mr. Kashmiri had been killed by a drone strike on a compound in the northwestern tribal areas, though there is no evidence that Mr. Headley had anything to do with the strike. In a sign of the distrust pervading relations between the United States and Pakistan, American authorities are still not sure whether to believe Pakistani assertions that Mr. Kashmiri was killed.
When the government refused Mr. Headley's request to be dispatched to Pakistan, and his e-mails failed to produce any arrests, he agreed to testify against Mr. Rana, who ran an office that helped process visa applications for guest workers.
Mr. Rana's lawyers described Mr. Headley as a ''lifelong manipulator'' and said his accusations were a desperate attempt to save his own life and yet another demonstration of his ability to cheat his way out of trouble. ''They've got the executioner's ax,'' said Patrick Blegen, the lead lawyer for Mr. Rana. ''And he knows it.''
The lawyers said that Mr. Headley had duped their client into using his immigration business as a cover for Mr. Headley's terrorist activities and that he was now trying to dupe the government, as well.
Mr. Blegen suggested that in exchange for Mr. Headley's cooperation, the government had agreed that he did not have to provide testimony against relatives who had supported his terrorist exploits, including his third wife, a Pakistani immigrant who continues to live in Chicago with the couple's four children.
''Headley fooled him,'' Mr. Blegen said of his client. Then speaking to the jury, he added, ''Don't let him fool you.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 8, 2011


End of Document