A Would-Be Shoe Bomber Testifies in a Terror Trial
The New York Times
April 24, 2012 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 605 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body


He was supposed to be the other shoe bomber. Saajid Badat said Osama bin Laden himself had dispatched him to board a plane with a bomb sewn in his shoe, which he would detonate in midair as part of a choreographed attack that would crash the American economy.
But unlike Richard C. Reid, a member of Al Qaeda whose unsuccessful attempt in 2001 to detonate explosives in his shoes on a Paris-to-Miami flight changed airport security, Mr. Badat did not follow through with the attack.
On Monday, over 10 years after he backed out, hiding the equipment under his bed in Britain, Mr. Badat testified by video to his role in the shoe-bombing conspiracy in Federal District Court in Brooklyn in the terrorism trial of Adis Medunjanin, a Queens man who is accused of joining his high school classmates in a separate plot to blow up New York subways.
Another admitted terrorist, Bryant Neal Vinas, a Long Island man who fought with Al Qaeda against American troops in Afghanistan, also appeared in court as a government witness on Monday. He had pleaded guilty and is awaiting sentencing.
The testimony of the two men was a brief departure from the facts of the subway bombing plot, which federal authorities have called one of the most dangerous threats to America since the Sept. 11 attacks.
Instead, Mr. Badat and Mr. Vinas were called to corroborate facts about the training in Qaeda-run camps in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Mr. Medunjanin is accused of traveling to one such camp in 2008 along with Zarein Ahmedzay and Najibullah Zazi, who testified last week that the three of them had learned how to make bombs there and had received orders from senior Qaeda leaders, who urged them to return to the United States to stage a terrorist attack. Mr. Ahmedzay and Mr. Zazi have pleaded guilty.
The testimony of Mr. Badat, who served more than a decade in prison after pleading guilty to terrorism charges in Britain, appeared in a video made there.
Mr. Badat said he traveled to Afghanistan in 1999 and came into contact with many of the members of Al Qaeda whom Mr. Ahmedzay and Mr. Zazi recalled meeting in Pakistan nine years later.
Among those he encountered was Bin Laden.
''It was just the two of us in a room, and he explained to me his justification for the mission,'' Mr. Badat said of the shoe bomb.
''He said that the American economy is like a chain. If you break one link of the chain, the whole economy will be brought down,'' Mr. Badat testified. ''This operation will ruin the aviation industry and in turn the whole economy will come down.''
Mr. Badat said Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, had personally wished Mr. Reid and Mr. Badat well on their mission.
Unlike Mr. Reid, Mr. Badat never boarded his flight. He testified that he had been fearful and worried that his family would get dragged into an investigation.
He contacted his Qaeda handlers about his decision but did not inform law enforcement, saying he remained committed to the ''jihadist ideology.'' He later learned through news reports that Mr. Reid had been stopped by fellow passengers while trying to light a fuse in his shoe.
Mr. Badat was arrested in November 2003. He initially received a sentence of 13 years, but that was cut to 11 years when he agreed to testify against other members of Al Qaeda.
He said he now believed the group's leadership manipulated the people who went to the training camps.
Though Mr. Badat completed his prison term in Britain, terrorism charges are still pending against him in the United States, which was why he refused to come to the country to testify in person. Mr. Reid is serving a life sentence.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 24, 2012


End of Document