A WORTHY TERROR WATCH CNN'S ZAKARIA LOOKS 'BEYOND THE MANHUNTS'
Daily News (New York)
May 10, 2013 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: TELEVISION; Pg. 8
Length: 487 words
Byline: BY DAVID HINCKLEY
Body


REPORTS ON terrorism and counterterrorism haven't exactly been tough to find lately, but Fareed Zakaria of CNN thinks we can use one more.
"We've spent a lot of time looking back on what we've done up to now," he says. "That's fine. But with things like the Boston marathon bombing still happening, we also need to examine what we should do next."
Zakaria tackles the what-next question Sunday morning at 10 in "Beyond the Manhunts," an hour-long special tied to CNN's airing of the movie "Manhunt," about the two-decade pursuit of Osama Bin Laden.
Zakaria drills further into several of the themes in "Manhunt," including the value of controversial measures like drones and "enhanced interrogation."
He speaks with experts and former counterterrorism officials, including Leon Panetta, a former defense secretary and CIA director, who says he does not think techniques like -waterboarding yield information that can't be obtained by other means.
Some of Zakaria's subjects also suggest different times call for different measures.
"2013 is not 2001 or 2002," Zakaria says. "After 9/11, a lot of decisions were made in an atmosphere of panic and fear. I understand that. My college roommate's brother died in the towers. But that's not the best state of mind in which to make decisions.
"Now we need to look at what we did and evaluate how the techniques worked."
Zakaria was surprised, -he says, at how open that discussion is, and has been, among people involved fighting terrorism.
"We have an image of this monolithic American giant," he says, "when the value of these policies has been under discussion and evaluation all along."
Zakaria, who will mark his fifth year next month hosting his Sunday foreign affairs show, touches this weekend on the side issue of whether women at times can make better analysts than men.
"That was just too interesting to leave on the cutting-room floor," he says.
But much of his focus falls on how far we should go in pursuing and dealing with potential terrorists.
"I try to give all sides a fair hearing," he says, "although I also let viewers know when I have views of my own. I don't sit there like a potted plant."
He says he doesn't "just want to tell viewers the issue is complicated. They know it's complicated. They want to know how we can sort it it."
He also stresses that even though policies are created at the highest level, the opinions of the public have a real impact.
"That's the wonderful thing about America," he says. "We have this self-correction mechanism of public opinion. If we feel strongly about something, we can make it happen."
In this case, he thinks a better informed public ultimately will decide we should be cautious about tactics like drones and waterboarding.
"To put it bluntly, if your policies create more terrorists than you kill, it's not a good tradeoff.
"The best form of terrorism prevention is better relations with the community." dhinckley@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Fareed Zakaria says "an atmosphere of panic and fear" has not been the best way to make decisions.

Load-Date: May 13, 2013


End of Document