A World Court for Terrorists
The New York Times
July 9, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-ed
Length: 796 words
Byline: By Arlen Specter; Arlen Specter, a Republican, is a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorists continue to get away with murder by playing one nation against another, avoiding extradition, escaping prosecution and even securing their freedom by blackmailing powerful countries. The fight against terrorism could be tremendously aided by an international court to try these international criminals.
What is also needed is a modern-day Devil's Island on international territory, where terrorists can be kept in the custody of the court -rather than the custody of an arresting nation - thus depriving terrorists of targets for blackmail. Several recent incidents illustrate the problem.
Abul Abbas, hijacker of the Achille Lauro, the cruise ship on which Leon Klinghoffer was murdered, was released by Italy after efforts by the U.S. to arrest him almost resulted in a shootout between U.S. and Italian forces. Egypt and Yugoslavia also caved in to pressure that permitted Abul Abbas to escape prosecution.
Lebanese terrorists recently held two West German businessmen in an effort to blackmail West Germany into releasing Mohammed Hamadei, who was convicted of hijacking TWA Flight 847 in 1985 and murdering U.S. Navy diver Robert Stetham in Beirut. On March 14, 1989, Fawaz Yunis was convicted in U.S. Federal court of hostage-taking, air piracy and conspiracy. In the absence of an international mechanism to address terrorism, it took a dangerous James Bond-type kidnapping on the high seas to bring Mr. Yunis into U.S. custody.
The efforts of the world community to combat terrorism have been overly cautious and relatively ineffective. There are official channels through which national security forces can exchange intelligence in an effort to prevent terrorist acts. But the world is too large and the terrorists' opportunities too plentiful for law enforcement agents to stop any but a small fraction of attacks.
It is more realistic to focus on a strategy of deterrence. If would-be terrorists became convinced that their prospects of finding a safe haven from prosecution were slim, there would be less terrorism in the world. Unfortunately, terrorists receive precisely the opposite message today. Successful prosecution and confinement would at least remove the convicted terrorists from the international scene.
Difficulties in bringing terrorists to justice have already led the Congress to extend U.S. criminal jurisdiction worldwide and to call upon President Bush to negotiate with other nations to establish an international court for terrorism. In 1984, Congress made it a violation of U.S. law for terrorists to assault, murder or maim U.S. citizens anywhere in the world. These laws provided the authority for the Federal Bureau of Investigation to arrest Fawaz Yunis.
This is not a new concept, but it is one whose time has come with a vengeance. An international criminal court was proposed in the aftermath of World War I, but the Allies were unable to agree on the boundaries of international criminal law. The 1937 Convention Against Terrorism would have established such a court, but World War II broke out and only one nation, India, ratified the convention.
The most successful international criminal tribunal was created following World War II. The War Crimes Commission, a cooperative effort by the United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union, conducted 13 trials in Nuremberg and one in Tokyo between 1945 and 1949.
Another significant development following World War II was the establishment of an International Court of Justice in The Hague. It is empowered to resolve treaty disputes between nations but has no criminal jurisdiction over individuals. In its early years, the United Nations tried to create a court with criminal jurisdiction over individuals, but distrust between the United States and Soviet Union thwarted these efforts.
Recent dramatic developments in the Kremlin's view of the International Court of Justice may provide a decisive opportunity for the creation of an international criminal court. Last year, Mikhail Gorbachev proposed that the permanent members of the U.N. Security Council - Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and the United States - agree to upgrade the Court's status in resolving treaty disputes among them.
And in recent discussions with Secretary of State James Baker, Soviet officials showed a particular interest in international cooperation against terrorists and drug traffickers.
A narrow definition of terrorism, limited to offenses such as hijacking and hostage-taking, could avoid the political quagmire of distinguishing between a terrorist and a freedom fighter. Panels of the existing International Court of Justice could be used to try cases. Many procedural questions would have to be resolved, but the time is ripe to press for an international court to try terrorists.


End of Document