A World Made More Dangerous as Terrorism Spreads
The New York Times
April 18, 2004 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1; Wildfires
Length: 297 words
Byline: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.
Body


EVERY day --some days, it seems, nearly every hour --a terrorist alarm is sounded somewhere in the world. Each new threat has immediate consequences. 
Flights may be canceled, a few embassies closed. And it almost always stokes fears that another terrorist attack is imminent.
  Is the world more dangerous today than it was a year ago, or on Sept. 10, 2001, or even since the end of the cold war?
  Yes, say many terrorism experts, for a number of reasons: the American-led occupation of Iraq, which has become a rallying cry for hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Islamic militants; the campaigns by a growing number of groups to obtain weapons of mass destruction; and the prolific violence of local terrorist groups.
  Since being routed from Afghanistan in late 2001, Al Qaeda has again proved its protean nature by morphing into a baseless, rootless organization with potent alliances. Although two-thirds of its core leadership has been killed or captured, Al Qaeda has managed to export its violent, anti-Western militancy to dozens of like-minded regional terrorist groups.
  ''Al Qaeda has been replaced by Qaeda-ism,''a top counterterrorism official based in Europe said recently.
  This Qaeda-ism accounts for some but hardly all of the world's terrorist activities. There are dozens of other groups with locally motivated reasons for murder and mayhem, from Maoist guerrillas in Nepal to right-wing paramilitary groups in Colombia.
   A worldwide map of the hotbeds of terrorist activity shows a daunting array of distinct and interconnected motives. With so many groups declaring the United States their principal enemy, the map also illustrates why even the most optimistic counterterrorism officials predict that the war on terrorism will last generations.   DON VAN NATTA Jr.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Residents of Medellin, Colombia, assist a civilian wounded in a crossfire two years ago. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)
Rush-hour commuters were the target of the train bombings last month in Spain. (Photo by Reuters)
In Kenya, a bomb blast ripped apart an Israeli-owned hotel in 2002. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)
Chaldean Christian mourners in Baghdad after a suicide bomber struck last month. (Photo by Agence France-Presse/Getty Images)
A car bombing victim in Karachi, Pakistan, this month. (Photo by Getty Images)
 An Indonesian woman was overcome after a blast in Jakarta killed over a dozen people last August. (Photo by Reuters)Chart: ''The Landscape''Highlighted countries are those that have been among the most prominent sites of recent terrorist attacks, attempted attacks, heightened warnings or measures to counter the spread of terrorism.THE AMERICASWhile the United States focuses on Al Qaeda, Colombia offers proof that some of the bloodiest terrorism has no links to Islamic fundamentalism. There are hundreds of violent incidents each year, from car bombings to kidnappings, mass killings in isolated villages and assassinations of human rights advocates and journalists. The culprits are Marxist insurgencies and a right-wing paramilitary group linked in the past to Colombia's army.EUROPEThe Madrid bombings last month confirmed Europe's fears that it is a Qaeda target. Analysts say Al Qaeda and its affiliates are more deeply entrenched in Europe than in North America. Investigators have thwarted suspected plots in Britain, France, Belgium, Spain and Germany, and terrorist groups may view Eastern Europe as the new soft spot for entry and hiding.AFRICAIn Morocco, now both a target and operating base for bin Laden followers, more than 30 people died in a suicide bombing in Casablanca last May. Most of the suspects arrested in the Madrid bombings were Moroccan, the suspected mastermind a Tunisian. America and France have reportedly been trying to assist Mali, where members of an Algerian terrorist group affiliated with Al Qaeda have taken refuge.THE MIDDLE EASTSince the American-led invasion of Iraq, coalition troops there as well as Shiite clerics, foreign aid workers and U.N. staff members have been targets of bombings, killings and kidnappings, most by Iraqis, although American officials say there is some foreign involvement. Israel, where hijackings and bombings long predate Al Qaeda, remains a frequent target of Palestinian suicide bombers. In Saudi Arabia, Al Qaeda has been linked to attacks whose ultimate target is the royal establishment that Osama bin Laden hates.CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIAAfghanistan's government remains threatened by Al Qaeda and the Taliban, while in Pakistan, more attempts on the life of President Pervez Musharraf are expected. Meanwhile, Islamic militants stage attacks weekly in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir and mingle among Chechnya's rebels. Suicide bombers linked to Al Qaeda have attacked in Uzbekistan. In Nepal, Maoist insurgents have been blamed for several bombings.SOUTHEAST ASIAIndonesia, where a Bali nightclub was bombed two years ago, and the Philippines, where the Abu Sayyaf rebellion continues, were identified early as places where Qaeda affiliates operated. The Philippine rebels now help train the Indonesian group. Malaysia was a meeting place for Qaeda operatives before Sept. 11. Now militant Islam, with apparent Qaeda connections, has flared in southern Thailand, and Cambodia has responded to the spread of militant Wahhabi madrassas.Raymond Bonner, Desmond Butler, Juan Forero, Seth Mydans and Greg Myre contributed reporting for this chart.

Load-Date: April 18, 2004


End of Document