A year after bin Laden's death, al-Qaeda is down but not out
USA TODAY
May 2, 2012 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 632 words
Body


From the moment that SEAL Team 6 killed Osama bin Laden a year ago today, the event has carried a sense of finality. Public enemy No. 1 -- the personification of international terrorism and American vulnerability -- was dead, cut down in an audacious raid of his compound in Pakistan.
It was a transcendent achievement that brought the 9/11 mastermind to justice. But little about it spelled finality, a fact underscored by President Obama's surprise trip Tuesday to Afghanistan under cover of darkness and amid extraordinary security.
The slaying of bin Laden was, instead, a strategic triumph and a marker of the way the war on terrorism is changing: a departure from large-scale ground wars with fuzzy objectives, tragic costs, unintended consequences and inconclusive endings, and toward a razor-sharp focus on decimating his al-Qaeda organization.
Obama emphasized again, in his speech from Afghanistan on Tuesday night, that the U.S. combat role will end in 2014 -- an ending that will almost certainly be as muddled as last year's conclusion of the Iraq War. In the place of these conflicts will be drone strikes and other counterterrorism measures aimed at killing al-Qaeda leaders.
Because al-Qaeda remains a significant and metastasizing threat, the emerging strategy is not a formula for quick and certain victory. But it has something going for it that the previous strategy did not: a definable ending, one that will come  when the last of the 9/11 plotters is dead and al-Qaeda realizes that attacking the United States is self-destructive. It can also be attained at far lower cost than the 6,300 lives and $1.28 trillion sacrificed in Iraq and Afghanisan.
Results are already measurable, headlined by bin Laden's demise. Since then, drone strikes have killed about half of al-Qaeda's top 20 leaders and reduced the strength of "al-Qaeda Central" to perhaps no more than 100. Documents found in bin Laden's compound show the organization to be under so much pressure that it can't mount the international threat it still aspires to achieve.
In Yemen, home to al-Qaeda's most dangerous franchise, the headliner, Yemeni-American cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, is also dead, killed by drone strike five months after the bin Laden raid.  Strikes on the organization are being ramped up.
More broadly, al-Qaeda continues to lose public support in the Muslim world. A new poll this week from the Pew Global Attitudes Project finds that even in Pakistan, where anti-American sentiment is intense and bin Laden's partner and successor, Ayman al-Zawahri, is believed to be hiding, only 13% of the public views the terrorist organization favorably.
If all this invites a sense of contented triumph, it is misplaced.
Al-Qaeda continues to inspire "lone-wolf" terrorists and thrive in unstable countries, particularly Yemen and Somalia. And if the organization is losing public support, it retains enough in certain places to be worrisome. The Pew poll found  21% of Egyptians still view al-Qaeda favorably, a troubling number in the country most central to the Arab world. Zawahri, the Egyptian who co-authored the 9/11 attacks, remains a threat, if a diminished one.
The pressing challenge, though, is to end the war in Afghanistan without re-creating an al-Qaeda sanctuary.
Obama traced the timetable in his speech: full exit -- except  for counterterrorism and training contigents -- by 2014. Whether that's enough time for an effective handoff to the Afghans is open to question. But with U.S. public support for the war teetering near 30% and Afghans increasingly enraged by a series of incidents involving U.S. troops, a dozen years of war will have to do.
It's past time to zero in on the original mission: to crush al-Qaeda and leave an indelible message about the consequences of attacking America. 

Load-Date: May 2, 2012


End of Document