A.C.L.U. Report Says Antiterror Fight Undercuts Liberty of Muslim Donors - Correction Appended
The New York Times
June 16, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 642 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE STROM
Body


The fight against terrorism has dealt a harsh blow to Muslim charities and interfered with their donors' religious freedom, a new report by the American Civil Liberties Union concludes.
  The report says statutes that it describes as overly broad and enforced in a discriminatory manner, coupled with a lack of due process, have starved Islamic charities of money and impeded Muslims' ability to fulfill zakat, their religious requirement to make charitable donations. 
  The report is based on interviews with more than 100 Muslim community leaders as well as experts on antiterrorism laws and regulations. Though it gives no estimate of the decline in donations to Muslim groups, it says a total of nine Islamic charities have closed as a result of government action against them since the Sept. 11 attacks.
  That action ranges, it says,  from declaring a group to be under investigation to designating it a terrorist organization and freezing its assets.
  ''While there is a legitimate concern about the use of charitable funds to finance terrorism, it does not outweigh the rights of American Muslims to fulfill their religious obligations or override constitutional requirements for due process,'' said the  author, Jennifer Turner, the A.C.L.U.'s human rights researcher.
  President Obama mentioned the issue in his speech in Cairo this month. ''In the United States, rules on charitable giving have made it harder for Muslims to fulfill their religious obligation,'' Mr. Obama said. ''That is why I am committed to working with American Muslims to ensure that they can fulfill zakat.''
  Natalie Wyeth, a spokeswoman for the Treasury Department, which is charged with oversight of charitable activity, said the department was working  to address some of the concerns. 
  The report notes that independent bodies like the Sept. 11 commission have found that evidence used to seize assets is often secret, making it impossible to challenge, and has in some cases included  hearsay or been based on news reports.
  Advocates for Muslim donors and organizations say the rules governing charitable giving are opaque or poorly defined. Donors could, for instance, find themselves in trouble for past gifts to an organization newly designated a terrorist group.
  ''It's absolute madness how this policy has been put together and practiced,'' said Maja Freij, chief financial officer at Access, a large Arab-American social services group based in Dearborn, Mich. ''It makes you guilty by association, offers no due process and lacks checks and balances.''
  Farhana Khera, executive director of Muslim Advocates, said, ''American Muslims with U.S. passports are returning from abroad and being asked about their charitable donations by customs and immigration agents.''
  Paradoxically, two of the largest mainstream Arab-American charities -- Access and Islamic Relief USA -- say they have benefited from aggressive enforcement of antiterrorism laws. 
  Islamic Relief USA, an aid organization with affiliates around the globe, has seen annual donations rise to about $25 million last year from roughly $7 million at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks, with an additional $50 million in in-kind gifts, said the group's spokesman, Mostafa Mahboob.
  At least part of that increase can be attributed to the decline of other Muslim charities, Mr. Mahboob said, though his group has also been working to emphasize its work in places with relatively little Islamic presence, like New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.
  Ms. Freij, of Access, said support for her organization by companies like Ford, and the fact that more than half its financing was government-provided, had helped it retain and even add to its Muslim donors. ''While they are scared to make a charitable donation to a mosque,'' she said, ''we are a safe haven for them to write that check.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article on Tuesday about an A.C.L.U. report that concludes that the fight against terrorism has hurt most Muslim charities described incorrectly Islamic Relief USA, a charity that says its donations have actually increased. It is a Muslim-American group, not an Arab-American group. 
Correction-Date: June 17, 2009

Load-Date: June 16, 2009


End of Document