A.C.L.U. SAYS EFFFORTS TO COMBAT TERRORISM HOLD THREAT TO RIGHTS
The New York Times
May 19, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 11, Column 4; National Desk
Length: 347 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 18
Body


An official of the American Civil Liberties Union asserts that efforts of conservatives ostensibly aimed at combating subversion and terrorism could be transformed into programs to punish political dissent and to erode civil liberties.
The statement by John Shattuck, the legislative director of the civil liberties group, was the lead item in the May issue of the newsletter ''Civil Liberties Alert,'' released today.
American Civil Liberties Union article charges conservative moves to combat terrorism could be channeled into means to punish political dissentThe publication is aimed at opinion makers and at the organization's 200,000 members.
Mr. Shattuck's remarks represented a shift from recent tactics by the A.C.L.U.'s officers and staff. For more than five months, they have privately debated how to respond to recent developments and trends that they believe bear on free speech and other constitutional rights. Some A.C.L.U. spokesman had said in private discussions or in internal memorandums that they wished to avoid the appearance of ''overreacting'' to the initiatives of conservatives.
 
Sees Threat to Civil Liberties
In contrast, Mr. Shattuck's statement sounded an alarm to the A.C.L.U.'s membership and allies on the work of a new Senate subcommittee on security and terrorism; efforts to revive the House Internal Security Committee; Administration moves to relax safeguards against political abuses by intelligence agencies, and related matters.
Mr. Shattuck said that these developments ''pose serious and complicated threats to civil liberties'' and that ''a new talisman, 'terrorism,' may come to center stage in Washington.''
While terrorist acts of violence are crimes, Mr. Shattuck wrote, ''investigations of 'threats' and political activities which 'may' result in criminal conduct create classic opportunities for investigative abuse.''
The A.C.L.U. official was also critical of President Reagan for his pardons last month of two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had been convicted of ordering illegal break-ins of private homes.z


End of Document