ABA urges permanent terror cover solution
Business Insurance
May 1, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 30
Length: 431 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


The pre-emption of state insurance pricing laws and the extension of terrorism insurance coverage to such perils as nuclear, biological and chemical losses should be part of a ``permanent government/industry solution'' to the provision of terrorism insurance, according to an American Bar Assn. task force.
``It seems unlikely that the risk of terrorism, or what we know about that risk, will so change in the next two years that the market will be willing and able to provide terrorism insurance without the backstop'' provided under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act, said the Federal Involvement in Insurance Regulation Modernization Task Force of the ABA's Tort Trial and Insurance Practice Section in a paper released a few days ago. TRIEA, which provides a federal financial guarantee to insurers facing future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire Dec. 31, 2007.
``The task force therefore recommends that a permanent government/industry solution be developed and adopted that will continue to provide the framework necessary for market forces to develop capacity for highly unpredictable terrorism risk,'' according to the paper.
Francine Semaya, the task force chair and a member in the New York office of the Philadelphia-based law firm of Cozen O'Connor, called the paper ``an educational piece.'' Ms. Semaya said the task force began working on the paper last fall as Congress debated extending the backstop-which was initially scheduled to end on Dec. 31, 2005-for another two years.
In addition to endorsing a permanent public/private partnership, the ABA task force also recommended that:
* Federal law pre-empt state pricing and coverage requirements for terrorism insurance to ``allow market forces to operate to set the price for terrorism insurance, which will allow development of capital and resources for purchasing reinsurance.''
* Coverage be expanded to nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological losses. Doing so ``would provide the benefits of insurance, such as incentives for mitigation and a claims-handling apparatus, which would be superior to reliance on after-the-fact governmental relief to address the economic impact of such an event.''
* Coverage be expanded to include acts of domestic terrorism as well as those perpetrated by terrorists acting on behalf of foreign interests.
* Financial and market circumstances be used to set retentions. Doing so would permit retentions to be set high enough to create demand for reinsurance while remaining low enough ``to avoid significant risks of insolvency,'' according to the task force.

Load-Date: May 5, 2006


End of Document