Abandon superpower myth
USA TODAY
January 17, 2005, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 944 words
Byline: Nancy E. Soderberg
Body

I remember sitting in the White House as a National Security Council official during the last transition from a president's first term to a second term. Back in 1996, the mood was confident and even a little cocky, with no more political campaigns looming.
As President Bush and his team prepare for their second term, the mood may again be a little cocky, but the choices are much starker. Perhaps none is more important than how to make America safe again. Yet the administration has made the wrong choices when it comes to weapons of mass destruction.
Bush must abandon the dangerous myth that, as the lone superpower, America can use its military strength alone to bend the world to its wishes and counter the emergence of any rival to its power. He still believes this superpower myth, as demonstrated by his promoting Condoleezza Rice to secretary of State and retaining Donald Rumsfeld as Defense secretary -- two of the myth's biggest supporters.
As the lone superpower, America is powerful enough to act whenever and wherever it wants. But as the costly experiments of the past four years have shown, the United States cannot single-handedly spread democracy, end terrorism, prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, transform the Arab world and bring peace to the Middle East.
Issue No. 1: Terrorism
The all-important threat of global terrorism -- vastly enhanced by the increasing challenges of drug trafficking, weapons of mass destruction, failed states, refugees and infectious diseases -- cannot be met by America alone. An international coalition is the only way.
Yet, during the past four years, the world has become evermore wary of the United States and, accordingly, less willing to help U.S. policymakers realize their international goals. The world needs superpower leadership, but as a reliable partner. And America needs the world.
To make this country safer, Bush must put the superpower myth to rest. He must shift to a new, realistic policy of tough engagement. The United States must engage, lead and build coalitions while acting alone only when it must -- as a last, not first, resort.
With the grave threat of terrorism, the new policy must include zero tolerance toward terrorism and proliferation. That means building global coalitions -- often through the United Nations -- to combat supporters of terrorism and proliferation, as well as the use of sanctions and, when necessary, force.
Tough engagement will require the president to change policy in four key areas: non-proliferation, Arab reform, the Middle East peace process and economic development. In addition, a realistic policy for Iraq will require staying the costly course, at least for now.
Policy of 'tough engagement'
 * First, there's a real possibility that the next terrorist attack will involve weapons of mass destruction. Yet the administration spends $10 billion a year on an elusive national missile defense system and is cutting a $1 billion program that is preventing dangerous materials in the former Soviet Union from falling into terrorists' hands. It needs to shift those priorities and re-engage in the various international non-proliferation regimes it has undermined during the past four years.
The U.N. Security Council's endorsement of Bush's Proliferation Security Initiative last year demonstrated that the world will follow responsible U.S. leadership. That lesson urgently needs to be applied in negotiating deals to stop North Korea and Iran's nuclear programs.
 * Second, Bush must address the root cause of the Sept. 11 attacks: the need for reform in the Arab world. Terrorism is on the rise in the region, especially in Saudi Arabia, which faces increasing attacks against foreign and regime interests. Osama bin Laden's most recent message once again focused on the corruption in the Saudi capital of Riyadh. One in five Arabs lives on less than $2 a day. Until the paltry 0.5% annual growth in per capita income increases -- through a sharing of the regimes' monopoly on power and resources -- the region will remain a source of instability and a terrorist breeding ground.
 * Third, the Arab-Israeli conflict continues to fuel hatred for America. The death of Yasser Arafat and the election of new Palestinian leadership offer the U.S. an opportunity to get off the sidelines and re-engage in the search for peace. This time, it will have to lay out a clear endgame of a comprehensive settlement and secure the support and engagement of the Arab world, especially Saudi Arabia and Egypt. The recent U.S.-Israel-Egypt trade deal is an important step forward.
 * Finally, the United States must lead in addressing the challenges of the developing world. The link between economic underdevelopment, failing states and conflict is well documented. The U.N.'s Millennium Report, due this month, will lay out a bold strategy for increased investment, aid and reform. The president must take up that challenge in earnest, not only to revive America's leadership role, but to minimize the superpower burden. Increased aid today means having to spend less on peacekeeping and interventions tomorrow, and fewer threats to America.
The age of terrorism puts new demands on the lone superpower and primary target: the United States. The myth that this nation can stay safe acting on its own is dangerous. By taking up a new, realistic policy of tough engagement, the United States -- and the world -- will be a safer, more prosperous place.
***
 Nancy E. Soderberg was ambassador to the U.N. and a foreign-policy adviser in the Clinton administration. She is the author of the forthcoming book, The Superpower Myth: The Use and Misuse of American Might.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION)

Load-Date: January 18, 2005


End of Document