ABBAS INTERVIEW IN ALGERIA
The New York Times
May 21, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 366 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 20
Body


United States Government sources said today that Mohammed Abbas, facing murder and kidnapping charges in the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, was on a secret visit to Algeria when he said in an American television interview this month that President Reagan had become ''enemy No. 1.''
The State Department has complained to Algeria for not turning the Palestinian over to Italian or American authorities for prosecution in the hijacking of the cruise ship last October and the death of Leon Klinghoffer, an American passenger, the sources said.
''We've made no secret of our views,'' a United States official said. He said that Mr. Abbas, head of a faction of the Palestine Liberation Front, had left Algeria since and that his whereabouts were unknown.
The official said the United States Government did not know Mr. Abbas was in the North African country when NBC News conducted the interview, or it would have insisted he be turned over. Three other American sources corroborated the account.
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d described Mr. Abbas as the mastermind of the ship's seizure in October. Four other Palestinians were arrested by Italian authorities after American jets forced down an Egyptian plane taking them and Mr. Abbas to Tunisia, but Mr. Abbas was allowed to leave Italy.
Last month, an Italian court in Genoa indicted Mr. Abbas, who is known by the code name Abu Abbas, and 13 others on murder, kidnapping and various other charges stemming from the hijacking.
Mr. Abbas vowed in the interview with NBC News on May 5 that attacks would be carried out in the United States in retaliation for the bombing of Libya on April 15. He also said Mr. Reagan had become ''enemy No. 1.''
The State Department accused NBC News on May 6 of encouraging terrorism with the interview.
''Obviously, terrorism thrives on this kind of publicity,'' said a department spokesman, Charles E. Redman. ''This is the kind of interview that gives terrorists the platform they seek.''
However, Lawrence K. Grossman, president of NBC News, was quoted by the network as saying it was vital to provide full information to the American people about terrorism ''and the dangers of the world in which we live.''


End of Document