ABC returns to Munich Olympics, the 'fuse' of terrorism
USA TODAY
August 29, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; The media mix
Length: 501 words
Byline: Peter Johnson
Body

If you or your kids or anyone you know has doubts about the roots of how some 3,000 people came to die Sept. 11, tuning into ABC on Sunday at 1:30 p.m. ET/PT is something to consider.
That's when ABC revisits the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, Germany, when 11 Israeli athletes were killed by eight Palestinian terrorists after a hostage siege that many people consider the birth of modern-day terrorism.
ABC Sports anchor Jim McKay, who narrated the unfolding drama before a worldwide audience on Sept. 5, 1972, is one of them. When terrorists struck last year, "my instant thought was of Munich," McKay said Wednesday. Munich was "the fuse" that started Arab terrorism, he said.
But unlike Munich, in which gunmen demanded the release of 200 Arab guerrillas jailed in Israel, Sept. 11 took terrorism to a new level, McKay said. "It was pure horror. There was nobody fighting with anybody. No one winning or losing except for the terrorists who saw it as a victory."
The stark, hour-long documentary, produced by ABC Sports producer Natalie Jowett Antley, looks at the tragedy through film clips and recent interviews with key ABC anchors and producers, German officials and the survivors of the slain athletes.
The special shows how a sporting event billed as the "Games of Peace and Joy" came to be better known as one of the biggest modern-day security debacles as German police bungled any hope of rescuing the athletes.
Two athletes were killed at the Olympic Village; the other nine died during a botched rescue attempt at a nearby airport. Among the terrorists, five were killed at the airport and three were arrested. Two were later killed by the Israelis, and one is still at large.
The Israelis -- keenly aware that during World War II, Nazis had gassed Jews by the thousands just 20 miles away from the Olympic Stadium in Munich -- knew that Germany wanted to distance itself as far as possible from the horrors of the Holocaust.
"The Israelis thought going into it that if they would be safe anywhere, they would be safe with the Germans," Antley said. Instead, German security was lax, officers didn't carry arms, and the Palestinian gunmen were able to enter the Olympic village quickly and seize their hostages. "It was one of the great ironies in history," she said.
ABC News anchor Peter Jennings, then a 34-year-old Middle East correspondent for the network, was in Munich because his future boss -- Roone Arledge, then head of ABC Sports -- asked him if he'd like a relaxing assignment for a change: Olympic features.
Instead, Jennings was awakened at 5 a.m. that fateful day and reported live on the hostage siege from just feet away, thanks to help from Italian athletes.
Now 64, Jennings said the shock of what happened in Munich remains a textbook case in terrorism.
"We won't be surprised if the country is hit again, and we won't be surprised if it is a complete surprise," Jennings said. "That is how terrorism operates."
---
The media mix appears Monday through Friday
E-mail pjohnson@usatoday.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, 1972 AP file photo; Siege: A Palestinian terrorist on the balcony of the Olympic Village building where Israelis were held.

Load-Date: August 29, 2002


End of Document