ABI wins concession on terrorist cover
Business Insurance
December 28, 1992


Copyright 1992 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 31
Length: 444 words
Byline: By GAVIN SOUTER
Dateline: LONDON
Body


The British government has relented to pressure from insurers and industry and has agreed to act as a reinsurer of last resort for coverage against attacks by terrorists on mainland Britain.
The announcement comes amid a Christmas bombing campaign in English cities by the Irish Republican Army, and one month after reinsurers told insurers that they would not automatically cover damage from terrorist attacks under commercial property policies (BI, Nov. 23).
The reinsurers' refusal comes seven months after a bomb planted by the IRA in the City of London caused 800 million pounds ($ 1.26 billion at current exchange rates) in insured losses (BI, April 20).
Following a series of IRA bombings in late November, including an explosion in Manchester that injured 50 people, the Assn. of British Insurers wrote to Prime Minister John Major ''expressing concern at the serious implications of the progressive withdrawal from the beginning of January of all but the most basic insurance cover for commercial and industrial properties and business against terrorist attack.''
The ABI told Mr. Major that if corporations have no terrorist coverage next year, IRA attacks could bankrupt businesses, hurt property values and harm the property investments of pension funds.
Anticipating commercial reinsurers' refusal to cover terrorism risks, the ABI on Nov. 12 had published a draft terrorist exclusion clause for industrial and commercial risks. The exclusion did not apply to homeowners and auto policies.
Originally, the government refused insurers' request to step in as a reinsurer. But it relented last week, after continued pressure from the ABI.
But the government coverage will only be for a limited period, said Trade and Industry Minister Michael Heseltine.
''It is the government's objective that its involvement should be of limited duration and should cause the minimum interference necessary with the working of the market,'' he said.
Details of the scheme are still being worked out by the government and the ABI, but the key factors are:
* Insurers will continue to provide full coverage for personal lines risks, like home-owners and auto insurance.
* Insurers will cover commercial damage caused by terrorism up to 100,000 pounds ($ 156,700) for each of five sections of a property policy: building, contents, computers, engineering and business interruption.
* An additional premium will be paid by commercial and industrial policyholders for the terrorism coverage.
Insurers will forward the premiums to a terrorism coverage pool. The government would then reinsure the pool.
The government currently indemnifies losses from terrorist attacks in Northern Ireland.


End of Document