ABORTION ISSUE STALLS 'STALKING' BILL
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 27, 1993, Wednesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1993 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Local/Wisconsin
Length: 661 words
Body


One bipartisan crimefighting measure won't get a vote in the Legislature this week because it has become mired in another political controversy: abortion.
Legislation targeting ''stalkers'' who follow or harass people has been held up in Assembly and Senate committees because anti-abortion rights groups said the measure might limit their right to protest.
Kathleen Krenek, executive director of the Wisconsin Coalition Against Domestic Violence, said the quarrel had distracted attention from the bill's real focus, which is to protect women from harassment.
''This has become a a pro-life or pro-choice issue,'' Krenek said Tuesday. ''The whole thing that's being lost here is that women are being terrorized.''
By Tim Kelley  State government reporter
Rep. Jeannette Bell, D-West Allis, the Assembly stalking bill author, said she and Wisconsin Right to Life had agreed on changes to her bill that would protect peaceful, legal anti-abortion protests. But Bell said other anti-abortion rights activists were insisting on a broader exemption for their activities.
Committee leaders Sen. Joanne Huelsman, R-Waukesha, and Rep. Wayne Wood, D-Janesville, said that even if a deal was struck, the measure stands almost no chance of getting a vote before the Legislature adjourns for the year. Thursday is scheduled to be this year's final day of legislative votes.
The anti-abortion rights group Wisconsin Right to Life recently told lawmakers in a letter that they believed the bill contains a ''hidden agenda'' to squelch their right to free speech and assembly.
The current version of the stalking bill would make it illegal to linger outside a person's home for no legitimate reason. Anti-abortion rights groups have protested outside the homes of doctors.
But Sen. Margaret Farrow, R-Elm Grove, the sponsor of the Senate version of the bill, said the bill was never intended to target abortion protests. She said she remained hopeful that a compromise could be struck that would clearly target stalkers, not protesters.
But that may be unacceptable to abortion rights supporters who back the current bill and contend that some anti-abortion activities, which have included threats to harm physicians who perform abortions, cross the line from free speech to criminal behavior.
Krenek supports the abortion rights advocates: ''Anybody who stalks should be arrested. It's terrorism.''
Key vote expected: The Joint Finance Committee is expected to vote today on a compromise crimefighting bill that would set aside $ 2.7 million in tax money over two years for anti-crime measures and borrow $ 3 million to build a boot camp for juvenile delinquents.
The bill introduced Tuesday contains 40 anti-crime measures that would: Spend $ 1.2 million over two years to operate the proposed boot camp.
Set aside $ 400,000 over two years for juvenile ''early intervention'' services meant to deter youth from committing crimes.
Spend $ 300,000 over two years on services to reduce repeat offenses among juveniles and solve underlying causes of youth crime.
Provide $ 250,000 for job training of young people.
Outlaw use of ''cop-killer'' armor-piercing hangun bullets in crimes.
Track the location and employment of convicted sex offenders for up to 15 years after their release.
Increase penalties for trying to disarm a police officer; sell, loan or give handguns or other dangerous weapons to children; commit acts of terrorism; commit crimes as a gang member.
Allow electronic monitoring of some youthful criminals as an alternative to detention centers.
Allow juveniles to be waived more easily to adult court, where they would face stiffer penalties.
Enact penalties for people who recruit kids to join gangs.
Drunken drivers: The Assembly approved 90-8 a measure that would allow judges consider drunken driving convictions from as long as 10 years ago in order to impose tougher penalties on repeat drunken drivers. Current law does not allow judges to count offenses more than five years old.

Load-Date: July 19, 1995


End of Document