ABORTION PROTESTERS MARK 24TH ANNIVERSARY OF 'ROE V. WADE' / A BOMB SCARE PRECEDED A SPEECH BY VICE PRESIDENT GORE. HE CONDEMNED ANTIABORTION TERRORISM.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JANUARY 23, 1997 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 471 words
Byline: James Rowley, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The 24th anniversary of the Supreme Court's landmark decision legalizing abortion was marked yesterday by protest, a bomb scare, and condemnation of antiabortion terrorism by Vice President Gore.
"To those who committed the horrible deeds of Tulsa and Atlanta, I say this . . . the American people will not tolerate your cowardly crusade," Gore said of recent abortion-clinic bombings.
As he and Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke to the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, tens of thousands of abortion opponents rallied near the White House, then marched to Capitol Hill to protest the Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade decision.
The marchers included many schoolchildren, seminarians wearing long black robes bearing religious icons, and busloads of members of the Knights of Columbus, a Catholic men's group.
Randall Terry, leader of the antiabortion Operation Rescue group, told marchers their job was to "carry the banner of resistance and replace evil politicians."
At a rally on the Ellipse, Rep. Kenny Hulshof (R., Mo.) voiced concern that Gore and Hillary Clinton would "point to random acts of violence in an effort to taint our worthy cause."
"But just as we must call for an end to violence outside those clinics, let us continue to pray for an end to the violence inside those clinics," Hulshof said.
Protest leaders vowed to push legislation to ban a late-term procedure known as a "partial-birth" abortion. Clinton vetoed a bill passed by Congress last year to outlaw the procedure, and Republican leaders vow to bring up the measure again this year.
The anniversary got off to a shaky start several hours before the speeches when a worker at the hotel where Gore and Clinton were to appear found a small fusing device used in grenade training. The device, with less force than many firecrackers, went off in the employee's hand two blocks from the hotel.
Police said there was no evidence the incident was related to the abortion controversy, even though it was found within a block of a Planned Parenthood clinic.
Gore, referring to earlier clinic bombings, said the administration would "find the terrorists who committed these heinous acts and we will pursue you to the fullest extent of the law."
Hillary Clinton voiced hope for a dialogue with abortion opponents - "people of good faith who do not share extremism as their rallying cry."
Gore also said there was room for people on both sides of the issue to work together, but pledged: "We will not allow a woman's right to choose to be taken away."
NARAL president Kate Michelman told supporters that the right to obtain an abortion remained under attack, citing restrictions adopted by states.
Combined with the threat of violence, restrictive laws mean "it's not a safe place in America today for a woman to obtain an abortion she needs," Michelman said.

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document