ABORTION PROVIDER: WE FACE TERRORISM;
   PLANNED PARENTHOOD PRESIDENT SAYS TOUGH RESPONSE NEEDED.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
September 30, 2001 Sunday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2001 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. E1
Length: 358 words
Byline: Marv Balousek Wisconsin State Journal
Body


Planned Parenthood knows terrorism and can teach other Americans how to cope with it, national president Gloria Feldt told a group of the organization's Midwest leaders Saturday.
"Those of us within Planned Parenthood understand what's going on all too well," she said, referring to violence against abortion clinics and the recent terrorist attacks. "We've had too much personal experience with terrorism. I think we have a lot to teach the rest of the country now."
Feldt said incidents have increased at abortion clinics since Sept. 11 terrorist bombings and she believes they stem from a similar kind of loathing.
"The terrorism we face needs to be dealt with exactly as the terrorism we faced as a nation," she said. "There is no difference. "
She told the group, which came to Madison's Edgewater Hotel from 16 states as far away as Louisiana, not to be dissuaded by violence or opposition.
"It's exactly the time that the public needs what we provide," she said. "The world's women depend on us. As the economy goes south, people have little insurance or don't have any and more people will need Planned Parenthood services."
Feldt encouraged the leadership group to "look fear in the face" and continue moving forward. She cited the recent opening of an abortion clinic in Omaha and received a round of applause.
"Being together today in this time is an act of courage and an act of will," she said. "It's exactly what I would expect of Planned Parenthood people."
Feldt also highlighted the organization's goals for 2025, which include access for all to reproductive and sexual health care, celebrating sexuality as an essential aspect of humanity, and ensuring human rights worldwide.
She said the terrorist attacks and contributions to help the victims had a major impact on Planned Parenthood's fundraising and she estimated the organization will lose $2 million this year.
Anita Perez Ferguson, past president of the National Women's Political Caucus, told the group that striving for diversity often isn't easy or comfortable and involves sharing privileges and power.
"The whole idea of having diversity is not equal to having harmony," she said.

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document