ABORTION CLINIC BOMBING;
Possible motive: Media coverage;
Experts say terrorists may have planned second blast to guarantee dramatic footage.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 26, 1997, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 06G
Length: 618 words
Byline: Craig Schneider; STAFF WRITER
Series: This version ran only in the Home and Sports Final editions of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Body


Drawn by a bomb blast at a Sandy Springs abortion clinic, television reporters were on hand, cameras rolling, when a second blast brought new tragedy.
Those images of chaos, smoke and blood from the second blast have fascinated the nation ever since - and raised the question of whether the Jan. 16 twin bombing was planned with the media in mind.
 
It could have been, say terrorism experts.
Although the Sandy Springs bombing certainly was aimed at destroying life and property, some terrorism experts say the bomber also may have had another target in mind: the nightly news.
The first bomb would draw the media; the second one would provide the highlight footage.
"Here you had the news people right on hand, able to capture it firsthand; that makes it more of a media event," said David Estenson, president of B. Prepared Inc., a Minnesota-based training and consulting firm that specializes in bomb threats and anti-terrorism tactics. "The pictures of the dark cloud from the bomb looked hellacious."
The initial blast at the Carpenter Drive building provided news teams with footage of building damage (and no victims); the second blast, 65 minutes later, created scenes of billowing smoke, people screaming in horror and bloody victims crying in pain as seven people, including a firefighter and three federal agents, were injured.
No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, which took place a week before the 24th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion nationwide, and which was followed days later with the double bombing of an abortion clinic in Oklahoma.
Terrorists want their acts to create havoc in order to publicize their causes, experts say, and having reporters and camera operators at the scene when a bomb explodes "gives the bomber the maximum bang for the buck," said Dr. Neil Kressel an author on terrorism and associate professor of psychology at William Paterson College in New Jersey.
Shocking footage also gives the story more staying power in the media, said Kressel. Shots of the Sandy Springs bombing could even resurface when the media picks the decade's most dramatic shots, he said.
The dual explosions appear to be the first two-bomb attack reported on U.S. soil, though the use of back-to-back bombs is a familiar terrorist tactic in Northern Ireland and the Middle East.
In the Sandy Springs bombings, the first blast outside the abortion clinic in a three-story building off Roswell Road, was reported about 9:30 a.m. The second followed just over an hour later, allowing ample time for the arrival of police, rescue workers, federal agents and the media.
Mayer Nudell, a Virginia consultant on terrorism, said he doesn't think terrorists plan carefully enough to have planted a "media" bomb.
"There's only one reason for the second bombing," he said. "To hurt somebody."
Several experts and federal authorities say the targets may have been federal agents, who investigate acts of terrorism.
But that theory does not necessarily discount the media conjecture. The double bombing may have been intended to harm the abortion clinic, federal agents, and provide dramatic media footage, said Tom Preston, chairman of Preston-Osborne, a Kentucky consulting firm that has 30 years of crisis management experience.
The more exposure an event receives, the more fear it can create, he noted.
"One of the essential ingredients of terrorism is widespread public attention," Preston said. "Certainly that could include bringing media into the area with an initial attack."
But purposely drawing cameras to a bombing can backfire on a bomber trying to rally public support for a cause.
"If you kill a 7-year-old child," Estenson said, "you do not do your cause any good."

Graphic

 
Photo: At work when the second explosion occurred, WGNX cameraman Randy
 Paige was injured, then tended by colleague Tiffani Diaz (left) and two
 others./ CHARLOTTE B. TEAGLE / Staff

Load-Date: January 27, 1997


End of Document