ABROAD AT HOME;
FREE MARKET TERRORISM
The New York Times
September 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 739 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Body


BOSTON Blocked by Congress from directly funding the contras' war on Nicaragua, the Reagan Administration is pursuing the policy by other means. In a spokesman's delicate phrase, the Administration does ''not discourage'' support of contra terrorism by private American individuals and groups and by foreign governments.
 The contras are getting, they say, $1.5 million a month from American citizens and corporations. Money has also come from the Governments of Israel, Taiwan, Argentina, Venezuela and Guatemala. An organization called Civilian Military Assistance in Alabama supplies weapons and advice. Two of its men were shot down while flying a helicopter in a rebel raid on Nicaragua.
All this sounds like a novel application of the Reagan free-market ideology: The magic of the marketplace goes to war. Skeptics, and I am one, will doubt that it is really so unorganized - that C.I.A. Director William Casey, for one, is doing nothing to line up his conservative friends. But at a minimum a U.S. Government is smiling at a new method of financing covert war. And that has extremely dangerous implications.
First, the episode marks a fresh extreme in the Reagan Administration's record of disregard for the will of Congress.  A State Department spokesman, Alan Romberg, said officials had decided not to discourage outside funding of the contras ''when it appeared that Congress would go into recess in July without having provided all the funding that had been requested and was acutely needed for Central America.'' In other words, the constitutional system did not work the way we liked, so we decided to make an end run around it.
Just think of the implications of that attitude. If it takes hold, Presidents could propose the most controversial policy to Congress - and, if it is rejected, turn to wealthy individuals and companies to finance the idea. ''The Mighty Corporation proudly joins in sending our Marines to Beirut . . .''
The Reagan Administration has become increasingly brazen in its disregard for the coordinate branches of Government. Congress, worried about military adventurism in Central America, puts limits on building of bases; the Pentagon thereupon spends millions on ''temporary'' installations for exercises in Honduras - and the contras fly from one of those airfields.
There is nothing more fundamental to our constitutional system than the principle that Congress decides whether to support a policy by appropriating funds. Questions have been asked about the legality of private contributions to a foreign war. But the real lawlessness here is more profound: contempt for the Constitution.
Second, for the United States to wink at official foreign and private American involvement in Central American military struggles sets a troubling precedent.
The Monroe Doctrine may not be mentioned so often nowadays; the unilateralism of its veto on foreign intervention in this hemisphere is out of fashion. But does this country really want to start inviting governments in Asia and the Middle East to arm one side or another in our backyard? Do we want to go back to the days of privateers, of private war-making? The Sorcerer's Apprentice comes to mind.
Reagan Administration officials privately admit that there are dangers in reliance on other governments and wealthy private interests to support the contras. But then, with staggering logic, they blame Congress: If it had approved the money we requested, we would not have had to take this dangerous step . . .
Third, this latest turn in the dirty war on Nicaragua does more damage to American credibility.
The Reagan Administration from the beginning made a point of rallying the decent governments of the world against terrorism. But who can respect that effort when its authors take extraordinary steps to keep a terrorist campaign going themselves? For much of the contra activity is undoubtedly that: kidnapping and murdering civilians, for example, even children.
But then this Administration has an amazing ability to take opposite positions without blinking. It mines the harbors of Nicaragua and then deplores the nasty people who may be doing the same thing in the Suez Canal.
The episode is so sordid and so dangerous that one would have expected a national outcry. But where are the big headlines, the brave speeches by opposing candidates for President? If we needed another demonstration that this is a time of deadened sensibilities, here it is.B


End of Document