ABROAD AT HOME;
ACCORDING TO PLAN
The New York Times
March 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 756 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Dateline: WINSTON-SALEM, N.C.
Body


Muammar el-Qaddafi is a satisfying target for American military action: a bullying menace to his neighbors, a sponsor of international terrorism. We have bloodied him now in the Gulf of Sidra. The question is what, if anything, we have accomplished by doing so.
The purpose of the U.S. action was to retaliate against Libya for its role in terrorist outrages - to teach Colonel Qaddafi a lesson. Planning began months ago, after terrorists with reported links to Syria attacked the airports in Rome and Vienna last Dec. 27. Twenty people were killed, among them five Americans.
President Reagan had often promised to hit back at terrorism. In January he imposed economic sanctions on Libya. He also approved sending ships into the Gulf of Sidra as soon as the Navy could gather the three aircraft carriers it felt it needed for the operation: the end of March.
Colonel Qaddafi claims the Gulf of Sidra as Libyan waters, in conflict with international law and with the view of virtually all other countries. But it was hardly necessary to run a large naval exercise in the gulf to show U.S. disdain for the claim.
The point of the exercise, rather, was to provoke Colonel Qaddafi. U.S. planners reckoned that he would have to respond to such a massive show of disregard. They thought that he would fire some of his new Soviet surface-to-air missiles at American planes, and that the planes could avoid them and attack the missile-launching sites.
In the event, everything went exactly according to plan. Indeed, the incident had the look of a well-rehearsed scenario - on both sides. That is, Colonel Qaddafi made his show of military response without a real challenge, for example by his substantial air force. He may even have ordered the missiles fired when the U.S. planes were out of range.
Thus the two parties, for their own purposes, kept the Gulf of Sidra incident to a limited, demonstrative one. David Shipler of The New York Times summed up the conclusions of some Washington analysts as follows:
''Libya and the United States, both motivated more strongly by political than military considerations, seemed to play willingly into each other's hands. They allowed each other to maintain the impression of valor, to avoid the risk of having threats shown to be empty and to enjoy the convenience of having a clearly focused enemy.''
President Reagan certainly gained politically in the short run. Once again he drowned public doubts about his policies in patriotric fervor over a military adventure, as he did with the invasion of Grenada in 1983 just two days after 241 U.S. servicemen sent to Lebanon on a foolish mission died in a terrorist bombing.
But what of the deeper American aims: Will the action in the Gulf of Sidra weaken Colonel Qaddafi? Will it reduce Libyan support for terrorism? The answer to those questions is almost certainly no.
In terms of his political position, Colonel Qaddafi has surely gained from having his nose bloodied in the gulf. Worsening economic conditions in Libya, caused by the oil price fall, had produced some signs of internal opposition to his rule. Now he is a hero, standing up to the imperialist enemy.
In the region, the American naval operation will make it harder for Arab governments that dislike Colo-nel Qaddafi to disagree with him publicly. Even Egypt, Libya's uneasy neighbor, anticipates new popular sympathy for Libya as a victim of American power. The Soviet Union, while avoiding any confrontation with the United States, may make careful shows of further support for Colonel Qaddafi - and may seek more frequent use of Libyan ports.
As for terrorism, Libyan-sponsored attacks are more likely now, or so many experts believe. Colonel Qaddafi has threatened action against Americans, and there is no reason to think that he will be more restrained after the Sidra incident. No respect for law or humanity will keep him from taking revenge on innocents.
What will the Reagan Administration do if there is some new terrorist horror linked to Libya? Will it bomb major Libyan facilities? What if Colonel Qaddafi then takes American hostages? Where will escalation go?
''It is no time for Rambo-like enthusiasm,'' The Winston-Salem Journal said in an editorial. ''We must take care not to let ourselves be manipulated and drawn far into a game that develops its own momentum.''
The very nature of the Qaddafi problem is that it is not soluble by a neat military action. Smacking him in the Gulf of Sidra and feeling good about it is not a strategy. Does the Reagan Administration have one?


End of Document