ABROAD AT HOME;
Arafat To Choose
The New York Times
June 5, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 733 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


Are Yasir Arafat and the P.L.O. committed to seeking a political destiny for the Palestinians by political means? Or do they condone terrorist acts by Palestinians?
That is the issue posed by last week's attempted guerrilla attack on the Israeli coast. It is a fateful issue for Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian cause.
The guerrillas, in two speedboats, were stopped by Israeli forces. Responsibility for the raid was taken by the Palestine Liberation Front, a faction headed by Abul Abbas, who is a member of the P.L.O. executive committee.
Mr. Arafat said the P.L.O. was ''not responsible'' for the raid and had ''no connection with it.'' But he declined to condemn it, and he rejected the idea that he remove Abul Abbas from the executive committee, saying that could be done only by the P.L.O.'s exile parliament, the Palestine National Council.
In the days since the raid much attention has focused on whether it will lead the United States to stop talking with the P.L.O. Inside the P.L.O. there has been resentful comment about American calls on Mr. Arafat to condemn the raid. A leader cannot act to please the United States, it was said.
But what is at stake is not the pleasure of the United States. It is the hope of the Palestinian people for an end to Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, the hope for a chance to govern themselves.
The speedboat raid was a devastating blow to those Palestinian hopes. That is so for a reason that most leading Palestinians well understand: Palestinians can make political progress only by convincing Israel of their desire for negotiation and peace.
That message had just been sounded by leading West Bank figures under poignant circumstances. Faisal Husseini and others went on a hunger strike in Jerusalem after a deranged Israeli killed seven Palestinians on May 20. Day after day Mr. Husseini lectured Palestinians on the need to convince Israelis of their commitment to peace and Israel's security. Then came the raid. The leaders ended their hunger strike.
The raid was devastating, too, for Israeli peace groups. Its effect was to give powerful support to Prime Minister Shamir and the extreme right, who depict Palestinians as terrorists not fit to meet in negotiations.
Prof. Yaron Ezrahi of the Hebrew University, a leader of Israel's Peace Now movement, said: ''I doubt that there will be much capacity for Israeli moderates to push for negotiations with the P.L.O. after this. It is as if the P.L.O. factions have decided to play the role assigned to them in a drama written by Yitzhak Shamir.''
All that is surely clear enough to Mr. Arafat. He knows that terrorism cannot force concessions from Israel, that to the contrary every terrorist act strengthens those in Israel who want to keep the occupied territories forever. Yet he hesitates to speak clearly.
There is a reason in history for Mr. Arafat's reluctance to choose. He has built up Palestinian national consciousness precisely by avoiding ideological disputes - by making the P.L.O. an umbrella that covers all in the Palestinian cause.
But the time for fudging has run out. Abul Abbas is a terrorist, and he does not belong on the executive committee of an organization committed to negotiation and peace with Israel. P.L.O. organizational technicalities are unimportant. Yasir Arafat can speak. That is what leaders are for.
Those who deal with the endless conflict in the Middle East have to keep in mind the human beings who are its victims: the ordinary Israelis who live with the fear of terrorism, the ordinary Palestinians who live under the grinding conditions of occupation.
The Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza feel powerless and abandoned now. Since the May 20 shooting the Israeli Army has put down protests with tactics deplored by Israeli human rights groups. At least 16 have been killed; hundreds of thousands of Gazans have been confined to their homes for days.
The United States sharply increased the feeling of hopelessness when it vetoed a Security Council resolution to send a U.N. investigating mission to the occupied territories. Secretary of State Baker had indicated that he would agree to the mission. At the least he owed a gesture to West Bank leaders, the moderates who have been in the eye of U.S. policy.
But that does not affect Mr. Arafat's responsibility. It is his choice: to condemn terrorism or to let the faint hopes of peace flicker out.


End of Document