ABROAD AT HOME;
Reasons for Doubt
The New York Times
April 21, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 728 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


The attack on Libya has left the United States and its European allies profoundly divided: a gulf not only of policy but of perception. Americans tend to react in anger to the doubting Europeans. We would do better to try to understand the reasons for doubt.
Britain is the most dramatic example. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher let U.S. bombers fly from bases in Britain. Yet while 77 percent of Americans cheered President Reagan's decision to bomb Libya, 59 percent of Britons condemned the raid. Conservative newspapers like the Daily Telegraph were highly critical. So were former prime ministers, Labor and Tory.
Virtually no one in Britain or on the Continent has any sympathy for Muammar el-Qaddafi. Nor are Europeans oblivious to terrorism. They have suffered a lot more of it on their soil than America has. Shots from the Libyan People's Bureau in London killed a policewoman, and not many Britons have forgotten that.
U.S. officials have criticized the allies for not agreeing to tough economic sanctions against Libya, implying that that step could have avoided the need for military action. Yet President Reagan, while imposing sanctions, opened a giant loophole in February when he exempted the five U.S. oil companies operating there. They reportedly paid $2 billion a year in taxes to Colonel Qaddafi, a quarter of his budget.
There are indeed some not-so-noble factors operating in European policy. Economic ties to Libya have made governments reluctant to close the people's bureaus that they well know are centers of arms traffic and terrorism. In Britain as in France there is a mood of nationalism, of neo-Gaullism, that can take anti-American forms.
But there are deeper reasons for European disagreement with the Libyan raid, I am convinced. They go to American policy and to the men who make and administer it.
The European members of the Atlantic alliance always looked to the United States for leadership, and especially to the President. But underneath official deference there have been doubts about Ronald Reagan and his policy. His ingratiating personal policies are felt less on the other side of the Atlantic. There are more worries about his unilateral interventionism - in Lebanon, Nicaragua, Angola - and about the Rambo talk.
On Libya, there is no disagreement about the end of resisting terrorism. The question for the Europeans is one of effectiveness. Will a bombing attack deter terrorism? If not, what follows? Does the United States Government have a strategy? Or is it just hitting out in rage?
Americans should be concerned about those same questions. I have found the Libyan issue intensely troubling, and I think many others have despite those first poll figures. The only way toward a sound judgment is to work through the factors with an eye on the ultimate question of effectiveness.
The first proposition, for me, is that Colonel Qaddafi's open support of terrorism is a blatant evil. There is no reason to let murderers go unpunished if you know their author. Nor can it be a decisive factor that retaliation will kill some innocent civilians, or murderous states would never fear retribution.
But punishment cannot be enough of a reason for a great power like the United States to take military action. That would reduce America to the level of those we charge with inhumanity. And for a superpower to use its military forces for revenge raises justified fears about escalation if the blow is returned.
Deterrence is the necessary justification. Are there convincing reasons to believe that the air attack will deter Colonel Qaddafi and others from further terrorism?
The immediate signs - the random attacks, the killing of hostages - are negative. They need not exclude a deterrent effect in the longer run. But one would first have to have confidence that American officials have a plan beyond punishment.
To the contrary, the Reagan Administration has looked inept or worse since the raid. Secretary of State Shultz's endorsement of a coup against Colonel Qaddafi was loose talk of the most self-defeating kind. The decision to give film of the bombing runs to the television networks was a shameless appeal to jingoism. There is no sign that anyone has thought about how to deal with the political effects in the Arab world.
Our European allies are irritating at times in their caution. This time they have reasons for doubt.


End of Document