ABROAD AT HOME;
Seeing Iran Plain
The New York Times
February 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 722 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis; Flora Lewis is on vacation.
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


In searching through the obscurities of the Iran affair we are in danger of overlooking the obvious. So it seems to one returning to this country after several weeks abroad, away from the Iran story.
The obvious is this: The policy carried out by President Reagan and his collection of White House aides, freebooters and foreign maneuverers was and is a disaster. It has done - is still doing - deep, humiliating damage to the interests of the United States and of a decent world.
Terrorism has been emboldened by the Reagan policy. More Americans are held hostage by terrorist gangs in Lebanon today than ever before, and more innocent human beings of other nationalities. Now the Iranians have detained an American correspondent, Gerald F. Seib of The Wall Street Journal, whom they had invited to visit.
''We will never deal with terrorists.'' That was Ronald Reagan's line. But he did, offering arms for hostages and obsessively pursuing a deal in the teeth of failure. Everyone knows it, and his word on terrorism - America's word, for the moment - is worth nothing.
State-supported terrorism is a particular evil, in our view. But U.S. condemnation is so devalued now that Iran does not bother to conceal its support for terrorism.
The speaker of the Iranian Parliament, Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, said last week that the Lebanese were justified in hostage-taking and other terrorist acts because they were ''so ignored and so oppressed.'' He was the very man with whom Mr. Reagan's agents tried to deal, the one they identified as a ''moderate.''
Secretary of State Shultz said out loud that Iran had ''very strong ties'' to the group that recently kidnapped four professors in Beirut. But then Mr. Shultz had seen the Iranian link all along, and called the approach to Iran a ''perverse'' idea.
But Mr. Shultz's warning was rejected, and he was then excluded and lied to so the policy could go forward. President Reagan went so far as to make the amazing statement, last Nov. 13, that Iran had not been connected to terrorism against Americans for 18 months.
The Reagan policy has had a second effect, potentially as serious as the emboldening of terrorists. That is to strengthen Iran's war effort against Iraq.
The latest Iranian offensive, begun last month, had considerable success in its opening phase, threatening the Iraqi port city of Basra. And some military analysts say that equipment supplied in the Reagan operations played a significant role in that success.
The arms shipped by the Reagan Administration last year included 2,000 TOW antitank missiles and many urgently needed spare parts for Hawk antiaircraft missiles. Reports of the fighting in Iraq last month said that Iran showed greatly improved capability in antitank and antiaircraft warfare.
If the Iranians were able to press their offensive and take Basra, the fall of the Iraqi regime might follow. Then revolutionary Iran would be at the gates of Saudi Arabia and the smaller states of the Persian Gulf, with the most threatening consequences for the West.
Perhaps with that prospect in mind, President Reagan has sent U.S. Navy ships to the gulf. Are they going to do something to correct the Reagan-North-Poindexter tilt toward Iran? Is there anything left in American policy to take seriously?
One other phenomenon strikes an observer returning to the Iran affair. That is the response coming from certain segments of the political right: namely, that a President must have the power to act covertly and decisively in foreign affairs, without being hamstrung by accountability to Congress and the people.
A chorus of neo-conservatives has been saying that America cannot play its necessary role in the world unless the President has such power. Then, last week, Vice President Bush said the Constitution was designed to let a President ''achieve his goals abroad'' secretly, if necessary. Congress, he said, should not try to regulate ''the conduct of foreign policy generally and covert actions particularly.''
What those conservatives want to do is to take the example of a disaster and entrench it in the American system. They want mistakes to go uncorrected, to fester. They want to forget our history, our law. But that is another story. For today it is enough to remember that the President and conspiratorial colleagues have wounded this country.


End of Document