Abroad at Home;
Faith In Reason
The New York Times
April 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 681 words
Byline: By ANTHONY LEWIS 

By ANTHONY LEWIS 
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


Thirty years ago, as a reporter in Washington, I could enter almost any Government building without a security check and walk down the halls from office to office. That now seems an almost unimaginable past.
The horror in Oklahoma City reminds us how far we have gone into the land of fear. We live with security measures, and they will inevitably become more burdensome.
Has something gone wrong in human society? Are more people feeling discontent so intense that it drives them to acts of terrorism? The Oklahoma City bombing leads one to ask questions of that kind. But we should beware of grand theories.
Terrorism is not something new, after all. A terrorist assassination in Sarajevo led to World War I. The Nazis used terrorism in their march to power in Germany. The world has experienced waves of terrorism, rising and falling, over a century and more.
What is different now is the technological development of devices that can be used by terrorists with dreadful effect in dense modern environments. A relatively small amount of explosive can destroy a building. Easily transportable canisters of poison gas can paralyze a subway system.
It may well be, too, that modern communications are enticing to potential terrorists. They can see their handiwork on television almost instantly -- and no doubt feel a surge of power. So do unbalanced people who after something like the Oklahoma City tragedy make telephone calls warning that bombs have been planted here and there.
Power is at the heart of terrorism. Putting aside the occasional madman who commits murder for revenge against imagined slights or at the order of voices, terrorists are people who want influence. Prof. Philip B. Heymann of the Harvard Law School puts it:
"We live in a world in which relatively few people -- maybe 500 or 1,000 -- make the important decisions. Outsiders who want to play on that stage but have no legitimate power see terrorism as a way to do it. Terrorism can put a few people with an agenda on the international stage."
The truth is that we are vulnerable to even small groups driven by extreme political ideology or religious fervor. There were only about 20 men and women in the Baader-Meinhof group, but it had West Germany in the grip of fear for a decade with its campaign of kidnappings and assassinations.
We cannot prevent terrorism perfectly by physical protection of buildings. Within reasonable economic limitations the Federal Government could have truly effective defenses at perhaps 500 of its buildings, but it has 7,000 around the country. State government and private buildings can also be targets as symbols: the World Trade Center, for example.
Intelligence-gathering is important. But to say that is to see the danger that the Government -- and the public, too -- will pick out some groups as suspect. That can lead to guilt by association: harassment of people with a Middle East background, say.
This country has too many episodes of group suspicion and persecution in its history to brush that concern aside. Red scares repeatedly led to cruel injustices, from mass arrests and deportations in 1920 to the McCarthy fear of the 1950's.
Even before the Oklahoma City outrage, the Clinton Administration had used the fear of terrorism to propose legislation that would violate basic American traditions of due process. Its proposed Omnibus Counterterrorism Act would let the Government deport people without showing them any evidence of wrongdoing. Representative Charles Schumer, a Brooklyn Democrat who used to care about civil liberties, was quick to say that the Oklahoma bombing required swift passage of the legislation.
The worst thing this country could do after Oklahoma City is to panic into measures that would injure our society, making it less free and less fair. That would be to give terrorism a victory.
For 200 years America has put its faith in constitutional democracy, preferring its reasoned process -- however slow and frustrating -- to this or that claim of absolute revealed truth. We should meet irrationality now by redoubling our commitment to reason.

Load-Date: April 21, 1995


End of Document