ABROAD AT HOME;
AGAINST THE LAW
The New York Times
April 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 779 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Dateline: BOSTON, April 11
Body


More than any other people on earth, Americans believe in the idea of government under law. They really expect the state and its officials to respect the law. It was something our European friends never understood about Watergate: that in the end Americans would not tolerate criminal behavior in the White House.
 That same American nerve has been touched now by President Reagan's covert war on Nicaragua. A majority of the Senate was willing to accept much evasion and equivocation on the policy. But brazen lawlessness was too much. Senator Barry Goldwater cut through all the official mincing in his letter to William Casey, Director of Central Intelligence:
''Mine the harbors in Nicaragua? This is an act violating international law. It is an act of war. For the life of me, I don't see how we are going to explain it.''
The sophistries offered by the Reagan Administration to justify the mining would not persuade many ordinary Americans. We know how we would feel if a foreign power stationed ships just outside our 12-mile limit and sent speedboats into New York Harbor to drop mines. We would consider it ''terrorism,'' Senator Robert Byrd's word for the mining in Nicaragua.  One is entitled to raise an eyebrow at the senatorial gasps of horror over news of the mining. Any senator who wanted to know what the C.I.A. was doing in Nicaragua could have known. Just last week 47 senators voted to kill an amendment that would have barred American aid to ''terrorism'' in Nicaragua. This week Howard Baker and Alfonse D'Amato and Charles Percy and others who did rushed to deplore the mining.
But there is something of an explanation. Americans will stand a good deal of dirty business. But once the dirt is exposed, they do not want their Government to be seen justifying it. They do not want the United States to be identified with lawlessness.  Americans' commitment to law was further offended when the Reagan Administration maneuvered to avoid a Nicaraguan lawsuit in the World Court. Here was the United States running from the sheriff. It was a humiliating spectacle: ''a disgrace,'' as Oscar Schachter, professor of international law and diplomacy at Columbia University, put it. He noted that ''every President until now has strongly advocated American adherence to the World Court.'' Why would the Reagan Administration do something guaranteed to shame and outrage many Americans, namely the crude attempt to wriggle out of the World Court's jurisdiction? One reason is no doubt sheer stupidity. Even the legal maneuver was inept. The U.S. has bound itself to give six months' notice of withdrawal from the Court's jurisdiction, and the claim that this was not really a ''withdrawal'' was strained.  The political logic was equally unconvincing. The State Department's spokesman, John Hughes, explained that the Administration was ''concerned lest the Court be turned into a propaganda arena.'' Crocodiles could not equal that tearful concern.
Just four years ago the United States arraigned Iran in the World Court in a suit to get the hostages released. Our Government had no illusion that the Ayatollah Khomeini would comply with an adverse judgment. But it saw a proper purpose in raising the standard of law for the world to see. Now a spokesman for the State Department dismisses the whole process as ''propaganda.''
But there is a deeper reason for the failure of the Administration to understand how it would be hurt by its own actions - the failure, especially, of Ronald Reagan. The reason is that this President has no understanding of law.
It was President Reagan - and his Attorney General, William French Smith - who intervened in the legal process on the issue of tax exemptions for segregated schools. It was President Reagan who tried to install a massive new censorship system in Government without any basis in law. It is his Justice Department that even now is trying to persuade the Supreme Court that the Government can use back-door methods to ban American travel to Cuba instead of the process recently laid down by Congress if there is any emergency need for such a ban.
Some may be surprised that an Administration calling itself conservative cares so little for the law. But Ronald Reagan is not a conservative - not in the sense of Barry Goldwater. He is a radical who wants to enlarge the power of the executive, including the power to wage secret wars, regardless of law and tradition. Americans are not cynical about the law. To see Richard Nixon mewling and oozing on television is to be reminded of the price he paid for lawlessness. The response to the Reagan policy on Nicaragua shows that the American commitment to law remains.


End of Document