ABROAD AT HOME;
HAIG'S BEST-LAID PLANS
The New York Times
March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 830 words
Byline: By Anthony Lewis
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


When Secretary of State Haig chose to begin by concentrating his public energies on El Salvador, he evidently calculated that he had a political winner. The public seemed to be in the mood for tough talk of a military stand against Communism. But things have not worked out exactly as planned.
Haig's strident words caused immediate uneasiness among our allies; there were expressions of concern in Bonn, Paris, London, Ottawa. In recent days it has become clear that a good many Americans, too, are worried about what we are doing in El Salvador. The question is being asked in newspapers, in churches, on college campuses. The policy is not going down so easily.
Anthony Lewis Op-Ed comment discusses Secretary of State Alexander Haig's policy on El Salvador
At his press conference the other day President Reagan was asked whether he thought there was a valid analogy between El Salvador and Vietnam. He answered no - predictably, and in a narrow sense correctly: the two situations are vastly different in geography and history and military posture.
But the reason Vietnam is in people's minds is not that the analogy is exact. It is that in El Salvador, as in Vietnam, we must beware of simplicities - of a policy based on slogans, on ignorance of the indigenous reasons for disorder in a society.
When we went into Vietnam, we knew nothing of its history or culture. Our politicians said we were drawing a line against Chinese Communist expansionism - a theory so absurd that it is hard to imagine anyone ever believed it. And the present Adminis-tration's statements on El Salvador ring with the same kinds of empty simplicities.
El Salvador is under attack by ''terrorists,'' General Haig and the President say; Cuba and the Soviet Union are trying to infiltrate terrorism into the Americas. But anyone who cares to know is aware that most of the killing in El Salvador has been done by security forces nominally but not really under the Government's control. And everyone knows that the revolutionary movement did not originate abroad but began as an indigenous response to a century of right-wing exploitation enforced by state terrorism.
To portray U.S. policy as protecting Central America from external intervention is in any case laughable. The United States has been intervening there for a century. The term ''banana republics'' was not coined in Moscow. In Guatemala, next door to El Salvador, the C.I.A. in 1954 installed a right-wing regime whose heirs have just been charged by Amnesty International with mass political murder.
Or consider the argument that Secretary Haig is using El Salvador to signal the Russians - to warn them that they had better behave in Afghanistan and Poland. Is that really the message Moscow is going to get? Not bloody likely.
The message of the Haig policy is that a superpower will not tolerate political upsets in its own back yard. If that is true for us in El Salvador, why should it be any different for the Soviet Union in Poland or Afghanistan? What we are doing in El Salvador will in fact make it easier for Moscow to justify intervention in Poland if it ever takes that fateful step.
General Haig's policy on El Salvador puts the United States down hard on the side of the status quo. Is that a line likely to serve American interests in a world of poverty and discontent and change?
These are some of the questions giving rise to public doubts about El Salvador. The Administration may have the votes in Congress to send its arms and advisers. But doubts of this fundamental kind matter. Americans are not informed in detail on El Salvador, but after Vietnam they are skeptical of a policy based on simplicities and bluster.
By now it is a good guess also that the White House is wondering about the political wisdom of General Haig's El Salvador caper. For one of its effects has been to subordinate what President Reagan and his advisers wanted to keep at the top of the public agenda: the Reagan economic program. The television news programs are giving more prominence now to El Salvador, and it was the subject of more questions at the President's press conference than his tax and budget proposals.
In Washington generally, murmurs of doubt are beginning to be heard about the sagacity of Alexander Haig. It is not just El Salvador.  Even his advertised skill at bureaucratic in-fighting has proved flawed. He suffered an unnecessary public setback right at the start when the White House held up his plans to reorganize the national security structure. He accepted a dodo, the President's friend William Clark, as his deputy.
The contrast with Henry Kissinger is asserting itself in people's minds. For all his love of right-wing governments and military force, Kissinger would never have been so self-defeatingly crude in El Salvador. He would have managed his relations with the White House more smoothly, too. But then Haig has an inescapable problem with the President's men. They know that he aches to be President himself.


End of Document