ABSU observes 22nd death anniversary of Jwhwlao Swmbla Basumatary
The Sentinel
July 30, 2018 Monday


Copyright 2018 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 283 words
Byline: Our Correspondent
Body


KOKRAJHAR, July 30: The All Bodo Students' Union (ABSU) on Monday observed the 22nd death anniversary of its former president Jwhwlao Swmbla Basumatary as anti-terrorism day at his birth place at Goybari in Chirang district with a day-long programme. The beginning of the programme started with the hoisting of the flag of the ABSU by Pramod Boro, ABSU president, followed by floral tribute at the tomb by Bhanumoti Basumatary, wife of Jwhwlao Swmbla Basumatary. She also started the signature campaign against terrorism. A blood donation camp was also organized where ABSU president Promod Boro donated blood along with other guests.

Meanwhile, the theme of the anti-terrorism day was 'New face of terrorism versus path to peaceful society'. The open discussion was inaugurated by Rwn Gwra Narzary, MCLA BTC and former president of the ABSU. In his speech he stressed rooting out the new face of technology-enabled terrorism and appealed to the youths to avoid all forms of anti-social activities.

The key-note address was delivered by ABSU president Pramod Boro. He opined that the concept of terrorism had changed and the Bodo society had experienced all stages and forms of terrorism. The time had come to explore better and affirmative message to be sent out to establish a democratic and non-violent society by spreading awareness against the terrorism. This age of IT-enabled terror was a challenge and Bodo people had to remain peaceful and democratic while resolve the long-standing issues of Bodos.

The open discussion was also graced by appointed speaker Urkhao Gwra Brahma, president of UPPL and former ABSU president, and resource person Raju Narzary who is the executive director of NERSWN.

Load-Date: July 31, 2018


End of Document