Abusing animals
University Wire
December 18, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The Rebel Yell via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1206 words
Byline: By Joseph Nickelson, The Rebel Yell; SOURCE: UNLV
Dateline: LAS VEGAS 
Body


elcome to Bush land, welcome to corporate America, and welcome to a post 9-11 era.
Imagine being appalled by an organization, corporation or business and wanting to do something about it. Now imagine taking legal, First Amendment action, being successful and soon thereafter being arrested on domestic terrorism charges. With the introduction of the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act passing the House and the Senate, we leave it up to President Bush to sign that bill into law. The A.E.T.A. is designed and targeted specifically at animal rights protesters. What this means is that if a group of people participates in an activity that physically disrupts and causes more than $10,000 in lost profit for an animal enterprise they can be charged with domestic terrorism and imprisoned.
In 1998, the first group to be tried and convicted under the A.E.T.A. was two activists who rescued a mink from a fur farm. The second conviction went to the group S.H.A.C. (Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty), who were victims of their own success. In 1999 the members of SHAC formed the organization with the aim of closing down the largest animal testing lab in Europe, Huntingdon Life Sciences (H.L.S.). Through their five year effort, the group caused the bankruptcy and public humiliation of H.L.S. According to the Web site shac7.net, "these activists are alleged to have operated a website that reported on and expressed ideological support for protest activity against Huntingdon and its business affiliates." For this, they were charged with "terrorism" and face an "aggregate of 23 years in federal prison." Charges against one of the seven were dropped. Four out of the other seven were charged with "conspiracy to harass using a telecommunications device." This charge against one member resulted from speaking to a crowd of 11 college students. The other three were charged with conspiracy to commit interstate stalking and three counts of interstate stalking via the Internet. Conspiracy is easy to imply guilt and is historically used on political protests against administrations that want to rein in those who are vocal about their concerns. Of the seven who were originally charged, six were prosecuted and sent to prison on pure speech activity. Not a single one was charged or convicted on a physical act. Additionally, not a single one of the defendants have ever even been to the state that they were charged and convicted in. As of Nov. 16, 2006, six members of the S.H.A.C. 7 are in prison. The six face lengthy prison terms, and it will take many years for appeals.
This modern day McCarthyism is a frightening blow to free speech and the First and Fifth Amendments. The bill defines the standard offense as anyone who uses the postal system "for the purpose of causing physical disruption to the functioning of an animal enterprise" or "intentionally causes physical disruption to the functioning of an animal enterprise by intentionally stealing, damaging, or causing the loss of, any property (including animals or records) used by the animal enterprise, and thereby causes economic damage exceeding $10,000 to that enterprise, or conspires to do so; shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both." Does this bill go too far? Could this bill be taken too far? That is for you to decide. Whether or not this bill affects you now or later, its effects will reverberate through your future actions, or lack there of, in the years to come.
So this brings me to the current issue of UNLV's continued support of the National Finals Rodeo.
With an estimated $49 million the rodeo is expected to bring in this year, there is little interest in animal welfare from the school, the city or casinos. Regular death and carnage is not even enough reason for the Department of Transportation to move swiftly to protect human life, so a few hundred animals' lives are nothing compared to the almighty dollar. If this were a campus of empathetic, active students whose idea of social change wasn't identity theft, and those who wanted to take a stand really did, would we be the ones being censured, expelled or charged with terrorism for standing up for this or any other school-related causes? While this may not be a fear in the present day, ask yourself if any changes by the Bush administration have scared you in the past six years, because this one should.
The A.E.T.A. draws a very fine line between activism and terrorism. What still is legal is the dissemination of information for voluntary behavior change. An organization called sharkonline.org has been protesting rodeos for years. In 2000, the organizer, Steve Hindi, drove from his home in Geneva, Ill. to Las Vegas with S.H.A.R.K.'s Tiger Video Truck. This truck is equipped with three 100-inch video screens that can be played while moving. The screens played videos of steers' heads being snapped around after being roped by a cowboy, as well as many other different types of rodeo-related animal abuse. Hopefully Hindi was back this year to stand up for the rights of animals to live their lives as they were meant to, and not being entertainment for a multimillion-dollar profession that has no use in today's modern world.
This bill, as well as this article, should send a shivering chill down your spine. At what point do conscientious thoughts and actions become criminal? What if African Americans were charged with terrorism for demanding the end to slavery or equal civil rights? There had to be a substantial financial loss to plantation owners who actually had to pay for labor, or construction companies who lost business since they only had to build a single school, restaurant or public bathroom after slavery and the civil rights act. This is quite a slippery slope of legislation that could at some time in your life affect you and what you believe in. If any of this has touched you, I would recommend writing the President to veto this bill. At the very least, take the intercampus transit bus to the white parking lot in the Thomas & Mack (since it's such a long walk) and take a look at what passes for holding units for the animals, and their behavior while penned up. Now go home and watch some "Nova" on P.B.S. of the same animals in the wild; do you see any differences?
So what would it take and where would pressure need to be applied in order to cause a change in rodeo animal welfare? Shac7's model started with video footage of disturbing animal abuse within the company's lab. S.H.A.C. released this video to their insuring company, Marsh. Within weeks Marsh buckled and sent H.L.S. scrambling to find another insurer so that their business could stay open. That tactic would not work in Nevada, where the law says that rodeo and ranch animals have no rights not to be abused, killed, maimed or tortured, as is common practice in the same rodeo that consumed the parking lot from Nov. 30 to Dec. 6.
Could a rapid social change cause the downfall of the rodeo industry? Doubtful. But with the pervasiveness of technology, I'm willing to bet that students, faculty and staff could keep a check on the rodeo to such an extent that they wouldn't dare mistreat animals (at least not in public).
(C) 2006 The Rebel Yell via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 18, 2006


End of Document