ACADEMICS SKEPTICAL OF U.S. CHARGES AGAINST ALLEGED TERRORISTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 3, 1993, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 608 words
Byline: Daniel R. Browning Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Academic experts on terrorism and Middle Eastern affairs said Friday that they were skeptical of federal charges accusing four men - including three from St. Louis - of belonging to a notorious terrorist organization.  The academics said the charges appear to be based on conversations or activities that were several years old.  And the timing of the charges - coming on the heels of the World Trade Center bombing in New York - calls into question the motives of the federal prosecutors.  Their comments were echoed in interviews with friends and business associates of the accused.  The indictment on racketeering charges accuses Zein Isa of St. Louis and the other three men of conspiring to kill Isa's daughter Tina, 16, in 1989.  Isa was convicted in the killing and is on death row in Missouri.  The indictment alleges that Tina Isa was killed, at least in part, because the men feared she would disclose their links to Abu Nidal, a Palestinian outlaw responsible for hundreds of deaths resulting from terrorism.  That scenario seemed odd Friday to Tina Isa's best friend, Marianna Palladino, 20, of St. Louis.  Palladino said she had never heard of Abu Nidal before, and that Tina Isa never mentioned that her father had any terrorist links.  "I keep thinking that if she knew, she probably would have told me," Palladino said. "We were best friends since she came to this country in '85.  "What I can remember is that she told me that her father was in some sort of trouble with the government over in Israel and he wasn't allowed back into the country.
She never was specific about why." The other men accused with Zein Isa are Saif "Steve" Nijmeh, 33, of Bridgeton, his brother Luie Nijmeh, 29, who moved recently from St. Louis to Dayton, Ohio, and Tawfiq Musa, 43, of Racine, Wis.  The men also are accused of plotting to blow up the Israeli Embassy in Washington and of talking about killing Jews.  "I think it's a pack of lies," said Jackie Hogan, who worked for the Nijmehs periodically for two years as a bookkeeper and secretary.  The Nijmehs own a liquor store in Hillsdale and another in Dayton, along with three other brothers.  Hogan said Friday that she had watched the Nijmehs around Jewish vendors and had never heard them make hateful remarks.  "I believe there's a paranoia going around after this terrible thing in New York," she said. "There are some folks who may be losing their jobs in Washington because of the change of administrations, and they want to make themselves look big." Victor T. Levine, a professor at Washington University who is an expert on terrorism, also questioned whether federal prosecutors are trying to hang on to their jobs.  "Please note that this is a time of transition for federal prosecutors, and if you've got something hot now, maybe they'll keep you on the job," Levine said.  Engin D. Akarli, an associate professor of Middle Eastern history at Washington University, noted that Isa was fanatical enough to have killed his daughter because he believed she was becoming too Americanized. Isa is the sort of person who might have allied himself with Nidal, Akarli said.  Nevertheless, Akarli agreed that the charges call for some skepticism.  Akarli, Levine and Masoud Kazemzadeh, a visiting scholar at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville, suggested the government may be trying to save face, or send a message.  On the other hand, the government may have incriminating information about the defendants that it has yet to release, the academics said.  "I want to see more of the government's hand before I say, 'Yeah, well, I'm convinced there was a conspiracy,' " Levine said.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document