Academe and the Threat of Biological Terrorism
The Chronicle of Higher Education
August 13, 1999


Copyright 1999 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: OPINION & ARTS; Pg. B6
Length: 1566 words
Byline: RONALD M. ATLAS and RICHARD E. WELLER
Body


Recent revelations of the existence of biological weapons in Iraq and the former Soviet Union clearly show the inadequacy of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, which was designed to prevent the development and use of such weapons. The multilateral treaty, known as the B.W.C., was adopted in 1972. It has now been signed by 160 nations -- yet fear of the use of biological weapons in war and by terrorists is justifiably growing. Most Americans want to prevent the spread of such weapons, but a proposal being drafted to do so may place significant burdens on colleges and universities.
One key limitation of the B.W.C. is its lack of provisions for verification and enforcement. Today, only a charge of a major violation of the treaty can lead to an investigation by an international body. However, negotiators from an ad hoc group of nations that have signed the B.W.C. are now preparing a draft compliance/verification protocol that would set forth specific, legally binding obligations for all the nations that have signed. It is likely that the draft will be completed soon and that it will contain many of the provisions of the current working version.
The document will probably subject many U.S. colleges and universities, along with industrial and governmental facilities, to close scrutiny. That is because many academic institutions possess the materials and facilities to make biological weapons, and because other countries, such as Iraq, have used academic institutions to provide cover for illicit biological-weapons programs. In the United States, large institutions -- particularly those with medical schools, veterinary schools, or health-science complexes -- would probably receive the most attention. Even many small institutions, though, conduct research that could be covered by the B.W.C. compliance/verification protocol.
According to the draft protocol, if an institution performed certain activities -- such as producing vaccines, or conducting research on genetic manipulation or aerosol transmission of specific biological substances -- or had certain facilities -- such as laboratories designed to contain dangerous micro-organisms, or reactors capable of producing large quantities of biological materials -- it would be required to submit an annual report to a new international organization, providing specific, relevant details. The institution could be subject to on-site inspections by an international team to determine the accuracy of its reports, or to detect violations of the B.W.C.
Hundreds of U.S. academic institutions would be subject to those requirements. With a grant from the Department of Energy, we recently conducted a survey of administrators at more than 1,400 institutions. The results show that, for instance, 16 per cent of the institutions possess human, animal, or plant pathogens or toxins that would appear on the draft protocol's list of biological agents; 11 per cent have high-level containment facilities; 7 per cent conduct research on vaccines; 5 per cent perform research for the military or the Department of Energy to develop defenses against biological weapons; and 3 per cent have high-volume bioreactors.
If every institution that possesses a biological substance on the draft protocol's list is required to file an annual report -- an approach favored by the Federation of American Scientists, a non-governmental organization that focuses on global security -- up to 300 U.S. colleges and universities would have to submit reports. Most of those institutions would be major research universities, but up to 50 smaller colleges might be included because of the items they possess. The federation points out that inspectors could then compare the agents listed in the report with what they found on a campus, to obtain objective evidence of compliance -- or lack thereof -- with the protocol.
Another approach would be to require reports only from institutions where scientists work with listed substances in ways that might be relevant to a biological-weapons program, such as producing significant quantities of a specific biological agent, using it to carry out genetic manipulation, or disseminating the material through the air, perhaps as a vaccine that would be inhaled. We favor that approach, in part because it would lower the number of institutions that would have to file annual reports and would reduce the work of the new international organization created by the protocol.
One reason to limit the number of institutions that must file reports is that the broader requirement might produce less-accurate reports -- and violations of the protocol -- as administrators not expert in the area struggled with reporting requirements. Our survey indicated that most department chairs and higher-level administrators have little idea of which biological agents their faculty members possess.
Few colleges and universities -- less than 20 per cent of the institutions we surveyed -- maintain centralized inventories of the agents listed in the draft protocol. As many as 66 per cent of major institutions with health-science complexes or medical or veterinary schools have no such inventory of pathogens and toxins. Additionally, many academic institutions have collections of biological materials that include unidentified cultures of micro-organisms. Administrators at 14 per cent of the institutions we surveyed said it was likely that such collections existed on their campuses, while respondents at 7 per cent of the institutions said they had no idea if their institution had any such collections.
It would be even more difficult for administrators to determine accurately the volume of biological agents that their institution could produce in its bioreactors at any one time. The potential misuse of bioreactors to produce biological weapons is a concern, and the final B.W.C. protocol may specify a certain production capacity as a trigger for requiring annual reports. Given that a bioreactor can be a simple flask, and that the relevant capacity is what an institution can produce in the aggregate, all colleges and universities will have to pay attention to that requirement, if it is adopted.
At the very least, the lack of centralized inventories of biological agents would make filing annual reports and preparing for on-site inspections a time-consuming and costly activity for many academic institutions. The mean cost estimate that administrators gave in our survey was $ 5,000 per year ($ 28,000 for institutions with medical schools), and the mean time estimate was 500 hours (2,250 hours for institutions with medical schools). If those estimates are accurate, major research institutions required to file an annual report would need at least one additional staff member to comply with the reporting requirements of the draft protocol.
The final B.W.C. compliance protocol may require even more from academe than money and time. While administrators at 49 per cent of the institutions that we surveyed expected that the draft protocol would have no adverse consequences on their college or university, others expressed a variety of concerns. Administrators at 9 per cent of the institutions were worried about the possible loss of intellectual property if an inspection revealed details of research prematurely; 4 per cent expressed fear that their institution might lose funds if researchers decided to avoid work in areas that might lead to inspections; and 14 per cent were concerned about possible negative public reaction if the press learned of an inspection to investigate the institution's compliance with the B.W.C.
Five per cent of our respondents felt that having to file reports would lead to questions about their institutions' adherence to state or municipal regulatory requirements and could lead to additional inspections by local agencies, and about 17 per cent worried that the reports might produce other unpleasant effects. Administrators at the more research-oriented institutions expressed the most concern.
Clearly, academic institutions should establish management systems that would allow them to comply easily with the B.W.C. protocol. In fact, they should do so even if the protocol's enactment is delayed, to reduce the threat of biological terrorism. The responsibility for oversight of biological agents, bioreactors, and containment facilities should be a centralized, university-wide function. Those charged with that function should be responsible for maintaining records of all the biological agents and related facilities on their campuses. They should serve as the conduit for exchanging information with U.S. government representatives, and they should be responsible for educating their colleagues about biosafety and compliance with regulations relating to biological weapons. Although secrecy is anathema in academe, to eliminate the possibility that information or biological agents could fall into the hands of terrorists, the centralized records should be treated as if they were classified documents.
Colleges and universities must act responsibly -- whether or not a protocol requires them to do so.
Ronald M. Atlas is a professor of biology at the University of Louisville and a co-chair of the American Society for Microbiology's Task Force on Biological Weapons. Richard E. Weller is a senior research scientist at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.

Load-Date: August 26, 1999


End of Document