Access to lab part of UI terrorism case In court papers, FBI worries about N-waste use for 'dirty bomb'
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 7, 2003 Sunday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Pg.B1
Length: 810 words
Byline: Bill Morlin, Staff writer
Body


Newly filed court documents say a University of Idaho graduate student,
 under investigation for suspected terrorism ties, obtained unauthorized access
 to a campus lab containing radioactive material.
 Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, a Saudi national working on his computer science
 doctoral degree at the Moscow university, quietly moved his student office
 into the school's engineering isotope lab, according to the documents.
 He moved from the Computer Science Department, where he was enrolled,
 apparently without his adviser's knowledge, the documents say. It's not clear
 in the records when he did so.
Al-Hussayen, arrested in February on the Moscow campus, is scheduled to
 stand trial in January on charges of visa fraud and lying to federal agents.
 He remains in custody without bond. His wife, who was in the United States
 illegally, is to voluntarily return to Saudi Arabia soon.
 His trial likely will be postponed if he is charged with additional, more
 serious charges of providing material support to terrorists.
 ''The investigation of Sami Al-Hussayen has, from its outset, been focused
 on suspected material support to terrorism, particularly to Osama bin Laden's
 alQaeda network," FBI agent Michael Gnecknow said in the court documents.
 ''I have yet to see any piece of evidence, when viewed as part of the
 totality of information developed, that would dissuade me from believing that
 Sami Al-Hussayen is supporting terrorism," Gnecknow said.
 Sami Al-Hussayen was the Web master for the Islamic Assembly of North
 America and another Internet site where two radical Saudi sheiks, Salman
 Al-Awdah and Safar al-Hawali, espoused violence against the West,
 investigators say.
 At the time of his arrest, University of Idaho officials downplayed the
 significance of Al-Hussayen's access to a campus building containing
 radioactive material.
 The engineering building houses the university's defunct nuclear
 engineering department, and its radioactive waste is kept ''under lock and key
 awaiting disposal," said university spokeswoman Kathy Barnard.
 But in the newly filed court documents, FBI agents say they were worried
 that the nuclear waste at the university lab could be used in a ''dirty
 bomb."
 Such devices involve the use of conventional explosives, such as dynamite,
 coupled with nuclear waste material to spread radioactive contamination.
 The documents were drafted by federal prosecutors and made public last week
 in response to defense attorneys' challenges of the validity of FBI search
 warrants used in Moscow.
 Al-Hussayen moved into the engineering lab while he was under surveillance
 by agents assigned to the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force, the
 documents disclose.
 ''The fact that Al-Hussayen moved his work station from a Computer Science
 Department laboratory to a facility for which he had unauthorized access and
 that houses radioactive isotopes was of immediate concern," Gnecknow said in
 an affidavit.
 Surveillance teams determined Al-Hussayen primarily used the engineering
 isotope lab after hours. The documents say he obtained access to the
 engineering lab through the help of another Saudi national enrolled at the
 university.
 Al-Hussayen ''had little or no contact with individuals who might question
 his right to access that facility," Gnecknow said in the affidavit.
 ''This pattern of clandestine activity was of concern to terrorism task
 force members," he said.
 The document also offers additional details surrounding Al-Hussayen's
 uncle, Saleh Al-Hussayen, who lives in Saudi Arabia.
 He was visiting the United States, and checked into the same Herndon, Va.,
 Marriott Inn on Sept. 10, 2001, as some of the 9-11 hijackers, including Nawaf
 Al-Hazmi. Al-Hazmi is suspected of piloting the hijacked American Airlines jet
 that crashed into the Pentagon.
 After 9-11, Saleh Al-Hussayen ''feigned a seizure" as he was being
 interviewed by two FBI agents from Washington, D.C., the documents say. Saleh
 Al-Hussayen subsequently returned to his native Saudi Arabia, out of the reach
 of FBI agents.
 Saleh Al-Hussayen, like 15 of the 19 hijackers, is from Saudi Arabia, the
 documents say.
 Sami Al-Hussayen's uncle also has ties to AL-WAQF, a foundation that
 promotes radical Islamic thought, including acts of violence against the West.
 One of its ''most famous graduates" is Mohammed Atta, the terrorist
 credited with planning and carrying out the 9-11 attacks.
 The uncle's trip to the United States was sponsored by the Islamic Assembly
 of North America (IANA) and the International Institute of Islamic Thought
 (IIIT).
 The latter organization's office was raided in March 2002 and shut down for
 suspected money laundering for three known terrorist groups: Hamas, al Qaeda
 and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
 A former employee of the IIIT, based in the United States, has been
 identified by federal agents as an al Qaeda operative.

Notes

Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or billm@spokesman.com  

Graphic

 
Photo; Al-Hussayen

Load-Date: December 10, 2003


End of Document