ACCESSORIES TO TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
August 9, 2002, Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.
Section: EDITORIAL;; EDITORIAL
Length: 674 words
Body

As President Bush said memorably after the Sept. 11 attacks, you are either with the free people of the world or you are with the terrorists. There is no middle ground - for countries or for individuals.
Today's example of choosing wrongly comes in the form of one Yisra Bakhri, an Israeli Arab. On Sunday, she was riding a bus when another passenger - a suicide bomber - advised her that "something horrible" was about to happen. In an act of unmitigated and murderous cowardice, Bakhri and a friend disembarked and hailed a taxi - without warning the rest of the passengers or the driver or the police. Instead, the two just watched the bus explode as they followed it in the cab. Nine people died.
Israeli police have charged Bakhri with failing to prevent a crime. As a citizen of Israel - and as a human being - she had an obligation to warn the others. If she had spoken up, lives could have been saved. Bakhri is as much to blame for those nine deaths as if she had lit the fuse herself. The blood is on her hands.
Not as lethal, but profoundly disgraceful in their own way, are the nine foreign meddlers arrested yesterday for staging disruptive protests and interfering with West Bank military operations. Among the culprits is Brooklynite Adam Shapiro, the Jewish PLO fellow traveler who gained worldwide notoriety in April for running to Yasser Arafat's side and labeling Israelis "Nazis." He and the other dupes will be deported, deservedly so.
Demanding and enforcing personal responsibility is the foundation of law - the rule of law terrorists seek to overthrow. Israel also is applying the law when it demolishes the homes of the families of suicide bombers and other terrorists. This is not random punishment of innocents. It is based on the principle that people must be accountable for their actions. And sometimes, as in the case of Yisra Bakhri, for their failure to act.
Terrorists - including Arafat - have declared war on Israel. Israel is fighting back. But the fight goes beyond gun battles. The civilized are entitled to bring the uncivilized to justice.
You are either with the civilized or you are with the terrorists.
There is no middle ground.
No betrayal
The unnamed officer, in a squad car near Ground Zero, was asked about the possibility of a wildcat police strike on Labor Day. "Nothing is going to happen," he said. "The city is going to be fine. We are just going to continue to be upset."
Let's hope this attitude is shared by the other 40,000 uniformed members of the NYPD.
Their dismay at being without a contract for two years is understandable, and it is now compounded by anger over the reported 5% raises they will be offered instead of the 23% they sought. But a job action would be illegal. Cops who break the law shouldn't be cops.
Over the last decade, thanks to the efforts of the Police Department, New York City has realized an amazing decline in crime. The force also has survived scandals - the Abner Louima atrocity, the killing of Amadou Diallo - that in some other city would have completely undermined trust in the police. Not here. New Yorkers can tell an aberration (like Justin Volpe) from the masses of decent cops who daily do their job with dignity and quiet courage.
Do those honorable officers really want to call that public trust into question? Anger is no justification for a civilian to commit a crime. How can it possibly be reason for a cop to do so?
Never in its history has New York depended on its police force more than now. Lest anyone need reminding, the job description has expanded to include an anti-terrorism mission. Even one day off the job has repercussions a walkout would not have had a year ago.
Cops who would put the city at risk shouldn't be cops, either.
The razor's edge
From the wires: GDANSK, Poland (Reuters) - Polish Solidarity leader Lech Walesa, who once turned down a million-dollar offer to shave his trademark mustache, has at last taken a razor to his upper lip. But he's not happy with the results.
That's because it turns out he looks a lot like Robin Williams.

Load-Date: August 9, 2002


End of Document