ACCEPT THE FACT OF TERRORISM AND LEARN TO LIVE WITH IT
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 30, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 544 words
Byline: Stephanie Salter
Body


Standing in a blocks-long line to clear a metal detector in the
Indianapolis airport, I could not help but overhear:
"They asked me the stupidest questions when I checked in. Like, 'Did
you pack your own suitcase?' and, 'Did any stranger give you a package
or bag to carry on board?'"
I turned, expecting to see a bumpkin - this was five days after TWA
Flight 800 went down - but instead saw a very well-dressed,
middle-aged woman with an air of sophistication and intelligence.
Where in the hell had she been all her life? Such "silly" questions
have been standard in European and Middle Eastern airports for many
years. Besides, a 747 had just been blasted out of the sky.
Then it hit me.  All her life she probably had been traveling around
the United States, an almost fairyland-safe country that just recently
has begun to feel the bloody reality of planned violence and
terrorism.
Why has the United States become a target for terrorists - domestic
and foreign? And what can we do to stop them?
The answers are pretty simple.  Why? Because we're overdue.  How do we
stop it? We don't.  At best, we might slightly mitigate future
terrorist activity. Otherwise, we can do what everybody else on the
planet does: Learn to live with the threat.
The world has long been a violent place where fanatics with a point to
make have done so by terrorizing sacred shrines, government officials
or private citizens.
Despite recent rumblings to the contrary, the United States has not
become a target of such terrorism because it is a free, open and
democratic society and thus more vulnerable. Terrorism occurs in
police states, democracies and banana republics.
Rather, the globe has shrunk while the population of angry, alienated
fanatics has increased - within our citizenry as well as outside of
it. Angry, alienated fanatics can come in groups or alone. Whatever
their number, with the technology available to them, they can inflict
major harm.
Instructions on how to make bombs that are powerful enough to blow up
a federal office building are available in cyberspace as well as from
easily obtained print sources.
When all it takes to be a spectacular terrorist is 1,000 pounds of
fertilizer, fuel oil, detonators and a cause, any zealot or nut can
become one. And no nation is immune.
A country like ours, which places high value on the safety and
well-being of its citizens, is an especially attractive target. What
better way to "get" to America - for whatever sick, burning reasons -
than to kill innocent citizens?
Former Associated Press reporter Terry Anderson was kidnapped by
extremist Shiite Muslims and held hostage for seven years in Lebanon.
He writes: "Terrorism scares and kills and causes a lot of individual
pain, but, long term, it can't change a society. In the end, the only
change it can effect is the change we do to ourselves to protect
ourselves."
Perhaps the biggest change Americans should make is to accept that
there is little we can do to protect ourselves from terrorism. The
possibility of it is now part of life here - along with "silly"
questions, less convenience at airports and a chronic, low-grade
unease in many public places.
But, as the rest of the world can tell us, even under these
conditions, life goes on. And it goes on pretty well.
Salter writes for the San Francisco Examiner.

Load-Date: August 31, 1996


End of Document