Acknowledging reality America must confront Israel's own terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 07, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 801 words
Byline: Georgia Bellotte
Body


READING Dr. John Warner's interesting and informative article on Dec. 12 entitled, "American Suckers: Israel Intended to Drive Palestinians to Terror All Along," encouraged me that yet another scholar shares the view that is realized by so many of the world's most knowledgeable people. …
As Dr. Warner so eloquently referred in his article, it is obvious that Israel has gained benefit from the Sept. 11 tragedy by cleverly twisting the U.S.'s war on terrorism to fit its violent and selfish needs. Israeli Prime Minister Sharon tried to parallel the grief that we Americans suffer in post-WTC days with the present Israeli-Palestinian conflict, framing Palestinians as terrorists and Israelis as their victims. But he can never compare his situation to ours.  When Israeli soldiers walk into a Palestinian boy's home, demolish his house, murder his parents, then force him to live in a refugee camp … then build a settlement on his land and import Jews from Russia to live in it … then harass him in the streets with curfews, roadblocks and guns … then finally, when that Palestinian boy is enraged to his breaking point and throws rocks at the passing tanks, he is labeled a "terrorist" and shot by Israeli soldiers. Yes, THIS is the reality of what is happening in the Middle East today.
The calamity is that our country - the democratic and humanitarian policeman of the world - not only ignores the inhumane situation, but supports it by contributing nearly a tenth of our gross domestic product to Israel, along with four billion dollars in weapons per year. Sadly, it is our guns, our tanks, our missiles - labeled with the words "Made in the USA" - that Palestinians have seen killing their loved ones each day for years now. And after 60 U.N. resolutions directing Israel to stop the violence and stop the building of settlements on Palestinian land, Israel still refuses, and our country still supports it in every way.
Yes, THIS is why, after years of failed peace talks, negotiations and cries for help from the United States, young Palestinian boys find themselves without families, without homes and without hope. THIS is why they become so desperate as to strap a bomb to their chests and blow themselves up. And finally, THIS is why our country was attacked on Sept. 11.
Today, Israel takes advantage of the attacks to get Palestinians listed as targets in the U.S.'s war on terrorism. Today, any Palestinian that Israel decides to murder is automatically labeled a "terrorist."
Israel massacres innocent men, women and children by hastily explaining that those civilians were "planning a terrorist attack." Contrary to what Israel wants us to think, Palestinians are not terrorists - they are fighting terrorism. The sad hypocrisy is that the people who were once upon a time subjected to genocide themselves are now its perpetrators. Furthermore, what Israel is doing to the Palestinians at this very moment and ever since 1967 is nothing short of a holocaust.
Stated simply by respected international lawyer John Whitbeck, "Palestinian resistance to the Israeli occupation will continue as long as the occupation continues. Israel will have peace and security when it ends the occupation."
As Americans, we must educate ourselves and understand what is happening in the world around us. We are on the brink of creating World War III, and it already has been proven that we are not even safe on our own soil.
The tenuous and devastating situation in which our country - our world - exists right now will never be resolved unless we confront the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We must see that for decades, the United States has been an obstacle to Middle East peace, not an asset. We must try to understand, then, why many people in the Middle East justifiably hate our country. Furthermore, we must remodel our policies toward the Middle East to make them consistent with international law, U.N. resolutions and the moral and ethical principles that the U.S. claims to support elsewhere.
America is the strongest, most beautiful country in the world. And if we want to act like the policemen of the world, then we must act with kindness, fairness, justice and peace.  In the eloquent words of Dr. Warner, I don't want to be an "American sucker" "suckered right into" Israel's "neat little game."
Please note, these words are in no way meant to be interpreted as anti-Semitic; many Jews support this opinion as well.
People who share these views have nothing against Judaism as a religion. They simply condemn any act of violence as terrorism - for any reason - whether carried out by Israelis, by Palestinians, by bin Ladens or by Americans.
Beliefs such as these are not anti-Semite, they are anti-human suffering and anti-terrorist.
Bellotte is a member of the Physicians for Human Rights organization.

Load-Date: January 8, 2002


End of Document