ACLU says FBI misusing its antiterror resources
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 20, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A11
Length: 520 words
Byline: Ted Bridis, Associated Press
Body


The American Civil Liberties Union accused the FBI of misusing terrorism investigators to monitor some domestic political organizations, despite apparently disparate views within the FBI on whether some groups supported or committed violent acts.
Citing hundreds of pages of heavily censored documents it obtained from the FBI under the Freedom of Information Act, ACLU lawyers described this disputed use of terrorism resources as the latest illustration of intensified surveillance aimed at Americans.
"Using labels like 'domestic terrorists' to describe peaceful protest activity can chill robust political debate in this country," ACLU lawyer Ben Wizner said in New York. The ACLU said it would publish the FBI reports it obtained on its Web site today.
In one case, government records show that the FBI began a terrorism investigation of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals in Norfolk, Va., despite acknowledgment by one FBI official that "the FBI does not consider PETA a terrorist organization."
The FBI responded that it conducted its investigations appropriately, subject to U.S. laws and Justice Department guidelines.
It said the ACLU mischaracterized some passing references to political groups in FBI files to suggest that those groups were under investigation; in other cases, the FBI confirmed it was acting on tips tying groups to alleged illegal activities.
"You end up in FBI files with your name and your group's name because you're doing stuff," the bureau's assistant director, John Miller, said. "By and large, the FBI has done a pretty good job sticking to those rules."
The FBI documents indicate that the government began its investigation of PETA because the group was "suspected of providing material support and resources to known domestic terrorism organizations," including the Animal Liberation Front and Earth Liberation Front.
The PETA investigation began in August 2003 and lasted at least 12 months, according to documents. Miller could not say whether the investigation was concluded.
The FBI reports also linked PETA to the government's investigation of a bombing outside the Shaklee Cosmetic Corp. in Pleasanton, Calif., in September 2003. The FBI said that Shaklee conducted animal testing of cosmetic products and that its parent company was a frequent target of campaigns by PETA and another group, Stop Huntington Animal Cruelty.
PETA's lawyer, Jeffrey S. Kerr, denied the organization has provided support or resources to the Animal Liberation Front and Earth Liberation Front, calling such claims "tired old allegations." Kerr said any terrorism investigation was "a scurrilous waste of resources."
"This is really an abuse of power," Kerr said. "PETA and other groups are really being targeted because we are being social activists and engaging in free speech."
The ACLU said the FBI documents also suggest that federal terrorism investigators infiltrated the Washington-based American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee. Other FBI documents it obtained describe efforts in 2001 by Greenpeace and the Los Angeles-based Catholic Workers Group to disrupt missile tests in California.

Load-Date: December 20, 2005


End of Document