ACLU AND NRA WORK TOGETHER; THEY SUCCEED IN LIMITING GOVERNMENT POWER IN ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 1996, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 538 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a victory for what one lawmaker called a "strange, bizarre marriage" of the National Rifle Association and the American Civil Liberties Union, the House of Representatives Wednesday removed two provisions of an anti-terrorism bill that some critics had said would have revived McCarthyism.
By a vote of 246-171, the House voted to strike out language that would give the government authority to label groups as terrorist in order to make it easier to bar their foreign members from entering the country and to deport them when they did.
In the same action, the House voted to prohibit the use of wiretap evidence obtained without a warrant.
Voting with the majority was a coalition of conservative Republicans and some liberal Democrats, both loath to grant the federal government additional police power.
"We do not need to give our government vast new powers," said Georgia Republican Bob Barr, R-Ga., the amendment's author. He said some provisions in the bill duplicated existing law.
But Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., sponsor of the original measure, protested that, "With the Barr amendment, this is not a real anti-terrorism bill."
Hyde attributed the vote to a "strange, bizarre marriage" between the NRA and the ACLU, and, in fact, those two groups joined others in signing a letter to lawmakers last December expressing numerous objections to the bill.
In reply, the ACLU said it avoided taking a firm position on the amendment, even though it supported many of its provisions. Most liberals voted against Barr's amendment.
"We have just eviscerated the heart and soul of the anti-terrorism bill," said John Conyers, D-Mich.
Many conservatives oppose giving federal law enforcement agencies more authority in the light of conspicuous blunders by federal officials at Waco, Texas, where more than 80 cult members, including children, were killed in an assault by federal agents in 1993, and at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, where the wife and son of a white supremacist were shot by federal agents in 1992.
With dismay, Hyde quoted an individual he identified only as "a dear friend of mine, a great Republican," as saying "I trust Hamas more than I trust my own government."
Hamas is the militant Muslim group that has claimed responsibility for the recent wave of suicide bombings in Israel.
"I am extremely disappointed at today's congressional action," Attorney General Janet Reno said in a written statement. "It bars changes in law that would have made it possible to trace terrorists' phone calls in a way that is now permitted in organized crime investigations. It guts provisions for the swift expulsion of foreign terrorists and barriers to fund raising to support terrorism overseas."
The bill already had been substantially modified since it was approved by the House Judiciary Committee last year. To attract more support, provisions were added to limit death penalty appeals and its title was changed to the "Effective Death Penalty and Public Safety Act."
The measure is a blend of anti-crime provisions originally passed last year by the House as part of the "Contract with America," as well as steps to fight terrorism requested by the administration last year in the wake of the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City.

Load-Date: March 14, 1996


End of Document