Activists wary of new British Terrorism Act
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
February 13, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 731 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


LONDON -- Anti-terrorist legislation that comes into force next week is hailed by the government as a powerful weapon against international violence. But opponents say the law will stifle dissent, whether on the Internet or in slogans on a T-shirt.
The Terrorism Act empowers Britain to outlaw groups that commit violence abroad and to crack down on supporters who channel funds and recruits to terrorist organizations.
Potential targets are already reacting sharply.
"It's goodbye to the peace talks" if Britain bans the Tamil Tigers, London-based spokesman Anton Balasingham was quoted as saying in a Tamil-language newspaper published in Sri Lanka.
Closer to home, an animal-rights activist complained that activists who release beagles raised for experiments will have fewer rights than murderers.
Governments have pressed the British to outlaw such organizations as the Tamil Tigers, Hamas and the Kurdistan Workers' Party.
The Home Office won't say which groups will be banned. It plans to issue a list sometime after the Terrorism Act takes effect Feb. 19.
Existing counter-terrorist legislation applies to Northern Ireland and was largely rushed into effect in 1974, after Irish Republican Army pub bombs killed 19 people in Birmingham.
Unlike the United States, Britain does not maintain a list of foreign organizations banned from operating on its soil.
"London has, let's face it, been a base for groups exploiting the freedoms of this country," said Paul Wilkinson, director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at St. Andrew's University.
Under the new law, said Neil Durkin of Amnesty International, "the British government may come under intense pressure to 'silence' dissidents based in the U.K."
Sri Lanka has called on Britain to outlaw the Tamil Tigers, while Egypt has asked it to ban the Islamic Group, responsible for the 1997 attack in Luxor that killed 58 foreign tourists.
Sheik Omar Bakri Mohammed, London-based leader of the militant Al-Muhajiroun, says the legislation will poison the relationship between British Muslims and the government.
"I will support the new law if it is really against terrorist activity," said Bakri Mohammed, whose group encourages young Muslim men to join armed struggles abroad. "But why is raising funds for Israel legal and raising funds for Muslims in Kashmir or Palestine illegal? The people who are going to be affected, besides the Irish, are the Muslims."
Amnesty International says the law, which passed with all-party support, casts too wide a net. It broadens the definition of terrorism to include religious or ideologically motivated violence and acts, such as disruption of power or computer systems.
It also forbids fund-raising for a banned group, possessing information "which is likely to be useful to terrorists," posting weapons-making instructions on the Internet, wearing a T-shirt promoting a banned group or speaking at a terrorist meeting.
A suspected terrorist may be arrested without a warrant and detained for up to a week without charge.
Amnesty International says the law may contravene the European Convention on Human Rights.
The definition of terrorism was "vaguely worded and could be extended to include supporters of, for example, animal liberation or anti-nuclear campaigns and others," Amnesty said.
Animal liberation militants -- some of whom have resorted to bombing -- fear the government will use the new law to crack down on their protests. Home Secretary Jack Straw, Britain's top law-enforcement official, has called protesters who attacked staff at animal research laboratories "frankly evil."
"The government is taking on American hysteria, because it's taking on the American definition of terrorism," said Animal Liberation Front spokesman Robin Webb. "It's a sledgehammer to crack the proverbial nut."
Webb says existing laws on burglary and criminal damage are adequate to cover the actions of animal liberationists, who have received sentences of up to 18 years in prison.
He said the law "gives someone who was trying to rescue some beagles fewer rights than someone who has raped and murdered."
Wilkinson counters that the law's critics are unduly anxious.
"It's quite clear the legislation is not aimed at suppressing protest or dissent. It's aimed at suppressing terrorism," he said.
"The right to life is the most basic of human rights, and terrorism is a threat to that."

Load-Date: February 13, 2001


End of Document