Action is needed on TRIA solution
Business Insurance
April 11, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 12
Length: 760 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


Congress has already begun considering whether the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, currently slated to sunset on Dec. 31, should be extended for an additional two years.
While many knowledgeable people I've spoken with expect lawmakers to extend TRIA, no one expects them to do so quickly. In fact, House leaders appear likely to keep the extension on ice until the Treasury Department issues its long-awaited report on the terrorism insurance marketplace. That report, required by law, does not have to be issued until June 30.
Even with the delay and even with the likely fallout from continuing investigations into industry misconduct, the extension still looks probable. But merely giving TRIA an additional two years is far from enough to address the underlying issue of terrorism coverage.
Face it: in all probability, the most lawmakers will do is grant a one-shot, two-year extension. House Financial Services Committee leaders said as much last fall, when that panel unanimously approved a two-year extension that ultimately went nowhere.
That's understandable. TRIA was designed to accomplish two goals-make coverage available and allow the emergence of a private terrorism insurance market. Everyone agrees that TRIA has achieved the first goal. The second goal, though, has been elusive.
And it's likely to remain so for the foreseeable future. Unlike natural disasters, manmade disasters are extremely difficult, if not impossible, to underwrite. Throw in such variables as biological and nuclear attacks, and any pretense to terrorism being an insurable risk goes out the window.
A truly devastating nuclear attack in, say, New York's financial district, could end up causing more damage than the property/ casualty industry has surplus and capital to cover, particularly when factors such as workers compensation payments are considered.
That leaves lawmakers with some pretty stark options.
One, do nothing and hope new commercial activity doesn't cease in certain parts of certain cities. This is called wishful thinking.
Two, do nothing with the implicit understanding that the federal government would pick up the bulk of the cost of reconstruction. This option should be less attractive than the current TRIA arrangement, under which individual insurers accept quite a bit of risk and promise to pay back the government's contributions over time.
Three, devise some sort of long-term public-private partnership that recognizes the unique nature of the terrorism risk.
Of the three options, only the third merits serious consideration. It pains me to say that, because I'm generally skeptical of government intrusion into economic matters. Ideally, the private sector could cover the exposure all by itself.
But in an ideal world, there wouldn't be any terrorists, either.
Given our imperfect world, a long-term plan is needed as soon as possible-preferably before the end of this year. Anyone who followed the year-long campaign to enact TRIA knows that Congress acts neither quickly or smoothly on issues with which it has little experience, and property/casualty insurance is one of those issues.
It's not that insurance industry figures aren't aware of the urgency of the task. Just last week, American Insurance Assn. President Bob Vagley called for a long-term approach in a Perspective piece published in Business Insurance (BI, April 4). And only a few weeks before that, Ron Robinson, a Los Angeles lawyer who chairs the Defense Research Institute's TRIA subcommittee, outlined a possible approach in another Perspective piece (BI, Jan. 17).
What's needed is a consensus plan, and I don't pretend to be enough of an expert on the finer points of catastrophe underwriting to spell out which risks should be dealt with by the private sector and which should be backed by the public sector. But I do know that for a consensus plan to work, there's going to have to be a good deal of policyholder input.
Coming up with a politically viable solution isn't going to be easy, but it is doable, particularly in light of how quickly the insurance industry rallied in October 2001 behind a single terrorism insurance proposal that drew from the individual approaches of many groups. To use a phrase popularized by the late futurist Herman Kahn, it involves, in part, an exercise in ``thinking about the unthinkable.'' But insurers, reinsurers and, above all, policyholders have to think about it, and soon. Dec. 31, 2007, is going to be here a lot faster than many would like to think.
Senior Editor Mark A. Hofmann can be reached at mhofmann@businessinsurance.com

Load-Date: April 18, 2005


End of Document