Activists decry 'terrorism' label;
Remarks by a sheriff's official at a seminar pose a threat to their free speech rights, group members say.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 11, 2003, Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 430 words
Byline: Randy Furst; Staff Writer
Body


Several activist groups, appearing at a news conference Monday, criticized the remarks of a Hennepin County sheriff's official who named them during a seminar titled "Understanding Terrorism in Minnesota."
     Members of those groups said the remarks represented a threat to their rights to free speech and association. They said they worried that their political activity now will be viewed as criminal and that they will be targeted for surveillance and harassment.
   The news conference was called in response to a Star Tribune report Wednesday on a seminar in which Capt. Bill Chandler mentioned the groups.
     He said in an interview afterward, "We are not calling any of them terrorists. We call them domestic groups that may affect our communities."
     Chandler did not respond to a reporter's calls Monday.
     His seminar was one of many conducted last week at the annual Governor's Emergency Management Conference. The state Department of Public Safety had issued a news release, encouraging media coverage, including Chandler's seminar.
     Kevin Smith, Public Safety Department spokesman, said Monday that Chandler did not call the local groups terrorist.
     "It's no surprise to me that there are organizations in Minnesota that law enforcement keeps its eye on, and it doesn't seem that any huge trade secrets were let out," he said. "But it's important to have those first responders know and be aware of groups that operate in their communities."
     The Star Tribune reported that among the groups mentioned at the seminar were Students Against War, Arise and antiracist groups.
     The activist news conference was chaired by state Rep. Keith Ellison, DFL-Minneapolis. He said it was called "to let people know that the First Amendment is still the law here in the United States and that groups such as ARA (Anti-Racist Action), Arise and Students Against War have every right to do what they are doing _ to exercise their rights and to be free of being labeled as suspected terrorists."
     Nathan Mittelstaedt, speaking for the activist groups, said it was unjustified at the seminar to identify groups concerned with justice and human rights alongside "ultra-violent, right-wing extremist organizations" such as neo-Nazi groups.
     Randall Morris, speaking for the Minnesota chapter of the National Lawyers Guild, said that "finger-pointing at progressive activist organizations" was comparable to the McCarthyism of the 1950s when there was a political witch hunt against members of left-wing organizations.
    _ Randy Furst is at rfurst@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: March 11, 2003


End of Document