Activists protest at Berkeley Law commencement
Daily Californian: University of California - Berkeley
May 11, 2013 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 318 words
Byline: Andy Nguyen
Body


U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder spoke to graduating law students from the UC Berkeley School of Law Saturday morning amid protests from human rights and medical marijuana activists.
In his commencement speech to the graduating class of 2013, Holder touched upon the concerns of some of the protesters who criticized the Obama administration's stance on terrorism and the continued operation of the Guantanamo Bay detention facility.
Holder said that the government should continue trying suspected terrorists in civilian courts, as they remain the most effective tool in bringing terrorists to justice.
"(Civilian courts) have enabled us to convict scores of people of terrorism-related offenses since Sept. 11," Holder said in his speech. "Hundreds are properly, safely and securely held in our federal prisons - not Guantanamo - today."
The protest was organized by the San Francisco chapter of The World Can't Wait, an organization that aims to stop the use of torture around the world. Protesters wore orange jumpsuits and black hoods similar to those worn by prisoners and handed out flyers to people arriving for the ceremony.
Similar protests were held at last year's ceremony regarding the continued employment of law professor John Yoo, who wrote a series of controversial memos for the Bush administration that expanded the use of torture on Guantanamo detainees.
Another group of protesters also demonstrated at the ceremony. Members of Americans for Safe Access, a marijuana advocacy group, protested against the federal government's stance against medical marijuana.
Throughout the ceremony, a plane circled the theater, towing a banner reading "Holder End RX Cannabis War #Peace4Patients" and advocating for medical marijuana.
This demonstration follows the filing of a lawsuit the federal government filed last week to shut down the Berkeley Patients Group, a medical marijuana dispensary in Berkeley.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document