Action in House and Senate
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 30, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A26
Length: 282 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


What Congress did:
Congress sent President George W. Bush a bill allowing military commissions to prosecute terrorism suspects with legislation that also spells out violations of the Geneva Conventions.
The Senate sent Bush a $448 billion defense spending bill that includes $70 billion for military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The House and Senate passed and sent to Bush a nearly $35 billion homeland security spending bill that included $1.2 billion for increased border fencing to discourage illegal immigration.
Senate Democrats blocked a final vote on sending Bush a bill that would make it a crime for anyone but a parent to take a girl across state lines to obtain an abortion. The bill was passed Tuesday by the House.
The Senate sent to Bush a bill to build 700 miles of new fencing along the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border. The House passed this bill two weeks ago.
What Congress didn't do:
The House and Senate could not reconcile their differences over legislation allowing the warrantless wiretapping of terrorism suspects in time to deliver a bill before the election.
Spending bills for annually funded government programs other than defense and security remained unfinished.
Congress did not renew a host of tax breaks that expired at the end of last year, including deductions for tuition, teachers' classroom expenses and state and local sales taxes, as well as a research and development credit for businesses.
Efforts to merge different House and Senate bills expanding offshore drilling failed.
The House and Senate responded to lobbying scandals by passing ethics bills, but they couldn't reconcile their differences and send an overall measure to the White House for signing.

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document