Ad scare shows how scared we are
University Wire
February 2, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 The Daily Reveille via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 679 words
Byline: By Jonathan Lo, The Daily Reveille; SOURCE: LSU
Dateline: BATON ROUGE, La. 
Body


Let's consider the recent "bomb hoax" in Boston. It is not often that I laugh aloud over a bomb hoax, but the events that transpired were comical to say the least. A marketing campaign for "Aqua Teen Hunger Force," a Cartoon Network television program, was misconstrued as a potential bomb threat to the residents of Boston. The "fake bombs" were little more than LED boards displaying "mooninite" characters from the series. The two artists responsible for the ads were arrested and now face felony charges for "creating a hoax to cause panic." Feeling the gravity of the situation, the two artists would only answer questions about hair in their recent press conference. Not just any hair, of course, but hairstyles of the 1970s.
Perhaps the only thing more amusing than their reactions to the fiasco was watching the media's attempt to describe the characters of such an inane and comical series. Honestly, how do you explain a show about the adventures of a box of fries, a milk shake cup and a ball of meat?
Of course, officials were far less tickled by the situation. At the perpetrators' arraignment Assistant Attorney General John Grossman said, "It's clear the intent was to get attention by causing fear and unrest that there was a bomb in that location." Looking at the ads themselves, though, any reasonable person would conclude otherwise. Boston Police Superintendent Ed Davis went so far to say, "It is unconscionable that in this post-9/11 environment that Turner Broadcasting would do something like this in an urban setting."
The oft-used "post-9/11" phrase is used to help frame the events and reactions of the public in a world defined by terrorism. Despite the fact Islamic-extremist terrorism against the United States had existed for some time (1998 U.S. Embassy Bombings), 9/11 was the defining moment in which all illusions of safety were lost. Of course this is old news, about five-and-a-half years old actually. Yet we're still living in the shadow of 9/11 and with some good reason. There are still people determined to throw nations into chaos, as proved by the recent arrest of terrorist conspirators in England.
Yet the United States of America is no stranger to fear and paranoia. During World War II apprehension gripped the nation, best immortalized in posters from the period declaring "He's Watching You." After the unconditional surrender of Japan, there was a demonstrable end to the Japanese threat to the United States. With the last member of the Axis subdued, peace once again settled into the American consciousness.
Shortly after the conclusion of World War II, this paranoia was replaced by the threat posed by communism and the U.S.S.R. The most memorable panics include the Cuban Missile Crisis and the national implementation of "nuclear safety drills." Yet after the fall of the U.S.S.R., the embodiment of communism was dissolved, and the threat was perceived gone.
The war on terrorism is a different kind of war, unlikely to end either swiftly or decisively. Even if we score incredible victories in Iraq and Afghanistan, the threat of terrorism will be present for years to come. It has already surpassed the length of World War II and, with no signs of abating, is on track to surpass the duration of "the red menace." I won't say something inane like, "If the terrorists force us to live in fear, they have already won," but our suspicion should be tempered from becoming as irrational as our extremist enemies. We'd be better for it, lest we scare ourselves to death over nothing.
There are many who would say that such outrage and suspicion is justified in this "post-9/11 world." Yet if Hasbro-like toys are enough to widely disseminate fear five-and-a-half years after 9/11, it begs the question: How long is long enough? After, or more likely if, we "win" in Iraq and Afghanistan? After Israel manages peace with the rest of the Islamic world? When Islamic extremism is removed from the face of the earth? Or is the "post-9/11 world" going to take on a more literal meaning as well?
(C) 2007 The Daily Reveille via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 2007


End of Document