Add level to visa vetting
The Bismarck Tribune
December 17, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 299 words
Byline: JEFFREY KAY Douglas
Body


Terrorists entering our country through visas can be tightened up significantly by putting the onus of vetting back on the country of origin. The country of origin for the person requesting a visa to enter the U.S. is 100 percent responsible for its citizens’ actions in terms of terrorism.
If the country of origin says its citizen will not commit an act of terrorism, then we can grant the visa after the person passes our vetting process. If a visa holder commits an act of terrorism against the United States then the country of origin is held accountable.
Accountability can take the form of sanctions, aid reductions, military hardware sale reductions, restitution for all damages, etc. Accountability must be predetermined by Congress in consultation with the executive branch, passed into law, individualized for each country, be of limited duration, be of such a nature that the country of origin will feel the sting of a vetting failure and will be put in place within 90 days of the FBI determining a terrorist’s country of origin.
This eliminates religious profiling and is equal for all countries worldwide. It will make it in every country’s best interests to be diligent in the fight of terrorism exported to the United States. For those countries without a centralized/organized government visas are not given, period.
Immigration can be handled in a similar manner until the person becomes a U.S. citizen. In addition, if an immigrant has a U.S. sponsor, the sponsor is totally responsible for the immigrant’s criminal actions (if the immigrant commits a terrorist act, the sponsor could be charged with criminal negligence to an act of terrorism).
This visa and immigration process turns passive observers into active participants with a vested interest in the fight against terrorism.

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Document