Address to focus on war, terrorism, President planning to speak to nation Sunday evening
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 6, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 313 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - Wanting to command a rising and contentious debate, President Bush will address the nation Sunday on the war on terrorism and efforts to stabilize Iraq.
Bush will deliver a speech from the White House at 8:30 p.m., officials said. His address, lasting about 15 minutes, will cap a media blitz the administration is launching Sunday with appearances on television talk shows by Secretary of State Colin Powell and national security adviser Condoleezza Rice.
"During August, the president spent a considerable amount of time talking to his national security team and military leaders about our ongoing efforts on the war on terrorism and making assessments about our needs," White House press secretary Scott McClellan said Friday. "The president has been assessing our needs and looking at what's needed going forward."
White House officials said they had requested time from the major broadcast networks for the speech and were awaiting responses.
The last time Bush addressed the nation from the White House was on March 19 when military operations began in Iraq. His last national speech was May 1, when he declared that "major combat operations in Iraq have ended."
Since then, the postwar U.S. death toll has climbed past the number killed in major combat.
Despite increasing criticism from lawmakers, anti-war protesters and Democratic presidential candidates, Bush has not spelled out how much rebuilding Iraq will cost, how long U.S. troops will be stationed there or what happened to the weapons of mass destruction the administration said Saddam Hussein had.
The address will come three days after Democratic candidates for president, at a debate in Albuquerque, N.M., said Bush has unnecessarily put U.S. troops in danger and split the country from its allies.
As of Friday, 287 Americans had died in Iraq, 149 since Bush declared the end to major combat operations.

Load-Date: September 8, 2003


End of Document