ADL Says Right-Wing Terror Is As Dangerous As 'Radical Islam' But Is Often Ignored
The Forward
June 6, 2017


Copyright 2017 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 10
Length: 821 words
Byline: 
Email Sam Kestenbaum at kestenbaum@forward.com and follow him on Twitter at @skestenbaum
Body


Number of  Incidents: 150
Incidents per 3-year Period
Right-wing Terror Incidents  in the United States  1993-2017 | by Movement
42%
11%
2%  1%  1%
43%
White Supremacist  Anti-Gov't Extremist  Anti-Abortion Extremist  Anti-Muslim Extremist  Anti-Immigrant Extremist  Other
Right-wing Terror Incidents  in the United States  1993-2016
Note: Partial  data for 2017
1993-1995
2014-2016  Note: Incidents include terrorist acts, attempted  acts, plots and conspiracies
1996-1998  1999-2001  2002-2005-2008-2011-2004 2007 2010 2013  30
25
20
15
10
SOURCE: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE
On St. Patrick's Day, 28-year-old  James Harris Jackson boarded a bus in Washington   and rode it to New York looking for black men  to kill. He found Timothy Caughman, a 66-year-old   African-American who was scavenging for cans  in Midtown Manhattan around the corner from  his home. Jackson pulled out a sword and fatally  stabbed the defenseless man.
The violence stabbing shocked the country, particularly   because the stabber showed no remorse.  The defendant was motivated purely by hatred,  a prosecutor said days later, this was an act most  likely of terrorism.
The gruesome event is just one of 150 plots and  attacks detailed in A Dark and Constant Rage: 25  Years of Right-Wing Terrorism in the United States,  a new report from the Anti-Defamation League.  While much political rhetoric and public discourse  seems to focus on Islamic terror  violence carried  out by what the ADL calls right-wing extremists  receives markedly less attention.
Right-wing extremists have been one of the largest   and most consistent sources of domestic terror  incidents in the United States for many years, a fact  that has not gotten the attention it deserves, the  report, released last week, reads.
Right-wing extremists killed 255 people and  injured more than 600 in the United States over the  past 25 years, with about half the incidents carried  out by what the ADL calls lone wolf attackers. Law  enforcement officers were common targets as well  as racial and religious groups  Jews and Muslims  being the most frequently targeted among religious  groups. White supremacists and anti-government  militants carried out the overwhelming majority of  attacks.
The ADL breaks down the broad category of right-wing   extremists into a number of subgroups.
White supremacists and anti-government extremists   account for 85% of the plots identified on ADL's  list of terrorism incidents. The rest are attributed  to anti-abortion, anti-Muslim, anti-immigrant and  other extremists. Firearms and explosives were the  most common weapons used.
Dylann Roof's killing of nine people at the AME  Emanuel Church in Charleston, South Carolina,  in June 2015, is one of the most high-profile and  recent incidents on the list.
While the Southern Poverty Law Center has  reported a surge in hate crimes in the wake of the  presidential campaign and election  and civil  rights groups have blasted Trump for not doing  enough to condemn the far right  the ADL report  is largely backward looking. It makes no claims  about Trump's effect on such movements, much  hyped by advocates elsewhere.
For example, advocates and experts in the field  believe that the Trump administration is seeking   to redefine violent extremism and reshape  government policy for dealing with the problem   focusing exclusively on violent Islamic extremism,   while eliminating programs aimed at the types  of right wing extremism outlined in the new ADL  report.
But the effect of the Trump presidency on such  right-wing groups is difficult to predict, the report's  author, Mark Pitcavage, said.
The ADL defines terrorism here as a pre-planned  act of violence to further an ideological cause.  Domestic terrorism is carried out by citizens or  permanent residents.
Some anti-government groups are facing internal  struggles about exactly how to view the new president,   who they perceived as a hero to their cause,  asking: Can the government still be the enemy  now?
For the militia movement, Trump was a celebrated   figure  and his election was seen as triumph  against his opponent Hilary Clinton, who many  feared would strip them of their cherished right to  bear arms. It's unclear whether the militia movement   will continue to view the government as an  enemy, or shift their sights elsewhereto racial or  religious minorities for example.
And the alt-right is also now making real-world  forays, energized by Trump's election, but still  ambivalent as to whether he is as much a friend to  their movement as they had hoped.
The New York slaying of Caughman is perhaps the  only attack that has any alt-right connection, as  the white supremacist killer said he was a reader of  Daily Stormer, a neo-Nazi website on the alt-right.
The 'alt-right' has already begun to be more  active in the real world, Pitcavage said. There are  already signs that this will result in more violence  in the years to come.

Graphic

 
IMAGE: He Traveled From Baltimore To AttackBlack People:James Harris Jackson at a NewYork police precinct in March 2017 after fatallystabbing Timothy Caughman.; TWITTER

Load-Date: June 10, 2017


End of Document