Administration plans to redo Homeland Security grants; Department wants money to go to cities facing different threats
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 3, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. c5
Length: 384 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Working to further define its mission, the Homeland Security Department is seeking a major shift in competitive bidding for federal grants, directing money to cities that face a wide range of threats - not just those from terrorists.
The change, outlined in departmental documents sent to state and local officials, addresses both the destruction and lack of preparedness seen during Hurricane Katrina. It also reflects Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff's efforts to give his department an all-hazards mission - even though it was created as a direct result of the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks.
Chertoff will announce today which cities will receive part of $765 million in annual Urban Area Security Initiative grants.
In past years, the grants generally have gone to the nation's 50 largest cities for terror-related security measures. This year, however, cities that risk being hit by a natural disaster or a health crisis would also be eligible, according to the documents.
"In light of several major new national planning priorities, which address such issues as pandemic influenza and the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the allowable scope of (grant) activities (include) catastrophic events - provided that these activities also build capabilities that relate to terrorism," according to a 203-page Homeland Security plan for state and local officials.
Still, the money would have to be used for programs and items that also could help during a terror attack, the plan noted.
"For example, mass evacuation planning supports terrorism preparedness but also other types of catastrophic events," it said. "Planning for pandemic influenza and linking that effort to a larger bioterrorism preparedness effort offers another example. Grantees must demonstrate the dual-use nature of any activities implemented under this program that are not explicitly focused on terrorism preparedness."
Homeland Security spokesman Russ Knocke would not comment on which cities will be eligible for grants this year. Capitol Hill aides who oversee Homeland Security said they received very vague briefings by department officials on the changes, but weren't told which cities would be eligible.
Calls to city officials around the country and to the U.S. Conference of Mayors for comment were not immediately returned.

Load-Date: January 3, 2006


End of Document