ADMINISTRATION WANTS TO KEEP SURVEILLANCE LAW
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 23, 2009 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-5
Length: 401 words
Byline: LARRY MARGASAK, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration yesterday promised Congress to negotiate stronger privacy protections for Americans under terrorism surveillance, but it insisted on retaining current authority to track suspects and obtain records.
House Judiciary Committee liberals were left unsatisfied, clearly wanting the administration to go further and pledge to curb what they consider abuses of the Bush administration. They repeatedly insisted that the law be rewritten to require better justification for wiretaps and subpoenas.
Committee Chairman John Conyers, D-Mich., even compared the Obama administration's position so far to that of the Bush administration. "You sound like a lot of people who came over from DOJ [the Department of Justice] before," he told Deputy Assistant Attorney General Todd Hinnen.
Congress is starting to consider changes in three expiring provisions of the USA Patriot Act, a counterterrorism law initially passed after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks. These three provisions require the government to seek permission from a special foreign surveillance court for subpoenas and surveillance.
The Bush administration, while using the court, also had the National Security Agency -- without warrants -- eavesdrop on Americans and others inside the United States to search for terrorist activity. That program ended before Mr. Bush left office.
Mr. Hinnen yesterday told a Judiciary subcommittee, "We are ready and willing to work with members on any specific proposals" that would provide "effective investigative authorities and protects privacy and civil liberties."
Conservative lawmakers want to reauthorize the expiring provisions without changes, insisting that the statute helped prevent attacks. "All of this hyperbole" about trampling civil liberties "has not been borne out in litigation. I don't feel we should break something that doesn't need fixing," said Rep. F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., R-Wis.
The three expiring Patriot Act provisions provide:
* roving, court-approved wiretaps that allow surveillance on multiple phones. Law enforcement is not required to ascertain that a suspected foreign terrorist is actually using the phones being tapped.
* that businesses produce "any tangible things" at the FBI's request.
* authority to conduct surveillance against a so-called "lone wolf," a non-U.S. citizen engaged in terrorism, who may not be part of a recognized terrorist group.
.

Load-Date: September 24, 2009


End of Document