Administration eager to reward 'rogue' states for good behavior
USA TODAY
February 21, 2000, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 825 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- They are sometimes called the "seven sisters,"
nations accused of sponsoring terrorism and stigmatized by placement
each April on a State Department list.
But the "sisters" -- Iran, Sudan, Libya, North Korea, Cuba,
Iraq and Syria -- are likely to lose at least one sibling before
the Clinton administration ends. Administration officials, after
years spent trying to isolate so-called rogue states, say they
are now eager to show that better behavior will be rewarded.
This past summer, it appeared that Libya might be first off the
list. The North African nation has not sponsored an act of international
terrorism in more than a decade, according to the State Department.
In April, Libya turned over two suspects in the Pan Am 103 bombing
in 1988, which killed 189 Americans. However, a delay in the trial
of those suspects from this month to May, and an outcry by relatives
of the victims, have postponed any action, U.S. officials say.
Syria's chances for removal have been hurt by the suspension of
U.S.-brokered peace talks with Israel and the recent upsurge of
attacks in southern Lebanon by Hezbollah guerrillas. The guerrillas
receive supplies from Iran through Syria.
That leaves North Korea as the likeliest contender for early removal.
U.S. officials say the Stalinist Asian nation will be listed as
a sponsor of terrorism in the next State Department report, which
comes out April 28 and covers activity in 1999. However, in talks
later this month meant to prepare for a high-level North Korean
visit, U.S. diplomats will lay out a plan for removal, which can
come at any time at the discretion of the White House and recommendation
of the secretary of State.
North Korea is chiefly accused of harboring old terrorists, specifically
a few members of the Japanese Red Army who hijacked a Japanese
plane 30 years ago. Korea must try the suspects or turn them over
to Japan, U.S. officials say.
At a recent symposium on terrorism in Washington, Michael Sheehan,
U.S. ambassador for counter-terrorism, said the aim of U.S. policy
was to persuade all seven countries to take steps to get off the
list.
In a time when terrorism is being redefined by computer hackers
in basements, critics say, there is increasing disconnection between
the terrorist list and the changing sources of terrorist acts.
Increasingly, experts say, terrorism is plotted by individuals,
such as exiled Saudi Osama bin Laden.
Sheehan said the United States hopes to "drain the swamps in
which terrorists operate." He listed those "swamps" as Afghanistan,
where bin Laden is based, parts of Sudan, the Bekaa Valley in
Lebanon and Colombia's rural valleys.
Sheehan pointedly omitted another country that has become a focus
of concern: Pakistan. Pakistan's intelligence service has connections
with a terrorist group that hijacked an Indian airliner last year,
U.S. officials say. Although it is not clear whether Pakistan's
new military government had foreknowledge of the hijacking, it
is harboring the group that carried out the crime.
Asked whether Pakistan was being considered for inclusion on the
list, Sheehan said that was "under review." Other U.S. officials
say such a designation is unlikely and certainly will not occur
before President Clinton visits South Asia next month, with a
possible short stop in Pakistan.
That Pakistan is not on the list, while Cuba and North Korea still
are, analysts say, signals the list has become mired in U.S. domestic
politics.
Cuba's status on the list "is strictly a policy question," said
Paul Pillar, deputy chief of the CIA's counter-terrorist center
from 1993 to 1999. Its inclusion is part of "a larger dialogue
on a whole host of issues, going well beyond terrorism," he told
the symposium.
Beginning as a section of a law called the Export Administration
Act of 1979, the terrorist list has become an increasingly counterproductive
policy tool, critics say.
Dozens of laws refer to the export law. They oblige the United
States to oppose loans from international lending organizations
to countries on the list and also bar U.S. credits for exports,
even food. That's a major concern for chronically hungry North
Korea, which has relied for several years on U.S. "emergency"
grants through the United Nations.
None of the list's original members has changed, with the exception
of South Yemen, which ceased to exist when it merged with northern
Yemen in 1990.
Iraq was removed in 1982, when the United States tilted toward
Baghdad during the Iran-Iraq war. It went back on the list after
Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990.
Some analysts say the list has become a geopolitical and psychological
substitute for the Soviet Union.
In a new book, Rogue States and U.S. Foreign Policy, Robert
Litwak of the Wilson Center, a think tank that focuses on international
matters, writes that the U.S. tendency to separate countries into
responsible actors and rogues reflects a tradition in American
diplomacy "in which international affairs is cast as a struggle
between forces of good and evil."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Korean Central News Agency; Terror list perennial: North Korean leader Kim Jong-Il visits a cooperative farm in September. North Korea is the likeliest contender for early removal from the State Department's list of 'rogue' states accused of sponsoring terrorism.

Load-Date: February 21, 2000


End of Document