Ads urge parents to talk terrorism
USA TODAY
November 23, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION  Correction Appended


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 366 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Between spoonfuls of cereal, a little girl in pajamas looks across the kitchen table and innocently asks her mother some chilling questions: "What if something happens? Should I stay where I am and wait for you?"
She may not understand the implications, but she's talking about terrorism. Now the government wants parents to provide answers.
In a series of new TV, radio and print ads, the Department of Homeland Security is encouraging parents to talk to their children about what to do if disaster strikes.
The public service ads, unveiled by the Ad Council on Monday, are aimed at parents. Stations are being encouraged to air them only during adult programming. "It is certainly not our goal that these run during Saturday morning cartoons," said Kathy Crosby of the Ad Council.
But some experts say the ads could frighten children who see or hear them. The ads could make children worry that a terrorist attack is likely, said child psychologist David Fassler of Burlington, Vt. "Parents need to emphasize that's simply not the case," he said.
Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said parents talk to their kids about other issues, including crime and speaking to strangers.
"We don't think this will be any different than anything else parents have been asked to do for a long, long time," Ridge said. "This is only a difficult subject if the parents make it a difficult subject."
The new campaign is part of a government effort to get families to plan for emergencies. In one ad, three siblings ask whether they should go to a neighbor's house and how to keep in touch if the phones are out.
An adult voiceover says: "There's no reason not to have a plan in case of a terrorist attack. And some extremely good reasons why you should." It refers parents to www.ready.gov for information.
Marsha Evans, president of the American Red Cross, called it "a powerful way to use children to get to adults." But Ronald Stephens of the National School Safety Center said: "Children have very tender and fragile hearts. You want them to grow up with a feeling of security and safety without feeling that the big, bad boogeyman is going to get them at any moment."
***
Contributing: Marilyn Elias
Correction

A story in Tuesday's editions cited the wrong profession for David Fassler. He is a child psychiatrist in Burlington, Vt.
Correction-Date: November 24, 2004, Wednesday

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Alex Wong, Getty Images; Encouraging readiness: Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge and Kathy Crosby of the Ad Council watch an ad at the National Press Club.

Load-Date: November 26, 2004


End of Document