Advertising changes its voice after terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
September 14, 2001, Friday Cook/DuPage/Fox Valley/Lake/McHenry


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS;
Length: 638 words
Byline: Anna Marie Kukec Daily Herald Business Writer
Body


Companies have been either pulling their print advertisements or changing their strategy this week in light of the horrific acts of terrorism.  
They're taking a closer look at the impression they are making on a mourning country. Initially, some companies believed that not many people will go shopping, to the movies or to festivals this weekend.  
"In most instances, a more serious tone is being developed," said Wally Petersen, senior vice president of Leo Burnett USA, based in Chicago. The advertising agency has more than 30 clients, many which are changing their strategies this week.  
"They don't want anything that's funny or over the top anymore," Petersen said. "It's not the right time for that."  
Since the acts of terrorism, television has dropped its commercials to provide 24-hour news coverage. Until events change or broadcasters return to regular schedules, company ads will not be seen, Petersen noted.  
"But when the shock starts to wear off, we have to return to the business at hand," he said.  
At the Daily Herald, about a dozen companies including Carson Pirie Scott, Gateway and others initially pulled their ads. However, when single copy sales more than tripled on newsstands, companies began to realize the impact of their decisions and returned with more patriotic themes to reach their customers.  
"If we're going to fight this thing together, we have to keep life going as usual," said Chris Rutherford, assistant vice president and director of advertising for the Daily Herald.  
For example, Gateway replaced its ad with a dedication to the Americans who lost their lives. "We mourn for them and pray for their families," the ad said Wednesday. "May God bring peace to this troubled world."  
On the other hand, Tellabs in Lisle said it plans to continue its regular advertising, according to spokesman George Stenitzer.  
"The events of this week created an enormous and urgent workload for our customers, and Tellabs is focused on helping customers work through the crisis," Stenitzer said.  
Also Heller Financial, based in Chicago, plans to continue its regular advertising efforts which are primarily in trade publications, according to spokesman Joe St. Henry.  
During a time when newspapers and magazines, along with other media outlets, have been streamlining and laying off workers because of lower ad revenues, the loss of advertising dollars from this week's business slowdown has been a one-two punch where the impact is yet to be tallied.  
This week's events will be a financial blow to the industry, according to Jim Gray, executive director of the Society of Professional Journalists, based in Indianapolis.  
Numerous papers across the country and around the world produced extra editions Tuesday afternoon, primarily ad-free, and added pages to their regular editions throughout the week.  
"All will bear the increased personnel costs, as reporters and editors worked many hours straight through to put out those extra editions," Gray said.  
Besides print, major broadcast networks and their cable affiliates also were wall-to-wall with coverage.  
"All of this represents advertising revenue forgone as well as the additional costs to pay reporters, anchors and technicians who worked hour after hour to bring coverage," Gray said. "It will be some time yet before we know the full economic impact to newspapers, magazines and broadcast companies."  
Even Internet advertising has changed its approach.  
For example, HouseOfIreland.com sent personal e-mails to customers, saying it along with the Irish government declared today a national day of mourning for their American friends.  
"We have been shocked and saddened by these abominable acts of terrorism. Our sympathies go to all those who have been touched by these events," e-mailed spokeswoman Sheila Kelly for HouseOfIreland.com.

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document