Aerospace plane plan flies
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 25, 1990, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WASHINGTON DIGEST; Pg.  6A; DIGEST
Length: 533 words
Body


NASA and the Defense Department announced Thursday they have approved a unique plan by five aerospace companies to put aside rivalries and work on the National Aero-Space Plane as a team. The aerospace plane, to be known as the X-30, will be a research vehicle capable of flying up to 25 times the speed of sound.  It is to be built primarily to develop technologies that will be used on planes of the future. A priority goal for the X-30 is to fly directly into orbit from a conventional runway and return. The five companies are General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, Rockwell's Rocketdyne Division and Pratt & Whitney.
  Bush opposes clean air item
 President Bush praised the House on Thursday for approving a clean air bill, but said he would seek to remove a provision granting $ 250-million in aid to workers who lose their jobs because of tougher anti-pollution controls. "The overwhelming backing it received shows that the American people strongly support steps to reduce acid rain, smog and air toxic emissions," Bush said in a written statement. But he objected to the amendment by Rep. Robert Wise, D-W.Va, which the administration fears could set an expensive precedent for workers affected by other government actions. Bush said he was confident the amendment would be "addressed" by a House-Senate conference committee.
 Bush vetoes Amtrak bill
 President Bush on Thursday vetoed a bill authorizing $ 2-billion in spending by Amtrak, complaining that its expansion of federal regulation over railroad acquisitions "represents a step backward for the entire rail industry." Bush took issue with a provision that would require the Interstate Commerce Commission to approve the acquisition of railroads by non-railroad companies. Amtrak spokesman Clifford Black said the veto would have no effect on daily train operations because the railroad is working with money that Congress already had appropriated for 1989-1992. It was Bush's first veto of 1990.
  Administration: PLO in line
 The Bush administration reaffirmed its view Thursday that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has kept its promise not to engage in terrorism. The administration's assessment, presented by assistant secretary of state John Kelly, was immediately branded a "whitewash" by influential House members. The State Department must certify every 120 days that the PLO is abiding by Arafat's December 1988 commitment to renounce terrorism.  Otherwise, U.S.-PLO discussion must be severed. While Kelly acknowledged the State Department had identified various acts of violence against Israel by groups that are members of the PLO, it concluded the acts could not be defined in a way that would justify ending the discussion.
 Briefly. . .
 The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration proposed that new light trucks and vans be equipped with center high-mounted rear brake lamps like those on cars, saying they could prevent thousands of accidents and injuries each year.
 The State Department said it opposed a visa for PLO leader Yasser Arafat to attend a U.N. Security Council meeting in New York because it wanted to keep attention focused on the lack of Middle East peace talks.
 

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document