Afghanistan grabs Obama's focus; Amid the Times Square terrorism investigation, a tumultuous congressional session and dealing with the Gulf oil spill, President Barack Obama will hold a meeting Wednesday that could have a profound effect on the war in Afghanistan.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 9, 2010 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2010 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 762 words
Byline: Bill Steiden

Staff
Body


Target: Kandahar
Traveling to Washington for the session is Afghan President Hamid Karzai. The White House isn't specifically saying what Karzai and Obama will discuss, but the most pressing subject is the next step as American forces prepare for a large-scale operation this summer aimed at pushing Taliban elements out of Kandahar.
The southern Afghan city of 800,000 is regarded as the spiritual birthplace of the Taliban, and the rebels have reasserted their control in the surrounding province in recent years.
The operation is intended as a followup to a February assault on Marja, another Taliban stronghold, as American forces complete a 30,000-troop buildup Obama ordered last fall.
At the same time, Karzai is planning his own initiative: a summit, or jirga, later this month with leaders from across Afghanistan on opening peace negotiations with the Taliban. He had scheduled it for May 2, but delayed the meeting after the United States expressed concern about its goals.
Strained relations
Relations with Karzai have been thorny for the Obama administration. This week's meeting between the two leaders came close to being canceled after Obama criticized Karzai during a surprise March visit to Afghanistan. Reelected in a disputed August vote, Karzai has struggled to assemble a Cabinet amid accusations of cronyism. He was angered when Obama suggested he should spend more effort on combating the corruption that has fueled a resurgence of Afghanistan's illegal leading cash crop, the opium poppy --- a trade in which Karzai's brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, is believed to be involved.
Conflicting goals
The planned Kandahar operation and Karzai's peace initiative would seem to be at cross-purposes. It's not clear at this point which would be the most productive approach.
The February attack on Marja has so far produced mixed results.
Coalition forces are now entrenched there and are attempting to help the Afghan government build its authority in the region.
But Taliban forces have reportedly filtered back into the city, wreaking vengeance on dozens of people who cooperated with Western and government forces.
Also, newspapers in Great Britain --- second only to the United States in the number of troops it has committed to Afghanistan --- have reported the failure of efforts to hand over more authority to Afghan forces, including an aborted helicopter assault meant to help prepare for the Kandahar operation.
Adding to questions about the military strategy, the U.S. Government Accountability Office in a report last week concluded that Obama's troop surge in Afghanistan has so dar failed to quell growing violence.
Tricky timing
Karzai's peace initiative is also problematic. It is believed he will propose a deal that would allow Taliban leaders to leave the country and provide land, jobs and protection to others who agree to abandon the rebels' cause. He has the backing of the United Nations. But the Obama administration may push to further delay the jirga until after the Kandahar assault, in hopes that the Taliban will be more motivated to make a deal and stick by it.
The timing is also tricky because of the now-suspected Taliban tie to the attempted terror bombing in Times Square.
The Pakistani branch implicated is believed to have many connections to the Afghan Taliban, most of whose members share the same Pashtun ethnicity. U.S. leaders would have difficulty endorsing any agreement made with a group potentially linked to terrorism on American soil.
Mounting bills
There is one option nobody is talking about yet: extending the troop surge beyond a mid-2011 withdrawl target set by Obama. About one-third of the $1 trillion the United States has committed to war efforts since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks has gone to Afghanistan, and spending there is rising rapidly as the focus moves from Iraq.
This fiscal year, spending on Afghanistan, at $72.3 billion, is for the first time expected to outstrip that in Iraq, at $64.5 billion. It costs the military upward of $1 million a year to field each soldier in Afghanistan, and almost 100,000 will be there by this summer.
Criticized for setting the 2011 withdrawal date, Obama has declined to describe it as a deadline.
But with sentiment to cut costs increasing as the deficit grows, he may find expectations rising for a troop pullout that would bring dramatic spending reductions as the 2012 election nears.
Sources: The Guardian, Voice of America, the Scotsman, Agence France Presse, Reuters, the New York Times, Radio France Internationale, National Public Radio, CNN, McClatchy Newspapers

Graphic

 
Photo: U.S. Army Sgt. Sean Henry of Bellevue, Wash., zooms in on an area with his rifle scope while on patrol in Afghanistan's Kandahar province. Julie Jacobson Associated Press /ImageData*

Load-Date: May 9, 2010


End of Document