Afghan suicide blast kills 8 Victims were Americans, may have included contractors, intelligence agents; bomber breached base's security. TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 31, 2009 Thursday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 741 words
Byline: BY DEB RIECHMANN - The Associated Press The New York Times contributed to this report.
Dateline: 0 
Body


KABUL, AFGHANISTAN - A suicide bomber killed eight American civilians Wednesday at a U.S. base in southeastern Afghanistan, according to U.S. and NATO officials.
The attacker detonated explosives at Forward Operating Base Chapman in Khost province near the Afghan border with Pakistan, U.S. officials in Washington said. The bomber, wearing an explosive vest, managed to elude security and reach an area near the base's gym, said one official, who did not want to be identified because the official was not authorized to speak about the attack. It was not clear whether the bomber entered the gym.
One official said Forward Operating Base Chapman is "not a regular base," suggesting that it was used by American intelligence agencies.
A senior State Department official told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity that all of the victims were civilians. However, that could include military contractors and U.S. intelligence officials.
In Kabul, a spokesman for the international coalition force in Kabul said no U.S. or NATO troops were killed in the afternoon explosion.
Another senior U.S. official in Washington said there were conflicting reports on the number of casualties, but that others were injured in the attack. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because not all details about the incident had been confirmed.
The State Department did confirm that eight Americans had been killed, but would provide no further information.
"We mourn the loss of life in this attack, and are withholding further details pending notification of next of kin," State Department spokesman Ian Kelly said.
Even by the standards of a war with a rising number of U.S. and NATO casualties, the attack was an especially deadly one for Americans in Afghanistan, who, in addition to soldiers, include a growing number of civilian contractors employed in reconstruction and intelligence operations. That the bomber managed to breach a secure base assigned to potentially sensitive operations also made the attack particularly audacious.
Khost province borders Pakistan and has been a prime area for insurgents with links to the Taliban and al-Qaida who use Pakistan's lawless tribal areas as a base to stage their insurgency.
U.S. bases in Khost, particularly Camp Salerno, one of the largest in the country, have been the targets of frequent attacks, but rarely, if ever, do suicide attackers make it past the main gate.
Repeated suicide attacks at the entrance to Camp Salerno have killed dozens of Afghan laborers in the past several years.
In May, a suicide attacker exploded a car bomb near the main gate, killing seven civilians and wounding 21. The bombing took place a day after a coordinated Taliban attack inside the city of Khost, the provincial capital, that left at least seven civilians and eight insurgents dead.
In June, a man riding a motorcycle detonated explosives near a densely crowded intersection in the city, killing seven Afghan civilians and wounding 44, including seven children.
Last week, heavily armed insurgents entered a police headquarters in Gardez, to the north of Khost, and battled Afghan and U.S. security forces for more than three hours.
That attack was attributed to the Taliban network run by Sirajuddin Haqqani, which bases itself just south in Pakistan's tribal area of North Waziristan.
In recent weeks, U.S. officials have stepped up pressure on Pakistan to root out the Haqqani network, whose fighters pose one of the greatest threats to U.S. forces and hold sway over large parts of Afghanistan, including Paktika, Paktia and Khost provinces.
AFGHANS SAY CHILDREN WERE KILLED IN ATTACK
Separately on Wednesday, NATO questioned Afghan reports that international troops killed 10 civilians, including schoolchildren, in a weekend attack that prompted hundreds of angry Afghan protesters to burn an effigy of U.S. President Barack Obama and chant "death" to America.
The head of an investigative team appointed by Afghan President Hamid Karzai told The Associated Press by telephone that eight students between the ages of 12 and 14 were among the dead discovered in a village house in a remote section of Kunar province in eastern Afghanistan.
NATO said in a statement released late Wednesday night that while there was no direct evidence to substantiate the claims, the international force had requested and welcomed a joint investigation to reach an "impartial and accurate determination" of what happened in the attack.

Load-Date: February 25, 2010


End of Document