AFGHAN SUICIDE BOMBER KILLS 2; PA. GUARDSMEN FROM W. ELIZABETH, CONNEAUTVILLE WERE ON FOOT PATROL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 14, 2010 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 450 words
Byline: From local and wire reports
Body


A Pennsylvania National Guard official said two soldiers from Western Pennsylvania have been killed in a suicide bomb attack in Afghanistan.
Guard spokesman Cory Angell said the guardsmen were Sgt. 1st Class Robert Fike of Conneautville, Crawford County, and Staff Sgt. Bryan Hoover of West Elizabeth. He said the attack happened Friday in Zabul province in southeastern Afghanistan while the men were on a foot patrol.
Several civilians were killed.
Sgt. Fike, a corrections officer at the State Correctional Institution Albion, had been deployed to Saudi Arabia in 2002 and to Iraq in 2007. His father, James Fike of Stafford, said he loved the military and also loved hunting and fishing as well as being with his daughter.
Sgt. Hoover was a track coach for the Elizabeth Forward School District. Students gathered at the high school on Saturday to place a memorial there and to remember the man one student called a "nice, inspirational coach."
They were serving with the Pennsylvania Army National Guard's Company C, 1st Battalion, 110th Infantry, in Connellsville. They were providing security with Provincial Reconstruction Team Zabul.
"These were experienced soldiers who had done other combat deployments and were dedicated to serving the nation and the commonwealth," said Maj. Gen. Randall Marchi, commander, 28th Infantry Division. "It is a tragic loss and we send our heartfelt sympathies to their families and friends."
Sgt. Fike was a 1989 graduate of Penn Trafford High School and earned a bachelor's degree from Edinboro University.
He joined the Pennsylvania Army National Guard in September 1993. In his 16 years of service he served two tours, one in Saudi Arabia from 2002 to 2003 and another in Iraq from 2007 to 2008. His awards include the Army Commendation Medal, Army Achievement Medal, Armed Forces Reserve Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary and Service Medals and Iraq Campaign Medal.
Sgt. Hoover earned a bachelor's degree in sports management from California University of Pennsylvania. He joined the Marine Corps in October 1999 and served on active duty until September 2004. In March 2005, after several months in the Marine Corps Reserve, he enlisted in the Pennsylvania National Guard.
His military awards include the Army Commendation Medal, Pennsylvania Commendation Medal, Navy/Marine Corps Achievement Medal, Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Air Assault Badge and Humanitarian Service Medal.
Sgts. Fike and Hoover previously served together in Iraq in 2007 and 2008 with the 28th Military Police Company. They were the 35th and 36th soldiers of the Pennsylvania National Guard killed in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Load-Date: June 15, 2010


End of Document