AFGHANISTAN PLAN MUST KEEP FOCUS ON TERRORISM
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 24, 2009 Thursday
Main Edition


Copyright 2009 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 9
Length: 427 words
Body


Eight years ago, it made sense to go to war in Afghanistan. The United States had just been attacked by a terrorist group that received  shelter from Afghanistan's Taliban-run government. Absent that, there would have been no invasion.
 Since then, the Taliban have been driven from government leadership, but al-Qaida still lurks  in the vast mountains that form a border with Pakistan. Since last year, the U.S. has doubled the size of the military presence, but the Taliban is resurgent and al-Qaida is still hatching terrorist plots. Through August, 182 U.S. troops have died in Afghanistan, making this the deadliest year of that war for Americans.
 In March, President Barack Obama signaled that a counterinsurgency was the best strategy to stem the losses from a war effort that was adrift because of a shift in focus to Iraq. In June, a new commander, Gen. Stanley McChrystal, was installed. He recently delivered a sobering assessment of a "deteriorating" war that will require  Obama to make tough decisions.
 Commanders want as many as 40,000 more troops. McChrystal says, "Resources will not win this war, but under-resourcing could lose it." Obama also said in March that the war was  under-resourced because of the shift in emphasis on Iraq. However, both men know that success  will take more than a new war plan and more troops.
 The Afghan government needs to take a leadership role so U.S. forces can eventually leave. But that prospect was dealt a  blow because of  fraud suspected in the election of Prime Minister Hamid Karzai. Even then, he barely mustered enough votes to forestall a runoff.
 It's difficult to see how Americans can capture the hearts and minds of the Afghan people when teaming up with government that is considered corrupt. It also isn't clear how this is making America safe from terrorism, which was why  we got involved in the first place.
  The history of Afghanistan tells us that whenever we depart, tribal rivalries will erupt and religious factions will revolt against Western-style governance. History also tells us that the military will suffer and our efforts will be expensive for as long as we stay.
 The American people had been solidly behind the war, but support is waning. Upon receipt of McChrystal's assessment, Obama has decided to  review  the mission. After eight years with spotty results, an extensive reassessment is in order.
 But we must remember that the goal is to fight global terrorism, not rescue pride. The question is whether this is the best way to go about it.
TYPE: Column, Commentary, Editorial

Load-Date: September 26, 2009


End of Document