Afghanistan, Pakistan Presidents Pledge To Open Joint Front Against Terrorism
RTT News (United States)
March 10, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 718 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari held talks in Islamabad on Wednesday with his Afghan counterpart Hamid Karzai, who arrived in the Pakistani capital city earlier in the day for a two-day visit.
The talks between Asif Ali Zardari and his Afghan counterpart reportedly focused on fighting terrorism and extremism prevalent in the two neighboring countries and devising ways to address regional issues related to peace and security.
During the talks, the two leaders agreed to open a joint front against terrorism and extremism in their respective countries and coordinate efforts aimed at tackling the two issues. They also agreed to make sincere efforts to resolve issues that had led to past misunderstandings between the two nations.
A statement issued after the talks quoted Zardari as saying that Pakistan and Afghanistan "need to speak the same language at international forums because both suffer from the same malaise caused by the same mindset of militancy and extremism."
Zardari also urged Karzai to take a joint stand in persuading the international community to devise a plan for the region to "banish the militancy and its effects for all time to come" in the lines of the &apos;Marshal Plan&apos; launched in 1947 under the initiation on the United States to rebuild western Europe after World War II.
The statement went on to say that President Karzai, on his part, urged his Pakistani counterpart for forming a meaningful partnership that would allow "the realization of the full potential of human and natural resources, greater connectivity, more trade and economic cooperation."
Karzai was received on arrival at Islamabad on Wednesday afternoon by Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi and other senior officials. He is scheduled to meet and hold talks with Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani on Thursday.
The Afghan President is accompanied on his two-day Pakistan visit by a 45-member delegation including ministers and advisers. It is also the Afghan President&apos;s first visit to Pakistan since his re-election last year.
During their talks with the Pakistani leadership, the Afghan delegation is expected to request for Islamabad&apos;s assistance in holding reconciliation with Taliban and demand the extradition of Taliban leaders recently arrested in Pakistan.
Pakistan has indicated that it is willing to help in promoting reconciliation in Afghanistan and has promised to assist the peace efforts initiated by the Afghan government.
The relations between the two neighboring south Asian countries had soured in the recent years over the escalation of insurgent activities in their volatile border regions. Kabul has accused Islamabad in the past of not doing enough to prevent Taliban militants using Pakistan&apos;s northwestern tribal areas as a base for launching cross border attacks in Afghanistan.
Last year, Islamabad launched two separate anti-militant offensives in the Taliban strongholds of South Waziristan and the Swat Valley region after coming under immense pressure from the U.S. to take on Taliban militants Washington considers responsible for the escalating violence in Pakistan and neighboring Afghanistan.
However, Pakistan has thus far resisted calls from Washington to launch a new anti-militant offensive against Taliban militants operating in North Waziristan, which is considered to be a strong-hold of al-Qaeda militants and a Taliban faction led by Afghan Taliban commander Jalaluddin Haqqani.
The Taliban militants belonging to the Haqqani faction are based in the mountainous tribal regions of North Waziristan that neighbors Afghanistan. The militants had launched several cross border attacks, along with the al-Qaeda militants operating in the region, on U.S. forces stationed in Afghanistan.
Pakistani army has indicated that it will not launch any new anti-militant offensives during the next six months as it is fully occupied with the two ongoing anti-Taliban offensives. It has also rejected U.S. calls for extending the ongoing anti-Taliban offensive in South Waziristan to the neighboring North Waziristan, pointing out that such a move would risk losing the advances made in the South Waziristan offensive.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document