Afghanistan War Subject of Protest On Snow Campus ; Foes say violence no answer to terrorism
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
December 8, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B4
Length: 422 words
Byline: GREG DART, SPECIAL TO THE TRIBUNE
Body


EPHRAIM -- You cannot fight terrorism with terrorism.
That was the message conveyed by Colyn Kilmer at a student protest against the war in Afghanistan held on the Snow College campus in Ephraim.
"Terrorism was never the right answer for terrorism," Kilmer said. "The motives behind the attacks in Afghanistan are not pure, and if terrorism is going to be properly dealt with, it means eradicating such behavior wherever it takes place, not just when it happens on U.S. soil."
Sitting at a table inside the Greenwood Student Center on Wednesday, Kilmer, a sophomore majoring in political science, and Holly Papasodora handed out literature denouncing the international coalition's use of war to topple the Taliban government and hunt down Osama bin Laden.
There are nonviolent ways to achieve the objective that started after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, Papasodora said.
"If we [United States] use violence to fight terrorism, we are no better than the terrorist," she said.
Snow College was the only one of Utah's universities and colleges to heed the call by a French group to protest the military actions in Afghanistan. Throughout the day, Kilmer and Papasodora received help from about 22 sympathetic students.
Kilmer called the war the result of the "Hitler effect," whereby oppressive governments can come to power in war-ravaged countries, like Germany after World War I and Afghanistan after its war with the former Soviet Union, when they are ignored by more powerful nations.
"When a country like Afghanistan has been continuously destroyed by war, they have no other choice but to turn to a leader like Osama bin Laden; he offers them hope," Kilmer said. "We could stop these terrorist activities from happening by rebuilding troubled nations, instead of letting them harbor people like bin Laden to take over the rebuilding."
Not everyone on campus agreed with the protesters.
Carl Sullivan, a foreign language professor at the school, said as horrible as war is, sometimes it is justified. "What else could we have done in this case besides retaliate," Sullivan said. "It was not only the right choice, but the only choice."
Sophomore Carlee Hamblin did not perceive U.S. forces acting like terrorists while attacking terrorism in the latest conflict.
"The attacks are not an act of terrorism," she said. "They are simply an act of justice."
Kilmer defended the protest, saying patriotism does not necessarily mean people agree with everything the government says and does. "Patriotism," Kilmer said, "means loving America."

Load-Date: December 9, 2001


End of Document