AFGHAN PRESIDENT BACKS NEW U.S. PLAN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 29, 2009 Sunday
FOUR STAR EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 736 words
Byline: Pamela Constable, The Washington Post
Body


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Afghan President Hamid Karzai said yesterday that he was in "full agreement" with President Barack Obama's newly announced strategy for Afghanistan, saying it was "exactly what the Afghan people were hoping for" and promising to "work very closely" with the United States to implement the plan.
After months of tension between the Afghan leader and officials in Washington, especially over civilian casualties caused by Western military forces, Mr. Karzai seemed pleasantly surprised by Mr. Obama's prescriptions for Afghanistan's problems, calling his plan "better than we were expecting."
Like a cross-section of Afghans interviewed yesterday, Mr. Karzai said he was especially glad that Mr. Obama explicitly endorsed two ideas Afghan officials have been stressing for several years: that the fight against Islamist terrorism must focus on militant safe havens in next-door Pakistan and that negotiations with Taliban insurgents are essential to ending the conflict in Afghanistan.
Afghan and U.S.-led coalition forces have been fighting a revived Taliban insurgency for several years but making little headway, while across the border in Pakistan, other extreme Islamist groups have been making steady inroads from isolated tribal zones along the border into Pakistani society, using a mixture of violent intimidation and religious influence.
Mr. Obama's strategy calls for a major expansion of Afghan security forces and the deployment of 4,000 new U.S. troops to train them, on top of an additional 17,000 combat troops. It also proposes a boost in U.S. civilian expert assistance, more economic aid to Pakistan in return for stronger action against Islamist militant groups, and support for a better-run, more honest and responsive Afghan government as part of an overarching focus on fighting terrorism in the region.
Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari also praised Mr. Obama's plan, telling members of Parliament in Islamabad yesterday that it "represents a positive change" in U.S. policy. He specifically endorsed Mr. Obama's proposal to devote large amounts of aid to development in Pakistan's lawless border region as an antidote to Islamist extremism.
Mr. Zardari said Pakistan would deal "firmly" with groups that seek to harm the government but did not elaborate. The Obama plan would toughen conditions for U.S. economic aid, making it conditional on a stepped-up commitment by Pakistan to fighting Islamist terrorism within its borders.
Afghans interviewed yesterday in markets, on university campuses and in offices in Kabul, the capital, said they were grateful that Mr. Obama had recognized the role of Pakistan as a sanctuary for Islamist terrorism yet pleased that he had endorsed the idea of seeking reconciliation with the Taliban, calling this the only sensible way to make peace with their fellow Muslims.
"The American government has finally realized the threat that comes from our neighbor. We welcome that," said Enayatullah Balegh, an influential cleric and Islamic law professor. Negotiating with the Taliban, he added, is "the only way to bring peace and stability. We cannot defeat them when we have foreigners bombing our villages and raiding our homes. Once we solve things with the Afghan fighters, the al-Qaida forces will go away on their own."
It was not clear, however, whether Afghan and U.S. officials would agree on which adversaries to approach. Mr. Karzai said yesterday that he seeks dialogue with Afghan Taliban leaders who are not part of al-Qaida. He said some should be removed from a U.N. blacklist, but he did not name them. Mr. Obama said there should be no talks with an "uncompromising core" of Taliban hard-liners, including the fugitive leader Mohammad Omar.
Political leaders here expressed overall appreciation for Mr. Obama's new focus on Afghanistan but said they had concerns about various details or omissions in the plan. Several said they worried that an emphasis on building democracy in their country was being subordinated to the international war against terrorism.
"I was excited that he had a new strategy but not totally satisfied with the result," said Shukria Barakzai, a member of parliament. "In some ways, it seems like a continuation of President Bush's policies. Is he just going to put pressure on the Pakistani executive, or on the army and the intelligence agencies and other groups? There is a much larger picture there."

Load-Date: March 31, 2009


End of Document