Afghanistan hangs 6 insurgents
Chicago Daily Herald
May 9, 2016 Monday


Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS WIRE_; Pg. 11
Length: 269 words
Byline: By Eltaf Najafizada Bloomberg News
Body


Afghan President Ashraf Ghani ordered six insurgents hanged on Sunday, fulfilling a vow to crack down on terrorism while endangering the foundering peace talks being brokered by the U.S., China and Pakistan between the government and Taliban.
Ghani approved the executions after the six were convicted of "grave crimes against civilians and national security," according to an emailed statement from his press office.
The death sentences, the first since Ghani took office in 2014, were carried out a month after he pledged to parliament to hang people found guilty of terrorism. Ghani acted amid rising violence, including an attack on an elite office of intelligence agency in Kabul last month that killed 64 and wounded more than 340, one of the deadliest since 2001.
"The executions of Taliban have now evaporated any efforts of peace talks," Ahmad Saeedi, a former Pakistan diplomat, said by telephone. "I am really worried about the Taliban's retaliation that may bomb everywhere."
The U.S., China and Pakistan have tried to broker talks between the Taliban and Afghan government.
A first round last year was halted by the death of Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar. The militant group has since refused to restart negotiations unless all foreign forces leave Afghanistan, the group is removed from a United Nations blacklist and its members are freed from prison.
Five members of Taliban and a member of Haqqani terrorist network were hanged at dawn inside the Pul-e-Charkhi prison on the outskirts of Kabul, according to an emailed statement by the National Directorate of Security, the government's spy agency.

Graphic

 
Associated Press/Oct. 8, 2014 Afghanistan's police officers take positions by nooses prepared to execute men at a jail in Kabul. The country has hanged six men convicted of terrorism, signaling a tougher approach toward the Taliban.

Load-Date: May 9, 2016


End of Document