Afghan president offers peace talks with ousted Taliban leader
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 9, 2006 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 501 words
Byline: By Daniel Cooney THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN 
Body


President Hamid Karzai said Sunday that a few hundred Taliban fighters had reconciled with the government and suggested that militant leader Mullah Mohammed Omar should "get in touch" if he wanted to talk peace.
In the context of escalating violence, including suicide attacks, the remarks by Karzai in an interview with The Associated Press were seen as a significant softening of the government's previous policy of not negotiating with top leaders of the hard-line militia.
Despite the spike in bloodshed, Karzai, who has U.S. backing, said the Taliban's resistance was fading.
He acknowledged, however, that he expected suicide attacks to continue in Afghanistan "for a long time."
Karzai said a booming drug trade presented a greater threat to Afghanistan than terrorism.
Omar has been in hiding since U.S.-led forces ousted his fundamentalist Islamic regime four years ago for hosting Osama bin Laden in the wake of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The Taliban leader has a $10 million U.S. bounty on his head and is believed to be leading holdouts in a rebellion that left about 1,600 people dead last year, the most since 2001.
Karzai, 48, won a five-year term as the war-battered nation's first democratically elected leader in 2004.
He invited all Afghans, "Taliban or non-Taliban," to help rebuild the country, and he said that included Omar.
"If he wants to come, he should get in touch with us," the president said, indicating he was open to the possibility of talks with the reclusive militia leader despite his most-wanted status.
"We would see what he has to say, of course," Karzai said. "But I don't think he will come.
"He has so much on his hands against Afghanistan. We don't even know as to where he is hiding. He has to first give us an account as to what he's done."
Karzai, who appeared upbeat during the interview at his heavily guarded palace in the snowy capital, Kabul, said hundreds of Taliban members who were "not associated with terrorism" already had participated in a government reconciliation program.
He said the hunt for Omar and bin Laden, who are believed hiding in rugged mountains on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, would continue.
The president said terrorism was "relegated to little more than a nuisance" when compared with the scourge of drugs facing the country.
Afghanistan is the world's biggest producer of illegal narcotics, yielding enough opium last year to make about 450 tons of heroin-- sparking warnings the country is fast becoming a "narco-state."
The problem has criminalized the economy, tainted the country's image, hindered the development of strong government institutions and undermined young people's lives, Karzai said. He claimed that criminal gangs, including some from Europe, threatened to kill farmers if they didn't turn to cultivating poppies.
Karzai said suicide attacks were a sign of the "desperation" of anti-government forces. The past four months have seen a spate of about 20 suicide bombings, once a comparative rarity in Afghanistan.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan speaks in an interview in Kabul   on Sunday.     The Associated Press 

Load-Date: January 9, 2006


End of Document