Afghanistan, India enter pact on trade, politics and security
USA TODAY
October 5, 2011 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 474 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Afghanistan on Tuesday signed a strategic partnership with India -- its first such agreement with any country -- recognizing a regional ally largely sidelined during a decade of U.S.-led international efforts to root out terrorists on Afghan soil.
The announcement comes after Afghan President Hamid Karzai chastised neighboring Pakistan, which has been a traditional foe of India, for failing to act against Taliban-led insurgents based within its borders.
Islamist terrorists from Pakistan with ties to that country's intelligence services have launched attacks in India, including the 2008 shooting and bombing attacks in Mumbai that killed 166 people.
Karzai and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh spoke about the need for regional peace and prosperity, saying their countries envision a shared future free of extremism.
"Afghanistan recognizes the danger that this region is facing through terrorism and the radicalism that's been used as an instrument of policy against civilians, against innocent citizens of our countries," Karzai said.
He emphasized the need for broad regional cooperation, saying his country would "aspire to a life that is free of violence and will seek cooperation and understanding from the members of this region, including our other neighbors."
Singh emphasized the countries' historical and cultural links and said the two leaders discussed terrorism in detail.
"The people of Afghanistan have suffered enough. They deserve to live in peace and decide their future themselves, without outside interference, coercion and intimidation," Singh said.
The strategic partnership  outlines areas of common concern, including trade, economic expansion, education, security and politics. The two sides also signed deals to boost cooperation in mining, oil and gas.
"Afghanistan will benefit from India's expertise," Karzai said.
Karzai had said he was giving up on negotiating with the Taliban directly and accused Pakistan of doing little to stop terrorists. Hindus are considered infidels against God by Islamist terror groups in Pakistan.
"Everybody keeps options open depending on how the solution evolves," said a former Indian diplomat in Pakistan, G. Parthasarathy, adding that it would serve no one's interest for Afghanistan and India to snub their volatile neighbor.
India's policy on Afghanistan has been to support international action led by the United States over the past decade while staying out of political and security issues so as not to antagonize Pakistan. However, the U.S. may welcome a more active role for India.
"The U.S. is now willing to let India play a larger role in Afghanistan, and certainly Afghanistan wants it," said analyst Lalit Mansingh, a former Indian foreign secretary and ambassador to Washington. "After years of being sidelined, India is now regarded very much as part of the solution." 

Load-Date: October 5, 2011


End of Document