AFGHAN, PAKISTAN LEADERS MENDING RELATIONS; DISCUSSIONS FOCUS ON FIGHTING TERRORISM, SHARING INTELLIGENCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 27, 2007 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 435 words
Byline: SALMAN MASOOD AND CARLOTTA GALL, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


Afghan President Hamid Karzai and Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf signaled an improvement in relations between their two countries after an unusually cordial meeting yesterday, and called for greater cooperation in fighting terrorism.
Mr. Karzai was on a two-day visit to the Pakistani capital, where he also is to meet with opposition politician Benazir Bhutto, a former prime minister, said a statement from the Afghan president's office. Ms. Bhutto is contesting parliamentary elections scheduled for January.
The two presidents have regularly leveled harsh accusations at each other over the last two years, since a Taliban resurgence shook the Afghan government's control of much of southern Afghanistan. Mr. Karzai has blamed Pakistan for harboring the Taliban and militant training camps, which he says have allowed the insurgents to stage a comeback, while Mr. Musharraf has blamed the creeping insurgency on lawlessness in Afghanistan and Mr. Karzai's failure to govern.
But the two men emerged yesterday from their discussions closer to agreement on how to deal with the militants, who over the last year have extended their reach inside Pakistan.
Mr. Musharraf said their talks focused on terrorism and the need for cooperation on intelligence to meet "this menace of extremism and terrorism, which is destroying both our countries.
"I think we have developed very strong understanding of each other's problems, and we look forward to cooperation and coordination in all fields for our mutual benefit," Mr. Musharraf said during a news briefing, aired live by Pakistan's state-run television.
"The meeting was productive in all aspects," Mr. Karzai said. He said cross-border incursions by pro-Taliban militants from Pakistan had decreased by 40 percent in recent months, but suggested that more still needed to be done.
"There is reduced activity on the Afghan side," Mr. Karzai said. "Unfortunately, there is an increased activity now on the Pakistani side. President Musharraf and I discussed the issue of Swat and South and North Waziristan, and the issues of terrorist activities in Afghanistan. We discussed Helmand. We discussed other parts of Afghanistan."
Mr. Musharraf said the reduction in cross-border activity was a positive sign, but acknowledged that suicide bombers and militancy in Pakistan's tribal areas remained a problem. "The activity of training of suicide bombers and militancy in South and North Waziristan continues," he said.
"The two intelligence agencies on both sides must cooperate more strongly if we are to deal with terrorists and extremists more effectively," he said.

Load-Date: December 27, 2007


End of Document