Afghans grow weary of NATO Many say they don't see benefits from presence and would prefer troops to leave. WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 22, 2010 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 531 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


KABUL, AFGHANISTAN - U.S. and NATO forces will stay in Afghanistan for at least another four years, yet there are growing signs that the West has worn out its welcome.
With the war in its 10th year, foreigner fatigue is becoming more apparent among Afghans as the U.S. and its international partners try to shore up support among their own populations for continuing the fight. President Barack Obama and other Western leaders approved plans during a weekend summit meeting in Lisbon, Portugal, for Afghans to move into the lead role in fighting the Taliban and its allies by the end of 2014.
The reasons for Afghan patience running out are numerous. Progress against insurgents is mixed at best. Tactics such as night raids on homes to capture militants fuel resentment in a society with a centuries-long tradition of resistance to foreign domination. In a sign of the ill will, Afghans often blame coalition troops for killing civilians even though the Taliban and militants kill more.
Moreover, the Western footprint has grown. The buildup of 30,000 U.S. reinforcements this year made the foreign presence even more overt but underscored Afghan feeling that all the troops and billions in aid haven't substantially improved their daily lives.
"I don't think NATO has done much good," said Siyal Khan Farahi, 39, a contractor in Kandahar in the south, where the Taliban insurgency was born. "They are spending millions of dollars over here, but I don't see many signs of prosperity or anything that can change the people's standard of life.
"America calls itself a superpower, but they can't control these insurgents, so they should leave this place."
The concern among international representatives is that the sentiment will undermine NATO's attempts to win public loyalty away from the Taliban. Reflecting the mood, President Hamid Karzai has grown more vocal in criticizing the roughly 147,000 international troops on his country's soil.
Karzai's comments in turn make it difficult for Obama and other Western leaders to sell their war policies at home, if there's a perception even Afghans don't want troops there.
Last week, Karzai said Afghans are skeptical because they are getting mixed messages about why international forces are here. He bluntly declared NATO must cut back the "intrusiveness" of its forces.
That runs counter to the U.S. war strategy of interacting with the public in areas cleared of insurgents, bolstering governance and rushing in development aid. The counterinsurgency strategy of Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. and NATO commander in Afghanistan, instructs his troops to: "Earn people's trust. Talk to them. ... Listen. Consult and drink lots of tea."
Suspicion of Western motives is deep in some areas. An informal October survey of 1,000 people in Kandahar and Helmand provinces - two battle areas where winning over the population is key - found that 40 percent believe international forces aim to destroy Islam or occupy Afghanistan.
Also, 92 percent were unaware of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and that they triggered the international move against the Taliban, according to the poll by the London-based International Council on Security and Development.

Graphic

 
 Photo by Ahmad Massoud • Associated Press Afghan police officers try to restore order after a crowd set fire to two SUVs in Kabul, Afghanistan, in July. U.S. and NATO forces say they will stay in Afghanistan for at least another four years, but there are growing signs that Afghans are tired of having foreign forces on their soil.  GRAPHIC - U.S. MILITARY WAR DEATHS | AP 

Load-Date: November 23, 2010


End of Document