AFTER THE RAID;
WHERE WILL REAGAN'S LIBYAN BATTLE PLAN LEAD?
The New York Times
April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 1401 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


DURING just 11 minutes in the night skies over Libya, United States warplanes opened a new chapter last week in the confrontation between the technological power of the West and the ideological fervor of Middle East terrorism.
With something of the same mathematical calculation that delivered the sophisticated, laser-guided bombs and missiles to their targets, the White House employed a cold logic against a milieu of turbulent zealotry, reasoning that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, would respond to punishment by halting terrorist attacks on Americans or - as Secretary of State George P. Shultz explained - that he might be overthrown by dissident military factions annoyed at losing valuable equipment. ''If a coup takes place, that's all to the good,'' Mr. Shultz declared in what may have been the first case of a postwar Secretary of State's publicly advocating the overthrow of another government.
There were reports of sporadic internal fighting in Tripoli after the air strike. But whether a coup would be desirable would depend on what kind of new regime it produced. As menacing as Colonel Qaddafi has been, the alternatives could be worse for American geopolitical interests. A senior White House official acknowledged, as diplomats and academic experts on Libya had observed, that the army appears to contain competing elements, some moderate but others either strongly pro-Soviet or deeply fundamentalist. One might produce a solid, dependable client for the Russians, more of a Soviet asset in the strategic Mediterranean than the erratic, unpredictable Colonel Qaddafi. The other could mean an Islamic fundamentalist regime as anti-American as that of Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
In either case, the United States would have solved one problem by creating another. ''We have to be very careful,'' the White House aide said. ''We can't control, but we can influence'' by finding ''pockets of opposition,'' he said. ''We have tried from time to time to make contact with those people, but to sustain the operation is very difficult.''
Since American law prohibits the assassination of heads of state, killing Colonel Qaddafi cannot be a stated objective of the Reagan Administration. ''He was not a direct target,'' Mr. Shultz insisted, despite the bombing of the Libyan leader's quarters where his adopted infant daughter died and two young sons were injured. ''We knew that that was his residence and that he perhaps might be there and members of his family,'' said a senior White House official. ''We were showing him that we could get people close to him, and this is the price he's going to have to pay for continued terrorism, and that's why members of his family were hurt during this thing.''
Washington officials spoke in the dispassionate terms suitable to corporate board rooms. Missing from the conversations were the emotions of nationalism and vengeance and the hurt of vulnerability, which fuel both terrorism and the responses to it. Indeed, from the perspective of a small band of angry men with a few guns and explosives, the events of the week probably illustrated terrorism's utility as a weapon of the powerless against the powerful. On the balance sheet for the attack, both the credit and debit columns began to fill.
 
Support Across America
Many officials believe that a government cannot stand motionless against terrorism without losing popular support. Terrorism's most important threat is not to the physical safety of a citizenry - the number of victims is relatively small - but to a national psychology. Therefore, even if there is nothing much that can be done, many political leaders think some action becomes preferable to inaction. Perhaps that is why last week's bombing drew solid support across America - from 77 percent of those surveyed in a New York Times/CBS News Poll, for example - and produced a flood of phone calls and telegrams to the White House greater, it said, than any since the resignation of President Nixon.
The approval was a plus for President Reagan, and it gave muscle to the threats he has been voicing for months. The attack may have temporarily patched up the image of a mighty America, damaged by the fiasco in Lebanon, where United States marines, warships and aircraft proved ineffectual against corrosive guerrilla warfare. But the terrorism resumed so quickly last week that the impression of new strength began to fade.
A United States communications technician in the Sudan was shot and wounded, prompting before dawn Friday an evacuation of dependents of American diplomats and others from Khartoum. American embassies were placed on alert, and many tourists curbed plans for summer trips abroad. Even in its offensive, then, the United States seemed in retreat. ''There is something anticlimactic about military power,'' wrote Fouad Ajami, a professor of Middle Eastern studies at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. ''Once it is deployed, those who deployed it come to learn of its limits.'' So do those against whom it is deployed. Internally in Libya, ''we probably put off a coup that was coming in the next year or so,'' said Lisa Anderson, an associate professor of political science and a specialist on North African and Libyan affairs at Harvard. ''What we've done is really weaken the moderate, pro-American factions within the elite. It is going to be harder to act against him because it's going to look as if you're doing it at American urging.''
Externally, there were also political costs. Even though the Soviet Union failed to provide intelligence to Libya on the impending attack, American officials said, it canceled Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze's trip to Washington, scheduled for mid-May, to work on a second meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader. This was taken as a sign of Moscow's reluctance to hold a summit without progress on arms control, and it seemed to rule out a meeting before the November elections.
 
Hostility in Europe
Washington's efforts to restrict the attack to military targets - airfields, barracks and a terrorist training camp - did little to dampen anti-American hostility in Europe and the Middle East. The deaths of innocents prompted the left-of-center New Statesman of London to denounce American ''state terrorism.'' Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher appeared to have been politically weakened by her decision to allow F-111's to leave on the mission from bases in Britain; she was strongly criticized by politicians and newspaper columnists as polls showed two-thirds of Britons opposed to the attack. In Lebanon, one American and two British hostages were killed, their bodies found with a note saying the murders were retaliation for the American raid. France's refusal to allow the planes to fly through its airspace highlighted the fissures that exist in the Atlantic alliance, cracks that Moscow has been trying to exploit.
In the Arab world, even countries menaced by Qaddafi-inspired subversion issued condemnations. Chedli Klibi, the Secretary General of the 21-member Arab League, contended that the attack ''compromises, perhaps irreversibly, United States relations with Arab peoples.'' As Mr. Ajami noted, while Colonel Qaddafi is hated in the region, ''he acts out the anti-Western resentments of more ordinary, mainstream opinion.''
Israel endorsed the American attack, which resembled the Israeli tactic of holding neighboring Arab states accountable for the use of their territory by terrorists. This is what Israelis call having a ''return address'' for terrorist acts, and it has worked with Syria, Jordan and Egypt, which have long tried to prevent Palestinian guerrillas from crossing their borders into Israel. Consequently, Israel's frontiers have been mostly quiet, except for the one with Lebanon, where the central Government is too weak to police its border areas.
Libya may be only a partial parallel, however. It may have ordered the April 5 bombing of a West Berlin discotheque frequented by American soldiers, as President Reagan charged in justifying the American air strike, but Libya probably could not turn off much international terrorism, even if it wished. The terrorist groups, mostly Palestinian, get weapons, training, intelligence and safe haven from various sources, not just Colonel Qaddafi.
So the balance sheet's bottom line remains to be written.

Graphic

 
Photo of Libyan rescue workers sifting through rubble of an apartment building (Reuters); Photo of President Reagan with George P. Schultz and Caspar W. Weinberger (AP)


End of Document