AFTER THE WAR: Terror;
International Teamwork May Have Foiled Terror
The New York Times
March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;
Length: 958 words
Byline: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 3
Body


A "staggering" global security effort and the reluctant cooperation of other terrorist sponsors in the region probably succeeded in averting spectacular acts of terrorism by Middle Eastern groups during the Persian Gulf war, Government intelligence officials say.
But those officials and other private experts warned that the threat of major terrorist strikes did not end with the cease-fire on Thursday and, in fact, was likely to increase markedly in coming months.
Western intelligence agencies have seen no slackening of activity by members of terrorist groups previously known to be planning attacks, they said. The resounding defeat and huge casualties suffered by Iraqi forces in the 43-day war also may give radical Palestinians and fanatical Muslim factions new motives to retaliate against the United States and its allies.
The American officials, who refused to be identified, said that Western intelligence services had foiled a number of planned terrorist efforts and that the expulsion of Iraqi diplomats from Western nations probably had averted many more. In addition, the officials said, diplomatic pressure by Syria and other Arab countries had succeeded in reining in terrorist groups, including those sponsored by Libya.
Moreover, they said, allied bombing may have disrupted Baghdad's ability to communicate with terrorist cells outside Iraq, and the international trade embargo may have deprived the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, of the money or the equipment to sponsor violence by freelance terrorist groups. .
 
Not Exaggerated, Officials Say
 The officials rejected suggestions that warnings of gulf-related terrorism had been exaggerated. On the contrary, they said, attacks against Western targets have risen sharply since August and even more dramatically since Jan. 17, when the bombing of Iraq began.
An Administration official said that roughly 120 terrorist attacks against American targets had been recorded since war broke out, compared with 17 in the same period in 1990. Worldwide, acts of terror have roughly tripled since the war began, said Brian Jenkins, a leading expert on terrorism who is a senior managing director of Kroll Associates, an international investigative company.
"They were primarily symbolic protests," Mr. Jenkins said. "Less than 5 percent involved fatalities, whereas normally about 20 percent of terrorist attacks do." Overall, only eight people have died in terrorist acts since the invasion of Kuwait.
But Western services uncovered or foiled a number of terrorist plots in Europe and Asia that could have caused great loss of life, Mr. Jenkins and American officials said. The best-known was the planned destruction of an American cultural center and office complex in Manila, which failed in January when one bomb exploded prematurely, killing a terrorist. The French police also broke up an Iraqi plot in mid-January to attack a major oil port near Marseilles.
 
'Staggering' Cooperation
 The officials said that many other plots had probably been aborted by the systematic arrest, expulsion or interrogation in the last seven months of thousands of Iraqi intelligence agents, diplomats and terrorist sympathizers worldwide.
One Administration official said that global cooperation in the counterterrorism effort, involving private businesses such as airlines and once-recalcitrant governments such as Greece, had been "absolutely staggering."
"So far, the big boys haven't played in this game," the official said. "The fact is that the pre-emptive measures such as expulsions, combined with the awesome security, went a long way toward disrupting some of the apparatus that these groups had been putting in place since August."
Officials said that Egypt and other Arab nations had persuaded Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, to rein in terrorist groups under his sponsorship. Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, also pledged last fall to discourage Syria-based terrorists from attacking Western targets outside Israel during the gulf crisis, they said.
"Syria has taken some action," Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today on the NBC News program "Meet The Press" when asked about moves against terrorism. He added, "With respect to some of those groups that were targeting Western and particularly U.S. interests, Syria is serious when it says, 'We are going to see what we can do about that, because we are interested in improving our relationship with the West.' "
Mr. Baker said he would ask the Syrians to continue their efforts to control terrorism during his coming trip to the Middle East.
"I think it's clear there was a great deal of bluster in Saddam's claims to be able to launch a holy war against Western targets," said Paul Wilkinson, a professor at St. Andrews University in Scotland, who heads the London-based Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism.
But Mr. Wilkinson and other private and Government experts said they did not expect Mr. Hussein or the terrorist groups he supports to remain quiet.
"Americans and other members of the coalition have been in the business of killing Arabs on a large scale," Mr. Jenkins said. "We have killed tens of thousands. When I look at those ingredients, I say there's a real potential for terrorist violence in the future."
As the cease-fire took hold on Friday, the Party of God, a radical Muslim group that is based in Lebanon and backed by Iran, declared that the "real mother of all battles" had just begun and that it would be directed against the United States.
"Muslims in Iran and all the world will not sit and watch Westerners take control of their wealth and land," Hussein Mussawi, a leader of the group, said in Lebanon. "They will fight, not like Saddam, but a real and distinguished battle."

Load-Date: March 4, 1991


End of Document