AFTER THE WAR: MILITARY; U.S. Commander Says Terrorism Is No. 1 Threat to Iraqi Reconstruction
 The New York Times
August 22, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 489 words
Byline:  By THOM SHANKER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21  
Body


The American commander of allied forces in Iraq said today that terrorism is the No. 1 threat to the reconstruction effort and suggested that foreign fighters aligned with terrorist cells may be coordinating attacks with remnants of the ousted government of Saddam Hussein. 
     The commander, Gen. John P. Abizaid, said the solution is "to bring an Iraqi face to the security establishments" by increasing the size of the reconstituted Iraqi police, border patrol and civil defense forces as well as the Iraqi Army, which together now total more than 50,000 people. 
 He also said efforts are continuing to persuade other nations to contribute military forces, perhaps two divisions of troops beyond the two foreign divisions already organized. 
Two days after a truck bomb devastated the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, the Iraqi capital, General Abizaid said during a Pentagon news briefing that terrorism was clearly "emerging as the No. 1 security threat, and we are applying a lot of time, energy and resources to identify it, understand it and deal with it."
General Abizaid, chief of the United States Central Command that controls American military operations from the Indian Ocean to the Red Sea, said it was too early to know who planned, paid for or carried out the attack.
But he did mention a fundamentalist Islamic group called Ansar al-Islam, whose base in northeastern Iraq was destroyed during the war but whose fighters are said to have slipped back into Iraq from Iran.
"We think they've migrated from the north down into Baghdad, and we think that they're established there," General Abizaid said. 
Although the group is a religious-based organization whose aims may not be wholly compatible with the secular Baath Party holdouts still loyal to Mr. Hussein, General Abizaid said. "I believe that there are some indications of cooperation in specific areas." 
He stopped short of blaming Syria or Iran for directly supporting fighters entering Iraq across their borders, but he suggested that anti-American forces "are supported by misguided people who think that sending money to them is O.K."
General Abizaid said security in Iraq cannot be measured by the size of the American force.
"We have over one million people under arms in the United States of America and it didn't protect us from what happened on 9/11," he said. "So, the number of troops, boots per square inch, is not the issue. You have to have good, solid intelligence in a conflict such as this so you can get at the terrorists."
Defense Secretary DonaldH. Rumsfeld asserted again today that Iraq does not need more American troops, although he added, "the president has indicated that whatever level of U.S. forces is appropriate, that the general will have that level."
Just under 140,000 American troops are now in Iraq. General Abizaid said that even increases in foreign forces might not result in the immediate withdrawal of American troops.      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 22, 2003


End of Document