AFTER THE MISSILES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 23, 1998, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B2
Length: 671 words
Body

 
TERRORISM
Now what? Now that the smoke is literally clearing from the U.S. missile attacks on Osama bin Laden's "terrorist university" in Afghanistan and a suspected chemical weapons plant in Sudan, President Bill Clinton must address the American public and the world more fully.
Most Americans took the president at his word when he said that Saudi extremist Osama bin Laden was behind the U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania and, even more frightening, that bin Laden intended to strike other American installations soon. These strikes were a pre-emptive attack - to protect American lives and to cripple bin Laden's infrastructure, according to administration officials.
That, though, doesn't close the case or end the debate about what has happened - and what should happen. As Mr. Clinton underscored in his brief talk Thursday, these missile attacks are not the end of our "war" against terrorism. They are the beginning. The American public has a right to know more about what this "war" entails and how it will be waged.
In a democracy, the consent of the governed must be won, not just with appeals to patriotism and national defense but with evidence, reason and a dispassionate examination of the objectives. The president has to be able to launch secret military operations with the consultation of congressional leaders. But fuller discussion must follow in Congress and the country.
For the world community, Mr. Clinton must address legitimate issues of national sovereignty. This country wont win any war against terrorism alone. It needs the cooperation of other nations, which might legitimately question the use of unilateral American military action. We won't have many allies in the war against terrorism if our actions are seen as superpower bullying.
In the hours after the missile strikes, government officials became more explicit about the context in which the attacks occurred. They cited peaceful alternatives that had been pursued but without success. First, of course, they noted that bin Laden himself had been told to desist from terrorist actions. United Nations Ambassador Bill Richardson was also sent to Afghanistan to pressure the Taliban government there to expel him. It refused.
In 1996, Sudan expelled bin Laden under U.S. pressure. But it apparently has done little, or nothing, to dismantle his business operations there. Sudanese claims that U.S. missiles destroyed a privately owned pharmaceutical factory ring hollow, or does the Sudanese army guard every privately owned factory?
In the light of bin Laden's declaration of war, the subsequent embassy bombings, the terrible loss of life and the threat of more attacks to come, the United States has an affirmative responsibility to protect and defend its citizens. In this case, that requires more than defensive reactions because the United States can't always anticipate terrorists every action. It also means striking at terrorists ability to attack.
The United States acted with evident forethought in its Thursday attacks. The targets were carefully chosen, according to the U.S. account. Of course, bin Laden's compound, which hosted a meeting of his senior accomplices on Thursday, is away from civilian centers. The Sudanese chemical plant was hit at night, when not in production, to minimize casualties.
For some, no evidence will be enough to justify a pre-emptive strike or to violate the sovereignty of another nation, especially when that nation is not directly responsible for the provoking offense. Others are skeptical that military attacks can be effective in stopping terrorism and they fear deadly reprisals.
 
Those are all legitimate concerns, but they must not paralyze us.
It will be months before the United States knows how effective these missile attacks - and subsequent diplomatic or military follow-ups - were in disabling bin Laden's operation.
Everything about fighting terrorism is fraught with uncertainty. Indeed the only certainty we have is that Osama bin Laden won't be declaring a cease-fire soon.

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document