AFTER THE ATTACKS: THE MILITARY; Pentagon Drafts a Shopping List For Waging a War on Terrorism
 The New York Times
September 16, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 489 words
Byline:  By ERIC SCHMITT and THOM SHANKER
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15  
Body


As the Bush administration debates options for a broad, new kind of military campaign against terrorism, the Pentagon is describing what it needs to fight it -- better intelligence, more cruise missiles and special forces, all to be financed with billions in emergency spending.
     Combined with President Bush's decision on Friday to authorize the military to call up 50,000 reservists, mostly for defending the nation, the Pentagon spending outline illustrates how it will sustain a long-term offensive against terrorism. 
 The draft request for military spending proposes to buy more unmanned surveillance drones and high-technology reconnaissance aircraft, to enhance defenses for troops against chemical and biological weapons, and to speed the conversion of two Trident nuclear submarines to carry cruise missiles. And it projects payments for troops and for the reservists to stay on higher alert.
Military officials say they are prepared to strike with cruise missiles, manned bombers and, potentially, the special forces of any of the services as soon as the president gives the order, something that would require firm intelligence on the location of those who plotted and abetted the attacks on Tuesday.
But every indication is that the administration is developing a long-term offensive against an enemy whose soldiers hide in caves, but whose patrons are governments with central banks, power grids and organized armed forces. 
"It's all very complicated," said one senior general involved in the planning. "If there was a quick and easy solution to this, you would have seen it by now." 
"There is no campaign plan yet," said one senior officer at the military's European Command. 
The Pentagon said its budget request finances "those costs directly associated with the need to respond to the aftermath of the terrorist attacks" and "provides funds for enhancing America's capability to wage war against terrorism."
In its desire not only to provide more money for the Pentagon but to weave new international coalitions to attack terrorists in their bunkers and their bank accounts, Pentagon and administration officials describe a military buildup to rival that of President Ronald Reagan.
But officials already note the challenge of balancing the public's desire for immediate military action and the need to carefully arrange diplomatic coalitions, economic measures to squeeze the terrorists and a concerted military response.
"We're not going to fight this war with large arrays of soldiers on the battlefield," another senior general said. "We're not gearing up to punish. We're gearing up to eradicate the terrorism. And that's a different ball game."
The armed services are already identifying what weapons, precision munitions and fuel they would need, officials said. But they are still waiting to learn their share of the billions of dollars in emergency budget money proposed by President Bush and approved by Congress. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 16, 2001


End of Document