After protest, Specter toes the line
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 30, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1148 words
Byline: Steve Goldstein, Inquirer Washington Bureau
Body


Arlen Specter was ticked off.
So when the Pennsylvania Republican left the Senate chamber Thursday after seeing an amendment to preserve the rights of terrorism suspects fail, he said he was going to vote against the White House-backed bill on military trials.
"Patently unconstitutional on its face," an irritated Specter told reporters.
Hours later, Specter voted yea as the Senate approved, by 65-34, legislation that largely endorsed President Bush's view that the war against terrorism justifies extraordinary measures, including limits on the traditional rights of defendants in a courtroom.
Why the about-face?
"I haven't been in an argument that was open-and-shut until this one, so when I walked out of the chamber I was a little hot," Specter said in an interview yesterday. "If we didn't pass the bill, there would be a mess on how we handled these war-crimes tribunals.
"Congress could have done it right, and didn't," he continued, "but the next line of defense is the court. And I think the court will clean it up."
Overall, the vote among area members of Congress followed Specter's lead and went pretty much along party lines, except that three New Jersey Democrats - Sens. Frank Lautenberg and Robert Menendez and Rep. Rob Andrews - voted for the administration's favored version of the legislation.
Specter, as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, has been an ardent defender of the separation of powers and congressional authority.
But often on controversial matters, he has been a contentious questioner who ultimately voted the administration's way. During two Supreme Court confirmation hearings in the last year, Specter relentlessly grilled John G. Roberts Jr. and Samuel A. Alito Jr. on whether they would respect legislation passed by the Congress - and ultimately supported both nominations.
This week Specter again opposed the administration early. And he ended up on board by the end, saying, in effect: The legislation is flawed - but I will vote for it, expecting that the courts will remove the flaws after legal challenges. The senator admitted to the contradiction, but said he saw no other recourse.
"You take it as far as you can," Specter responded. "The Congress has spoken, but they have spoken wrongly. Congress did exercise its authority; they just did it in an unconstitutional, wrongheaded way."
University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias said it was not good practice to rely on the courts to correct legislative flaws.
"If legislation that is as critical as this is not clear, then Congress should not pass it," Tobias said. "You don't want to leave it to the courts. If there's too much ambiguity, you cannot rely on them to clear things up. It also puts too much pressure on the courts, and that's why judges get criticized for being activists."
At issue was the denial of the right of habeas corpus to military detainees. The Constitution affords defendants the right to file petitions of habeas corpus to challenge their detention.
An amendment to afford terrorism suspects this right and backed by Specter and Sen. Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont - the senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee - was defeated by a vote of 51-48.
That set Specter off because, as he said yesterday, he couldn't see the other side to this issue.
"The Constitution expressly says you can't suspend habeas corpus unless you have an invasion or a rebellion," Specter said.
"I did my best to get Congress to do the job, and when I couldn't get sufficient votes, the next alternative is the courts," he continued. "This is not going to stop somebody from filing a petition for writ of habeas corpus. They are going to file it. I think the District Court may disregard the statute and go ahead and hear it."
The senator argued that there were a lot of good provisions in the bill, but he predicted a slew of legal challenges to the legislation. One human-rights lawyer yesterday called the legislation "a full-employment act for lawyers."
Specter had cooled down a bit more yesterday, but the issue still rankled him.
"That part of the bill is unconstitutional and the court will clean it up," he said. "I think when it comes up, the court should disregard it. The court is not going to give up its authority on these matters."
Yea or Nay? How Some Area Candidates See Terrorism Bill
Here's what candidates in key races across the region think about the terrorism bill:
SIXTH DISTRICT
Rep. Jim Gerlach (R., Pa.): "I support
this legislation because it establishes a clear, workable system to properly adjudicate the detainee status of terrorists while, at the same time, protecting classified information and
our fighting men and women against frivolous claims or improper public exposure."
Democrat Lois Murphy would have voted no. "I take a backseat to no one in my determination to defeat the terrorists. The best way to do this is to establish a tribunal system that is tough, effective and constitutional... The difference between Jim Gerlach and me is simple - he is satisfied with the president's strategy, and I am not."
SEVENTH DISTRICT
Rep. Curt Weldon (R., Pa.): "This compromise legislation safeguards America's intelligence and military personnel by adequately defining the limits and protections of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Convention."
Democrat Joe Sestakdisagreed. "Unfortunately, the bill falls short of protecting American service members as well as ideals of fairness and justice."
EIGHTH DISTRICT
Rep. Michael G. Fitzpatrick (R., Pa.) backed the bill. "Our military and intelligence personnel desperately need the right tools to capture, detain, interrogate and put on trial, terrorists who wish to destroy our country and our way of life."
Democrat Patrick Murphy supports the measure. "We need to do everything in our power to bring these terrorists to justice. However, it is unacceptable that the Bush administration and the Republican Congress have waited five years to do so."
SENATE - PENNSYLVANIA
Republican Sen. Rick Santorumvoted for the bill. Congress "must give the president the tools he needs, short of torture, to keep us safe from those who want nothing more than to destroy our way of life."
Democrat Bob Casey Jr. also supports the bill. It allows the government to "detain and interrogate terrorists without putting our troops at risk."
SENATE - NEW JERSEY
Democratic Sen. Robert Menendez voted for the bill. "With the choice of passing an imperfect bill, or allowing the terrorists to go free and the Bush administration to operate without any oversight, I took a stand to protect the American people."
Republican Thomas H. Kean Jr. said he would have voted in favor because the bill "respects the guidelines of the Geneva Convention, and will help us to defeat terrorism."
- Inquirer staff writers Carrie Budoff, Cynthia Burton, Nancy Petersen and Christine Schiavo
Contact staff writer Steve Goldstein at 202-408-2758 or slgoldstein@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document