After Lima Crisis, Skeptics Deplore Japan's Response to Terror
The New York Times
December 17, 1997, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 546 words
Byline: By CALVIN SIMS 

By CALVIN SIMS 
Dateline: TOKYO, Dec. 16
Body


There will be no party this year at the Japanese Embassy in Lima, Peru, to celebrate the birthday of the Emperor.
The Japanese Government is taking no chances after Marxist guerrillas crashed last year's party and took hundreds of guests hostage in a standoff that lasted 127 days.
Japanese diplomatic missions in Bolivia and Egypt, where rebel groups are active, have also canceled receptions to honor the Emperor, while Japanese embassies worldwide have beefed up security.
But experts on terrorism and security say that Japan is no better prepared today to deal with terrorism than it was on Dec. 17, 1996, when Tupac Amaru guerrillas seized the Lima embassy. Although Peruvian commandos ultimately rescued the hostages and killed all 14 rebels, Japan continues to be seen as an easy target because of its history of giving in to hostage takers and its inability to manage crises, the experts said.
"Japan has shown itself woefully inadequate to respond to hostage situations because the Japanese put themselves at the mercy of the aggressor, and they take too long to make decisions," said John Neuffer, a political analyst for the Mitsui Marine Research Institute, an economic research center based in Tokyo.
Indeed, Japan's Government has long been criticized for its slow, consensus-based decision making, which often produces tardy and ineffective responses to calamities from terrorism to natural disasters.
The typical response is to avoid force and win the quick release of the captives, even if it means paying a heavy ransom. Last year, the Sanyo Electric Company paid kidnappers in Mexico a $2 million ransom for the release of a top executive.
In Lima, the Japanese pushed for a peaceful solution, and there were widespread reports that they were prepared to pay millions of dollars in ransom. But President Alberto K. Fujimori, who is of Japanese descent, ultimately employed his autocratic approach and sent in the commandos.
"Unfortunately, the Peru hostage crisis did not change the Japanese approach to terrorism," Mr. Neuffer said. "And unfortunately, it's still open season on the Japanese abroad because there is this sense that they have a lot of cash and they are willing to fork it over to avoid violence."
Shozo Azuma, a member of the opposition New Frontier Party, said that the time has come for Japan to join other countries in a tough response to terrorism. "I don't think that the current Government is utilizing the lessons from the Peru crisis and that is very, very sad," he said.
But officials of Japan's Foreign Affairs Ministry say that the Peru incident brought about heavier security at embassies, increased communications with the intelligence agencies of other countries, and better dissemination of security information to travelers.
Tsutomu Himeno, director of the ministry's division for the prevention of terrorism, said that Japan's policy on hostage-taking has been largely misunderstood and that its guiding principle is to make no concessions while seeking a quick resolution.
"Yes, we place a great value on saving the lives of hostages, but we are not just going to roll over and pay up when someone attacks us," Mr. Himeno said. "Unfortunately that message has not reached the terrorists because we don't have regular contract with them."

Load-Date: December 17, 1997


End of Document