After Killings, Turks Fear a Repeat of the Past
The New York Times
March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 657 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, March 17
Body


The killings of two policemen in January were bad enough. But after gunmen in recent weeks killed a leading lawyer and a prominent newspaper columnist, in street attacks in Ankara and Istanbul, Turks have begun nervously asking themselves whether they are back to the terrorism that led to a military coup in 1980.
The short answer from politicians is no. There is nothing comparable, they say, to the situation in the late 1970's, when about 5,000 people were killed in politically motivated violence and Ankara often resembled not so much a bustling capital as Dodge City.
This time, political leaders are united in condemning terrorism, and there is no evidence of unusual army movements. ''We should be rather immune to worries about losing our democratic system,'' said Erdal Inonu, leader of the main opposition force, the Social Democrat Populist Party.
 
An Unnerving Trend
Still, Turks are painfully aware that since 1960 there has been a military coup here at the start of every decade, and many wonder whether the 1990's will prove an exception. No one has been captured in the shooting of the lawyer, Moammar Aksoy, who headed the Turkish Law Association, or of the journalist, Cetin Emec. But strong statements by both men in favor of Turkish secular traditions have fed speculation that their assailants may have been allied with Islamic fundamentalists, whose numbers have grown in recent years, to the alarm of many Turks.
Violence also comes from other sources. An attack on an Istanbul policeman last Sunday ended with the arrest of two men and a woman described as members of an extremist group called the Revolutionary Communist Party. The next day, the authorities in a province near the Syrian border announced that they had captured five other members of this group who supposedly had plans to assassinate two retired army generals.
In the meantime, Dev Sol, a left-wing organization that was active in the 1970's, took responsibility for one of the police killings in January. Concern has also been expressed about possible comebacks by extremists of both the left and right who were imprisoned for 1970's violence but may be freed soon.
 
Uncertainty at the Top
For many Turks, the terrorism surge is linked to a leadership muddle plaguing the Government since October.
It was then that Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, Turkey's dominant political figure of the last decade, used his Motherland Party's overwhelming majority to have himself elected President by the Parliament. The presidency is essentially a ceremonial job, but its guaranteed seven-year term suited Mr. Ozal, whose popular support in opinion surveys had sunk to about 15 percent.
In his place as party leader and Prime Minister, he installed a loyalist, Yildirim Akbulut. But even though he now holds what is supposed to be the most powerful position, Mr. Akbulut gives no one the impression he is really in charge. ''We deal with the President's office, not the Prime Minister's,'' a Western diplomat said.
This sort of climate breeds political violence, the opposition says.
In reply, Mr. Ozal said in an interview that his critics were exaggerating the terrorist threat and exploiting it for their own purposes. As for the negative opinion polls, he added, they are mostly conducted by hostile newspapers.
But in fact many Turks have blamed Mr. Ozal for their problems, which for most of them are led by an annual inflation rate that while subsiding still lingers above 65 percent.
 
Calls for Prompt Elections
In the latest ballot-box test, nationwide local elections held a year ago, the Motherland Party finished a disastrous third in the popular vote. Seeking to press this advantage, opposition leaders are demanding national elections for now and not 1992, when they are next scheduled.
But at the presidential palace, Mr. Ozal said early elections were not in order, and Mr. Akbulut, who is supposed to have the final say in such matters, seems inclined to agree.


End of Document