AFTER THE ATTACKS: THE OVERVIEW;
PRESIDENT SWEARS TO USE 'ALL TOOLS' AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
August 23, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 1061 words
Byline: By STEVEN LEE MYERS 

By STEVEN LEE MYERS 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22
Body


President Clinton vowed today that the United States would use "all the tools at our disposal" to fight the terrorist network of Osama bin Laden, as the Administration outlined efforts to squeeze him financially after Thursday's American cruise-missile strikes against sites linked to him in Afghanistan and the Sudan.
"Our efforts against terrorism cannot and will not end with this strike," Mr. Clinton declared in his weekly radio address.
As he vacationed with his family on Martha's Vineyard, Mr. Clinton announced publicly that he had signed an executive order, which took effect on Friday, calling for the Treasury Department to block any financial transactions with American companies by Mr. bin Laden, two of his lieutenants and what the United States says is his principal terrorist organization, the Islamic Army.
Nearly 48 hours after the United States attacked a pharmaceutical factory in the Sudan and a remote training camp in Afghanistan with about 75 cruise missiles, the Administration also provided more detail on the damage it said was done to Mr. bin Laden's network.
A day after cloudy weather partly obscured the extent of the damage in Afghanistan, the President's spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said today that satellite photographs showed that the strike hit all six separate sites in the sprawling training camp, situated in a remote, mountainous area about 90 miles south of the capital, Kabul.
A full assessment could take more time, but Mr. McCurry, sticking to the measured claims of the day after the attack, said the strike had caused "moderate to severe" damage to the site's barracks, ammunition depots and other facilities. Mr. bin Laden has used the camp in the past, but his whereabouts remained unclear today.
"We have severely damaged the ability of the Osama bin Laden network to operate from these camps," Mr. McCurry said, speaking to reporters on Martha's Vineyard.
Mr. bin Laden, a Saudi exile accused of underwriting attacks by terrorist groups around the world, is believed to have a fortune exceeding $200 million -- invested in a network of agricultural, construction and financial companies -- which, officials say, helps pay for and conceal terrorist activities.
The President's order, which he signed only hours after the American strikes, places Mr. bin Laden and his associates on a list of terrorists monitored by the Treasury Department. The order prohibits all Americans and American companies from having any financial transactions with them, including business and fund-raising. The order also requires banks to freeze any assets found to belong to them.
The effort is not likely to have a significant impact on Mr. bin Laden's financial empire because, a senior Administration official said, he does not appear to have many assets that would fall under the scope of the law.
"We would not expect this single step to cripple this network any more than we would expect a single military attack against his headquarters in Khost, in Afghanistan, to cripple the network," the official said.
But the official said the Administration hoped that the formal legal step would prompt other countries to help freeze Mr. bin Laden's assets. In his address, the President called for precisely that.
"It takes money -- lots of it -- to build the network bin Laden has," Mr. Clinton said. "We'll do our best to see that he has less of it."
Around the world, reaction to the bombing continued. The Arab League announced today that it would hold a meeting in Cairo on Monday to coordinate support for the Sudan. In Khartoum, the Sudanese capital, another day of protests took place. President Omar Hassan al-Bashir pledged to retaliate for the destruction of a pharmaceutical factory that American officials maintained produced material for chemical weapons.
In Afghanistan, an Italian military officer working for the United Nations died today, a day after he was shot in Kabul, though it was still not clear whether the shooting was related to Thursday's strikes.
In Washington, lawmakers rallied around the President. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, expressed strong support. "The President deserves our support for acting swiftly and decisively," Mr. McCain said in the Republican Party's weekly radio address. "The military strikes he ordered against targets in Afghanistan and Sudan were appropriate."
The President's senior national security advisers -- Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen -- had gone to Congress on Friday to build support. In a classified briefing, they also laid out the evidence the Administration says links Mr. bin Laden to terrorist attacks, including the bombings of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug. 7, which killed 263 people, including 12 Americans.
Senator Dan Coats, a Republican from Indiana who had sharply questioned the timing of the strikes given the controversy over Mr. Clinton's relationship with Monica S. Lewinsky, emerged from Friday's meeting softening his remarks.
"There does appear to be credible evidence to suggest that targeting an Osama bin Laden terrorist training site was necessary," Mr. Coats said.
But he went on to say that Mr. Clinton's behavior had made skepticism about motives and timing of the missile strikes inevitable. "It is the President's private scandal that is leading to the public's skepticism," he said.
In his radio address, Mr. Clinton thanked Congressional leaders for offering bipartisan support for the strikes. He said the United States had "compelling evidence" that Mr. bin Laden's network "was poised to strike at us again -- and soon."
Mr. Clinton emphasized that Islam was not the threat, trying to draw distinctions between the Islamic world in general and what he called "a callous, criminal organization."
"Hundreds of millions of Muslims all over the world -- including millions right here in the United States -- oppose terrorism and deplore the twisting of their religious teachings into justification of inhumane, indeed ungodly, acts," he said.
Although he vowed to press the fight, the President grimly suggested that the strikes were not likely to put an end to Mr. bin Laden's self-proclaimed war on the United States and its interests.
"We should have realistic expectations about what a single action can achieve," he said. "And we must be prepared for a long battle."

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document