After his loss, Trump 'ashamed' of endorsing Georgia governor
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 30, 2020 Monday
MAIN Edition


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 615 words
Body


WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump said Sunday he was "ashamed" for endorsing the Republican governor of Georgia after he lost in the state to Joe Biden.Trump has seethed over losing the southern state, which hadn't voted for a Democrat for president in 28 years. In January, the state will decide whether the GOP retains control of the U.S. Senate when voters decide two runoff Senate races.
Trump said on Fox News that Gov. Brian Kemp has "done absolutely nothing" to question the state's results. Trump has made baseless accusations that illegal votes cost him the election in Georgia and beyond. His legal challenges have failed in several states.
Trump backed Kemp's campaign in 2018, boasting his "full endorsement" helped him edge rising Democratic star Stacey Abrams.
In this month's presidential contest, Biden beat Trump by 12,670 votes.
Democrats hope for two other upset victories in twin Senate races on Jan. 5 against Republican office holders. That would deny Republicans their majority, keeping the GOP with 50 seats, while Vice President-elect Kamala Harris would be available for tie-breaking votes.
Democrat Jon Ossoff is challenging Sen. David Perdue while Rev. Raphael Warnock takes on Sen., Kelly Loeffler. No candidate won at least 50% of the vote share in this month's election, leading to the head-to-head runoffs.
Ossoff said Sunday that a Republican-controlled Senate will hit the Biden administration with the same "obstructionism" it mounted against former President Barack Obama.
"It will be paralysis, partisan trench warfare," he told CNN. "At a moment of crisis, when we need strong action."
On Fox News, Loeffler said GOP victories would be a "firewall to socialism" and the Democratic policies of Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer. It is Loeffler's first election cycle after Gov. Kemp appointed her to the seat in January when her predecessor, Sen. Johnny Isakson, resigned.
On Saturday, Trump plans to arrive in the state he lost to campaign for the GOP incumbents.
"We're making sure that Georgians are fired up to turn out to vote," Loeffler said. "If we vote, we will win this election."
Kushner will lead U.S. delegation to Middle East
as regional tensions rise
WASHINGTON - Jared Kushner, senior adviser to President Donald Trump, will travel to Saudi Arabia and Qatar this week in a bid to ease tensions in the region, including the ongoing rift between Qatar and its neighbors.
Kushner, who's also Trump's son-in-law, will first go to Neom, Saudi Arabia, according to two people familiar with the matter.
His visit comes weeks after Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu met there with U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and, according to Israeli media, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman.
Kushner's team hopes to make progress on a three-year rift between Qatar and other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council over allegations from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates that Qatar supports terrorism.
The U.S. team recently helped negotiate three normalization agreements in the Middle East, and discussions about a similar deal between Saudi Arabia and Israel are likely to come up.
People familiar with his schedule say Kushner met last week with Kuwaiti foreign minister Sheikh Ahmad Nasser al-Mohammad al-Sabah, who has played an important role in recent mediation efforts.
The trip also comes in the aftermath of Friday's assassination of top nuclear scientist Mohsen Fakhrizadeh in Tehran, which has roiled regional relations yet again.
Expected to travel with Kushner will be White House envoy Avi Berkowitz, International Development Finance Corporation chief Adam Boehler, and former Iran envoy Brian Hook.
From wire reports

Load-Date: November 30, 2020


End of Document