After 5 Years, Padilla Goes On Trial In Terror Case - Correction Appended
The New York Times
May 15, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 836 words
Byline: By ABBY GOODNOUGH
Dateline: MIAMI, May 14 
Body


The trial of Jose Padilla, the American convert to Islam charged with conspiring to support terrorism, opened Monday with federal prosecutors describing what they called a calculated plan to provide money, equipment and recruits to Al Qaeda.
  Brian K. Frazier, an assistant United States attorney, spent a good part of his opening arguments defining terms like ''terrorism support cell,'' ''jihad'' and ''mujahedeen'' for the jury of seven men and five women.
Mr. Frazier described one of Mr. Padilla's two co-defendants, Adham Hassoun, as a zealot who ''indoctrinated people and converted them to become Al Qaeda fighters,'' and the other, Kifah Jayyousi, as ''the money man'' who provided financing and equipment to terrorist groups overseas. 
  Mr. Frazier said Mr. Padilla, who was declared an enemy combatant soon after his arrest in 2002 but was eventually moved to the criminal justice system, had gone even further, traveling to a training camp in Afghanistan. 
  ''We will prove that Jose Padilla became an Al Qaeda terrorist trainee,'' Mr. Frazier said.
  Mr. Padilla was described after his arrest as an operative of Al Qaeda plotting to detonate a radioactive ''dirty bomb'' in the United States. But that charge does not figure in the case being tried before Judge Marcia G. Cooke of the Federal District Court here, because, the government has said, it obtained the information by questioning other terrorism suspects abroad and interrogating Mr. Padilla during his initial confinement at a military brig in South Carolina. Federal rules of evidence prohibit or limit the use of information obtained during such interrogations.
  Mr. Padilla's detention without charges lasted more than three years and became a test case of President Bush's powers in the fight against terror. The government transferred him to civilian custody in Miami in 2005, just as the Supreme Court was weighing whether to take up the legality of his military detention. With the transfer, prosecutors added his case to those of Mr. Hassoun, a Lebanese-born Palestinian computer programmer, and Dr. Jayyousi, a Jordanian-born engineer.
  The trial is being conducted under heavy security. Federal marshals have been brought in from around the country to help protect the courthouse, and a bomb-sniffing dog from Rochester was outside the courtroom Monday.
  Mr. Padilla and the other defendants, dressed in dark suits and blending in with their lawyers, sat quietly through the day's proceedings, following attentively. 
  Mr. Frazier, the prosecutor, gave a history lesson of sorts, describing ethnic and religious conflicts in Lebanon, Somalia, Kosovo and Chechnya. He said Al Qaeda had sent recruits to those regions, using the conflicts to advance its own violent agenda. 
  Al Qaeda ''needed people who were willing to fight and even kill'' for Islamic fundamentalism, he said -- people like the three defendants. Their ''South Florida support cell,'' he said, ''fit right into this pattern of training, equipping and deploying Islamic fighters all over the world.''
  As evidence, he said, the jurors will see an application that Mr. Padilla filled out -- in Arabic, under an alias -- to attend a terrorist training camp. He said they would also hear many of the defendants' phone conversations, thousands of which were recorded by the F.B.I. from 1993 to 2000. ''The phone calls will tell the story of this case,'' Mr. Frazier said.
  Defense lawyers said their clients were merely passionate and vocal Muslims with no connection to Al Qaeda and no intent to support terrorism. The government's case is politically motivated, they said, and was fueled by the nation's dread following 9/11.
  ''In this case,'' said Anthony Natale, a lawyer for Mr. Padilla, ''you will see how in the absence of hard evidence, a suspicion can be fueled by fear, nourished by prejudice and directed by politics into a criminal prosecution.''
  Jeanne Baker, a lawyer for Mr. Hassoun, said the government had cherry-picked certain words and phrases from the recorded phone calls. ''The government really is trying to put Al Qaeda on trial in this case,'' Ms. Baker said, ''and it doesn't belong in this courtroom because it has nothing to do with the true facts.''
  She and other defense lawyers said that in fact their clients had only been trying to help Muslims who were under attack in the 1990s in places like Kosovo and Chechnya. In that context, Ms. Baker said, words like mujahedeen and jihad have positive connotations and nothing to do with terrorism. 
  Mr. Padilla, now 36, made his first visit to a Muslim country, Egypt, in 1998. He did so only because he wanted to become an imam, said Mr. Natale, who, like the other defense lawyers, dismissed the government's accusation of a conspiracy to ''murder, kidnap and maim'' people overseas. ''As you will hear clearly and without a doubt,'' he said, ''there were no victims in this case, real or imagined.''
  Testimony will begin on Tuesday. The trial is expected to last at least three months.  

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


A caption with an article on May 15 about the trial of Jose Padilla, who is charged with conspiring to support terrorism, incorrectly rendered the name of his mother, who was shown outside federal court in Miami. She is Estela Ortega-Lebron, not Estrela Ortega. The article also misstated the year of his transfer from military custody to civilian custody. It was 2006, not 2005.
Correction-Date: May 30, 2007

Graphic

 
Photo: Jose Padilla's mother, Estrela Ortega of Broward County, Fla., outside federal court in Miami yesterday. (Photo by Lynne Sladky/Associated Press)                                                    

Load-Date: May 15, 2007


End of Document