Aftershocks of the attacks changed 'everything' for law enforcement
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 11, 2016 Sunday
2 Edition


Copyright 2016 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPECIAL; Pg. 6T
Length: 1235 words
Byline: MARK BOWES Richmond TimesDispatch
Body


Steve Lambert was a state police sergeant waiting to testify in a Caroline County criminal case when news of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks began to circulate.
Anxious and distressed, he drove back to a local state police field office where he could tune in the news during a lunch break in the trial.
 A number of state troopers headed to the Pentagon that day to assist with the unfolding tragedy, while Lambert, then a 37-year-old road trooper, stayed in Caroline to patrol and protect.
 "I was thinking to myself, 'This changes everything,'" Lambert said of the attack's impact on law enforcement. "And from that day on, and in my career, a lot of things have changed for me.
 "The only thing that I did not realize on that day was how dramatically it would change."
 ***
 In a matter of a few years, Lambert would become commander of Virginia State Police's criminal intelligence division and oversee the state's premier counterterrorism operation, the Virginia Fusion Center, housed at state police headquarters on Midlothian Turnpike.
 The collection, analysis and dissemination of information that could be vital in thwarting a future terrorist attack is among the most significant changes that have reshaped the way Virginia law enforcement agencies now operate in the 15 years since 9/11. Enhanced training for police, the community and the private sector have been other significant developments.
 "What we've tried to do is raise the IQ of our police officers in that realm," said Richmond police Capt. John O'Kleasky, commander of the department's special operations unit, which includes Homeland Security. "We train all our personnel on how to investigate drug crimes, gang crimes, robberies - all of the traditional criminal activity. But since 9/11, we've injected one more layer into the policing package, and that would be in matters related to homeland security or terrorism."
 As with Lambert, the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks made a lasting impression on O'Kleasky and changed the mindset of law enforcement by redefining how officers do their jobs.
 "When the planes hit the towers, I was in the University of Richmond library," O'Kleasky recalled. "And I guess for me personally, it seemed like it was sort of (the start) of a new day. "It was a very ominous feeling and one that felt like - at least from the law enforcement level - that we were going to be faced with a threat that we maybe weren't familiar with. This was going to be a new challenge in the law enforcement spectrum."
 O'Kleasky also recalled the fear the attacks spawned in the community in the immediate aftermath.
 "They didn't know what to do," he said. "I think in some cases, local law enforcement didn't know what to do. It was a strange feeling."
 Along with an increased emphasis on gathering and sharing of intelligence, Richmond police applied the positive attributes of the department's community policing program to boost homeland security for the city.
 "Building strong relationships with the community and working collaboratively to problem-solve our traditional crimes - we use that same template for counterterrorism and for homeland security to identify individuals ... who may pose a threat to our citizenry," O'Kleasky said.
 Police also have increased the level of education and training - not only for police officers but for the private sector and the community at large.
 The goal, he said, is to "get the most eyes and ears out there to just basically trip up on something that may lead us in the right direction to mitigate a terrorist attack or some kind of mass-casualty event."
 On the law enforcement side, police throughout central Virginia participate in events such as the Richmond FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force conference held this summer at the University of Richmond. In addition, representatives of the National Counterterrorism Center, based in McLean, traveled to Richmond to conduct a daylong seminar at the Richmond Police Academy.
 There are also new public safety strategies for major events - such as last year's UCI Road World Championships cycling event - that are "totally different than how we did it 15 years ago," O'Kleasky said.
 ***
 Local police agencies point to the Virginia Fusion Center as one of the most game-changing new law enforcement tools to emerge after 9/11.
 "The No. 1 change (since 9/11) is intelligence-gathering and sharing," said Capt. Gerald Netherland, who heads homeland security and emergency preparedness for Chesterfield County police.
 "Our communication has grown and been enhanced by things like the fusion centers. All of that intelligence is coming in and being put together. The pieces are all coming from various police departments and various federal agencies, so now it becomes a much clearer picture and can be shared so much easier."
 Richmond police integrate the Virginia Fusion Center into all facets of their duties, including traditional crime fighting and major events and protests, O'Kleasky said.
 "If there's large-scale protest or demonstration we're aware of, for instance, generally the fusion center is on board with us from the beginning," he said.
 At the recent "Fight for $15" national conference and rally that brought thousands of workers from across the country to Richmond, city police worked with the fusion center to provide officers with hourly situational reports and updates on the size of the crowd. The center was used in similar fashion during the UCI Worlds.
 The fusion center, one of 78 now in the U.S., opened in 2005 as an intelligence network that made the sharing of critical information the rule, not the exception, in criminal investigations and major events such as terrorist attacks. The center operates on a $5.3 million annual budget - $900,000 of which is federally funded.
 The number of information requests to the fusion center from law enforcement, the military, regulatory agencies and private entities such as Dominion Power has grown steadily over the years - from 2,715 in 2013 to 3,765 last year. Federal law enforcement agencies made 45 percent of those requests, followed by 18 percent by Virginia police agencies and 14 percent by Virginia State Police.
 In addition, the fusion center receives for further investigation or review an average of 30 to 50 "suspicious activity reports" each month. Precise annual figures are not publicly available for operational and security reasons.
 Those reports are generated through what's known as Fusion Liaison Officer Program. The fusion center advises participants in government and the private sector "exactly what we're interested in, exactly how to report it, and exactly what you can expect from us in return," Lambert said.
 In addition to calling, anyone can report suspicious behavior through the fusion center's "See Something, Send Something" smart phone app or terrorism hotline.
 Lambert noted that it was a fusion liaison officer who first notified analysts at the center about recent online threat to Virginia Tech and several other universities.
 "We know that the threat came from outside the country or a spoofed IP address," Lambert said. "We wanted to put that out and tell folks (that) we know this is going on - that we're very much aware of it and we believe this to be a low threat and we're not concerned for the safety of the schools right now. This is just a tangible example of what we do."
 mbowes@timesdispatch.com
 (804) 649-6450

Graphic

 
Law enforcement agencies in Virginia interact often and place a premium on gathering, sharing and analyzing information and intelligence.  "What we've tried to do is raise the IQ of our police officers" in the realm of homeland security and anti-terrorism activity, said Richmond police Capt. John O'Kleasky. ALEXA WELCH EDLUND/times-dispatch Law enforcement agencies in Virginia interact often and place a premium on gathering, sharing and analyzing information and intelligence. "What we've tried to do is raise the IQ of our police officers" in the realm of homeland security and anti-terrorism activity, said Richmond police Capt. John O'Kleasky. ALEXA WELCH EDLUND/times-dispatch 9/11/2016: Law enforcement agencies in Virginia interact often and place a premium on gathering, sharing and analyzing information and intelligence. "What we've tried to do is raise the IQ of our police officers" in the realm of homeland security and anti-terrorism activity, said Richmond police Capt. John O'Kleasky. ALEXA WELCH EDLUND/times-dispatch Law enforcement agencies in Virginia interact often and place a premium on gathering, sharing and analyzing information and intelligence. "What we've tried to do is raise the IQ of our police officers" in the realm of homeland security and anti-terrorism activity, said Richmond police Capt. John O'Kleasky. ALEXA WELCH EDLUND/times-dispatch

Load-Date: September 12, 2016


End of Document