AGCA SAYS BULGARIA ABETTED A TERRORIST GROUP IN TURKEY
The New York Times
June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 619 words
Byline: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, June 6
Body


The Turkish terrorist who shot and wounded Pope John Paul II testified today that members of the Turkish underworld, working with the Bulgarian authorities, helped finance terrorism to undermine Turkey's civilian Government in the late 1970's.
The Turk, Mehmet Ali Agca, who is serving a life term for the assassination attempt in 1981, also told a court here that he was trained in the art of terrorism, including the use of guns and bombs, in 1977 at a Syrian camp in Latakia that was run by Bulgarians and Czechoslovaks under the direction of the Syrian secret service.
Lifting his voice, and speaking of the Syrian experience as if enunciating a formal pronouncement, he added: ''I learned with certainty that the political and financial center of international terrorism was the Soviet Union.''
Mehmet Ali Agca, Turkish terrorist serving life term for attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, testifies that members of Turkish underworld, working with Bulgarian authorities, helped finance terrorism to undermine Turkey's civilian Government in late 1970's; says he was trained in art of terrorism in 1977 at Syrian camp in Latakia that was run by Bulgarians and Czechoslovaks under direction of Syrian secret service (M)Some Discrepancies in Details
Mr. Agca is on trial with four other Turks and three Bulgarians on conspiracy charges growing out of the attempt on the life of the Polish-born Pope. The implication of the prosecution's case has been that the purported involvement of Bulgaria in a conspiracy means that the Soviet Union may have abetted the attempt on the Pope's life. Both Bulgaria and the Soviet Union have denied playing any role.
Parts of Mr. Agca's testimony today differed in detail from previous accounts given by him to investigators.
In one departure, Mr. Agca, in describing a letter sent in 1979 to the Turkish newspaper Milliyet, in which he said he intended to kill the Pope, said: ''It was my idea, my decision.'' In earlier accounts generally accepted by the prosecution, Mr. Agca said the idea to kill the Pope in 1981 came from Bulgaria.
Today Mr. Agca, speaking partly in Italian and partly in Turkish through an interpreter, described how he joined a group of right-wing extremists while a student at Ankara University in 1977.
After switching to Istanbul University in 1978, Mr. Agca said, he helped set up a kind of terrorist club, around a nucleus of seven or eight people, with as many as 50 supporters, whose ideas and organization were linked to the Gray Wolves, the youth arm of the right-wing National Action Party.
But instead of a terrorist group, Mr. Agca seemed to portray a band of petty criminals, involved in acts of political violence, but also in smuggling and in the sale of counterfeit goods.
When asked by Judge Santiapichi for specific examples of terrorist activity, Mr. Agca thought long before coming up with a little-publicized bomb attack on Turkey's constitutional court, which he described as ''contrary to the Turkish nation, to the personality and the national aspirations of the country.''
 
Source of Funds Described
Describing the means used by him and his associates in Istanbul to finance their activities, Mr. Agca listed ''extortions, threats, bank robberies.''
Some, he said, worked together with Abuzer Ugurlu, whom he described as a Turkish Mafia leader linked to the Bulgarian secret service, to smuggle cigarettes and counterfeit watches, which he said Mr. Ugurlu made in a factory in Varna, Bulgaria.
''I was in Bulgaria several times,'' he said. ''I saw that Ugurlu had a factory, shares in companies that organized arms and drug smuggling, also counterfeiting in every area of industrial production, all controlled by the Bulgarian state.''


End of Document