Agencies cancel terrorism-response training after attacks
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
September 16, 2001, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 526 words
Byline: JACK SULLIVAN, Associated Press
Body


Federal grants should cover $ 12,000 cost to rescheduledrill
 FARGO -- Terrorism has transfixed the nation for almost a week, but police, firefighters and paramedics here had planned earlier to think the unthinkable during a drill.
 'The scenario we had planned for Sunday really had to do with weapons of mass destruction, with numerous casualties,' Fargo Fire Chief Bruce Hoover said.
 The four-hour drill was to involve 125 people and cap nine months of training on how to respond to the unlikely event of a terrorist attack in the area, Cass County Emergency Manager Greg McDonald said.
It was called off Wednesday, after McDonald and other organizers realized the aftershocks of Tuesday's terrorist attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were pulling away National Guard personnel and federal law enforcement officers who had planned to participate.
 McDonald himself is now on duty with the North Dakota Air National Guard, which was activated Thursday.
 He said local emergency agencies have been trained on how to respond to chemical and biological weapons or large bombs that hurt or kill large numbers of people. The drill was to put that training into practice.
 Cass County is not alone. Bismarck agencies also have practiced disaster scenarios, and 30 officials from across North Dakota have been trained to teach people they work with how to handle catastrophic situations, said Doug Friez, director of the state Division of Emergency Management.
 'At the state level, and certainly at most local governments, there are procedures that have been established in terms of initial response to these sort of things,' Friez said.
 He cautioned that the training does not reflect any known threat. 'We want to reassure people that we're prepared' without raising false fears of any real risk, he said.
 'Being ready for war is a difficult thing,' he said.
 McDonald said federal grants aimed to encourage terrorism-response training will cover the $ 12,000 cost of the Fargo drill when it is rescheduled.
 The canceled scenario: An explosion releases poison at the Fargodome.
 The Fargo Fire Department would likely be the first agency on the scene and would be in control until the fire is out and the last injured person is removed from the building. Then control shifts to law enforcement agencies, as the disaster becomes a crime scene, McDonald said.
 A hazardous-material team that serves Fargo and neighboring Moorhead, Minn., has devices to detect and clear poison, McDonald said.
 The Air National Guard has similar devices and planned to participate in the drill, Master Sgt. David Somdahl said.
 The terrorism drill would not be the only disaster response practiced. Hoover said airports are required to hold regular drills with emergency workers on how to respond to plane crashes.
 In the number of people and agencies involved, however, the canceled event 'probably would have been the biggest drill done in the area,' Hoover said.
 Somdahl said the drill prepares for a scenario that appears more realistic than it was one week ago.
 'I never anticipated thousands of people dying in the middle of Manhattan,' he said. 'But it has happened.'

Load-Date: September 17, 2001


End of Document