AGENCIES ILL-PREPARED FOR TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 28, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. C2
Length: 347 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- If -- some say when -- a terrorist group sets off a chemical, biological or nuclear weapon in America, it will be local firefighting, police and emergency medical teams that will have to cope with it.
And they're not prepared, one fire official says.
It will be "local fire and emergency service organizations … who have to pick up the pieces" after efforts to prevent a terrorist attack have failed, Fire Chief Lamont Ewell of Oakland, Calif., said at a Senate hearing Wednesday."Of the overall government efforts to prevent and respond to terrorist incidents, these local fire, law enforcement and emergency medical services agencies are the least prepared to respond to a chemical or biological terrorist incident," said Ewell, who is president of the International Association of Fire Chiefs.
Federal agencies, while somewhat better trained and equipped, are hampered by turf battles, the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations found as it studied America's preparedness for a terrorist explosion of a chemical, biological or nuclear weapon.
It's not an idle concern, said the report written by the committee's Democratic staff at the direction of Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga.
"It is not a matter of if' but rather when' such an event will occur," the report said. "Many of the terrorist groups of today appear more likely to utilize weapons of mass destruction."
They have a wide choice of weaponry, as shown by the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, in which terrorists unsuccessfully tried to use sodium cyanide in an attempt to kill everyone in the north tower; the Tokyo subway gassing last March; and the Oklahoma City federal building bombing last April. The availability of nuclear material from the former Soviet Union is also a concern.Training exercises in New York and Los Angeles demonstrate how overwhelmed rescue workers who were first on the scene would be, the report said.
In a New York gas attack exercise last April, most of the first 100 or more rescue workers "were, theoretically, killed' by the gas since they were totally unprepared," the report said.

Load-Date: March 28, 1996


End of Document