Agency prompts farm states to plan for terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 30, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4C
Length: 377 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


OMAHA, Neb. - In the rural Midwest, people tend to live by a different set of rules. They trust their neighbors. They leave their tractors and livestock out in the open. They don't lock their doors.
That's going to have to change, a top U.S. Department of Agriculture official said Monday.
"It's going to take a lot to change the mindset of a lot of people," said Jim Moseley, deputy U.S. agriculture secretary. "The threats are real. Nine-eleven was not the end. Nine-eleven was the beginning."
Moseley spoke before a crowd of about 150 representatives from 13 states at the Midwest Governors' Conference summit on agricultural terrorism. Speakers at the two-day summit led by Nebraska Gov. Mike Johanns and Missouri Gov. Bob Holden included scientific experts and federal and state officials.
"Located in the Heartland, we have never felt we were the target of our foreign enemies," said Moseley, a former Indiana pork producer. "I have to tell you with all sincerity, this is one farmer who now understands the risk."
The summit's genesis can be traced more than a year ago to the outbreak in Europe of the fatal livestock disease foot-and-mouth. Then came the terrorist attacks last fall.
"We quickly realized the importance of collaboration," said Johanns, chairman of the Midwest Governors' Conference.
Some farm states already have taken steps. Holden noted he signed into law this year a measure that makes agriculture terrorism, such as spreading diseases among livestock, a felony in Missouri.
Other Midwestern states must also begin building an infrastructure to protect the nation's farms and food supply against terrorist attacks, said Holden, vice chairman of the conference.
Kent Kutnink, a Kansas City, Mo.-based regulatory manager with farm chemical distributor Agriliance LLC of St. Paul, Minn., said farmers can take simple steps to prevent terrorism.
"That could mean having a fence around a locked building that contains your chemicals, and locking up your most … volatile chemicals within the locked building," Kutnink said. "That's three barriers of protection."
Members of the Midwest Governors' Conference besides Nebraska and Missouri are Kansas, North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan, Indiana, Ohio and Kentucky.

Load-Date: July 31, 2002


End of Document