Agent: FBI not ready for terrorism if Iraq attacked
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 7, 2003 Friday 4 State / Suncoast Edition


Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A; DIGEST
Length: 343 words
Series: NOTEBOOK
Dateline: ST. PAUL, Minn.; SAN FRANCISCO
Body


The Minneapolis FBI agent who exposed Sept. 11-related intelligence failures has told her boss she doesn't think the agency will be able to handle terrorism that could follow a war with Iraq.
Agent Coleen Rowley outlined her concerns in a seven-page letter sent to FBI director Robert Mueller last month.
The nation's internal security "has been weakened by the diversion of attention from al-Qaida to our government's plan to invade Iraq, a step that will, in all likelihood, bring an exponential increase in the terrorist threat to the U.S., both at home and abroad," Rowley wrote.
Compiled from Times Wires
She added: "The bottom line is this. We should be deluding neither ourselves nor the American people that there is any way the FBI, despite the various improvements you are implementing, will be able to stem the flood of terrorism that will likely head our way in the wake of an attack on Iraq."
The letter is wide-ranging, variously questioning what evidence there is to link al-Qaida to Iraq and the veracity of a statement that there are 5,000 terrorists in the country. It also questions why the FBI has not investigated links between Zacarias Moussaoui, the person arrested in Minnesota and accused of conspiring with the Sept. 11 hijackers, and Richard Reid, convicted of trying to blow up a plane by igniting explosives in his shoes.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer discounted Rowley's latest letter, saying the administration heard the same warning about attacking Afghanistan and the Taliban.
 
Lindh bruised in attack
 
in prison, attorney says
SAN FRANCISCO - John Walker Lindh, the American imprisoned for taking up arms for the Taliban in Afghanistan, was attacked by a fellow inmate and slightly bruised, his attorney said Thursday.
Law enforcement authorities confirmed the 21-year-old Lindh was attacked but would not disclose a possible motive.
The incident happened Monday night at the medium-security federal prison in Victorville as Lindh was preparing to pray, said his lawyer, Tony West.
Lindh suffered a bruise on his forehead, West said.

Load-Date: March 7, 2003


End of Document