AGENCIES IN NEED OF ANTI-TERRORISM TRAINING, STERK SAYS;
 SHERIFF SAYS EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO POSSIBLE ANTHRAX THREAT TOO SLOW
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
February 24, 1999, Wednesday,
SPOKANE EDITION


Copyright 1999 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS,
Length: 725 words
Byline: Bill Morlin Staff writer
Body


The elected official who directs emergency services for Spokane County called for multi-agency training Tuesday to better respond to possible terrorist incidents.
Sheriff Mark Sterk said too much time elapsed Monday in handling a potential anthrax threat letter received at a Spokane Valley clinic.
Dispatch logs show that almost two hours elapsed from the time of the initial 911 call until hazardous materials experts got to the scene.
''My preference would be that it would be a quicker response,'' said Sterk, who directs the county-city Department of Emergency Management.
The sheriff didn't single out any of the four agencies involved.
Ron Bassen, deputy chief of the City Fire Department, also said the agencies took too long to respond.
''I don't think the response times are acceptable,'' he said.
At the Valley Fire Department, Assistant Chief David Lobdell didn't necessarily agree.
''The tiered response may have been too slow, or may not,'' Lobdell said. ''Emergency responders must take into consideration the risk at hand as well as the risk of stripping all of the resources from other areas of the community.''
The response started with a 911 dispatcher, then went to a sheriff's deputy, to his supervisor, to the Valley Fire Department and ultimately to the city Fire Department's hazardous materials team.
The incident began when John Nugent, local director of Planned Parenthood, called 911 Monday morning to report that a dental office leasing space in Planned Parenthood's Valley building received a letter he believed threatened anthrax contamination.
Anthrax threat letters have been received at 17 other abortion and family planning clinics throughout the country in the past week. All are believed to have been hoaxes.
Nugent said an employee at the dental office told him the envelope was addressed to the ''Director of Medical Operations'' and contained a small amount of a powdery substance.
Law enforcement officials said Tuesday that the envelope contained only a ''brown smudge'' and no powdery substance. The envelope is being processed in a laboratory as the FBI investigates who may have mailed it.
Nugent said that after he arrived at the scene, he was threatened with arrest when he offered a sheriff's deputy and a firefighter Planned Parenthood literature about anthrax exposure.
Planned Parenthood clinics throughout the nation have been targets of such threats, and the organization's security officials are well-versed on the topic.
Nugent also said he offered the number of the National Response Center, a national clearinghouse for such emergencies.
Nugent said he called the National Response Center from his cell phone and offered the call to the local authorities at the scene.
''They told me it could have been my dad on the phone, and they weren't interested,'' he said.
Spokane Valley Fire Department Chief Pat Humphries defended his agency's response and said authorities have their own procedures for handling possible hazardous materials.
''Part of dealing with a situation like this is leaving it alone before deciding what to do,'' he said.
Humphries said anthrax threats are a new type of terrorism, and local and federal agencies are working to develop procedures for handling them.
He also said anthrax is relatively hard to spread through inhalation, so a more patient response might be appropriate.
Valley firefighters were on the scene for 18 minutes before deciding they weren't equipped to handle a potentially contaminated letter.
Valley firefighters can respond to Level I hazardous materials incidents, those involving petroleum products or pesticides. More serious calls must be referred to the city's regional hazardous materials team.
Sterk said the incident ''points to the need for training'' and better coordination between various emergency response agencies.
For starters, the sheriff ordered immediate training for his department's deputies who may be the first on the scene of an incident involving ''weapons of mass destruction.''
''This is a whole new ballgame for us,'' Sterk said. ''We need some training, and we're going to do it.''
After his deputies are trained, Sterk said he will push for ''table-top exercises'' involving various agencies, including Valley Fire, the State Patrol, the Department of Ecology, private ambulance companies, the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

Notes


Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or by e-mail at billm@spokesman.com.  
 This sidebar appeared with the story:
 RESPONSE TIME LINE
 Here are the emergency response times for Monday's possible anthrax threat letter:
 8:29 a.m. - John Nugent, president of the local chapter of Planned Parenthood, calls 911 and reports that a possible anthrax threat letter has been received at Sprague and Pines at a building owned by the agency.
 8:38 a.m. - The 911 dispatcher contacts a sheriff's deputy on duty in the Valley and tells him to call back on a secure telephone line. The deputy makes the call a few minutes later, but the time isn't logged.
 9:04 a.m. - The deputy arrives at the Planned Parenthood building and goes to an office where the letter was received. The letter is isolated in an empty room.
 9:21 a.m. - After conferring with a sheriff's sergeant, the deputy has 911 call Spokane Valley Fire Department.
 9:26 a.m. - Valley firefighters arrive at the scene.
 9:44 a.m. - Valley firefighters decide they can't handle the hazardous material and call the city's regional hazardous materials team.
 9:50 a.m. - The city haz-mat team leaves its station in downtown Spokane after two team members return from a paramedic call.
 10:06 a.m. - The Washington State Patrol is called.
 10:16 a.m. - The FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms are called.
 10:20 a.m. - The haz-mat team arrives at the scene, after traveling to the Valley on the freeway with lights and sirens on.
 12:43 p.m. - The suspicious letter is removed in a sealed container.

Load-Date: February 25, 1999


End of Document