AGENTS TRY TO DEFEAT TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 28, 1996, Sunday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: COMMENTARY,; (lcs) BOOK REVIEW
Length: 433 words
Byline: Reviewed by; BRUCE SIMON; Bruce Simon is a Richmond freelance writer.
Body


THE ENEMY WITHIN, by Larry Bond; Warner Books, $ 22.95.
A seasoned writer and former naval analyst, Larry Bond has enthralled audiences with his timely novels centering on alternative geopolitical projections. From a rejuvenated Korea to a European coalition headed by a powerful Germany, his tales contain a haunting, unsettling believability. In his new novel, The Enemy Within, he concentrates on the ominous prospect of domestic terrorism.
The explosion of a tanker rigged with explosives and detonated by an Islamic suicide squad near San Francisco is a potent introduction to a story that does not lessen in its intensity. Following this tragedy, the United States promptly issues retaliatory missile strikes on Iran, the country that sponsored the terrorist attack.
Almost immediately, Iran begins to make diplomatic overtures to the United States. A Delta Force Commander, Peter Thorn, is dispatched by the Pentagon to verify the legitimacy of Iranian intentions. The head of the Iranian military regime, Colonel Amir Taleh, was a boyhood companion of Thorn when his family was stationed in Tehran.
TALEH IS a career officer who has survived lengthy imprisonment, first under the Shah, then under the Islamic Revolutionary Council, because of their distrust after he studied at American universities. Taleh demonstrates his sincerity to Thorn's satisfaction by annihilating radical terrorist strongholds throughout Iran. Following Taleh's purging, a dangerous cycle of events gets underway that could ultimately wreck the fragile relationship between the U.S. and Iran.
A secret abandoned Army base in the Middle East is renovated to attract Moslem mercenaries and commandos worldwide for grueling training sessions.  In the U.S., a temple is assaulted by a neo-Nazi fringe group bearing weapons of Middle Eastern origin. At the National Press Club, a horrendous act of genocide occurs with the principal victim being an aspiring black presidential candidate.
Thorn, reluctantly transferred to a Pentagon counter-terrorism installation, is assigned to analyze and find the source of this menace. He works with Helen Gray of the FBI Hostage Rescue Team to unmask a plan to paralyze the U.S. that may be traced to the Iranian cabinet. The plan may directly involve Amir Taleh.
The author, a strong advocate of military preparedness, writes crisply. Though The Enemy Within does not try to intimidate or alarm readers, it is cautionary nevertheless. The novel poses a plausible scenario few care to contemplate and yet, because of the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings, it must be considered.

Load-Date: April 30, 1996


End of Document