Agencies fight hunger in Afghanistan This year, centers battling malnutrition across the country will feed 100,000 children and 35,000 pregnant or breast-feeding women. WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 21, 2009 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 336 words
Byline: By ALFRED de MONTESQUIOU • The Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


AQCHA, Afghanistan - While international forces in Afghanistan battle militants hiding in the mountains, aid agencies are fighting an even more elusive enemy: malnutrition.
The World Food Program and UNICEF have launched a project to feed thousands of mothers and children - some too weak to cry. Aid workers hope a high-protein diet distributed through a network of village clinics can help them through the winter.
Despite the billions spent in Afghanistan since the 2001 U.S.-led invasion to oust the Taliban, the country is still comparable to the worst humanitarian crisis zones in Africa. Afghanistan has the world's highest maternal mortality rate and the second-highest child mortality rate - and hunger is a major reason why, the United Nations says. This year, centers across the country will feed 100,000 children and 35,000 pregnant or breast-feeding women.
Dozens of mothers, many clad in burqas, crouched in the clinic in Aqcha waiting for rations. The room was eerily silent except for gusts of wind that howled through the open door. Dozens of toddlers in their arms didn't make a sound.
"Most of the children are too tired and hungry, they don't have the energy to cry," said Dr. Nasrullah Sulfane, who oversees the program here.
The mothers received their weekly ration: 0.88 ounces of cooking oil with 7.58 ounces of corn and soya flour per child. The food doesn't cover all the children's needs, but it aims to provide the extra calories needed to avert the worst consequences of hunger.
The program was launched in August amid widespread security concerns because Afghanistan's insurgents have increasingly tended to target aid workers. There also were worries that conservative villagers would not let their women go to the feeding centers, where they might encounter foreigners regularly. That didn't happen in Aqcha, a remote town lost on the barren steppes of northern Afghanistan.
"So far, attendance is a real success," Sulfane said. "I think all the families understand the benefits of free food."

Load-Date: December 21, 2009


End of Document