AGENTS SEARCH THREE OFFICES OF MUSLIM GROUPS IN U.S.;
 ORGANIZATION DENIES LINKS TO TERRORISM; RAIDS ARE IN CHICAGO AND NEW JERSEY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 16, 2001 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 561 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: BRIDGEVIEW, ILL.
Body


One of two Muslim organizations based in suburban Chicago denied Saturday that it had links to terrorism after government officials raided the offices.
The Global Relief Foundation in Bridgeview and the Benevolence International Foundation in Palos Hills, Ill., were searched Friday, FBI spokeswoman Ebony Harrel said. No one was arrested.
Another search was conducted Friday at a Benevolence International Foundation office in Newark, N.J., the Customs Service said. No one was arrested.
"If they're investigating terrorism, they're not going to find anything here," said Roger Simmons, an attorney for Global Relief. Whatever the government is doing "is a terrible, terrible, terrible, tragic mistake," he said.
The government has frozen the assets of both groups, the U.S. Treasury Department said.
Officials said the searches were conducted by the Treasury Department, the FBI and the Customs Department.
A message left at the Benevolence International Foundation was not immediately returned.
Treasury Department spokesman Tony Fratto said the raids were conducted under the authority of the Patriot Act, signed by President George W. Bush on Oct. 26. The law gives federal agents broad new powers to detain immigrants, eavesdrop on telephone calls and e-mails and share sensitive details of criminal investigations with the CIA.
The search warrants were served the same day that NATO-led peacekeeping troops and United Nations police raided two Global Relief Foundation offices in Yugoslavia.
Global Relief issued a statement Friday denying any link to terrorist activities and lamenting the seizure of resources used to prevent "the slow starvation and gruesome death in parts of the Muslim world that rely on such badly needed aid."
Global Relief said in a statement that it was "in the business of helping innocent civilians and take every precaution to ensure our aid does not go to support or subsidize any nefarious activity."
The statement added that "just as we would call the police if our collection box or computer equipment were being stolen, we would certainly alert the authorities if we had reason to believe the intended humanitarian purpose of our aid were being subverted to harm innocent lives."
Simmons said agents were at the Bridgeview office from 9:30 a.m. until after 6 p.m. He said agents seized documents, computer tapes, receipts and other items. He said the organization was shown only a "sanitized" version of the search warrant that didn't explain the basis for the search or seizure of property.
"What they were after and why they were after it is in a classified document that we were never shown," he said.
In October, the Global Relief Foundation assailed published reports that it had ties to terrorist organizations. The Associated Press had reported that two government sources, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified, said the organizations were two of three U.S.-based Islamic aid groups receiving close federal scrutiny.
Global Relief Foundation raises about $5 million a year for programs in mainly Muslim countries around the world. It did not appear on the Treasury Department's list of 39 organizations and individuals whose assets were frozen because of alleged ties to terrorism. Last week, federal agents raided the Bridgeview offices of another Islamic charity, the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS

Load-Date: December 16, 2001


End of Document