Agents put other cases on hold to investigate terrorism; FBI: White-collar crime investigation has been left to local authorities
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 8, 2001 Monday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a9
Length: 475 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


As the federal government continues its investigation into terrorism, it could put strain on local law enforcement efforts.
FBI agents in the state have been leaving other crimes to local authorities as they help in the nationwide terrorist investigation, the Des Moines Sunday Register reported in a copyright story.
Most of Iowa's 26 FBI agents will stay in the state, said FBI Special Agent Larry Holmquist. But Holmquist says they are busy with the terrorist investigation, following leads coming in to FBI offices in Sioux City, Cedar Rapids, Des Moines, Waterloo and the Quad Cities.
As a result, some other cases are being put on hold.
"Some things are going on the back burner for a while, white-collar crime cases, for instance," Holmquist said. "No other federal agency is stepping in to take those cases."
But Holmquist would not give details on what aspects of the investigation Iowa's agents are following.
"It can be anything, from checking out people suspected of taking flying lessons here to checking out someone believed to have done something suspicious," Holmquist said. "We have a good number of our agents working full-time on this case. Others are spending most of their time on it."
Holmquist also said he expects some of Iowa's FBI agents to get called to New York and Washington to relieve agents who have been there for more than three weeks.
In addition to white-collar crimes, the FBI has also been leaving bank robbery investigations to local authorities since the Sept. 11 attacks in New York and Washington.
For example, Wright County Sheriff Paul Schultz said his deputies have been investigating a Sept. 20 bank robbery in Dows without the FBI but has gotten help from the Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation.
"The FBI has their hands full with terrorists, and DCI has stepped up and gone to bat for us," Schultz said.
Police in Davenport have investigated two bank robberies since the attacks without help from the FBI. Council Bluffs police have investigated two of their own without the FBI and have made an arrest in one of them.
DCI agents have handled bank robberies in small towns in the past. But since the Sept. 11 attacks, they have been in charge, almost exclusively, of bank robbery investigations, said John Lang, special agent at the DCI's Cedar Rapids office.
"I don't look at it as filling in," Lang said, adding that the FBI is still interested in robbery cases. "But it's common knowledge their emphasis is somewhere else."
And the FBI isn't the only federal agency dropping other cases to help with the terrorism investigation.
Iowa's 28 Drug Enforcement Administration agents are also helping in the terrorism investigation, DEA Chief Asa Hutchinson said.
"This certainly has put a strain on this law enforcement agency," Hutchinson said. "Meth producers don't stop just because there is a national emergency."

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document