Agencies failed to adapt to terrorism
USA TODAY
September 18, 2001, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1592 words
Byline: Susan Page
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The terrorists apparently spent years plotting their scheme, some hiding in plain sight in small towns in Florida and elsewhere. They went to U.S. flight schools to learn how to maneuver commercial airliners. Last month two of them -- identified as associates of Osama bin Laden, the exiled Saudi multimillionaire who has bankrolled violence against Americans -- slipped into the country.
But their audacious attack a week ago today apparently came with total surprise, stunning everyone from President Bush to intelligence analysts to the people who boarded planes or went to work at the World Trade Center that balmy morning.
"There were no warning signs that I'm aware of," FBI Director Robert Mueller said Monday.
How could that happen?
The failure of intelligence and law enforcement agencies to pick up the threads of the looming attack represents the most devastating breakdown of U.S. intelligence in modern times. It occurred despite a series of government-commissioned reports, the most recent in March, that warned of attacks on U.S. soil by ethnic extremists aimed at killing as many Americans as possible.
"When you have no inkling, no idea, not one bit of evidence that something of this magnitude was going on in the United States of America, then you've got an intelligence failure -- a big one," says Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
"We've been focusing on this perpetrator Osama bin Laden for 3 years, and yet we didn't see this one coming," says Vincent Cannistraro, former chief of CIA counterterrorism operations.
What went wrong?
The consequences of that lack of warning proved to be devastating.
Airport security precautions that might have impeded the hijacking of four airliners were not tightened. The only step that apparently reduced the death toll was the revolt by defiant passengers that sent United Airlines Flight 93 plowing into a Pennsylvania countryside rather than its likely Washington target.
Criticism so far has been muted as rescuers try to find the missing in the ruins of the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Officials warn of the possibility of additional terrorist attacks, and thousands of law enforcement officials are tracking down thousands of leads.
But those at the intelligence agencies are braced for a round of recriminations that is sure to follow, a senior intelligence official says. Congressional committees are making plans for hearings, public and secret, to determine what went wrong.
"There will be plenty of blame to go around," says Steve Pomerantz, former head of counterterrorism for the FBI.
In a USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll conducted Friday and Saturday, a 59% majority of those surveyed said the CIA deserved a great deal or a moderate amount of blame for the terrorist attacks; 52% said that about the FBI.
In an NBC/Wall Street Journal survey Saturday and Sunday, 47% said the attack represented a failure of the intelligence system; 45% said it was unreasonable to expect intelligence officials to know about it in advance.
There is still much that isn't known about how the terrorists planned and executed their attack. Besides the intense investigation, officials are systematically sifting through previous intelligence reports to see what hints might have been missed.
But so far the problem doesn't seem to be an individual misstep, according to administration officials, current and former intelligence officials, the heads of two terrorism commissions and key members of Congress. More likely, they say, it is rooted in a systemwide failure to focus on a new kind of terrorism.
The experts also say a lack of adequate funding isn't the main problem. The United States spends an estimated $ 30 billion a year on counterterrorism, more than the defense budgets of all but five countries.
But the terrorists have adapted more quickly to a post-Cold War world ruled by modern communications and ancient hatreds than the intelligence agencies have, analysts say. In other words, they say, the system failed.
"I don't think anything specific broke down," says former New Hampshire senator Warren Rudman, who co-chaired the U.S. Commission on National Security/21st Century, which delivered its final report to the White House in March.
"It's too easy to say it was an intelligence failure when the entire national security architecture is not designed to address these kinds of threats," says Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at the Rand Corp.
Among the factors blamed:
 * Bureaucratic divisions among the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the 10 other agencies involved in gathering intelligence. Three weeks before the attack, intelligence officials identified two suspected bin Laden associates and placed them on an immigration "watch list" of people to be stopped at the border. But when the INS got the names, the pair already had entered the United States. The FBI was looking for them when they hijacked American Airlines Flight 77, which slammed into the Pentagon.
"The CIA passed the names of a couple of these guys on to the INS, which put it from one box to another, only to find that these guys were already in the country," says Paul Bremer, who chaired the National Commission on Terrorism. He says it no longer makes sense for the United States to make a division between intelligence gathered abroad, the province of the CIA, and that gathered within U.S. borders, the job of the FBI.
 * A focus on developing high-tech surveillance technology rather than recruiting informants and spies. Restrictions put in place in the 1990s make it difficult for the CIA to hire agents who are linked to terrorist groups or human rights abuses. But those are exactly the characters, however unsavory, who are most likely to know what other terrorists are doing.
"We need to take the wraps off the CIA as to who they can deal with and who they can't," Shelby says. The administration is likely to change those rules, officials indicate. A quarter-century-old ban on assassinations also may be modified or eased.
 * An outdated intelligence approach focused more on troop movements than terrorist networks. Analysts estimate that 60% of U.S. intelligence is focused on gathering information about the armed forces of other nations. Eight of the 13 agencies responsible for gathering intelligence report to the Defense secretary, not the director of Central Intelligence.
"Our whole approach to national security was rendered anachronistic after Tuesday's event," Hoffman says. "This is a much more complex, amorphous and enigmatic kind of threat."
Cannistraro says U.S. law enforcement has approached bin Laden's terrorist network as though it was another Mafia. "We don't understand why people will kill themselves in pursuit of a violent action," he says, and that lack of understanding makes it impossible to effectively counter such fanaticism. "We have to understand it, culturally and religiously."
Prescient warnings
Several high-profile government commissions have warned in recent years of the threat to the United States posed by terrorists from abroad, in some cases citing bin Laden as a likely source. The reports now seem chillingly prescient.
"The United States will become increasingly vulnerable to hostile attack on the American homeland, and U.S. military superiority will not entirely protect us," the U.S. Commission on National Security/21st Century report concluded. It predicted "attacks against American citizens on American soil, possibly causing heavy casualties."
"Today international terrorists attack us on our own soil," the National Commission on Terrorism said in its report in June 2000.
Since then, "essentially nothing has been done," says Bremer, the commission chairman. But he says that is about to change.
"I don't see how the nation, faced with a disaster of this size, can even after the emotions of the moment go away, sit back on its oars and wait for the next one," he says.
U.S. intelligence agencies
The U.S. intelligence community includes 13 agencies that have separate chains of command. The director of Central Intelligence acts as a sort of chairman of the board. The agencies and their missions:
Independent agency
Central Intelligence Agency: Established in 1947, an independent agency responsible for gathering intelligence abroad. The director of Central Intelligence also oversees the Community Management Staff and the National Intelligence Council.
Department of Defense
Defense Intelligence Agency: Established in 1961 to provide intelligence to U.S. armed forces.
National Security Agency: Established in 1952 for high-tech eavesdropping.
National Imagery and Mapping Agency: Established in 1996 to provide maps and "imagery intelligence."
National Reconnaissance Office: Established in 1992 to provide technology and spaceborne surveillance.
Air Force intelligence.
Army intelligence.
Marine Corps intelligence.
Navy intelligence.
Other agencies
Federal Bureau of Investigation: Primary investigative arm of the Justice Department. Chiefly responsible for intelligence gathering within the United States.
State Department: The Bureau of Intelligence and Research, established in 1946, to provide foreign analysis.
Energy Department: Focused on nuclear proliferation and nuclear weapons technology.
Treasury Department: Office of Intelligence Support established in 1977 to provide information from the financial world.
Reported by Scott Hillkirk
Source: United States Intelligence Community, Director of Central Intelligence

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Joe Marquette, AP; Caught by surprise: There were no warning signs that I'm aware of," FBI Director Robert Mueller said Monday about the terrorist attacks last week, which apparently had been planned for several years.

Load-Date: September 18, 2001


End of Document