AGGRESSIVE EVIL IN OKLAHOMA CITY THE U.S. CAN DETER TERRORISM, BUT NOT WITH AN OPEN-DOOR POLICY
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 24, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 827 words
Byline: Gerogie Anne Geyer
Body


CHICAGO _ In the wake of the unspeakable horror of the Oklahoma
City bombing, the responses are predictable.  The killings were
"senseless," and one cannot make sense of "senseless violence."
One traumatized onlooker said that "I'll never understand it. Nobody
will."
In those same moments, President Clinton stepped in to
characterize Wednesday's car-bombing as "an act of cowardice and
evil." And the nation was left with an indelible new freeze-frame in
the nation's memory: a federal building in our Southwest with its
very skin blown off!
As someone who has for 30 years covered terrorism in the world _
and particularly in the Middle East _ I must fervently disagree with
these characterizations.
The bombing was not senseless at all; it made exquisite sense to
the people who did it. Not only can we understand it, we must
understand it. It was in truth an act not primarily of cowardice and
evil but of aggression.  And such attacks can most definitely be
prevented.
First, the supposed senselessness: Lenin said that terrorism's
purpose is to terrorize.  That is what the Oklahoma attack has done _
to the entire nation.  As of this writing, we can say that while the
bombing might possibly have been the handiwork of other groups
(right-wing vigilantes, the Branch Davidians), the indisputable fact
is that it has every single earmark of the Islamic car-bombers of the
Middle East _ from the blowing up of the American Embassy in Beirut
to the destruction of the Marine Corps barracks there.
Besides, both Oklahoma City and northern Texas have in recent
years become hotbeds of radical Islamic fundamentalism in America,
challenging our innocence.  As writer Steve Emerson, perhaps the
best-informed American on the Islamic networks in America, has put
it, the area has turned into "one of the centers for Islamic
radicalism outside the Middle East."
Beginning with Iran and the Ayatollah Khomeini in 1979 and
continuing through Algeria, Egypt, Sudan, and now even Turkey in
1995, what is clear to anyone who has studied the movements is that
they come out of a well-financed, new, organized network of
aggression.  It is fully as real and as lethal as was the Marxist
communist network from 1917 to 1989.
Point: The Islamic radicals hate us, even while they use America
for fund-raising and safe haven.
Point: They look upon "secular" and "ungodly" America as the
"Great Satan," which they must destroy with the only methods they
know.  This intention is not senseless to them at all: It is as
utterly cold and deliberate as those of any extremists or fanatics
throughout history.
But they would be far less effective in the United States were
it not for our innately but also deliberately sloppy responses to
this new network that stretches from the Near East to Southwest Asia
.  As in Beirut in 1982, when we left the American Marines so
incredibly exposed and thus open to attack by the car bombers (thus
giving all the initiative to our sworn enemies), so have we now as
willfully left America's door and vulnerabilities open to them.
Even while Khomeini was taking Americans hostage in 1980,
Iranian students of every political persuasion were allowed to pour
into America.  Egypt's Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman was welcomed with a
visa.  The radical Islamic fundamentalist Hamas, mother of the busy
suicide bombers in Israel, has an office in the United States.  Like
most of these groups, it raises lots of money here.  President
Clinton welcomes the Irish Republican Army Sinn Fein leader Gerry
Adams in the bosom of the White House, which hopes to "influence"
him.
None of these men was asked for any proof of innocence or
intention, much less any statement of commitment to this country.
To the contrary, self-proclaimed "refugees," many of them from
precisely the terrorism-exporting countries, have been pouring
through JFK airport in New York only to disappear forever into the
shadows of this country.  We have become the "no questions asked"
country.
Meanwhile, in those same 1980s, liberal Democrats such as Barney
Frank and Daniel Patrick Moynihan were impassionedly cutting back the
"ideological exclusion" sections of immigration laws, which had
since the years of the communist threat allowed aliens to be deported
who were suspected of opposing the U.S. Constitution in ways
dangerous to the nation.
At present, these same legislators are still opposing the Alien
Deportation Act, which would allow the United States to swiftly
deport aliens with terrorist connections.
So, yes, there are things that we can do, but they must be
done to stop the very implantation of this kind of terrorism in
America.  President Clinton could start by symbolically closing off
the White House in front of Lafayette Park, from which people have
shot at him; by moving to severely limit and control immigration; and
finally by thinking about what he's going to do if "Oklahoma 1995"
is linked not to a terrorist group, but to a terrorist country.
In which case, he will have not an act of aggression on his
hands but an act of war.GEYER-30-

Load-Date: April 25, 1995


End of Document