Agricultural terrorism a concern for Colorado growers
University Wire
November 16, 2001


Copyright 2001 Rocky Mountain Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 391 words
Byline: By Chris Martin, Rocky Mountain Collegian
Dateline: Fort Collins, Colo.
Body


Colorado, along with other agricultural states, could be at risk for terrorist activity that would harm crops and livestock.
However, now that winter is around the corner, the likelihood of such an attack being carried out in the near future is diminishing.
"There is not as much of a threat at this time of year compared to the growing season," said Howard Schwartz, professor of plant pathology at Colorado State University.
Colorado State U.
Schwartz however, does think that agricultural terrorism is something to be concerned about because of the nature of some contaminants that could be released.
"I think it's a fairly big threat," he said. "In the sense that looking at plants and animals there are some contagious agents."
Darrell Hanavan, executive director of the Colorado Wheat Administration Committee and the Colorado Association of Wheat Growers, also sees a potential threat.
"There's potential for the introduction of pests that could cause economic damage," he said. "I think it's something we have to be vigilant about. … Wheat is a very important commodity to the country, and we want to protect our commodity."
There are various plant pathogens or insects that could be introduced that would cause harm to crops, Schwartz said.
Responding to the threat, the United States Department of Agriculture has appropriated $ 45 million to help safeguard agriculture.
"The $ 45 million that has been requested is initial emergency funding to address the most urgent needs that we see as a result of Sept. 11," said Secretary of Agriculture Ann Veneman to farm broadcasters on Oct. 23.
"We want you to know that the USDA has taken steps to ensure our programs and services are responsive to potential threats … to ensure we continue to protect America's food supply and agriculture against pests and disease of any kind," Veneman said in a letter to USDA customers.
Although Colorado is largely agricultural, the state is at less of a risk than other parts of the country because Colorado is a relatively arid state, Schwartz said. Moisture is something plant pathogens need to survive, he said.
There are several precautions farmers should take, but the main one is just being alert, Schwartz and Hanavan said.
"The farmer is going to be more vigilant," Hanavan said.
(C) 2001 Rocky Mountain Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document