AHMADINEJAD'S LETTER REJECTS U.S. POLICIES
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 30, 2006 Thursday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A
Length: 285 words
Dateline: IRAN 
Body


President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad urged the American people in an open letter Wednesday to demand the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq and reject what he called the Bush administration's blind support for Israel and its "illegal and immoral" actions in fighting terrorism.
The letter to "Noble Americans" also accused Bush of governing by "coercion, force and injustice."
Ahmadinejad urged Bush to put the United States' "wealth and power in the service of peace, stability, prosperity and the happiness of all peoples through a commitment to justice and respect for the rights of all nations, instead of aggression and war."
He said the invasion of Iraq has led to hundreds of thousands of deaths, more terrorism and the destruction of Iraq's infrastructure.
NATO
Balkan nations make step to membership
NATO leaders Wednesday invited Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia-Herzegovina to join a program considered a first step toward eventual membership in the military alliance, but urged Serbia and Bosnia to fully cooperate with the U.N. war crimes tribunal.
NATO said at the end of a two-day summit that the three countries can offer a valuable contribution to the stability in the Balkans, and that their membership in the Partnership for Peace NATO outreach program is important for the region.
JAPAN
We could make nukes but won't, official says
Japan has the technological know-how to produce a nuclear weapon but has no immediate plans to do so, the foreign minister said Thursday, several weeks after communist North Korea carried out a nuclear test.
Foreign Minister Taro Aso, who has called for discussion of Japan's nonnuclear policy, also asserted that the pacifist constitution does not forbid possession of the bomb.

Load-Date: November 30, 2006


End of Document