AID FOR HUNGRY DESERVES SUPPORT;
   BY REDUCING HUNGER AND POVERTY ABROAD, AMERICA ADDRESSES THE CAUSES OF POLITICAL INSTABILITY, WARFARE AND TERRORISM.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
December 4, 2003 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2003 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A10; Editorial
Length: 282 words
Body


Of all the ways the U.S. government spends money, programs that feed the hungry yield some of the best returns. That's why Congress should abandon its plan to get stingy with a $100 million program that feeds children in poor countries.
The program, officially called the McGovern-Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program, provides food, money and technical assistance for school lunches and maternal and child nutrition projects in poor countries. Last year 2.2 million children from Bolivia to Bangladesh received school lunches through the program, created by the 2002 farm bill after an experimental program proved successful.
The program offers multiple benefits. At home, it provides another outlet for the production of U.S. farmers. Abroad, it not only saves children from starvation but also encourages families to send their children to school. Thus, it helps to transform undernourished and undereducated populations into more productive societies. And because hunger and poverty are causes of political instability, warfare and terrorism, it helps to promote peace and defend against terrorism.
Furthermore, it enhances the image of the United States abroad.
Although the program has proved itself a good investment, Congress may cut it 50 percent. While we applaud efforts to be frugal with federal spending, pulling funding for school lunches in poor countries is the wrong place to cut. If the program's benefits aren't enough to change Congress' mind, consider how eliminating school lunches for impoverished children will hurt America's reputation.
Wisconsin's congressional delegation should help to ensure that the $100 million funding level remains intact.

Load-Date: December 5, 2003


End of Document