AID FROM BILLY CARTER SOUGHT IN A BID TO BUY 8 LIBYA CARGO PLANES
The New York Times
October 24, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 298 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23
Body


Billy Carter was offered $250,000 by American businessmen who wanted to buy Libya's C-130 cargo planes but the President's brother says he never saw their offer, according to testimony made public today.
The offer was one of several new details disclosed in nearly 3,000 pages of sworn depositions from 34 witnesses released by the special Senate subcommittee that investigated Billy Carter's ties with Libya.
Billy Carter testifies that he never saw offer by American businessmen to aid them in purchasing 8 Libyan C-130 cargo planes
The subcommittee concluded that the President's brother had profited from his ties with Libya but had made no attempt to influence United States policy on Libya's behalf. But the panel criticized the President's handling of the Billy Carter affair.
Billy Carter testified that he never saw the businessmen's letter until he was preparing for his public testimony to the Senate committee last August.
Al Cahill, an Atlanta real estate developer who sent the letter to Mr. Carter, said in his deposition that the President's brother never responded to the offer.
''It was a shot in the dark and it didn't work,'' Mr. Cahill testified, adding that he and two other men were trying to buy Libya's eight C-130 cargo planes and sell them at a profit.
Libya bought the planes in 1974 but they are still parked at the Lockheed Company's plant in Marietta, Ga. The United States has refused to allow their delivery to Libya on the ground that Libya supports international terrorism.
Mr. Cahill testified that he wrote Billy Carter a letter on Jan.  28, 1979, saying, ''There is over a million dollars in earned commissions to be shared by the four of us, referring to himself, Mr. Carter, Stan Carlin of Griffin, Ga., a lawyer, and Moseley Collins, a Florida businessman.


End of Document