AIDES SAY REAGAN'S LONDON GOALS ARE 'MODEST'
The New York Times
June 1, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Financial Desk
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 31
Body


President Reagan, in what was described as a ''modest'' agenda for an economic summit meeting, plans to ask Western allies in London next week to pledge to continue current policies for economic growth, Administration aides said today.
A senior White House official said that Mr. Reagan was adopting a ''laid back'' attitude toward the meeting, and another official said the White House was almost casual in its preparations.
For example, the officials said that Mr. Reagan did not feel strongly that there was a need for the leaders of the major industrial democracies to make a statement on relations with the Soviet Union at their three-day meeting in London, which begins next Thursday.
 
Statement of 'Concern'
In addition, they said that despite the crisis in the Persian Gulf, Mr. Reagan had no strong feelings about the necessity of a statement about the war between Iran and Iraq.
Reagan Administration aides, describing 'modest' agenda for upcoming economic summit meeting in London, say Pres Reagan plans to ask Western allies to continue current policies of economic growth; say Reagan is adopting 'laid back' attitude toward meeting; map; table showing Reagan itinerary (M)
A top official said that a public statement by participants at the meeting would probably amount to an ''acknowledgement of concern'' about the Gulf situation, as well as the importance of diplomacy to reduce tensions, but ''nothing more,'' he said.
In addition, American officials said that Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, the host of the meeting, would seek a statement from the participants on terrorism. She is considered under some pressure to do so because of the recent shooting of a British police officer by someone inside the Libyan Embassy in London.
Following the practice of past economic summit meetings, participants are to talk about economic issues during the regular sessions and political issues during their lunches and dinners. On occasion in the past, the political discussions turned out to be more important than the economic ones.
That was the case last year at Williamsburg, Va., where Mr. Reagan pressed the allies to reiterate their support for the deployment of American medium-range missiles in Europe aimed at the Soviet Union.
 
Objections From France
The possibility of any formal statement on political issues this year has been clouded by objections from France. French officials oppose any statements on noneconomic matters, even on terrorism. A French official said this week that a statement on terrorism would probably be ''absolutely useless.''
Mr. Reagan's noncommittal attitude toward a politial statement contrasts sharply with his insistence on a statement about the European missiles last year. A top aide explained the contrast by saying that ''last year, we were in the driver's seat,'' and this year, Mrs. Thatcher is in charge of the agenda.
He said that if Mrs. Thatcher wanted a political statement on any subject, Mr. Reagan would probably support one.
Mr. Reagan leaves Friday for Ireland, his first stop on the way to the summit meeting.
 
Vindication of Policies
In briefings and conversations, Administration aides have made it clear that Mr. Reagan has limited economic objectives for the summit meeting, the 10th annual such gathering. Besides the United States, the participants are Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, Canada and the president of the European Economic Commission.
Primarily, Administration aides said, Mr. Reagan will seek what they acknowledge would be a vindication of the economic policies he has been pursuing in the last three years.
Although European and other critics are worried about high interest rates and high deficits in the United States, Mr. Reagan is expected to dismiss the criticism in much the way he has dismissed criticism from his opponents in this Presidential election year.
With their minds on the election, in fact, Administration officials said that Mr. Reagan wants a peaceful summit meeting from which he would be able to say that his fellow allies agreed that ''America is back.''
 
No New Trade Initiatives
In keeping with this tone, Mr. Reagan is not expected to press some of the items that have led to contention and disarray in past summit meetings. In particular, the United States plans no new initiatives to clamp down on trade between the West and the Soviet bloc.
In an interview today with a group of television correspondents from participating countries, Mr. Reagan gave some indication of his line of defense on key issues, and to the contention that American high interest rates are caused by high deficits.  ''I don't believe the deficits have anything to do with our high interest rates,'' the President said, asserting that interest rates had gone down in the last few years, even though the deficit had gone up.
In addition, he said that ''as a percentage of gross national product, we're not too out of line with our deficits, with the deficits of our allies there in the summit.''
He added that, in any case, the Senate and House were making progress toward approving a ''down payment'' that would reduce the deficit between now and 1987 by $150 million.
Administration officials said that the summit meeting would be peaceful largely because so many countries now agree with the American priority of economic growth without inflation.
A sign of this, they said, is that inflation in all the summit countries - including France and Italy - has dropped since 1981, and growth has risen.
 
Three Economic Priorities
Three major economic priorities were outlined today by a senior Administration official.
First, he said, the United States would press for emphasis on reducing the role of government regulation and taxation in the West.
Second, on the subject of the debt problems of developing nations, he said Mr. Reagan would seek a continuation of the existing approach. This would involve helping third world countries with short-term loans and greater access to outside markets for their exports. The President opposes further steps now, and is not expected to meet much resistance.
Third, the official said, Mr. Reagan favors a commitment from the Western nations to a round of discussions next year to further lower tariff barriers. In principle, the participants always come out in favor of free trade, but in practice their record has been viewed as disappointing by United States officials.

Graphic

 
schedule of President Reagan's European trip


End of Document