Aiding Colombia's War on Terrorism 
 The New York Times
May 3, 2002 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 735 words
Byline:  By Luis Alberto Moreno;  Luis Alberto Moreno is Colombia's ambassador to the United States.
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Body


While the United States' attention is fixed on fighting terrorism in Afghanistan, the Middle East and Asia, a grave threat lurks in the Americas. Colombia is the leading theater of operations for terrorists in the Western Hemisphere. Under the false pretense of a civil war, Colombian guerrilla groups have ravaged the nation with violence financed by cocaine consumers in the United States. The Bush administration, appropriately, is pushing in Congress to have anti-narcotics aid expanded to strengthen Colombia's ability to defeat terrorists.
     Over the last four years, President Andres Pastrana has strengthened Colombia's relationship with the United States, improved cooperation on transnational crime and increased the commitment of the Colombian government and its people to human rights. This week, the State Department certified Colombia's compliance with human rights guidelines, allowing the United States to provide military aid. Attorney General John D. Ashcroft has also moved to support Colombia's efforts. "Just as we fight terrorism in the mountains of South Asia," he said this week, "we will fight terrorism in our own hemisphere." 
 Drugs are the root of almost all violence in Colombia. It is simple: everywhere there are poppies or coca in Colombia, there are guerrillas and paramilitaries. The Pastrana administration has moved aggressively to sever ties between the armed forces and the paramilitary group called the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, which is itself involved in the drug trade; in 2001 government forces, including police, captured 992 paramilitaries and killed 116.
Where there are guerrillas and paramilitaries, there are terror and violence against civilians. While they may hide behind a Marxist ideology, Colombia's leftist guerrillas have ceased to be a political insurgency. They have traded their ideals for drug profits. 
The guerrillas were offered many generous opportunities to declare themselves for peace and to enter meaningful and legitimate peace talks with the government. They failed to take these opportunities.
No sector of Colombian society has been spared. Guerrillas with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by its Spanish acronym, FARC, have kidnapped five members of the Colombian Congress, 11 state legislators, the governor of Antioquia and Ingrid Betancourt, a presidential candidate. Recently they attempted to assassinate the leading candidate for president. (The election will take place May 26.) The FARC has murdered Colombia's minister of culture, Consuelo Araujo, as well as leading religious figures, human rights workers, labor leaders, journalists, health care workers, police and military personnel and their relatives, executives, foreign workers, and thousands of civilians.
Colombians understand that nothing less than the future of our democracy is at stake in this conflict, and we are united to defend it. The international community has understood the change in the nature of the conflict, and is supporting our efforts. Mexico recently closed the FARC's office. Other governments should also close FARC offices in their nations.
President Pastrana has increased defense spending to its highest level in our nation's history. We have also increased the number of Colombians serving in the military and police force to an all-time high. But despite these efforts, the adversaries of peace continue to spread terror throughout Colombia. We need America's help.
Soon President Pastrana will leave office. His commitment to resolving the conflict in Colombia and his personal courage set a very high standard. Yet I am confident a worthy successor will be elected who is equally committed to bringing peace to our nation. The terrorists will want to test our new president quickly. It is critical that the United States show that the change in administration does not signal a change in America's partnership with Colombia.
Since this is no longer an ideological war but a narco-terrorist one, Congress should, continuing in a bipartisan spirit and recognizing our shared responsibility in the drug war, quickly approve President Bush's request to allow the Colombian military to use American military equipment and intelligence in its war against terrorism. In addition, Congress should pass the long-stalled Andean Trade Preferences Act, which provides alternatives to the cultivation of coca and poppy plants. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 3, 2002


End of Document