Air travelers need government protection
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 4, 1989, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Columns; Pg. 13A; COLUMN
Length: 645 words
Byline: Noel Koch
Body


The destruction of Pan American Flight 103 was incidental to the    purposes of those who arranged and executed the deed; their real target    was on the tail of the aircraft: the American flag.
 
     The United States is the leading target of international terrorism    today, and our airlines are both powerful and accessible symbols of    America herself. But the U.S. government does next to nothing to    protect air travelers, dumping the burden on the airlines. It's time    that changed.
    Confronted with similar circumstances in the past, our government    took responsibility for the safety of American lives and exacted a    price when they were threatened. What finally brought the United States    into World War I was the sinking of three U.S. merchant vessels, with    less loss of life than occurred over Lockerbie last Christmas.
 
     Yet the most significant debate over the destruction of Flight 103    is not about which country caused it and what to do about it, but about    how far the airline is responsible for allowing it to happen. Some    members of Congress are joined with the families of the victims in the    effort to apportion blame. In truth, Congress need look no farther than    itself and the White House. By federal statute, however, the airline    appears most at fault.
 
     More than any other scheduled airlines in the world, U.S. carriers    are naked to our enemies, and responsible for their own security. This    is codified in the Aviation Act.
 
     Our airlines are brought to this dilemma by a process of regulatory    accretion. It was reasonable to hold the airlines responsible for the    safety of their passengers when this meant assuring the machine had gas    in it, that it wasn't overloaded and that one of the pilots was sober.
 
     These and similar flight-related obligations must remain with the    airlines. But they cannot be expected to confront single-handedly the    forces of hostile foreign intelligence organizations, advanced    explosive technologies and terrorism in general. For this, our air    carriers need much greater assistance from the federal government.
 
     Regrettably, even those who agree with this usually construe it to    mean giving the airlines financial assistance.
 
     But what the airlines really need from the federal government is    more direct assistance, and less responsibility for matters beyond    their competence. They need help. The agency most capable of providing    it is the Federal Aviation Administration.
 
     Nor are the funds lacking. They are simply caught up in one of    those games of political chicken that so often characterize relations    between the Congress and the Executive Branch.
 
     The Aviation Trust Fund, from which resources for improved aviation    security could come, has a current surplus of $ 5.8-billion. Revenues    for this fund come from the air traveler through user fees and other    taxes that will contribute about $ 3.6-billion this year.
 
     If the FAA took over a greater share of aviation security, the    Aviation Trust Fund could finance much of the replacement of obsolete    equipment, procurement of new technologies such as the thermal neutron    activator and vapor sensors, as well as much-needed air terminal    architectural and engineering retrofits. This still would not come    close to exhausting the current surplus.
 
    It is time to recognize that our airlines are in the transportation    business, and not in the business of combating terrorism. They    shouldn't be penalized for doing poorly what they ought not to have to    do at all. We can protect our airlines and their passengers from    terrorism, and do it at a reasonable cost. But it will require more    help from the federal government.
 
  Koch was the Pentagon's top counter-terrorism official    during the Reagan administration.
 
    

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document