AIR FORCE GAUGES WARS OF THE 2000'S
The New York Times
November 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 918 words
Byline: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 31
Body


The Air Force has peered into the next century and has seen a world of diffused military power, of many nations armed with advanced and even nuclear weapons, of frequent regional wars and worldwide terrorism.
In that world, the service concluded in a study called ''Air Power Entering the 21st Century,'' the Air Force must be ready to fight ''across the spectrum of conflict,'' from guerrilla operations to nuclear exchanges. But since funds to increase air power will be limited, the authors of the study said, the Air Force must change many of its ways, from tactics to technology.
Not everything in the 21st century will be grim, they said. The United States and the Soviet Union will avoid an all-out war, the analysts assumed, and both nations have a chance to become selfsufficient in energy by the year 2000, a development that could remove a major source of rivalry.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 - The Air Force has peered into the next century and has seen a world of diffused military power, of many nations armed with advanced and even nuclear weapons, of frequent regional wars and worldwide terrorism.
With all the differences, some present trends will continue. The world's population will rise from 5 billion to 6 billion, the study said, and competition for natural resources will become more intense. Technical progress will be swift, but no nation will achieve a breakthrough to an ultimate weapon.
 
Study Classified Secret
The Air Force forecast, which is intended to guide long-range planners, drew on thoughts from several hundred officers, scholars, scientists and specialists in aerospace companies. The 450-page study, which took 10 months, is classified secret, but Air Force officers made an extract available.
Before wars start, the Air Force must provide more training for friendly air forces than it does today to multiply the air power that could be mustered against an adversary, the report said. That means ''establishing greater Air Force presence in countries or regions of strategic interest,'' reversing a trend that began in the 1960's.
In a guerrilla war, ''the primary role of the Air Force in special operations is clandestine airlift,'' which means flying Army Green Berets into and out of enemy territory undetected. That ability is limited today, as indicated by the debacle that aborted the 1980 mission to rescue American hostages in Iran.
Air Force analysts questioned Reagan Administration plans for fighting a worldwide conventional war. Lack of funds ''may preclude attaining a global war-fighting capability'' to defeat simultaneous attacks, the researchers said. Rather, alliances ''to defeat an attack in one theater while deterring or delaying enemy attacks elsewhere will be necessary.'' Outside of NATO, few such alliances exist now.
Since the Air Force expects to be outnumbered and outgunned in the 21st century, as it is today by the Russians, it will rely on vast amounts of intelligence gathered by satellites and sensors, on swift communications and on computers to sort things out. Otherwise, ''this unprecedented information volume can inundate the decision maker.''
 
Single Data Network Needed
A single, integrated network to distribute vital information will expand rapidly and ''could well be the resource that provides the crucial technological advantage over potential enemies possessing quantitative superiority,'' the study said.
To generate more sorties with fewer aircraft, fighters and bombers must become more fuel-efficient, must be far more reliable and must have greater operating ranges than today. Moreover, ground crews, mechanics and their equipment must become more mobile.
The study said the Air Force should reverse a course that began in World War II, turning away from centralized command and large bases in favor of flying from small, dispersed and hidden airfields that can survive intense 21st century firepower.
Another big change will be joint operations with the Army and Navy; such operations are conducted today, but grudgingly. ''Fiscal realities and economy of force make stressing joint operations an absolute requirement,'' the analysis said.
In technology, the authors found 15 areas that should be given priority in money and effort because they are close to providing major results. Of those, five were emphasized: information processing, sensors, certain electronics, lasers and the stealth devices that mask aircraft from radar.
 
More Research Funds Urged
But to accomplish that, the study said, a 15-year downward trend in research funds must be reversed ''to insure that the technology breakthroughs necessary to remain at the leading edge will in fact occur.''
The analysts said the country's economy would average a growth rate of 2.6 to 2.8 percent through the year 2000, compared with 3.3 percent for the last 25 years. Military spending will account for about 6 percent of the country's wealth, they said, with the Air Force share a constant third.
''Inflation rates should decline to 6 percent by 2000,'' Air Force economists said. ''But petroleum costs will grow at an average of 2 to 4 percent above the inflation rate through 2000.'' That would be bad news for a service that consumes about half the fuel in the Defense Department.
With a nod to the ''unprecedented peacetime funding growth'' under the Reagan Administration, the study said expectations of big increases in the future ''reflect unbridled optimism unsubstantiated by either an analysis of the economic and budgetary environment or historical funding patterns.''


End of Document