Air Force blasts Northrop mismanagement
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 10, 1990, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WASHINGTON DIGEST; Pg. 10A; DIGEST
Length: 664 words
Body


Top Air Force officials say that Northrop Corp., which builds the B-2 Stealth bomber and other expensive weapon systems, is so poorly managed that it cannot account for the cost of many programs and has suffered breakdowns in the production of every weapon the service reviewed. In a report made public Tuesday, weaknesses were identified in systems engineering; the transition from research and development to production; software management; subcontract management; organization and personnel; and business systems, which includes cost and schedule estimates. The report marks the first time the Air Force has openly criticized the troubled Los Angeles-based defense firm, which is the subject of numerous investigations. A Northrop spokesman said the company is taking steps to correct problems.
FBI anti-terrorism probes questioned
 The FBI's anti-terrorism methods raise concerns about possible violations of constitutional freedoms, the chairman of a House subcommittee said Tuesday. Rep. Don Edwards, D-Calif., said a General Accounting Office (GAO) report done at his request on the FBI's counterterrorism program found that 44 percent of investigations had been opened without any suspicion of criminal conduct. The GAO report covered about 19,500 FBI cases between 1982 and 1988. It said it could not determine whether the investigations violated constitutional rights of the suspects because the FBI refused to allow full access to its files. FBI director William Sessions said the report failed to mention the FBI's success in cutting U.S. terrorist activity from over 100 incidents a year in the 1970s to four in 1989.
 House panel approves defense bill
 The House Appropriations Committee approved a $ 268.2-billion defense bill Tuesday that would cut deeply into President Bush's 1991 budget request for strategic weapons and roll back proposed troop cuts next year to 77,000 because of the gulf crisis. The House earlier voted to cut the 2.1-million active duty U.S. force by 129,000 people next year, and the Senate had voted a cut of 100,000 because of budget constraints and the end of the Cold War in Europe. But the subcommittee said the U.S. military operation in Saudi Arabia "has forced the Department of Defense to reassess how quickly the forces can be drawn down." The bill also would halt production of the B-2 Stealth bomber with the 15 already started and cut President Bush's $ 4.7-billion Star Wars antimissile research request in half.
 Southern Command leader retiring
 Gen. Maxwell Thurman, commander of the U.S. Southern Command and the field commander in charge of the 1989 invasion of Panama, is retiring, the Pentagon announced Tuesday.  Thurman, 59, was diagnosed with leukemia last July and is undergoing chemotherapy treatment at Johns Hopkins Oncology Center in Baltimore. The Pentagon said Lt. Gen. George A.  Joulwan, 50, currently commanding general of the 5th Corps, U.S.  Army Europe and the Seventh Army, has been nominated by President Bush to replace Thurman and to be promoted to the rank of general.
 Briefly . . .
 The prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago met with President Bush, and White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said Bush congratulated Arthur N. R. Robinson and his government "for the bravery shown in confronting the terrorists and in defending their democratic institutions."
 The public interest group Common Cause has accused the Republican fund-raising group Inner Circle of deliberately violating limits on campaign contributions to Senate candidates. The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee also has complained about its Republican counterpart's fund-raising program.
 President Bush told top executives gathered for a briefing from the administration on drugs in the work place that corporate America is helping to win the war against drugs.
 President Bush will confer with leaders of Pacific island nations on economic and security issues during a meeting in Hawaii on Oct. 27,  White House officials said.
 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; William Sessions

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document