AIR-DEFENSE GENERAL WORRIES ABOUT TERRORISM FROM THE SKY 0000107069:
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
February 1, 2000, Tuesday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a8
Length: 402 words
Byline: BILL KACZOR, Associated Press writer
Body


TYNDALL AIR FORCE BASE, Fla. -- The general responsible for protecting the continental United States from air attack says he fears it is not matter of if, but when terrorists or a rogue nation try something.
It may be a small plane or even a cruise missile carrying a biological or, perhaps, chemical weapon, said Maj. Gen. Larry Arnold, commander of the 1st Air Force.
"I lay awake worrying," Arnold said. "It is one thing to put a truck inside the twin trade towers and blow it up. It is quite another to be able to fly a weapon across our borders. That is an attack, a direct attack, an unambiguous attack from outside our country."
Striking from the sky may be more difficult, but Arnold said the political effect could make it worth the effort in the mind of a terrorist.
So far, nothing of the kind has happened, but Arnold's nationwide Air National Guard command scrambles jets about 200 times a year at seven alert sites from Portland, Ore., to South Florida.
Most often they intercept drug smugglers and others who fail to file flight plans before entering U.S. airspace. In October, however, Oklahoma and North Dakota Air Guard fighters were called upon to track golfer Payne Stewart's business jet, which failed to respond to radio calls before crashing in South Dakota, killing Stewart and five others aboard.
Air defense sectors at Tyndall, Rome, N.Y., and McChord Air Force Base monitor ground radar shared with the Federal Aviation Administration throughout their regions. Airborne radar on balloons provides some, but not complete, low-altitude coverage to spot planes flying under the net cast by the ground radar.
Air Guard F-16 Fighting Falcons and F-15 Eagles can be airborne in minutes but are stretched thin.
Arnold, a Texas Guard member, used the example of terrorists taking off from Mexico in a small plane and giving an hour's notice before spraying sarin gas or anthrax over El Paso, Texas. The nearest alert jets are about 600 miles away near Houston and in California.
"If we scrambled them immediately, they would not yet be there that one hour later," Arnold said. "I don't want to be an alarmist, but that is a thing you have to think about."
Cruise missiles could exploit a chink in the air defense armor.
"It is easy to afford and have the knowledge to put together a poor man's cruise missile," said Florida Air Guard Col. Ted Kraemer, commander of the Southeast Air Defense Sector at Tyndall.

Load-Date: February 1, 2000


End of Document