Airlines and Others Question Aspects of Anti-Terrorism Plan - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 20;  Column 3;  National Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 725 words
Byline: By MATTHEW L. WALD 

By MATTHEW L. WALD 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11
Body


Airline representatives, airport operators and members of Congress expressed reservations today about the Clinton Administration's plans for preventing terrorism. They said they favored re-evaluating aviation security, but raised questions about the cost, practicality and usefulness of many of the proposed steps.
Matching all bags to passengers on domestic flights, as is now done internationally, is a fine idea, James C. DeLong, chairman of the Airports Council International-North America and the aviation director of the new Denver International Airport, testified before the Aviation Subcommittee of the House Transportation Committee. But if it increases the time the average departing passenger spends in the airport to two or three hours from the current 45 minutes, Mr. DeLong said, then airports would have to be three times as big.
Running computer background checks on passengers to decide who needs more scrutiny is a good idea, too, said John M. Meenan, vice president of the Air Transport Association, the big airlines' trade group.  But, Mr. Meenan testified, the biggest improvements to security would have to be carried out by others, notably by "redeployment of our nation's intelligence resources."
"Countering aviation terrorism, in our estimation, is the responsibility of the Federal Government," he said. He compared improving airport security with trying to stop theft in a home, saying, "Burglar bars and alarms are not a solution to crime, but one of its symptoms."
The subcommittee chairman, Representative John J. Duncan, Jr., Republican of Tennessee, said that security should certainly be re-evaluated, but that he did not believe the country should overreact. The ranking Democrat on the subcommittee, Representative William O. Lipinsky of Illinois, said that in most cases, the cost of the new steps would be justified by the benefits, but that all should be studied for the delays they would impose and the penalties on "efficiency and economy."
Also questioned were the criminal background checks performed on prospective airline employees.
Mr. Meenan said that examination of work history was much more productive, and that checking the backgrounds of employees would not have blocked acts of terrorism like the World Trade Center bombing.
Another witness, David Tomlinson, head of security at BAA P.L.C., the private company that used to be the British Airports Authority, said the British police scrutinize airline and airport employees' backgrounds, not for criminal records but for people who might sympathize with terrorists and provide them with useful information.
Questions about cost were also raised. Republicans said that they had not seen anything in writing from the White House on the $1.1 billion that the President is asking for, about one-third of it for aviation.
Representative Robert L. Livingston, Republican of Louisiana and the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, pointed out on Tuesday that Mr. Clinton had previously asked for a supplemental appropriation of $400 million to $500 million for fighting western forest fires and $250 million for fighting drugs. Congress is also considering requests for supplemental financing for the re-deployment of American soldiers in Saudi Arabia and the continuing peacekeeping operation in Bosnia, which together will run $300 million, Republicans say.
Mr. Livingston and others complained that the Administration had not identified any budget cuts or revenue increases to pay for any of its requests for more money. "He promises everything to everyone with complete disregard for the American taxpayer," Mr. Livingston said.
There is a vehicle handy, though, for supplemental appropriations; with the end of the Federal fiscal year on Sept. 30, Congress is almost certain to face a vote on a continuing resolution or an omnibus appropriations bill for the parts of the Government that have not had their budgets approved for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1. As of today, only 2 of 13 appropriations bills have final approval.
Even if there is no immediate appropriation, the House today overwhelmingly approved a three-year, $29.5 billion financing bill for the Federal Aviation Administration that will allow money earmarked for "airport improvements" to be used for security investments. The Senate is supposed to take up the bill next week.
      
Correction

An article yesterday about a hearing on airline security before the House Transportation Aviation Subcommittee misspelled the name of the panel's ranking Democrat. He is William O. Lipinski.

Correction-Date: September 13, 1996, Friday

Load-Date: September 12, 1996


End of Document