Airlines await 'no-terrorism' verdict;
Airlines await a 'no-terrorism' verdict on crash
Quick word would be good news for carriers<
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 13, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITIONCorrection Appended


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C01
Length: 1022 words
Byline: Tom Belden INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


The airline industry could be dealt a disastrous blow by American Airlines' crash in New York yesterday unless the U.S. government moves quickly to assure travelers that the crash was not the result of terrorism, travel and aviation experts said.
But if the cause was mechanical failure or pilot error - which are the chief suspects in the preliminary investigation into the crash - the airlines could recover fairly quickly, the industry observers said.
"I think it's critical that the government let us know as soon as possible" about the suspected cause, said Terry Trippler, a former travel agent and airline employee in Minneapolis who has an aviation Web site. "When I was a travel agent and something like this happened, business would be down a week, maybe two."
This year, Trippler said, with millions of would-be passengers already nervous about flying because of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, anyone still thinking of taking a flight around Christmas "will sit on the fence until the government says something."
The vast majority of travelers who have already paid for nonrefundable tickets to travel over the Thanksgiving holiday probably will still fly, Trippler and other travel authorities said.
About 4.6 million people are expected to travel by plane, bus or train over the Thanksgiving holiday. That would be a 27 percent decrease from last year, virtually all attributable to fewer airline passengers, according to the American Automobile Association.
Business for the major airlines was down 26 percent last month from October 2000, according to Bloomberg News. The decline was blamed on the weak economy, the sharp cutbacks in flights since the terrorist attacks, and a general uneasiness about air travel.
Most major airlines reported heavy third-quarter losses, and the industry as a whole had a net loss of $2.43 billion, industry analysts said.
American was already struggling from the effect of the terrorist attacks. The company - now the world's largest airline, with more than 900 big jets and more than 250 regional jets and turboprops since it bought TWA out of bankruptcy in April - lost $414 million in the third quarter.
American's quarterly loss was recorded despite its receiving $452 million in cash from the federal government, or just more than half the total grants it will receive under the federal airline bailout plan that Congress passed shortly after the attacks.
Analysts expect American to post an even larger loss in the fourth quarter because consumer demand for air travel, though somewhat improved, still lags far behind historical levels.
Shares of American's parent, AMR Corp., fell $1.64, or 9.0 percent, to $16.49 yesterday, and other airline and travel-related companies' shares also fell. United Airlines' parent, UAL Corp., fell 59 cents, or 5.4 percent, to $10.33, while Delta Air Lines Inc. declined $2.72, or 10 percent, to $23.27. Northwest Airlines Corp. dropped 81 cents, or 6 percent, to $12.73, and Continental Airlines Inc. fell $1.60, or 9.1 percent, to $16.00.
Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc., owner of the Sheraton and Westin hotel chains, declined 28 cents, or 1.2 percent, to $23.94, while Marriott International Inc., the largest U.S. hotel-management company, slid $1.50, or 4.4 percent, to $32.50.
Expedia Inc., an online travel-services company, declined $1.26, or 4.0 percent, to $29.96.
Richard Golaszewski, executive vice president of GRA Inc., a Jenkintown aviation-consulting firm, noted that, in recent weeks, some carriers were filling up their airplanes again.
"I think people will need a couple of days to digest this," Golaszewski said. "There is usually a short-term trend of fewer bookings for airlines when something like this happens. It's certainly not helpful, but I don't think it will have a lasting effect."
In other major-airline accidents in recent years, carriers continued to suffer heavy financial losses for months afterward only when there were special circumstances and uncertainty about the cause.
The crash of TWA Flight 800 into Long Island Sound in July 1996 is an example. The FBI was the lead U.S. agency on the investigation for weeks because a terrorist bomb was the suspected cause; eventually, mechanical failure was found to be the probable cause.
TWA lost $285 million in 1996, and the company attributed the loss in part to the uncertain cause of the crash.
More difficult to calculate in yesterday's crash, the experts said, will be the longer-term psychological effect on employees of American, those customers who depend heavily on the airline, and other would-be air travelers who have seen American lose three aircraft to crashes in two months. American owned two of the jets that terrorists crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11.
As do all airlines, American has insurance to cover the loss of aircraft, and it has liability coverage for loss of life in an accident involving mechanical failure or pilot error. Congress has been debating whether to help American and United with liability claims for the passengers killed on Sept. 11.
For yesterday's crash, the federal government could offer some help with liability costs because of the extraordinary circumstances of a crash coming so soon after Sept. 11, Golaszewski said.
Travelers' anxiety was palpable yesterday, even with the FBI saying there was no evidence that terrorism was involved in the American crash, and with the National Transportation Safety Board - not the FBI - taking the lead in the investigation.
Pete Buchheit, Black & Decker Corp.'s director of travel and meetings service, said about 10 percent of the Towson, Md., company's employees who were scheduled to travel yesterday canceled their plans. Normally, no more than 4 percent or 5 percent would cancel after a crash, he said.
"Even if it's finally determined that it was clearly an accident, people will say, 'Yes, but . . .' " he said. "They will have some residual thought in their mind. The damage is done. The timing is very, very bad."
Tom Belden's e-mail address is tbelden@phillynews.com.  
This article contains information from The Inquirer Washington bureau.

Graphic

 
PHOTO AND CHART

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document