Airline ruling is sensible
Business Insurance
March 13, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8
Length: 346 words
Body


A RECENT RULING by the Virginia Supreme Court barring an airline from essentially recovering for losses twice under federal assistance and its insurance policies is sensible, but it raises some key questions.
As we reported in the March 6 issue, the Virginia high court reversed a lower court ruling that US Airways did not have to deduct from its insurance claims any recoveries it received under the federal Air Transportation Safety and Stabilization Act, which Congress passed to assist airlines after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Is this ruling good policy? We think it is, though the case does raise questions about the interplay of federal aid and private insurance following megacatastrophes.
The 9/11 attacks were an extreme example, but they clearly could have been a death blow to airlines, most of which still are struggling. Without federal assistance and private insurance after the terrorist attacks, many airlines could have failed, with serious consequences for other industries dependent on aviation.
If this sounds familiar, it is. The insurance industry has been making much the same argument in seeking a public/private solution to terrorism risk. But the fact remains, there is an urgent need for a federal government role in protecting the nation against losses that private industry cannot absorb.
Critics of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act imply that TRIA is a handout to a single industry. We generally do not favor legislation directed at specific industries, but look at what's at stake. The aviation and insurance industries are two critical components of our nation's business infrastructure. Without air transportation, goods and services could not be distributed quickly. Without insurance, businesses could not function effectively, and many projects-and the economic opportunities those would offer-could never be undertaken.
In our opinion, the Virginia ruling does not suggest that federal assistance replace insurance. Instead, it signals a need to create a system in which private coverage and public aid complement each other when havoc strikes.

Load-Date: March 17, 2006


End of Document