Airmen urged to remain vigilant; Wright-Patt warns of social media postings, identifiable items.Advisory goes out after Canadian attacks.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 29, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAIN; Pg. A2
Length: 633 words
Byline: By Barrie Barber
Body


WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE - Wright-Patterson airmen have been urged to monitor what they post on social media and be mindful of things that could identify them as part of the military after separate attacks in Canada this month. The Canadian attacks killed two soldiers, and a gunman opened fire in the Parliament of Canada before he was killed.
The First Air Force headquartered at Tyndall Air Force Base, Fla., issued a force protection directive that was shared with Wright-Patterson civilian and military personnel, base spokesman Daryl Mayer said in an email Tuesday.
U.S. Northern Command sent security advisories to installation commanders and security forces throughout the United States, but the threat level was not increased, Preston Schlachter, a Northern Command spokesman, said Tuesday.
Base commanders have the authority to increase security to protect the installation, if they decide they need to, he said.
Mayer said no credible threats exist within the area, but authorities recommended personnel monitor what they post on social media, and be mindful of any identifying stickers on vehicles, equipment or other items such as clothing that could identify them as member of the military, as a government employee or part of law enforcement.
"Out of a concern for our personnel, we want to equip them with the knowledge and awareness to make good choices and protect themselves," he said in an interview.
Random measures may be taken to boost security at Wright-Patterson, the sprawling military installation with more than 27,000 employees and more than 700 buildings, Mayer said. That might mean, for example, employees use a security badge to gain access to certain buildings, he said.
"We want to vary our measures to avoid setting a predictable pattern," he said.
U.S. troops in Canada have been directed to follow the security measures imposed on Canadian troops, Schlachter said.
A message was left with a Canadian military spokesman Tuesday. Schlachter said in Canada "the wearing of uniforms outside of garrisons was suspended until further notice" except when traveling to and from work.
Mayer said he could not recall the last time an anti-terrorism security advisory was sent to base employees but said the bulletins are released periodically.
Donna Schlagheck, a Wright State University terrorism expert and political science professor, said it's more likely uniformed members of the military will be thanked for their service than attacked in the United States, but the threat level is not zero.
"After the shock of the Canadian attacks, I don't think we can ignore it," she said. "Lone wolf behavior is the most difficult to predict."
She noted Islamic State terrorists have beheaded U.S. journalists and radicalized Islamists have called for attacks on service members.
"They are looking for highly symbolic targets and they want to manipulate public opinion," she said.
So-called "lone wolf" attackers have disconnected themselves from society, often do not formally associate with a political or terrorist movement, and may have no presence on social media.
"That's how a lone wolf can operate," she said. "A lone wolf is typically invisible to law enforcement."
On Tuesday, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry laid a wreath at Canada's National War Memorial in Ottawa where on Oct. 22, a gunman killed an honor guard soldier before he repeatedly fired inside the Parliament building and was killed by a security officer. Kerry has called the attack a terrorist act. Days earlier, two Canadian soldiers were struck by a man driving a vehicle in a hit-and-run attack. One of the soldiers died. Canadian authorities attributed the attack to terrorism.
The attacks came as the U.S. and its allies such as Canada pressed airstrikes against Islamic State insurgents in Iraq and Syria.

Load-Date: October 29, 2014


End of Document