Airport security rules on the edge of reason
Business Insurance
December 6, 2010


Copyright 2010 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 6; Vol. 44
Length: 616 words
Byline: MARK A HOFMANN

mhofmann@businessinsurance.com
Body


Like millions of other U.S. residents, my family traveled by air during the Thanksgiving holiday. We did so with some trepidation-not because of the threat of terrorism but rather the security measures we'd have to contend with in the name of preventing a terrorist attack.
We'd been bombarded with horror stories of invasive pat-downs, exposure to radiation courtesy of new scanners, and voyeuristic scanner operators. Protesters promised to draw a line against the new requirements by refusing to comply with them.
So, we were surprised when the scanner process went without incident. Maybe the public uproar over the new security measures had been overblown. There were no large-scale protests-obviously the overwhelming majority of the flying public figured that taking such steps to manage the risk of terrorism was worth the hassle.
On the way back, at an airport without the new scanners, though, we had a somewhat different experience. My father-in-law, an 88-year-old World War II vet, has a pacemaker. He could not go through the metal detectors and had to go through a pretty thorough pat-down. He endured the procedure with good humor, but was it necessary? Where does managing the risk of terrorism cross the line from the rational to the surreal?
Most of the travelers I saw subjected to additional security were older people. I'm willing to bet that as a general proposition, the number of active terrorists among the 65-and-up crowd is minuscule.
There's been the very occasional geriatric lunatic, like the 88-year-old white supremacist who shot a guard at the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington last year. But these guys have tended to favor trucks or vans bristling with rifles and homemade bombs rather than attempting to board planes with explosives.
Octogenarian jihadists? They may exist, but there probably aren't many of them and I doubt their efficacy in carrying out an attack unless they're unwitting dupes.
This is where members of the traveling public ought to be shaking their heads if they're not already. In our effort to manage the very real terrorism risk, we're increasingly throwing common sense away.
One doesn't have to be paranoid to be concerned about where the security obsession may lead. Travelers have surrendered increasing amounts of personal freedom to meet the demands of an ever-more vigilant security apparatus. I used to carry a Swiss Army knife, but because of security regulations, now I don't. It's a small loss, but a loss nonetheless.
The little losses add up over time. Passing through a metal detector sufficed once upon a time. Somewhere along the line, we had to take off our shoes as well. There was the issue of the maximum size container of liquids that could be stowed in carry-on baggage-a boon to manufacturers of travel-size toiletries but an annoyance to the rest of us.
Now with full-body scans, you have to empty your pockets and take off your belt as well-another small annoyance added on top of small losses. The question naturally arises as to what happens next in the name of security.
I don't pretend to know what that will be. But the public outrage that accompanied the announcement of the new scanners and aggressive pat-downs indicates that there is only so much travelers will put up with in the name of security, particularly if they're not given a believable explanation of why the latest intrusion upon their persons and liberty is necessary. The government's initial explanation was pretty much, "Because we say so."
There's a line beyond which the public won't go; we just don't know where it is. But risk management practices that appear disproportionate or irrelevant to the risk cannot help but invite resistance.

Load-Date: December 9, 2010


End of Document