Airport terrorism
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
June 27, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 304 words
Body


Those who travel know the aggravation of going through airport security because, according to the Transportation Security Administration, everyone is a potential terrorist. 
As you exit the security lines in Nashville, there is a screening room made of windowed partition walls. I guess this is so everyone can see the extraordinary job TSA is doing to protect us from grandmas, children and everyone else who doesn't fit the terrorist profile. 
As I exited the security line in Nashville last Wednesday, I was shocked to see a U.S. soldier, in uniform, sitting inside the screening area. His bags were open on the floor so that anyone could view the contents. One can only wonder what was going through his mind. 
Across from him was a weight-challenged TSA official who had to sit because he couldn't bend over far enough or long enough to wave his magic wand over the suspicious contents of the soldier's bags. 
As I stood there in amazement, a second TSA official came over and requested the soldier's driver's license. At this point my shock turned to anger. 
I wanted to walk to the entrance of the room and thank the soldier for his service and give him a few words of encouragement. 
However, standing close by were two football player-sized airport security personnel who would have probably manhandled and arrested me for some frivolous charge like interfering with a federal investigation. 
I keep hearing that over 80 percent of Americans think our country is heading in the wrong direction. While mostly a fabrication of the liberal media, if true, it's not for the reasons people think. 
If our homeland ever needs to be defended, let's hope our brave men and women still believe in their patriotism. With incidents like this, we're well on our way to creating a nation not worth defending. 
Donald Rendulic 
Harrison City 

Load-Date: June 27, 2008


End of Document