Airport tightens terrorism security;
Greater Pitt Airport tightens security
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 3, 1995, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 323 words
Body


Travelers who use Pittsburgh International Airport will experience the inconveniences of the tighter security ordered nationwide after the convictions of 10 Muslim radicals.
Passengers should expect baggage- and passenger-unloading restrictions, parking restrictions, possible vehicle inspections and requests to show photo identification with their tickets, airport spokesman Patrick Boyle said yesterday.
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena ordered heightened airport security Sunday, hours after Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others were convicted of conspiring to blow up the United Nations, a federal building in Manhattan, two tunnels and a bridge. They also planned to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
The directive followed an alert Aug. 9 in which Pena called for announcements to passengers to keep track of their bags.
''The decision to increase security is based upon an assessment provided by federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies, combined with an analysis of the current state of affairs,'' Pena said in a statement.
''There has been no specific threat to aviation or any other form of transportation, but we are dealing with a general threat against all U.S. interests at home and abroad.''
Boyle said the latest directive would mean closing 941 parking spaces within 300 feet of the terminal and increasing police patrols throughout the airport -- at a total cost of about $ 10,500 a day in lost parking revenues and overtime police costs.
''There could be some slight impact on the delivery of supplies to stores. There could be some minor delays,'' Boyle said.
USAir spokeswoman Mary Jo Capizzi said that while she could not discuss specific security measures, she did not expect any significant delays of flights.
The only show of any special security at the airport yesterday were signs posted this summer asking passengers to keep track of their luggage and not to accept packages from strangers.

Load-Date: October 3, 1995


End of Document