Airports act to enhance security; Measures: Politicians express resolve in war on terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 8, 2001 Monday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 470 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


Security at Chicago airports was further tightened Sunday in the wake of airstrikes by the United States and Great Britain in Afghanistan and Illinois politicians expressed resolve in the war against terrorism.
"Enhanced security measures were put in place at noon today" to complement existing measures at O'Hare International and Midway airports, said Chicago Department of Aviation spokeswoman Monique Bond.
Bond would not say what specifically was being done. After the Sept. 11th terrorist attacks on the East Coast, members of the National Guard were posted at airports and other precautions put in place.
Gov. George Ryan released a statement saying that the president has formed a powerful alliance for the fight for freedom and against the forces of terrorism.
"The military mission to strike at the heart of darkness has begun," Ryan said. "We will pray for the brave men and women of our fighting forces and for this country."
U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., told WLS-AM that Americans should be ready for some kind of response.
"I think it is important that we are prepared … that we understand that the terrorists are not going to quit," he said. "Part of their defense is to suggest that if we hit their source, they'll come back at us. But, we can't live in the shadow of fear...we have to put and end to this terrorism."
U.S. Sen. Peter Fitzgerald released a statement saying that "the battle has been joined." He warned that the war on terrorism could be lengthy.
"Americans will need to dig deep for the resolve to fight back, to adjust their lives accordingly, to sacrifice, and to resolve that we will see it through to the end," the Republican said.
Meanwhile, Illinois emergency agencies are working to strengthen their plans for dealing with biological or chemical weapons.
"We are completely re-evaluating our preparedness and ability to respond," says Dr. John Lumpkin, director of the Illinois Department of Public Health.
The Bush administration has warned that terrorists such as Osama bin Laden might have access to chemical and biological agents, although the chances of isolated terrorists mastering the technology needed for a widespread attack are considered small.
Nonetheless, Illinois already had begun preparations; under a federal program started in 1999, the state has trained 1,000 physicians and emergency workers to treat victims of the bacteria, viruses and toxic gases that terrorists could use.
Now, public-health experts in Springfield are working to complete Illinois' plan for distributing stockpiled vaccines and antibiotics, and some hospitals have scheduled employee training on the symptoms caused by biological weapons.
"One of the jobs that we have now is to imagine the unimaginable," said Susan Scrimshaw, dean of the School of Public Health at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document