AIRPORTS BLOCK 350 AS THREATS; TIGHTER SECURITY REGULATIONS AFTER '09 CHRISMAS INCIDENT CREDITED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 12, 2011 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-4
Length: 556 words
Byline: Eileen Sullivan, Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- The U.S. government has prevented more than 350 people suspected of ties to al-Qaida and other terrorist groups from boarding U.S.-bound commercial flights since the end of 2009, The Associated Press has learned.
The tighter security rules -- imposed after the attempted bombing of an airliner on Christmas 2009 -- reveal a security threat that persisted for more than seven years after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Until then, even as commercial passengers were forced to remove shoes, limit the amount of shampoo in carry-on luggage and endure pat downs, hundreds of foreigners with known or suspected ties to terrorism passed through security and successfully flew to the United States each year, U.S. officials told the AP. The government said these foreigners typically told Customs officers they were flying here for legitimate reasons, such as vacations or business.
Security practices changed after an admitted al-Qaida operative from Nigeria was accused of trying to blow himself up on a Christmas 2009 flight to Detroit. Until then, airlines kept passengers off U.S.-bound planes only if they were on the no-fly list, those considered a threat to aviation.
Now, before an international flight leaves for the United States, the government checks passengers against a larger watch list that includes al-Qaida financiers and people who attended training camps but aren't considered threats to planes.
The government was checking this list before, but only after the flight was en route to the United States. If someone on the flight was on the watch list, the person would be questioned and likely refused entry after landing.
Hundreds of people linked to al-Qaida, Hamas, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terror groups have been kept off airplanes under the new rules. They include what U.S. officials described as a terrorist organization member who received weapons training, recruited others, fought against U.S. troops and had a ticket to fly to the United States.
Another traveler prevented from boarding a U.S.-bound flight was a terror group member who intelligence officials believe had bought equipment for terrorism.
A third case, in January, involved a Jordanian man booked from Amman to Chicago, who was considered a threat to national security, a law enforcement official said. The State Department had already revoked his visa. He was on the terrorist watch list, but not on the no-fly list since he was not considered a threat to aviation.
After U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers performed the now-routine check, the man was kept off the flight.
The law enforcement official and other U.S. officials insisted on anonymity to discuss sensitive security issues. They would not provide names of those suspected of terror ties or key details about the cases for security reasons.
Kevin McAleenan, deputy assistant commissioner of field operations at Customs and Border Protection, said the gap in U.S. security practices wasn't obvious until after the attempted Christmas attack, in which the accused bomber was subdued by passengers after igniting an explosive packet in his underwear.
There are about 30,000 on the no-fly list and a companion list for those who must have extra screening at airports, a counterterrorism official told the AP. The more expansive terror watch list has about 450,000 names.

Load-Date: April 12, 2011


End of Document