Airport Screening For Bomb Implants
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
July 14, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 11
Length: 413 words
Byline: Editorials
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Osama bin Laden is dead. Other top al-Qaida operatives have been targeted and killed. Terrorism worldwide has lost momentum.
But the war against terrorism is far from over.
The U.S. government has warned airlines that terrorists are considering surgically hiding bombs inside humans to evade airport security.
Such implants could be difficult to detect, experts warn.
Therefore, passengers flying into the United States this summer may notice additional security. In addition to the use of full-body scanning and hand pat-downs, security measures may include more intensive verbal interaction with passengers.
Those who have complained about scanning and pat-downs now have something else to gripe about: Is it really necessary to answer an intrusive battery of questions before boarding a plane?
Well, yes, it is. The safety of many passengers may be at risk.
Terrorists are continually looking for new ways to get around security. Remember the fellow who hid a bomb in his underwear at Christmas 2009?
Explosive experts say surgery to implant bombs could be done a couple of days before a planned attack. An explosive could be implanted in a woman's breast, for example, and the detonator hidden beneath the breast.
Bombs inside the body are not a brand new idea, but recent intelligence indicates a fresh interest in them. Unfortunately, body-scanning machines in airports cannot detect explosives hidden inside humans.
Once a terrorist finds a willing suicide bomber and implants a bomb, carrying out a mission would not be so difficult, according to Chris Ronay, a former chief of the FBI explosives unit.
"It's rather easy and the damage could be rather severe,'' he says.
On the other hand, getting the device to function properly once secured inside a body might not be so simple, says Leo West, a retired FBI bomb expert.
"There are more practical ways of doing it,'' he says.
And they also have been tried.
Terrorists have concealed bombs in printer cartridges and may have considered placing explosives in the insulated lining of beverage containers and carrying them aboard airplanes.
The point is that practically anything the human mind can imagine can be tried - as Americans discovered to their everlasting sorrow on Sept. 11, 2001.
Additional airport security has slowed down the boarding process and invaded privacy.
It also has saved lives.
Airport security agents must do whatever it takes to stop terroristic maniacs who are willing to explode themselves in order to kill others.

Load-Date: July 15, 2011


End of Document