AL LANCE ADDRESSES DOMESTIC TERRORISM CONFERENCE;
 ATTORNEY GENERAL SAYS STATE LAWS HAVE HELPED FIGHT ANTI-GOVERNMENT MOVEMENT
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 13, 1997, Sunday,
IDAHO EDITION


Copyright 1997 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE HANDLE,
Length: 482 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell Staff writer
Body


When the National Association of Attorneys General wanted someone to lead a discussion of the ideology of anti-government extremists, it turned to Idaho.
On Friday, Idaho Attorney General Al Lance and his deputy chief of staff, Lawrence Wasden, flew to Oklahoma City to address the association's conference on domestic terrorism. Lance touted laws enacted by the Idaho Legislature this year and last that he said should halt the spread of the commonlaw court movement and other anti-government efforts.
''Per-capita-wise, we have fewer of these individuals running around than the state of Montana, probably the states of Texas and Ohio,'' Lance said. But he said Idaho has reacted to the movement with preventive laws that other states may want to copy.
The first law, passed last year, bans the filing of bogus liens as a means to intimidate public officials or others. In the past, that's been a favorite tactic of anti-government activists. Although meaningless, the legallooking documents sometimes caused confusion or complicate real estate transactions.
The second, passed this year, made it a crime to intimidate someone by pretending to be a public authority, such as a judge or sheriff.
That targets common-law activists who've declared their own court systems, then attempted to arrest public officials or issue death warrants.
One such group tried to arrest the governor last year.
''For the most part, the leaders of these extremist groups are law-school dropouts and lawyer wannabes,'' Lance said. ''Still, their laughable misinterpretation of state and federal laws to justify their racist philosophy can create considerable unnecessary legal work.''
He added, ''Unfortunately, decent and well-meaning people can fall for this nonsense.''
Many common-law court advocates base their theories on the idea that there are two different classes of citizens, he said, and that whites have a higher citizenship status than nonwhites. They often erroneously trace this idea to the Magna Carta.
''It's so arcane and bizarre,'' Lance said.
But, he said, a well-meaning but frustrated citizen sometimes is taken in.
''Certainly we all get frustrated by government occasionally.''
With the new legislation in place, someone who's persuaded by common-law leaders that the right thing to do is to try to arrest a government official or some such act will learn otherwise quickly, Lance said.
''This puts them on notice that they're committing a crime.''
And when the well-meaning citizen discovers that the course pushed by the common-law court leader means violating the law, ''Who has the greater credibility at that moment in time?'' Lance asked, ''The Idaho Legislature and our judicial system, or this individual who claims that the Magna Carta somehow controls?''
The conference focused on preventing violent acts by domestic terrorists, in the wake of the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building.

Load-Date: April 16, 1997


End of Document