Al Najjar's rehearing request opposed
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 08, 2000, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
Section: CITY & STATE; Pg. 3B
Length: 349 words
Byline: SUSAN ASCHOFF
Body


The government aims at a bail hearing for an ex-USF professor it calls a terrorism supporter.
Government attorneys want to block a bail hearing for a Tampa man jailed on classified evidence, saying that the Aug. 18 hearing could free a supporter of international terrorism.
Mazen Al-Najjar, a former University of South Florida teacher, is accused of ties to Middle East terrorists and has been detained in a Bradenton jail as a national security threat.
ALNAJJAR08
In May, Al-Najjar won a rehearing on bail. A federal judge said his constitutional rights were violated when the government shared secret evidence with an immigration judge but did not give him enough to defend himself.
Immigration judge R. Kevin McHugh said Monday he will hear the case in his Bradenton courtroom on Aug. 18. McHugh also wants both sides to furnish witness lists by Friday.
The government, meanwhile, has gone back to the federal judge to attempt to block the bail hearing.
A hearing poses "unacceptable risks of either disclosing information vital to the national security, or allowing an illegal alien who actively supports international terrorism to be at large in the United States," the government's motion said.
In filings in late July, attorneys for the Immigration and Naturalization Service said they intend to appeal U.S. District Judge Joan A. Lenard's order to the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
Attorneys for the 43-year-old Al-Najjar said he has waited long enough.
A Palestinian who has lived in the United States almost 20 years, Al-Najjar was ordered deported in 1997 for overstaying a student visa. He is jailed while he appeals because the government says he participated in a think tank in Tampa that was a front for the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a group using suicide bombers to derail the Middle East peace effort.
No criminal charges have been filed against Al-Najjar. He says he is not a terrorist.
He is one of about two dozen immigrants nationwide, almost all of them Arab or Muslim, involved in secret evidence cases. Critics say the practice is unconstitutional and politically motivated.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Mazen Al-Najjar

Load-Date: August 8, 2000


End of Document