Al-Arian Could Be Factor In 2006 Vote
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 27, 2005 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 1
Length: 804 words
Byline: KEVIN BEGOS, , kbegos@tampatrib.com
Body


WILL CANDIDATES PLAY TERROR CARD?
By KEVIN BEGOS
kbegos@tampatrib.com
The prosecution of Sami Al-Arian on terrorism charges grew into a major election issue last year and may have helped tipped the balance in one race.
But will candidates in the 2006 elections stir the fading embers of that divisive chapter of Tampa Bay history or let them die out? The potential for a flare-up is still there, some experts say.
"I think anybody's got to be really careful in talking about the Al-Arian case. I don't know if that whole thing goes away," said Davis Houck, a professor of communications at Florida State University.
This month, a federal jury acquitted Al-Arian on eight counts and deadlocked on nine others alleging he was part of a North American cell of a Palestinian terrorist group. Two other defendants were acquitted of all charges, and another was acquitted of 25 charges but no verdict was issued on other counts.
Some called the outcome a triumph of the U.S. justice system, and others said it undermined the international war on terrorism. In the Bay area, many people hoped that the years of battles over Al-Arian, a former professor at the University of South Florida, would finally be over.
Some who said the verdict may open the door for healing locally wonder whether politicians will heed that call.
"While the Al-Arian verdict was a turning point for our community, I'm not sure it has the same significance for politicians," said Ahmed Bedier, a spokesman for the Council on American Islamic Relations.
Confusion About Islam, Muslims
Bedier thinks many Americans still have "a great sense of confusion" about Islam and the Muslim community here. Few elected officials publicly support or defend American Muslims, he said.
"Some politicians would still see that kind of relationship as a liability," he said. "It's not something that they want to get brownie points for."
Houck said the debate over terrorism is similar to the Cold War debate over which party is best at defending America. He sees it as a strong hand for Republicans.
"Who's the party to best protect us? As long as there are terrorist attacks around the world, you'll continue to hear that line of rhetoric," he said.
The Republican National Committee highlighted the threat in a speech President Bush made Dec. 21.
"The terrorists still want to hit us again. There is an enemy that lurks, a dangerous group of people that want to do harm to the American people," Bush said.
Still, Al-Arian played a role in the 2004 U.S. Senate race only because Republican Mel Martinez linked him directly to his Democratic opponent.
One Martinez flier included photos of hooded terrorists brandishing guns, with the words: "Evil was in her midst," referring to former USF President Betty Castor.
Martinez won by 1 percentage point.
"I don't know if you can point the finger at any other people" locally in the 2006 elections, Houck said.
But Bedier said U.S. Rep. Katherine Harris, R-Longboat Key, who is seeking the Republican nomination to challenge Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Tallahassee, has tried to play the terrorism card in another way.
"She made a claim that she was told that a man of 'Middle Eastern heritage' was captured in Indiana with explosives and - and that was a flat-out lie. She was trying to say she'll be tough on security," Bedier said.
Officials in the town Harris identified as the target said they had never heard of the plot and had never talked to Harris, who said the man "had plans to blow up the area's entire power grid."
Harris issued a qualified statement of regret but said her comments showed the need "for each of us to remain alert and vigilant in fighting terrorism."
Terrorism could surface in the 2006 elections, but it's too soon to say the Al-Arian case is over and done. He is in the Orient Road Jail while federal prosecutors decide whether to retry him on the charges on which the jury deadlocked, or possibly to deport him.
Civil Liberties Issues
And with secret wiretaps of Americans stirring controversy, Bedier thinks civil liberties issues the Muslim community has been talking about might resonate with other Americans.
"Now these policies are affecting them, and when they see these policies can be used against them - that's when it's alarming to them."
Houck also said that while it's terrible to even talk about, another terrorist attack on the United States before the 2006 elections could have a major effect on strategies.
Bedier said that given how little most Americans know about Muslim communities here, "they tend to believe what politicians say." That kind of speech "has a direct impact on the anti-Muslim sentiments that exist in our societies."
Reporter Kevin Begos can be reached at (850) 222-8382.
Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Graphic

 
.

Load-Date: July 31, 2006


End of Document