Al-Hussayen pleads innocent to charges UI grad student's terrorism trial delayed a month
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
January 13, 2004 Tuesday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 681 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


A University of Idaho graduate student pleaded innocent to terrorism
 charges Monday, and his trial was pushed back at least a month.
 Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, 34, who had been scheduled to stand trial next week
 on charges of visa fraud and false statements, now faces an additional charge
 of conspiracy to provide material support to terrorism.
 Al-Hussayen, former president of the Muslim Students Association at the
 university, has maintained his innocence.
 The government charged that the computer science student operated Web sites
 and an e-mail group that raised funds and recruited people for violent holy
 war, including terrorism in Israel and Chechnya.
More arrests are possible in the case, said U.S. Attorney Tom Moss. ''The
 charge we have now is a conspiracy charge with unnamed co-conspirators," he
 said.
 Moss said the government has been sorting through information contained on
 Al-Hussayen's computer hard drives, and it's taken nearly a year to pin down
 the basis for the terrorism charge.
 ''We got a great deal of material on those hard drives, and most of it is
 in Arabic. It's just taken a long time," Moss said. ''We move very carefully
 in these kinds of cases - we don't file these charges lightly."
 Al-Hussayen's Boise attorney, David Nevin, has criticized the belated
 charges. Al-Hussayen, a father of three young children, has been jailed since
 his arrest last February.
 ''It's very, very troubling that these charges were filed at the 11th hour
 and the 59th minute," Nevin said. ''This is material which was available to
 the government."
 Although U.S. Magistrate Mikel Williams set a new trial date for Feb. 17,
 he acknowledged that further delays were likely. The Feb. 17 date would give
 Al-Hussayen the minimum time required by law to respond to the new charge.
 Nevin has objected to the new charge as unconstitutional, saying it
 involves issues of free speech. But Moss said Monday, ''It's our position that
 this is conduct, it's not speech. Soliciting funds and recruiting is conduct,
 and whether you use a computer or you post it in the mail, it's the same
 thing."
 Nevin disagreed. ''The 9th Circuit has made it extremely clear where the
 lines are in these areas, and I expect we're going to litigate these
 questions," he said. ''You have to remember how this charge is structured. It
 does allege that support to terrorism has been given as a result of other
 people expressing themselves in e-mail groups."
 The government charges that in addition to his Internet activities,
 Al-Hussayen, a Saudi national, funneled large sums of money through six bank
 accounts to a Detroit-based Islamic charity, the Islamic Assembly of North
 America, that is suspected of ties to terrorism.
 In the new, superseding terrorism indictment issued Friday, the government
 also tied Al-Hussayen to a Saudi charity called Al-Haramain. That group's
 branches in Bosnia and Somalia have been designated as terrorist groups by the
 U.S. government.
 Al-Hussayen, dressed in bright-red jail-issue scrubs, appeared in good
 spirits as he visited with his attorneys in the courtroom. When he left, his
 hands cuffed behind his back, he looked back with a smile.
 ''Sami has the confidence of someone who knows that he hasn't committed any
 crimes," Nevin said. ''On the other hand, he's sitting in a jail cell, and
 it's a bleak existence. … He's doing all right, but it's tough."
 Al-Hussayen's wife and two of his three young sons have been ordered to
 leave the country by March 6, as their immigration status was dependent on his
 student visa. Immigration officials have revoked his visa and ordered him
 deported. He is appealing that ruling.
 The youngest son, who was born here, is a U.S. citizen.
 The new terrorism charge carries a maximum penalty of up to 15 years in
 prison, and a $250,000 fine, with five years of supervised release following
 any prison time. The previous charges - seven of visa fraud and four of false
 statements - carry penalties of up to 25 years in prison on each count of visa
 fraud, and up to five years on each count of false statements, plus fines of
 up to $2.7 million.

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854, or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net.  

Graphic

 
Color photo; Al-Hussayen

Load-Date: January 16, 2004


End of Document