Al-Najjar denies terrorism link, beliefs;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 13, 2000, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: FLORIDA/METRO,
Length: 742 words
Byline: MICHAEL FECHTER, of The Tampa Tribune;
Body


BRADENTON - The government promises to show newly declassified evidence today against a jailed  Palestinian.
The man the Immigration and Naturalization Service says poses a threat to national security  testified Thursday that he has never so much as touched a gun.
Mazen Al-Najjar unequivocally denounced terrorism and terrorist groups. That includes the  Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the group the INS says Al-Najjar is associated with.
"I disagree with violence," Al-Najjar said. "It is not a good part of the experience of mankind. It  may be the worst part. I don't think violence is the way to solve conflict."
Al-Najjar has been jailed without bond since May 1997. He was ordered deported that month  because of visa violations. Federal agents arrested him six days after the order was issued, asking  that he be held as a national security threat.
Secret evidence shown to an immigration judge dealt with an alleged association between  Al-Najjar and the Islamic Jihad.
A U.S. district judge ruled this May that the way the secret evidence was used violated  Al-Najjar's due process rights and ordered a new bond hearing. It began in August and continued  Tuesday.
After Al-Najjar's testimony Thursday, INS District Counsel Daniel Vara told the immigration  court that he had been authorized to submit evidence that had just been declassified.
Al-Najjar's attorney, Georgetown University law Professor David Cole, blasted the eleventh-hour  nature of the government's action.
"One thing that it does reveal is a real sense of the weakness of the government's case," Cole  said.
Cole confirmed that he has spoken with the INS about a possible deal to win Al-Najjar's freedom.
He declined to discuss specifics but said the two sides discussed conditions on Al-Najjar that  would allow him to be free and home with his wife and three daughters.
Al-Najjar's 61/2 hours on the stand marked the end of witness presentations.
The government has offered no evidence that Al-Najjar raised money for terrorist groups,  advocated violence or offered support to the Islamic Jihad. The agents suspect that a think tank  and Palestinian charity Al-Najjar worked with - World and Islam Studies Enterprise - were fronts for  the Islamic Jihad.
Current Jihad leader Ramadan Shallah worked at the think tank, known as WISE, until six months  before he was appointed to lead the terrorist group.
Al-Najjar said he was disappointed to learn of his former colleague's appointment. "He ruined his  own academic career," Al-Najjar said. "He was going to be a very fine academician."
His disappointment was compounded because he knew the news would ruin WISE. The research  institute was to be his life's calling, Al-Najjar said.
The strongest evidence linking WISE to the Jihad is the presence of Shallah in the four years  preceding his appointment.
Al-Najjar said he didn't know Shallah had any connection with the Jihad.
Many of the INS questions for Al-Najjar focused on his brother-in-law, University of South  Florida Professor Sami Al-Arian.
A videotape of a 1991 rally featured Al-Arian being introduced as the president of the  Tampa-based Islamic Committee for Palestine, which "is the active arm of the Palestinian Islamic  Jihad Movement," the speaker introducing Al-Arian said.
FBI agents also found a solicitation letter in Al-Arian's home that sought support for the  Islamic movement in Palestine, which the letter said was represented by the Jihad and Hamas, a  rival Palestinian terrorist group.
It referred to two people recently martyred in an operation and asked for help "so that  operations such as these can continue."
The handwritten letter was dated 10 days after a double suicide bombing in Israel that killed 18  people and wounded 69.
The attack prompted President Clinton to sign an executive order freezing domestic assets of  terrorist groups, including the Islamic Jihad, and prohibiting transactions with them.
Al-Najjar was not at the 1991 rally. He said he knew nothing about it or the Al-Arian  solicitation letter before this bond hearing began in August.
Again, he said the news disappointed him. He said he was outraged with demagoguery he read in a  speech transcript attributed to Al-Arian. He was outraged by the 1991 rally's references that he  said mischaracterized his charity, the Islamic Committee for Palestine.
The government's case boils down to guilt by association, Cole said after the hearing.  Michael Fechter can be reached at (813) 259-7621.

Graphic

 
PHOTO 3 (2C),
 Mazen Al-Najjar

Load-Date: October 14, 2000


End of Document