Al-Qaeda still a threat, says Group of Eight
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 6, 2003 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 418 words
Byline: John Leicester ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The al-Qaeda terror network remains a serious threat, with sleeper cells and agents "ready to act" and bases apparently relocated outside of Afghanistan, a group of justice and interior ministers said yesterday.
In a grim assessment, ministers from the Group of Eight nations - the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Russia - said that terrorism was still "a pervasive and global threat." They warned that terrorists could use chemical, biological or nuclear weapons in attacks.
The ministers pledged to strengthen cooperation among police forces and intelligence services to thwart terrorist attacks, and approved measures to combat the financing of crime and terrorism.
"The threat from the al-Qaeda network remains serious," the ministers said in a statement after a daylong meeting in Paris. "In spite of the elimination of most of its bases in Afghanistan, it seems that other camps have been reactivated in other areas."
The statement gave no details. French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said al-Qaeda appeared to have moved bases to the former Soviet republic of Georgia and Russia's restive Chechyna region.
The ministers said al-Qaeda's abilities had been shaken by recent arrests, but "dormant individuals and cells are always ready to act."
In the last week, Pakistan has arrested at least 10 suspected al-Qaeda members, including Waleed Mohammed bin Attash, whom U.S. counterterrorism officials describe as one of the most wanted al-Qaeda fugitives.
Sarkozy said that al-Qaeda "has been deeply disorganized" but that "we don't expect to lower our guard for a long time."
British Home Secretary David Blunkett said the ouster of Saddam Hussein's government in Iraq also had dealt terrorists a blow, but he agreed that terrorism remained a threat.
"Whilst we've removed one threat in relation to Iraq, a rogue state, and we've obviously damaged the morale of those who were able to draw on the tacit support of the regime, the network out there remains a problem," he said in an interview.
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft attended the meeting - a sign that France and the United States continue to work together against crime and terrorism despite their bitter dispute over the war in Iraq.
"French-American cooperation never stopped, because it concerns the security of our citizens," Sarkozy said. "Those disagreements [over Iraq] are real, but that does not necessitate disaccord on the fight against terrorism."
Ashcroft did not speak to reporters after the meeting.

Load-Date: July 28, 2005


End of Document