Al-Qaida is more active in Iraq, says Obama U.S., Iraqi leaders meet to discuss how to quell the violence.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 2, 2013 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 436 words
Byline:  By NEDRA PICKLER Associated Press 
Body


WASHINGTON • President Barack Obama and Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki discussed on Friday ways they can stop the threat of an increasingly active al-Qaida in Iraq, although Obama stopped short of announcing any new commitments of assistance as Baghdad was seeking.
Al-Maliki came to the White House seeking more American aid to combat the violence ravaging his country, including additional weapons and help with intelligence. Bloodshed brought on by insurgents in Iraq has spiked since American troops left in 2011.
Obama said at the end of his roughly two-hour meeting with al-Maliki that the best way to honor lives lost in the Iraq war would be to bring about a functioning democracy. Neither leader discussed al-Maliki's request for help before reporters, although Obama indicated the United States has a self-interest in helping Iraq fight terrorism.
"Unfortunately al-Qaida has still been active and has grown more active recently," Obama said. "So we had a lot of discussion about how we can work together to push back against that terrorist organization that operates not only in Iraq, but also poses a threat to the entire region and to the United States."
Al-Maliki said that the two leaders had "similar positions" on countering terrorism and want to work together. He described Iraq's democracy as fragile, but vowed to strengthen it.
The United States already provides military aid to Iraq, the legacy of an unpopular war that cost Americans nearly 4,500 troops and more than $700 billion.
The two leaders also said they discussed regional issues, including Syria and Iran. But al-Maliki said the main purpose of his visit was to enhance Iraq's relationship and postwar agreement with the United States.
Al-Maliki's meeting with Obama was their first since December 2011, six days before the last American troops left Iraq. At the time, Obama pledged the U.S. would remain committed to the government they left behind.
The troop withdrawal came after al-Maliki's government refused to let U.S. forces remain in Iraq with legal immunity that the White House insisted was necessary to protect troops. Obama had campaigned for the presidency on ending the nearly nine-year war in Iraq and took the opportunity offered by the legal dispute to pull out all troops.
Sunni Muslim insurgents who had been mostly silenced under the U.S. presence lashed out once the American forces had left, angered by a widespread belief that Sunnis have been sidelined by Iraq's Shiite-led government. Indiscriminate violence has continued to rise, with the United Nations saying Friday that 979 Iraqis were killed last month alone.

Load-Date: November 12, 2013


End of Document