AL-QAIDA DISPLAYS A CHANGED FACE;
SINCE 9/11, AL-QAIDA HAS EVOLVED INTO MOVEMENT OF LOOSELY AFFILIATED AD HOC GROUPS WHOSE AIM IS TO ATTACK 'SOFT TARGETS' IN COUNTRIES ALLIED WITH THE UNITED STATES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 8, 2005 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 695 words
Byline: SIOBHAN GORMAN, THE BALTIMORE SUN
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


If al-Qaida turns out to have been behind yesterday's bombings in London, as British officials suggested, it would be further evidence of the changing face of the extremist group, terrorism analysts said.
 Al-Qaida, they said, is global, opportunistic, fragmented -- and still very potent. The group's battle against Western society is both a war and an evolving propaganda campaign.
 Since 9/11, the pace of al-Qaida-sponsored attacks has quickened. They are now occurring globally at a rate of about once every three months, compared with fewer than one a year before 2001, according to Brian Jenkins, who has studied terrorism for more then three decades. At the same time, the number of casualties in each attack has been lower, he added.
These newer, smaller attacks are part of an emerging two-pronged strategy by al-Qaida, said Michael Scheuer, a former head of the CIA's Osama bin Laden unit and better known as the author of "Imperial Hubris," which critiqued the government's anti-terror policies.
 The older part of the al-Qaida strategy -- the more massive, 9/11-style attacks -- often involved many years of planning. The second, more recent phase, is part of a violent campaign against 23 U.S. allies that al-Qaida has vowed to attack.
 "This is a whole different campaign," Scheuer said of attacks in Madrid, in Bali and elsewhere "This is designed to attack our allies."
 In waging these smaller attacks, Scheuer said, al-Qaida is trying to turn the people of those countries against their U.S.-aligned government. If the attacks were much larger, he said, they would risk rallying those countries around their governments.
 But that should not comfort Americans, he cautioned.
 "They're saving the big one for us. We are their main enemy," he said. "The people who assume this is all they can do are kind of whistling past the graveyard."
 Other analysts said there is a perception, deserved or not, that the United States is harder to penetrate, so al Qaida-inspired jihadists are going elsewhere -- for now.
 The smaller attacks also keep the group and their cause in the public eye, said Jenkins. It's a way to attract new fighters and financing.
 The group that claimed responsibility for the bombings, "Secret Organization of al-Qaida in Europe," is unknown to analysts who track terrorism, and government officials have not yet identified the perpetrators of the attacks. This new organization would fit the post-9/11 trend of al-Qaida's becoming a movement of loosely affiliated, ad hoc groups.
 Al-Qaida tends to seek out so-called "soft targets" because they afford the greatest opportunity for success. Indeed, on 9/11, U.S. airports turned out to be rather soft targets.
 For an attack that will yield a significant number of casualties and far more fear, public transportation offers a more attractive option than other "easy-access" targets like shopping malls, hotels or restaurants. In urban areas, subways are the central nervous system, so attacking a transit system can severely disrupt a city and its economy for weeks or longer.
 For years, many terrorism analysts have been anticipating a major attack on Britain. Not only is it a close ally of the United States, but Britain has been the subject of repeated threats from al-Qaida, dating at least back to a 1998 religious call to arms by bin Laden.
 The London Central Mosque was infiltrated by radical Islamists. And two British citizens, "shoe-bomber" Richard Reid and Shaikh Omar Saeed, who was convicted in the kidnapping of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl, have been apprehended in conjunction with al-Qaida plots.
 Yonah Alexander, director of the International Center for Terrorism Studies at the Potomac Institute, said al-Qaida is "very active in every country in Europe." Anti-terrorism efforts in European countries "disrupted the infrastructure of al-Qaida but didn't disable it."
 The European terror infrastructure may actually be expanding. Freshly trained terrorists, or jihadists, appear to be returning to Europe from the war in Iraq, said David Kay, former chief U.S. weapons inspector in Iraq. "We've now put a group of terrorists on steroids and given them training."

Load-Date: July 8, 2005


End of Document