AL-QAIDA, HEZBOLLAH ARE TEAMING UP, EXPERTS SAY;
 THEY COORDINATE TERRORISM TRAINING, WEAPONS SMUGGLING, SOURCES SAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 30, 2002 Sunday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 803 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Lebanon-based Hezbollah organization, one of the world's most formidable terrorist groups, is increasingly teaming up with al-Qaida on logistics and training for terrorist operations, according to U.S. and European intelligence officials and terrorism experts.
The new cooperation, which is ad hoc and tactical and involves mid- and low-level operatives, mutes years of rivalry between Hezbollah, which draws its support primarily from Shiite Muslims, and al-Qaida, which is predominantly Sunni. It includes coordination on explosives and tactics training, money laundering, weapons smuggling and acquiring forged documents, according to knowledgeable sources.
This new alliance, even if informal, has greatly concerned U.S. officials in Washington and intelligence operatives abroad who believe the assets and organization of Hezbollah's formidable militant wing will enable a hobbled al-Qaida network to increase its ability to launch attacks against American targets.
Hezbollah, which was founded by Lebanese clerics in 1982, has two wings. One is political and social. Its vibrant political party holds nine seats in the Lebanese Parliament. The other wing is a guerrilla military force. The United States put Hezbollah on its terrorist list in 1997.
Unlike al-Qaida, Hezbollah has never targeted Americans on U.S. soil. But its operatives have killed nearly 300 Americans overseas in the last 20 years, including 241 service members in a Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon.
The concerns over the new partnership have reached the Senate and House intelligence committees' chairmen and vice chairmen, who, under special rules, are regularly briefed by CIA Director George Tenet and FBI Director Robert Mueller on highly classified information and operations not revea led to other committee members.
The new collaboration illustrates what analysts say is an evolving pattern of decentralized alliances between terrorist groups and cells that share enough goals to find common ground: crippling the United States and forcing U.S. armed forces out of the Middle East, and Israel out of Palestinian territory.
"There's a convergence of objectives," said Steven Simon, a former National Security Council terrorism expert. "There's something in the zeitgeist that is pretty well established now."
Although cooperation between al-Qaida and Hezbollah may have been going on at some level for years, the U.S. war against al-Qaida has hastened and deepened the relationship. U.S. officials believe that after al-Qaida was driven from Afghanistan, leader Osama bin Laden sanctioned his operatives to ally themselves with helpful Islamic-based groups, said a senior administration official with access to daily intelligence reports.
Loose partnerships are being facilitated by members' ability to communicate using Internet chat rooms accessible with constantly changing passwords. The connections, intelligence officials believe, are made case by case, depending on the needs of a particular local group. "When someone's traveling and needs assistance in passing through, whomever happens to have that capacity will be turned to," said Paul Pillar, former deputy director of the CIA counterterrorism center.
The chat rooms are set up to avoid detection. New recruits can enter only rooms where "holy war" against America or other general topics are discussed. Only trusted and vetted operatives can access chat rooms where specific deals are discussed.
Hezbollah's original goal was to create an Islamic state in Lebanon. For 18 years, with financial and intelligence support from Iran and Syria, the group fought to end Israel's military occupation of a buffer zone in southern Lebanon. It attacked American targets in a bid to drive the United States from the country.
Although all of Hezbollah's attacks have taken place overseas, the FBI is investigating close to a dozen Hezbollah groups in the United States. Their ostensible purpose is to raise money for Lebanese charities.
But a recent criminal court case in Charlotte - in which eight defendants pleaded guilty and two were later found guilty by a jury - showed how a group alleged to be a Hezbollah cell involved in cigarette smuggling conspired to aid the organization as a whole.
Court documents in the United States and Canada say Hezbollah members in both countries have tried to procure military equipment, including laser-range finders, aircraft-analysis software, global positioning gear, night-vision goggles, blasting equipment and mine detection machinery for fighters in Lebanon.
U.S. law enforcement officials and terrorism experts fear the infrastructure and personal relationships established to aid illicit arms and document purchases could easily be used to launch attacks on U.S. soil.
"It gives you an infrastructure you can potentially build on," Pillar said.

Notes

A shorter version of this story appeared in the Five Star Lift edition.

Load-Date: July 1, 2002


End of Document