Al-Qaida Less Potent Since 9/11: U.S.
RTT News (United States)
October 1, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 305 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A senior U.S. counter-terrorism official says the Al-Qaida has suffered set-backs due to relentless American pressure, but its presence in the Yemen threatens to turn that country into a dangerous training ground for plotting attacks, reports say.
In an an unusually-optimistic assessment of how America is faring in taking on the al-Qaida terrorist network, Michael Leiter, director of the National Counter-terrorism Center, told a Senate hearing that the extremist network was facing more challenges, and was a more vulnerable organization than at any time since the 9/11 attacks.
Leiter futrher told the Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee that Al-Qaida&apos;s safe haven in northwest Pakistan was diminishing by the day and less secure, while the group had suffered significant leadership losses over the past 18 months.
However, he said the group&apos;s regional affiliates, especially in the Yemen, were a growing threat. U.S. officials are particularly worried after the Saudi and Yemeni wings of Al-Qaida announced in January their merger into "Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula" (AQAP).
The counter-terrorism official said Somali terrorist group al-Shabaab was working with "a limited number" of al-Qaida operatives, besides recruiting and training hundreds of extremists from around the world, including "dozens" of American recruits.
In Algeria, he said, a violent al-Qaida affiliate continued to expand its operations from a new haven in northern Mali, along with lower-level operations in the nearby Mauritania.
However, in Iraq, added Leiter, the Al-Qaida affiliate&apos;s ability to stage attacks has been substantially reduced by coalition military and Iraqi security operations.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document