Al-Qaida Doesn't Exist
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
November 23, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 9
Length: 371 words
Byline: Letters
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


TO THE EDITORS:
Allegations of a UPS package containing explosive materials from Yemen aboard United Arab Emirates Flight 201 bound for the U.S.A. is a total hoax, according to UAE and Yemeni officials.
Emirate Civil Aviation Authorities claim that the flight did not contain any packages from Yemen.
This is supported by the Yemen Post, quoting Yemenia Airways Cargo Director Mohammed al-Shaibah as saying, "No UPS cargo plane left Yemeni lands," and that no UPS cargo package passed through Yemen, as well.
The UPS website lists 19 countries in the European-Middle East-African region in which it has a presence. Yemen is not among them.
The media have conditioned us into believing that al-Qaida is associated with terrorism and that it is a threat to the USA, yet at no time has the media adequately defined al-Qaida. The public hasn't a clue as to what constitutes al-Qaida. Yet instilled in the minds of the masses is the imperative that the government must have extra-legal authority to take extraordinary measures to protect us from this nebulous threat.
An article appearing in the July 8, 2005 edition of the London Guardian, written by former British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook four weeks before his untimely death, states that: "Al-Qaida, literally 'the database,' was originally the computer file of the thousands of mujahideen who were recruited and trained with help from the CIA to defeat the Russians" during the Russian occupation of Afghanistan.
In addition, former French intelligence officer and delegate to NATO headquarters in Brussels, Maj. Pierre-Henri Bunel, asserts, "The truth is, there is no Islamic army or terrorist group called al-Qaida. And any informed intelligence officer knows this. But there is a propaganda campaign to make the public believe in the presence of an identified entity representing the ''devil'' only in order to drive the ''TV watcher'' to accept a unified international leadership for a war against terrorism. The country behind this propaganda is the U.S. and the lobbyists for the U.S. war on terrorism are only interested in making money."
Remember the "weapons of mass destruction" lie that we were bombarded with in 2002-2003? Where did it lead us?
Russell Stepanchak
Columbia

Load-Date: November 23, 2010


End of Document