AL-QAIDA TO TARGET HOSPITALS?/ TERRORISM BULLETIN URGES VIGILANCE AT VETERANS AFFAIRS SITES
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 28, 2004 Saturday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 294 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Al-Qaida may attempt to attack Veterans Affairs hospitals as an alternative to more heavily guarded U.S. military installations, the FBI and Homeland Security Department warn in a new nationwide terrorism bulletin.
Although U.S. authorities say there is no credible intelligence regarding a specific threat against such hospitals, the bulletin said there have been persistent reports of suspicious activity at medical facilities throughout the United States.
That includes "possible reconnaissance activities" this year at unspecified military medical facilities in Bethesda, Md., and Aurora, Colo., the bulletin said. Even though later investigation of these two incidents uncovered no links to terrorism, the bulletin urges vigilance at VA hospitals on the part of police and security personnel.
"These facilities may be considered attractive targets due to their association with the military and a perception that such an attack may be more successful than an attack against traditional military targets, which generally maintain a more robust security posture," the bulletin says.
Bethesda, located just outside Washington, is home of the National Naval Medical Center, which is across the street from the National Institutes of Health. Aurora, located just east of Denver, is home to the former Fitzsimons Army Medical Center, now being redeveloped into a civilian medical school.
The Department of Veterans Affairs operates 163 hospitals in the United States, with at least one in each of the 48 contiguous states as well as in the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. There are also hundreds of VA clinics and nursing homes.
The bulletin was circulated among law enforcement and security personnel nationwide Thursday. The Associated Press obtained a copy yesterday.

Load-Date: August 31, 2004


End of Document