Al-Qaida still a global threat, ministers say; Officials from 8 nations warn of sleeper cells that are setting up shops worldwide
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 6, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 371 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The al-Qaida terror network remains a serious threat, with sleeper cells and agents "ready to act" and bases apparently relocated outside of Afghanistan, the world's top justice and interior ministers said Monday.
In a grim assessment, ministers from the Group of Eight nations said terrorism is still "a pervasive and global threat" and warned that terrorists could use chemical, biological or nuclear weapons in attacks.
The ministers pledged to strengthen cooperation between police forces and intelligence services to thwart terrorist attacks, and approved measures to combat the financing of crime and terrorism.
French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said al-Qaida appears to have moved bases to the former Soviet republic of Georgia and Russia's restive Chechyna region.
The ministers said al-Qaida's abilities have been shaken by recent arrests, but "dormant individuals and cells are always ready to act."
In the last week, Pakistan has arrested at least 10 suspected al-Qaida members, including Waleed Mohammed Bin Attash, whom U.S. counterterrorism officials describe as one of the most wanted al-Qaida fugitives.
Britain's Home Secretary David Blunkett said the ouster of Saddam Hussein's regime had dealt terrorists a blow, although he agreed that terrorism remains a threat.
"Whilst we've removed one threat in relation to Iraq, a rogue state, and we've obviously damaged the morale of those who were able to draw on the tacit support of the regime, the network out there remains a problem," he said in an interview with The Associated Press.
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft attended the meeting - a sign that France and the United States continue to work together against crime and terrorism despite their bitter dispute over the war in Iraq.
"French-American cooperation never stopped because it concerns the security of our citizens," said Sarkozy. "Those disagreements (over Iraq) are real but that does not necessitate disaccord on the fight against terrorism."
More than a year after the first of around 600 detainees captured in the war on terrorism arrived at the detention center, none have been charged with a crime and no preparations are under way for trials in Guantanamo, leaving the men in legal limbo.

Load-Date: May 6, 2003


End of Document