Al-Qaida 'chats' online
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
January 25, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 349 words
Byline: Deseret Morning News editorial
Body


   Because many good people see goodness as "wise," they assume those who choose "evil" must be foolish. When brilliance and evil are linked, it's usually in cartoonish versions of the mad scientist -- like Lex Luthor or Dr. Evil.
But the truth is more frightening.
Brilliance, in real life, sometimes shows up in the most twisted minds. The intricate planning of the 9/11 catastrophe is one example. And the fact the "media relations" arm of al-Qaida -- Al-Sahab -- now has a question-and-answer online format is another. Recently, Ayman al-Zawahri, one of the most sadistic killers in the world, received 900 questions in what was billed as an "online interview." Terrorists around the world asked if they should be focusing on the Arabs or the Americans. They wondered how many cells operating around the world are directly controlled by al-Qaida.
The format -- chilling and conversational -- was chatty and freewheeling. And that should send chills through anyone who values human life and believes terrorism is not only a cowardly form of murder but the work of brains twisted by mental illness.
One questioner -- who called himself Knight of Islam -- asked matter-of-factly, "We are awaiting a strike against American soil. Why has that not been done? Why are the Jews in the world not struck?"
The quickest way to lose in cards -- and in war -- is to underestimate your opponent. Those tempted to believe that terrorism is such an aberration it will eventually burn itself out or self-destruct misread the ruthless nature of the foe, and the care and intelligence behind the indiscriminate violence terrorists create. Just the brazen nature of the online "chat" should be enough to steel the West even more in its resistance to al-Qaida and those who believe bombing hospitals and schools is a legitimate way to express political positions.
Perhaps rooting out and destroying such madness will remain a well-intentioned dream. But the security of the nation doesn't have to be a dream. As the terrorists grow bolder, Americans cannot afford to become distracted. They must double their resolve.

Load-Date: January 25, 2008


End of Document