Al-Qaeda fugitive tied to '09 terror plot
USA TODAY
July 8, 2010 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 400 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


WASHINGTON -- A high-ranking al-Qaeda operative helped organize the foiled 2009 terrorist plot against New York City's subway, and his associates planned to attack the United Kingdom, federal prosecutors said Wednesday.
Adnan El Shukrijumah, the subject of a seven-year worldwide manhunt, was charged with helping recruit Colorado resident Najibullah Zazi, whose attempt to detonate explosives was derailed by federal investigators on the eve of the eighth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.
El Shukrijumah's associates were also communicating with a British man, Abid Naseer, about a 2009 plot foiled in Manchester, England. Naseer was arrested Wednesday by British authorities, prosecutors said.
The government's disclosure adds a larger dimension to the subway plot, described by Attorney General Eric Holder as one of the most serious terrorism attempts on U.S. soil since the Sept. 1, 2001, attacks.
Prosecutors allege that El Shukrijumah and plotters Saleh al-Somali and Rashid Rauf helped recruit Zazi, a former Denver airport shuttle driver. They also recruited two co-conspirators to conduct suicide bombings in New York using devices made from ordinary household supplies, including hydrogen peroxide, acetone, flour and oil, prosecutors said.
Zazi and Zarein Ahmedzay have pleaded guilty to their roles in the plot. They are awaiting sentencing. A third suspect, Adis Medunjanin, is in custody awaiting trial.
El Shukrijumah, a 34-year-old native of Saudi Arabia who once lived in South Florida, is charged with directing Zazi and others to carry out attacks in the United States.
Identified by federal authorities as "Ja'far the Pilot" because of his aviation skills, El Shukrijumah was first outlined to federal investigators by al-Qaeda operations chief Khalid Sheikh Mohammed after his capture in 2003. Mohammed is awaiting trial as the mastermind of the 9/11 attacks.
El Shukrijumah faces numerous charges, including conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and attempting to commit an act of terrorism. His whereabouts are unknown, and a $5 million reward is offered for information leading to his capture.
Tom Fuentes, a former FBI assistant director, said the alleged links to Shukrijumah are "pretty significant." He said it was unclear whether Zazi was offering up the al-Qaeda operative's name to win a lighter sentence.
"You really don't know if Zazi is just name-dropping," Fuentes said. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, FBI via AP

Load-Date: July 8, 2010


End of Document