Al-Qaida behind 2005 London bombing
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 29, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 6
Length: 446 words
Byline: TANYA DAVIS-GOESSE Central Alternative High School
Body


Editor's note: Students at Central Alternative High School are conducting in-depth research on the impact and significance of global terrorism.
For several weeks, the Telegraph Herald has been publishing essays written by the students as part of their project that will culminate in a public seminar on global terrorism in the spring of 2008.
The violence that took place in London on July 7, 2005, was the product of men suspected of involvement with al-Qaida. These Muslims used homemade bombs in their suicide attacks.
On July 7, three explosions occurred on London underground trains. About an hour later, another explosion took place on a double-decker bus. The toll was 52 dead and 784 injured.
The attacks were carried out by Mohammad Sidique Khan, Shehzad Tanweer, Germaine Lindsay and Hasib Mir Hussain, all of whom appeared to be average British citizens.
Khan, the oldest at 30, was believed to be the mentor to the other assailants. Twice this character was brought to the attention of British Intelligence officials in M15, before the attacks and during a trip to Pakistan with Tanweer where they might have met with senior al-Qaida members. Tanweer, 22, was a sports science graduate. Lindsay, 19, was an Islam convert who changed his name to Jamal in 2000 and began to associate with troublemakers. He was even disciplined for handing out leaflets in support of al-Qaida. Hussain was 18 during the attacks and was a quiet student. He was still living with his parents when he died. His suicide mission was performed on the double-decker bus when he was prevented from boarding an underground train like his accomplices.
The suspicion of al-Qaida involvement in these bombings increased after the attacks when a video message aired on the Arabic TV station al-Jazeera that showed Khan declaring himself a "soldier at war against those who have taken part in the atrocities against my people," or Muslims in general.
The bombs used were constructed in a flat discovered by British authorities after the attack. Evidence shows that each device contained 2 to 5 kilograms of explosives. The materials also had a bleaching effect, and the families of both Tanweer and Hussain noticed before the attacks that their hair was getting lighter. The funding was supplied by Khan with a 10,000-pound bank loan.
British authorities reconstructed the events leading up to the suicide bombings with the help of closed-circuit television. They discovered that three of the bombers carried out a practice run nine days before the attacks. Their plotting succeeded with deceptively simple tactics. The bombers used mobile phones and hired cars for activities connected to their planning.

Load-Date: March 29, 2008


End of Document