Al-Qaeda denies the death -- again -- of its No. 2 in Yemen
USA TODAY
April 11, 2013 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 345 words
Byline: Iona Craig, Special for USA TODAY,
Body


sanaa, yemen Al-Qaeda in Yemen's second-in-command appears, once again, to have come back from the dead.
Saeed al-Shihri has been pronounced killed three times, but an audio message purportedly from Shihri has been posted online by al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula's official media wing.
The authenticity of the recording could not be verified. However, the reported voice of Shihri refers to events that have taken place since his alleged death in November in what Yemen's national security agency described as a "counterterrorism operation" in Sadaa province.
In the 14-minute recording, Shihri denounces a February anti-terrorism conference in Saudi Arabia and refers to a meeting of Arab ministers in March. His main focus was to denounce Saudi Arabia's ruling family as "U.S. collaborators" and call for the removal of the Saudi regime.
Yemen's Supreme National Security Committee claimed in January that the terrorist  had been killed in November, at least the third time the former Guantanamo Bay detainee had been reported killed.
Shihri was captured in Afghanistan in 2001, sent to the U.S. detention facility for terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and put on a list of the 37 most dangerous inmates. He was sent back to Saudi Arabia in 2007 to take part in a rehabilitation program. Shortly after being released by Saudi officials in 2008, Shihri arrived in Yemen and in January 2009 appeared in a video message announcing the creation of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
The Yemeni government announced that Shihri had been killed in 2009 and then erroneously reported his capture in 2010 before  again reporting his death in a U.S. drone strike in September 2012. Most recently, authorities said he had been killed in November 2012.
The United States has been heavily involved in the fight against al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, regarded by Washington as the most dangerous branch of al-Qaeda in the world. The number of U.S. drone strikes carried out in Yemen surpassed those in Pakistan for the first time last year, according to monitoring groups. 

Graphic

 
photo SITE Intelligence Group via AP Saeed al-Shihri is shown in an undated video posted online in January 2009.

Load-Date: April 11, 2013


End of Document