Al-Qaida No. 2 denounces Iran
The Bismarck Tribune
April 23, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: WIRE; Pg. 2A
Length: 472 words
Byline: LEE KEATH Associated Press Writer
Body


CAIRO, Egypt - Al-Qaida's No. 2 leader issued a new audiotape Tuesday accusing Shiite Iran of spreading a conspiracy theory about who carried out the Sept. 11 attacks to discredit the power of the Sunni terrorist network.
Ayman al-Zawahri, Osama bin Laden's deputy, has stepped up his denunciations of Iran in recent messages in part to depict al-Qaida as the Arabs' top defense against the Persian nation's rising power in the Middle East.
The increasing enmity toward Iran is a notable change of rhetoric from al-Zawahri, who in the past rarely mentioned the country - apparently in a hopes he would be able to forge some sort of understanding with Tehran based on their common rivalry with the United States. Iran has long sought to distance itself from al-Qaida.
"Al-Zawahri wanted to work with Iran, but he's deeply disappointed that Iran has not cooperated with al-Qaida," said Rohan Gunaratna, a terrorism expert and author of "Inside al-Qaida: The Global Network of Terror."
So now, al-Zawahri "wants to appeal to the anti-Shiite, anti-Iran sentiments in the Arab and Muslim world," said Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research in Singapore.
Al-Zawahri appeared intent on exploiting widespread worry in the Arab world over Iran's influence, particularly in Iraq, to garner support for al-Qaida. At the same time, he sought to denigrate Iran's ally Hezbollah, which has gained some popularity even among Sunnis in the region for its fight against Israel.
Al-Zawahri's comments came in a two-hour audio posted on an Islamic militant Web site, the second message in weeks in which he answered hundreds of questions sent to the site by al-Qaida sympathizers and others.
The question-and-answer campaign is a sign of the terrorist network's sophistication in its use of the Web. They show al-Qaida can post frequent messages from its leaders while keeping in touch with its popular base - all while the leaders remain in hiding, presumably on the Afghan-Pakistan frontier.
The Web is a key tool of al-Qaida's central leadership to inspire and direct sympathizers at a time when some terrorism experts question how much control they have over Islamic militants. Al-Qaida branches in Iraq and Afghanistan are believed to have close ties with the network's core, but little is known about its level of control elsewhere.
The authenticity of the audio could not be independently confirmed. But the voice sounded like past audios from al-Zawahri, and the posting where it was found bore the logo of Al-Sahab, al-Qaida's media arm.
Al-Zawahri spoke on a wide range of topics in Tuesday's message. He told a female questioner there were no women in the ranks of al-Qaida, but praised wives of mujahedeen for their "heroic role in taking care of their homes and children amid the trials of exile."

Load-Date: April 23, 2008


End of Document