Al-Qaida may be on wane ? but danger isn't
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
September 27, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 789 words
Byline: Scott Shane New York Times News Service
Body


 WASHINGTON ? Eight years after 9/11, the specter of terrorism still haunts the United States. Just last week, FBI agents were working double time to unravel the alarming case of a Denver airport shuttle driver accused of training with explosives in Pakistan and buying bombmaking chemicals. In Dallas, a young Jordanian was charged with trying to blow up a skyscraper; in Springfield, Ill., a prison parolee was arrested for trying to attack the local federal building. 
Meanwhile, the Obama administration struggled to decide whether sending many more troops to Afghanistan would be the best way to forestall a future attack. But important as they were, those news reports masked a surprising and perhaps heartening long-term trend: Many students of terrorism believe that in important ways, al-Qaida and its ideology of global jihad are in a pronounced decline ? with its central leadership thrown off balance as operatives are increasingly picked off by missiles and manhunts and, more important, with its tactics discredited in public opinion across the Muslim world. "Al-Qaida is losing its moral argument about the killing of innocent civilians," said Emile A. Nakhleh, who headed the Central Intelligence Agency's strategic analysis program on political Islam until 2006. "They're finding it harder to recruit. They're finding it harder to raise money." Marc Sageman, a former CIA officer and forensic psychiatrist, counted 10 serious plots with Western targets, successful and unsuccessful, that could be linked to al-Qaida or its allies in 2004, a peak he believes was motivated by the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq the year before. In 2008, he said, there were just three. Sageman has been in the forefront of those who argue that the centrally led al-Qaida responsible for the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks is giving way to a generation of dispersed, aspiring terrorists linked largely by the Internet ? who still pose a danger, but of a lesser degree. "I said two years ago it was a diminishing problem, and everything I've seen since then has confirmed it," Sageman said of what counterterrorism specialists call al-Qaida Central. Sageman is not alone in that assessment. Audrey Kurth Cronin, a professor at the National War College in Washington, cites the arcs of previous violent extremist groups, from the Russian People's Will to the Irish Republican Army, that she studied for her new book, "How Terrorism Ends." "I think al-Qaida is in the process of imploding," she said. "This is not necessarily the end. But the trends are in a good direction." Yet the question of how much comfort to take from such an assessment, and whether it should change U.S. counterterrorism policy, remain wide open, as shown by the Afghanistan debate and the charges against the Denver man, Najibullah Zazi. Even counterterrorism officials who agree that al-Qaida is on the wane, for example, say the organization might well regroup if left unmolested in a lawless region in Pakistan, Afghanistan or Somalia. Moreover, they point out that even a lone terrorist with modest skills can produce mass carnage. Six years before 9/11, with no aid from a sophisticated network, Timothy McVeigh used a simple fertilizer bomb in Oklahoma City to kill 168 people. And the 2001 calamity was the work of, at most, a few dozen plotters. Nevertheless, some government officials do take quiet, if wary, satisfaction in two developments that they say underlie the broad belief that al-Qaida is on a downhill slope. One is the success of military Special Operations units, the CIA and allies in killing prominent terrorists. The second trend is older and probably more critical. The celebration in many Muslim countries that followed the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks has given way to broad disillusionment with mass killing and the ideology behind it, according to a number of polls. Between 2002 and 2009, the view that suicide bombings are "often or sometimes justified" has declined, according to the Pew Global Attitudes Project, from 43 percent to 12 percent in Jordan; from 26 percent to 13 percent in Indonesia; and from 33 percent to 5 percent in Pakistan (excluding some sparsely populated, embattled areas). Positive ratings for Osama bin Laden have fallen by half or more in most of the countries Pew polled. Despite the sinking poll numbers, Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at Georgetown University, said, "al-Qaida's core demographic is young hotheads aged 16 to 28, and I still don't think it's lost its appeal to that demographic." He said many terrorist groups kill their compatriots and become unpopular, but still remain in business. "Terrorism ends, sure," he said. "But with al-Qaida it may be 50 years, and we're only eight years away from 9/11."  

Load-Date: September 27, 2009


End of Document