ALABAMIAN TO HEAD REVIVED SENATE SECURITY PANEL - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 541 words
Byline: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12
Body


Even before taking his Senate seat, Jeremiah Andrew Denton Jr. of Alabama has been handed what may prove to be one of the most controversial assignments in the new Congress: chairmanship of a newly revived security panel of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
The name is different: the Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism.  But it is the direct descendant of the Internal Security Subcommittee that was involved in widespread investigations into allegations of Communist activity for more than two decades before it was abolished several years ago. The subcommittee provided a forum for Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin, in his crusade against Communists.
AN-A
The revival of the subcommittee was announced by Senator Strom Thurmond, the conservative Republican from South Carolina who will be chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee in the new Congress.
Senator-elect Denton, a Navy flier who was shot down early in the Vietnam War, spent seven years as a prisoner of war in Hanoi before his release in 1973.
 
Unseated Democratic Incumbent
The retired rear admiral was elected to Congress last month, unseating Senator Donald W. Stewart, a Democrat, to become the first Republican senator from Alabama since Reconstruction.
In his campaign, Mr. Denton was strongly supported by the Rev.  Jerry Falwell, the evangelist who is a leader of Moral Majority. Mr.  Denton, a self-described morality crusader, is founder of a group called the Coalition for Decency.
In his morality crusade, Mr. Denton has singled out such areas of concern as adultery, premarital sex among teen-agers and the decline of the family.
However, it is not known yet what areas he will focus on as chairman of the security and terrorism subcommittee.
 
Plan for the F.B.I.
''He wants to get a better handle on the matter,'' an aide said.  ''He wants to talk to the F.B.I. about what it sees as security dangers.''
The old Internal Security Subcommittee was established in 1951 as the Senate co unterpart to the equally controversial House Un-American A ctivities Committee, which later was renamed House Internal Secu rity Committee. Both panels were abolished several yearsago.
Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House, said this week that the House did not intend to revive that body's internal security panel, which was abolished in 1975.
In its earliest and most flamboyant years, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee was headed by Senator Patrick A. McCarran, Democrat of Nevada, and then by Senator William E. Jenner, Republican of Indiana. Senator James O. Eastland, Democrat of Mississippi, was chairman in later years.
 
Move to Abolish Panel
The Senate Rules Committee sought in 1976 to abolish the internal security panel. One of the subcommittee's chief opponents, Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, argued that the panel had done little for years. He said that from 1969 to 1975 the subcommittee spent $3.4 million dollars and produced only one bill that became law.
The subcommittee, finally cut off from any financing, drifted out of existence in 1977, but only after vigorous protests by Senator Thurmond.
''If we don't know who the enemies of this country are,'' he lamented at the time, ''then we're in real trouble.''
Correction

Because of an editing error,an arti- cle on Dec. 14 incorrectly described the panel that Senator Joseph R. McCarthy headed. He was chairman of the Gov- ernment Operations Committee and its Permanent Investigations Subcommit- tee.
Correction-Date: December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


End of Document