Albany Acts at Last On Anti-Terror Bill
New York Sun (Archive)
July 22, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1
Length: 715 words
Byline: By JILL GARDINER, Staff Reporter of the Sun
Dateline: ALBANY 
Body


After more than two years of debate, the Legislature passed an "anti-terrorism" bill yesterday that eliminates the statute of limitations for terrorism-related crimes, increases penalties, and makes permanent the state Office of Homeland Security.
The bill, which cleared the Senate and Assembly, has been on top of Governor Pataki's to-do list since two months after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Democrats have stalled it because of concern over civil liberties.
Mr. Pataki, who brokered the compromise deal with state Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, and Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno, hailed the bill as "an enormous breakthrough" and said it would add another layer of protection for New Yorkers. In his annual state address this year he called it the "most important bill" pending in the Legislature. He was expected to sign it last night.
"For the first time now people who possess or utilize biological or chemical weapons will be facing an A1 class felony, life without parole," he told reporters, before ticking off the bill's other measures.
Though some of the measures, including a wire-tapping provision, have been watered down, the bill lowers the threshold for terrorist-suspected mon ey laundering. Under existing law, for example, an individual would have to launder $10,000 to be convicted of a Class E felony. That amount has been dropped to $1,000.
The new law will require those convicted of terrorism-related crimes to submit DNA samples to the state. It also turns the state Office of Homeland Security, which Mr. Pataki created by executive order after September 11, into a permanent office, and eliminates the eight-year statute of limitations for prosecuting terrorism threats or actions.
Mr. Silver, who has voiced concerns about lowering thresholds and increasing penalties, said yesterday the package was a fair compromise, but noted the FBI has more extensive training and is better-equipped to deal with terrorism.
"We begin to address some of the things that are preventive in nature, rather than only adding penalties," Mr. Silver said. "We've added significant penalties for being involved in terrorism, we've reduced some of the thresholds on money laundering, especially where it is terrorist activity. I think we've done a good package."
A "roving wire tap" provision, which would have allowed the state to obtain court orders to eavesdrop on all communications rather than on a single phone line, was replaced by a more stringent version. Mr. Spitzer favored the more far-reaching authorization, saying terrorists were circumventing authorities by switching cell phones regularly.
But civil libertarians still have concerns. Legislative counsel to the New York Civil Liberties Union, Robert Perry, said lawmakers got it "half right," but criticized what he called a "slippery and imprecise definition of terrorism."
Mr. Perry, like others in his corner, was pleased with what was left out - primarily the due process provision that would have stripped terror suspects of standard legal protections and the "double jeopardy" provision, which would have allowed suspects to be tried in New York even if they had been tried elsewhere.
He also said the money-laundering definition could easily be misconstrued to profile someone of Middle East dissent, or any race, and penalize them for benign activities that should be protected under the First Amendment.
"There are still tensions between the civil liberties and anti-terrorism measures," Mr. Perry told The New York Sun, adding that the lawmakers hurriedly rammed the law through without debate. "There has not been a single public hearing on this in the state legislature and that, I think, is a scandal."
Others have said that the law essentially mirrors federal law and does not bring much else to the table. Mr. Pataki said it was a necessary and aggressive step to ferret out terrorists in New York and divert another attack.
Asked if the law violated suspects' civil liberties, the governor was blunt in his reply.
"These are criminals that I believe deserve the full penalty of the law and our ability to go after them," he said. "So if you don't break the law, if you don't engage, or threaten to engage, or aid terrorist organizations you shouldn't have a problem."

Load-Date: July 22, 2004


End of Document