Albright urges Arafat to combat terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 11, 1997, Thursday,
EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: ,
Length: 402 words
Body


SUMMARY: Secretary of State Albright prods Palestinian leader and tells Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to practice "give and take."
JERUSALEM - After consoling Israeli and American victims of suicide bombs, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright urged Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat on Wednesday to crack down on terrorists before expecting any trade-offs with Israel.
But Albright also told Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that peacemaking required "give and take" on both sides. A senior State Department official said Albright advised him to open the borders to Palestinian workers and resume repayments to the Palestinian Authority.
An Associated Press report
That would help Arafat sustain an offensive against terrorism over the long run, said the official, briefing reporters on Albright's three-hour meeting with Netanyahu on condition of anonymity.
Albright, making her first trip to the Mideast as secretary of state, was due to meet Arafat Thursday in the West Bank town of Ramallah.
In a clear split with Netanyahu, who is demanding Arafat arrest "the sharks and not the sardines" behind suicide bombing attacks, Albright said Israel should pull back on occupied lands, as promised in the 1993 Oslo peace accords.
Peacemaking "cannot proceed without reciprocity," Albright said at a news conference.
Netanyahu did not seem impressed with the argument, or with the arrest by Arafat's Palestinian Authority of scores of terrorism suspects. After Israel released about $ 13 million of a $ 80 million debt of withheld taxes, "the response I got was an embrace and a kiss for leaders of Hamas," Netanyahu said.
"If you say one good deed deserves another, we deserved something else," the prime minister said, referring to Arafat's embrace of a leader of the militant guerrilla group after it claimed responsibility for a bombing of a Jerusalem market July 30 that killed 15 civilians and two bombers. On Sept. 4, suicide bombings took the lives of five civilians and three bombers.
Albright visited Israeli victims at the Hadassah University hospital at Mount Scopus. "When you actually see the people and see the individual injuries it brings it home," she said of the bloody attack.
At the start of a drive to salvage the battered peace effort, Albright bolstered Israel's anxieties about terrorism that has claimed 176 civilians and 67 soldiers since the Oslo accord was concluded in September 1993.

Graphic

 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright places a wreath at Yad Vashem's Holocaust Memorial in Jerusalem on Wednesday. Albright called on Yasser Arafat to bolster the peace process.  AP photo

Load-Date: September 18, 1997


End of Document