Albright's Remarks on Iran: 'Khatami Deserves Respect'
The New York Times
June 18, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 3; Foreign Desk ; Column 3; ; Text
Length: 553 words
Body


Following are excerpts from Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright's speech last night to the Asia Society in New York, as provided by the State Department:
Since taking office, President Khatami has responded to the demands of the Iranian people by emphasizing the importance of dialogue among nations and cultures, and by acknowledging the world's growing interdependence. He has said that "a society intending to reach development cannot succeed without understanding Western civilization." I would say, in response, that the same can be said with respect to Eastern civilization and Islamic civilization.
President Khatami has said that the American Government deserves respect because it is a reflection of the great American people. I would say that President Khatami deserves respect because he is the choice of the Iranian people. . . .
In past years, Iran's opposition to the Middle East peace process and to those willing to negotiate with Israel has been vitriolic and violent. The Islamic Republic still refuses to recognize Israel, and its leaders continue to denounce Israel in inflammatory and unacceptable terms.
But last December, Iranian officials welcomed Chairman Arafat to the Islamic summit in Teheran and said that, although they did not agree with the logic of the peace process, they would not seek to impose their views and would accept what the Palestinians could accept.
In January, President Khatami publicly denounced terrorism and condemned the killing of innocent Israelis. He argued that terrorism was not only against Islam but also counterproductive to Iran's purposes. Iran, after all, has also been a victim of terrorism.
If these views are translated into a rejection of terrorism as a tool of Iranian statecraft, it would do much to dispel the concerns of the international community from Germany to the Persian Gulf, and from Argentina to Algeria.
There are other signs of change, as well. For example, Iran's record in the war against drugs has greatly improved -- at least within its own borders -- and it has received high marks from the U.N. for its treatment of more than two million Iraqi and Afghan refugees. . . .
The United States opposes -- and will continue to oppose -- any country selling or transferring to Iran materials and technologies that could be used to develop long-range missiles or weapons of mass destruction. Similarly, we oppose Iranian efforts to sponsor terror. Accordingly, our economic policies, including with respect to the export pipelines for Caspian oil and gas, remain unchanged.
But let me be clear. These policies are not -- as some Iranians allege -- anti-Islamic. Islam is the fastest-growing religious faith in the United States. We respect deeply its moral teachings and its role as a source of inspiration and instruction for hundreds of millions of people around the world. . . .
We are ready to explore further ways to build mutual confidence and avoid misunderstandings. The Islamic Republic should consider parallel steps. If such a process can be initiated and sustained in a way that addresses the concerns of both sides, then we in the United States can see the prospect of a very different relationship. As the wall of mistrust comes down, we can develop with the Islamic Republic, when it is ready, a road map leading to normal relations.

Load-Date: June 18, 1998


End of Document