Albright targets terrorism during visit to Pakistan
USA TODAY
November 17, 1997, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 538 words
Body


Anti-terrorist measures are high on the agenda of Secretary of
State Madeleine Albright during her visit to Pakistan. She arrived
Sunday night, just one day after the bodies of four Americans
killed in an ambush were flown home. Albright, the first secretary
of State to visit in 14 years, will meet today with Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, who seeks to use Albright's visit to better a relationship
shadowed by issues of nuclear proliferation, terrorism and Islamic
militancy.
Security in the capital, Islamabad, is tight after the State Department
warned Americans about possible revenge attacks after the sentence
on Mir Aimal Kasi, a Pakistani convicted of killing two CIA employees
in 1993. Pakistani officials say the attack on the Americans was
a botched attempt to wreck both Albright's visit and one by President
Clinton set for early next year.
BLAIR APOLOGIZES: Facing widespread criticism over a campaign
donor who won an exemption on tobacco advertising, British Prime
Minister Tony Blair said he made the right decision but apologized
for mishandling the controversy. "I would never, ever do something
wrong . . . or change a policy because someone supported or donated
to the Labor Party," he told the British Broadcasting Company
in a TV interview. Blair came under attack for reversing a campaign
promise and agreeing to grant Formula One auto racing an exemption
from a proposed European ban on tobacco promotions. The scandal
was compounded by disclosures that Blair met Bernie Ecclestone,
president of the Formula One Contractors Association, before making
the decision. Ecclestone had donated $ 1.7 million to the Labor
Party during the campaign that swept Blair to power on May 1.
Labor returned the money and halted its pursuit of a second donation.
FIRST LADY VISITS SIBERIA: First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton
braved Siberian snows to visit an elite scientific center struggling
to cope with the Soviet Union's demise. Once a prestigious haven
for scientists, the Akademgorogok academic settlement has suffered
greatly as Moscow cut back funding for key institutes. Clinton,
nearing the end of an eight-day tour of former Soviet republics,
urged the community to persevere in areas of science and democracy.
MIR REGAINS POWER: The Mir crew fired up systems that shut
down after the trouble-plagued space station lost power as it
tested a solar panel, Russia's Interfax news agency reported.
The power loss on Friday caused the station's motion control computer
to turn off, but it was restored to service the same day and all
other systems were switched back on Sunday night, Interfax said.
NASA spokesman Ed Campion said the crew -- Anatoly Solovyev, Pavel
Vinogradov and American David Wolf -- were not in any danger.
CLOSE CALL: An Argentine commercial airliner almost collided
with a U.S. Air Force Galaxy transport plane carrying equipment
and personnel for President Clinton's visit to Argentina last
month, La Nacion newspaper reported. Air traffic control
in the city of Bariloche mistakenly authorized an Aerolineas Argentinas
Boeing 737 to land while the U.S. plane was taking off from the
same runway on Oct. 15, said the Argentine Air Line Pilots Association.
The two jets came within 1,600 feet of colliding, an Aerolineas
Argentinas pilot said.

Load-Date: November 17, 1997


End of Document