ALERT CITIZENRY DIALING UP STATE TERRORISM TIP LINE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 19, 2004 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 676 words
Byline: TORSTEN OVE, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE
Body


On the beltway into Washington, D.C., drivers are greeted with a big lighted sign urging them to call a special terrorism hotline to report "suspicious activity."
 In Texas, the state just set up its own terrorism tipline, with police on hand 24 hours a day to answer the phone.
 Even some small towns have set up hotlines. Outside Boston, for example, the police department in Chelsea, Mass., has its own tipline where residents can call and leave a message, even though the state has a line, too.
The age of terrorism has spawned dozens of these new phone numbers as police across the country reach out to citizens to help in the effort to avert another 9/11. An alert citizenry, police and federal agents say, is the best defense in rooting out potential terrorists, who, like the hijackers of Sept. 11, 2001, won't be advertising themselves before they strike.
 Pennsylvania has a hotline, too: 1-888-292-1919.
 Run by the state police out of its Criminal Intelligence Center at police headquarters in Harrisburg, the line has been operating for two years and has received 1,426 calls as of last week.
 The majority don't amount to much, but some have required a follow-up investigation of one sort or another. Officials won't say if any of the calls have resulted in terror prosecutions, although no terror cases have come through the state or federal courts, at least in Western Pennsylvania.
 Sgt. Ray Cook, who supervises the center, said he couldn't comment on any specific calls or investigations. But he said callers are encouraged to report anything suspicious -- and they do.
 "It's just people feeling that something isn't right," he said. "A call could be something as simple as, 'I observed someone taking pictures of a highway bridge or overpass and I wrote down the license plate.' And they turn that over to us.
 "We might also get the type of call where someone says that someone has moved into an apartment next to me, and people are coming and going at all hours of the night, and I peaked in the door and saw a computer or I didn't see any furniture. At least at some level we will investigate that. The idea is that law enforcement can't do this by itself. We have to rely on the eyes and ears of the public."
 An "investigation" sounds ominous, of course, but it could just mean that police call back and ask a few more questions. Or they may go to the scene and check things out.
 Of the 773 calls received in 2003, Cook said 201 were deemed "credible," meaning someone followed up on it. Of the 653 calls that have come in this year, 234 have been credible.
 The terror tipline is similar to other hotlines run by the state police, such as one to report drug activity or other crimes.
It's manned by eight analysts 24 hours a day, so callers always get a live person. Pennsylvanians can also submit tips online at www.psp.state.pa.us. 
 All the calls and tips are confidential, and callers can remain anonymous.
 Some critics in other parts of the country have questioned the need for terror tip lines, especially since any concerned citizen can always call 911 or their local police.
 And people can also call the FBI, which supervises 66 Joint Terrorism Task Forces across the nation that comprise federal, state and local law enforcement agencies. The FBI number here is 412-432-4000.
 But Cook, like other officials in charge of tip lines across the country, said having a separate terror hotline is important because it gives callers an option to report something that isn't an obvious crime and know that someone will do something about it.
 "Sometimes if people call the local police, if there's no crime, they can't investigate," he said.
 Cook said callers should not be discouraged if they don't hear back from anyone at the center about a tip. He said police take callers seriously, despite the occasional crank call, and officers will take action.
 "We thank them for being concerned," he said. "However, we tell them, 'Don't necessarily expect a phone call back.' Some people don't like that, but we take the information and we run with it."

Notes

Torsten Ove can be reached at tove@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2620.  

Load-Date: September 22, 2004


End of Document