Algeria Rebuffs a Peace Delegation From the European Union
The New York Times
January 15, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 567 words
Byline: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY 

By CRAIG R. WHITNEY 
Dateline: PARIS, Jan. 14
Body


Algeria's military-backed Government reversed itself today and said it would reject a mission that the 15-nation European Union wanted to send this weekend to see what could be done to stop the killings of civilians there, which number in the tens of thousands in a six-year civil war.
The Europeans had received indications earlier that mid-level foreign ministry officials from Luxembourg, Britain and Austria would be welcome in Algiers, but only if they limited discussions to the Government's efforts to combat terrorism.
Today the Algerians barred the door. "This is a low-level delegation, which is not appropriate to discuss important matters that could have been discussed," Algeria's Foreign Minister, Ahmed Attaf, said in Algiers.
"We have recently been faced with reservations and hesitations from our European partners," he said, "and we have been told that the E.U. is not ready to offer help in dealing with combating terrorism. These elements take away the meaning and the substance of the mission and make it far away from what we wished from dialogue with the Europeans."
It was not clear what Mr. Attaf meant, as the Algerians have always resisted any interference in their internal affairs, and in any case the European officials have previously said they are not prepared to become involved in combating "terrorism," the term Algeria's Government uses for the activities of the Islamic militants fighting against it.
Officials in Britain, which now hold the European Union's rotating presidency, expressed disappointment at the cancellation of the mission and said a higher-level delegation could be put together if other European countries agreed.
Officials in France, which has deferred to its European partners because Algeria is still touchy about dealing with the country from which it won independence 36 years ago, said Paris would not object to a high-level mission if the Algerians would agree to receive it, but expressed doubt that they would.
The Algerian authorities have said that recent massacres of hundreds of civilians in the western mountains and in suburbs south of Algiers, like many earlier mass killings, were the work of the Armed Islamic Group, the most violent offshoot of an Islamic opposition that would have won legislative elections six years ago if the military had not called off the vote.
France, with millions of residents of Algerian origin and important trade in oil, gas and manufactured goods with its former colony, has suspected Algerian Government complicity in some of the violence. But it is now increasingly inclined toward the view that the Armed Islamic Group has turned to terrorism against civilians who accept the Government's legitimacy. Between 60,000 and 75,000 people have died since the violence began in 1992.
President Liamine Zeroual's Government held parliamentary elections last June that excluded the outlawed Islamic Salvation Front, the group that in all likelihood would have come to power in 1992, but saw a moderate Islamic force called the Movement for a Peaceful Society win 69 seats.
"This is the first Algerian Parliament since independence that has been a pluralistic legislature," one French official said today, explaining that France had hoped that the European mission could meet with Algerian officials and encourage them to pursue dialogue with the nonviolent Islamic opposition to isolate the forces of violence.
      

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document