Algeria: Descent Into the Abyss
The New York Times
April 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 420 words
Body


Beware of "enlightened" military coups. Two years ago, with a militant Islamic party poised to win parliamentary runoff elections, Algeria's army struck, canceling the vote, rounding up Islamic politicians and imposing an army-backed dictatorship. The West, led by Algeria's former colonial ruler, France, put their fear of Islamic radicalism ahead of their commitment to democracy and wished the soldiers success.
Instead Algeria plunged into an abyss of terrorism and civil war with no end yet in sight. More than 4,000 people have been killed and hundreds of thousands imprisoned. Tens of thousands more have fled abroad, mainly to France.
It should have been clear two years ago that an Islamic movement supported by millions of voters could not simply be crushed by military force. It should be even clearer today. But the middle ground for potential compromise has been much reduced.
Algeria's secular socialist regime was shocked by the success of the Islamic Salvation Front in first-round parliamentary elections in 1991. Low turnout and electoral ground rules guaranteed an Islamic majority in the runoff.
Wisely but in vain, then-President Chadli Benjedid argued that the runoff should proceed. His idea was power-sharing, with a secularist president guaranteeing basic rights and the Salvation Front operating within constitutional rules. It might not have worked out smoothly; but it would have honored the democratic process, and it could not have been worse than what happened after the coup.
Two years of violence have strengthened hard-liners on both sides. With top Salvation Front leaders in jail, the more radical Armed Islamic Group has launched a new wave of terrorism aimed at foreigners, unveiled women and even Islamic leaders who favor negotiations. Meanwhile, top army leaders oppose calls by President Lamin Zeroual for a compromise peace.
France last week withdrew most of its teachers and technicians. But fearing the establishment of an Islamic republic just across the Mediterranean and the resulting flood of refugees, France has been urging Japan to increase economic aid to Algeria, hoping to shore up the military regime.
Any such aid should be conditional on dialogue. The only choice left is between trying to negotiate with the Salvation Front and letting power shift in the streets to the Armed Islamic Group.
There were better choices two years ago, but Algeria's generals and their Western backers were not interested. Are they now ready to learn the lessons of that disastrous mistake?

Load-Date: April 5, 1994


End of Document