Algeria Gains Crucial Help In Fight Against Al Qaeda
The New York Times
November 4, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 688 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


ALGIERS (AP) -- Weary from years of kidnappings, the inhabitants of Algeria's rugged Kabylie mountains are finally turning against the fighters of Al Qaeda's North Africa affiliate in their midst and helping security forces hunt them down. And that turnaround is giving Algeria its best chance yet to drive the terror network from its last Algerian stronghold.
While defeated in much of the rest of the country, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb remains active in the Kabylie, partly because the Berbers there, the region's original inhabitants before the arrival of Arabs, have long been deeply hostile to the central government and refused to provide information on militant whereabouts or activity.
The situation began changing after a string of militant attacks over the summer, culminating in a daylight assault against a police station, prompted Algeria to hold an emergency security meeting to devise a new strategy to take on the militants, said a high-ranking official with knowledge of the meeting.
A pillar of the counterterror blueprint in this case has been exploiting frustrations over kidnappings to win over the Berbers, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.
The strategy appears to be working.
It first bore fruit with the capture early last month of a military commander. The biggest coup came on Oct. 14, with the killing of Bekkai Boualem, also known as Khaled El Mig, the head of external relations for Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. Since then, four other suspected militants were ambushed and killed by security forces after tipoffs from the local population.
The successes have some Algerians hoping that the country may finally quash a decades-old Islamist insurgency.
The steady campaign of kidnappings in the region, believed to be carried out to finance militant operations, was painful for many reasons. The kidnappings not only spread terror, but they also had an economic impact. More than 70 of those targeted in the past year were prominent businessmen, which led businesses to begin to flee the region.
''The kidnappings were interpreted by the people of the Kabylie as an effort by the terrorists to bring the local economy, already suffering from unemployment, to its knees,'' the security official said.
Mahmoud Bellabes, the president of the regional council for the Kabylie, said that while most inhabitants still viewed the army and gendarmes with suspicion, there was a growing trust for the police.
''In recent weeks, the terrorists were caught thanks to information given by the citizens to police when they saw unknown people in the area,'' he said, ''so there has been small coordination between the police and locals.''
Militants took up arms against the Algerian government after the generals in 1992 canceled a parliamentary election that an Islamist party was poised to win. In the ensuing fighting, an estimated 200,000 died.
Aided by a combination of ruthless repression and amnesty offers, the army gradually pushed the militants, who declared allegiance to Al Qaeda in 2006, into the mountains of the Kabylie region.
Riccardo Fabiani, the North Africa analyst for the London-based Eurasia Group, cautioned against pronouncing the end of the Qaeda affiliate in the Kabylie region too quickly, since the government keeps a tight lid on all information regarding the battle against the militants.
''There are no reliable statistics on terrorists in Algeria: no one knows anything about how many new recruits there are every year, how many people abandon terrorism within the framework of the national reconciliation program, how many people are actually killed,'' he said.
Echoing the opinion of many people in the Kabylie, Mr. Fabiani also noted that, to some extent, it serves the government's interests to have a constant low-level threat in an area remote from the capital to remind people of the darker days of the civil war.
''This is not to say that the government manipulates terrorism -- we don't know that,'' he said, ''but for sure, a certain level of fear is instrumental to the current political equilibrium.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/world/africa/algeria-gains-berber-help-in-pushing-out-al-qaeda.html

Load-Date: November 4, 2012


End of Document