Algeria blasts raise concern about threat to Europe
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 13, 2007 Thursday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 475 words
Byline: By Paul Haven THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MADRID, Spain 
Body


Algeria has seen more than its fair share of Islamist attacks, but Tuesday's carnage was different. Never before has such a prominent international site - U.N. offices - been struck with such deadly ferocity in the North African nation.
Rescuers in Algiers on Wednesday extracted the living and the dead from the crumpled remains of the offices bombed by an al-Qaida affiliate. Victims included U.N. staff members from around the world, police officers and law students.
The Interior Ministry said 31 people were killed in Tuesday's twin truck bombings, which also targeted Algeria's Constitutional Council. Initial reports elsewhere gave much higher figures, though the government insisted it had no reason to conceal the full tally.
Rescue work was focusing on five or six people who were in the basement of the U.N. building at the time of the attack and who could still be alive, said the chief of the emergency team, Djamal Khoudi.
Earlier in the day, seven survivors were pulled from beneath chunks of concrete, Khoudi said.
Experts say the twin bombings reflect the growing allegiance of local Islamic militants to Osama bin Laden, and their adoption of al-Qaida's war as their own.
They also could be a harbinger of far more bloodshed if the Algerian terrorist network behind the attacks - the group changed its name this year to al-Qaida in Islamic North Africa - makes good on its threat to spread into Morocco, Tunisia and beyond.
Terrorism analysts say that would produce a true pan-North African terrorist group on Europe's southern doorstep, and be one of the greatest threats to the continent in coming years.
"Without a doubt this is going to be one of Europe's biggest worries in the years ahead, because this is a veteran group with well-trained people," said Javier Jordan, director of Athena Intelligence, a think tank based in Spain and specializing in terrorism issues.
The group has been trying new tactics since a top leader returned in 2004 from fighting in Afghanistan, choosing soft targets rather than confronting the military head on, said Rolf Tophoven, director of the Institute for Terrorism Research and Security Policy, based in Germany.
"This new development is quite serious because Algeria ... could be a springboard to Europe, especially to France and then further on to countries like Italy and Germany," he said. But at the moment, he said, the group is not known to have any developed network in Europe.
The attacks drew international condemnation.
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged all nations Wednesday to stand united against terrorism, calling it "the scourge of our times."
"This attack on the U.N. is an attack on us all and our highest ideals," he said in a video address from Bali, Indonesia, to the 192-member General Assembly. He said the U.N. would not be deterred in its mission "to help those most in need."

Graphic

 
MAP
 MAP - Algeria Post-Dispatch 

Load-Date: December 13, 2007


End of Document