ALL TERRORISM CASES MUST GO TO D.C., FBI BOSS SAYS
Daily News (New York)
May 13, 2002, Monday
CITY FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 342 words
Byline: By JOSE MARTINEZ DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body

FBI boss Robert Mueller plans to pack up the agency's anti-terror operations and ship them off to Washington this week as part of an overhaul at the beleaguered bureau.
Days after the conclusion to one of the most embarrassing episodes in FBI history - the sentencing of turncoat agent Robert Hanssen to life in prison - Mueller is aggressively reorganizing the agency on several levels, according to this week's U.S. News & World Report.
The main move will be the centralization in the nation's capital - rather than in agency field offices - of all terror cases, a move similar to changes already implemented at the Justice Department, where Attorney General John Ashcroft shifted anti-terrorism prosecution from New York to Washington.
As part of the changes, the FBI also will bring aboard more than 100 intelligence analysts and recruit Arabic speakers to help prevent terrorist strikes. Other moves include redirecting drug-fighting agents into the anti-terrorism battle.
"We are fundamentally different from where we were," a senior FBI official told the magazine. "Prevention, counterterrorism and counterintelligence, without question, are the priorities getting all the attention, all the resources, all the focus."
The wholesale changes come as Newsweek reports the FBI may have had strong indications in advance that the Sept. 11 attacks were in the works.
The magazine reports that a Minneapolis agent worriedly noted in an internal document written just days before the attacks that flight student Zacarias Moussaoui - now known as the "20th hijacker" - might be planning to "fly something into the World Trade Center."
Another memo, penned by an agent in Phoenix in July 2001, warned that Middle Eastern men were involved in suspicious behavior at an Arizona flight school.
The documents are two of several potentially embarrassing issues that could turn up, congressional investigators believe. Newsweek reports that the CIA failed to follow up on information about a meeting in Malaysia of Al Qaeda operatives - including two of the hijackers.

Load-Date: May 13, 2002


End of Document