All faiths must unite against terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
May 17, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 18
Length: 527 words
Body


All faiths must unite against terrorism
Sami Hassoun's anger at the world, perhaps even at the Cubs, could have been overturned had he only followed his daily prescription — face east and prostrate into prayer. This is how Muslims should reconcile their anger, by praying for the salvation of their nation — not by setting plots to destroy the very cities in which we live. This is the oath I have taken as a Muslim and as a citizen of this country, " ... to sacrifice my life for the sake of my faith, country and nation." Sami, who was accused of placing a backpack he thought held a bomb near Wrigley Field, only fuels the misconceptions about Muslims, and his violent act is not our true practice.
As Americans of all faiths, we need to continue to join together and build a greater shield against those who target our safety in this country. While this doesn't guarantee a World Series, it is a leap toward a great victory for America. Now that's a home run!
Kamran Khan
Mount Prospect
Tax exemptions difficult to navigate
Cook County's property tax exemptions are meant to help reduce homeowners property tax burdens, but they are much like Chicago's weather. Just wait a minute and it will change. Our eight property tax exemptions are needlessly complicated, confusing and now said to germinate a plethora of homeowner and senior citizen crooks, according to the Cook County assessor.
This year's application rules include some of the following guidelines. All homeowner exemptions are automatic — only first-time buyers need to reapply. Seniors, only residing in Cook County, must apply each year for their senior exemptions. That new rules monitors if they are still alive and able to respond to the application by mail. Senior freeze exemptions are applied for yearly but cannot be received with some exemptions. The stealthlike "longtime occupancy" exemption replaces the 7 percent cap exemption, and you must apply for it each year, if you are mailed the exemption directly because it is not available to online.
For the home improvement exemption, apply once, and four years later those improvements reflect higher market values. Go file an appeal. Returning veterans apply once. Disabled veterans apply once, but this exemption may not be received with some exemptions.
Over the past 10 years, millions of dollars in lost exemption savings are due and/or are partially refunded to Cook County homeowners. And you can only reclaim your lost exemptions for the past three years.
Confused? You bet.
Pete Clark
Chicago
Balancing budget is no radical idea
I find it interesting that President Obama is blasting the GOP as "radical" for their ideas on how to balance the budget. What is radical is the idea of no more free rides, balancing the budget and letting people keep more of what they make. Another radical idea would be to get rid of the politicians' Cadillac health care benefits and enroll them with private insurers and then see how fast the system gets fixed.
And upon further reflection, it was not so long ago that it was a "radical" idea to think of an African-American as president. I guess all radical ideas deserve a chance.
Dan Vincent
Elk Grove Village

Load-Date: May 18, 2012


End of Document