All Terrorism All the Time: Fear Becomes Reality Show
The New York Times
August 12, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THREATS AND RESPONSES: COVERAGE -- THE TV WATCH
Length: 653 words
Byline: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY
Body


By yesterday the morning shows were back to consumer tips -- only the advice was about packing for red alerts, not campgrounds and water parks. An expert on ''Today'' instructed Ann Curry on how to ''be a minimalist.'' On CBS, Harry Smith performed a cheery show-and-tell about the risks of carrying aboard lip gloss, conditioner and, most of all, nail polish remover. 
  Even ''The Insider,'' the syndicated gossip show, found its own way to the foiled terrorist plot: on Thursday night's edition, it reported on celebrities -- Kim Cattrall and Kevin Spacey -- who were delayed at Heathrow.
 The averted bombings -- an extensive attack that may have been timed to coincide with the anniversary of Sept. 11 -- does not answer the question of whether the public is safer now than it was five years ago. European and American security forces are more vigilant, but terrorists have also grown more virulent. 
  What the close call did show is how far terrorism has metastasized on television. It's a fact of life at airports and on news programs, but even entertainment shows feel compelled -- or entitled -- to weigh in. Islamic terrorism is woven into the fabric of prime-time thrillers like ''24'' and ''The Unit,'' but it also surfaces on police shows and legal dramas. The first season of the Showtime series ''Sleeper Cell,'' about an undercover agent who infiltrates a cell of Muslim conspirators in Los Angeles, eerily presaged the London plot -- including terrorists who are Westerners who converted to Islam. 
  Through magnification and repetition, cable news does two opposite things at once: it stokes fear and inures viewers to danger. CNN chose a relatively prosaic rubric for its report, ''Security Alert,'' while Fox News chose the more vivid title ''Terror in the Sky.'' (MSNBC went for the wordier ''Target America: Terror in the Sky.'') All the cable news programs used music and graphics to hype any new development as a ''breaking news'' bulletin so important it would seem to merit interruptions by the Emergency Alert System. (''If this had been an actual emergency, you would have been instructed where to tune in your area for news and official information.'') 
  Yet the fact that the United States raised the security alert level to a limited red for the first time was relayed quite calmly. Yellow alerts have come and gone over the past few years, and this terrorist attack, however elaborate and deadly, was safely defused before the public knew of it. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff made appearances on almost every news program imaginable to reassure the public that this was just a precaution to match Britain's security rating, but also, perhaps, to take the victory lap that the British officials who broke up the plot were too busy to make. 
  Comedians felt safe enough to joke about it. On Comedy Central, Stephen Colbert said he had elevated his show's security level to brown. (''Somebody spilled coffee on the chart.'')
  CNN and others kept repeating the rules of the liquid ban (no to baby oil, yes to baby formula) long after travelers had caught on and airport delays had abated -- mostly because the piles of discarded shampoos and after-shave provided a way to illustrate a story that fortunately had few vivid images. By late afternoon yesterday, even CNN was making light of the restrictions on lotions and creams, showing a lively montage of passengers tossing out toiletries. (A woman who threw away an $80 tube of foundation winced and said, ''That hurt.'') 
  Television labeled the changes ''the new normal,'' a catchphrase that by yesterday had spread throughout the spectrum, from the ''NBC Nightly News'' to Tucker Carlson debating, on his MSNBC show, ''Tucker,'' whether the administration was right to secretly beef up surveillance measures.
  These kinds of precautions are not new, and they certainly are not normal. It's the coverage that has normalized. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 12, 2006


End of Document