All for the sake of the anti-terrorism bill; Maybe train derailment was the work of rogue federales
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
October 12, 1995, Thursday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 538 words
Byline: Frederic Smith
Body


Well, well -- isn't that a coincidence.
A story in the New York Times last week detailed how President Clinton's anti-terrorism bill has stalled in the U.S. House. The legislation, which gives broad new powers to the federal police, whooped through the Senate in the wake of Oklahoma City. But the House, which has since had the benefit of hearings on police abuses at Waco and Ruby Ridge, has said, "Wait a minute."
A spokeswoman for the American Civil Liberties Union, which is tight with the National Rifle Association on this one, said it all:
"The thinking, which has crossed party lines, is that if law enforcement can do these things without a counterterrorist bill, imagine what would happen with one."
Now, last Monday, comes the Arizona train wreck, advertised as the work of saboteurs, "Sons of Gestapo," angry about Waco and Ruby Ridge. Just like Oklahoma City, eh?
Sure enough, there was the president on Tuesday, saying, "I am determined that we will make sure in the United States that we will have the tools, the means we need, to keep the American people safe."
When Clinton says "tools," he's not talking about crowbars. Obviously, he will seize on the railroad sabotage to try to jump-start his antiterrorism bill.
Everybody stand up who would feel safer if the FBI, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and U.S. Marshals Service were given broad new powers. Maybe -- if they had more of an appetite for reclaiming our Mean Streets than for shooting fish in a barrel as at Waco and Ruby Ridge. Given the present sinister cast of characters, no thanks.
Instead of being passive news consumers, let's use our imaginations and entertain the possibility that Arizona was the work of some rogue federales interested in advancing the antiterrorism bill.
It's not such a stretch. Anybody wicked enough to give us Waco and Ruby Ridge is, in my opinion, capable of anything in a righteous cause. And who's a better candidate to expertly rig a railroad signal light: the FBI or some yahoos who would give themselves a comic-book name like "Sons of Gestapo"?
Amtrak and/or the Southern Pacific Railroad over which it was running is a curious target for rightwing avengers. Granted, Amtrak is "federal," but as a symbol it isn't in the same class with a hulking presence such as the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
The timing is also curious. Ruby Ridge was three years ago, Waco two. Granted, the Oklahoma City bombers now in custody -- if guilty they are -- also took their time. But, with the president's bill languishing, why would someone who hated and feared his government do the one thing calculated to bolster its power?
I'm only saying, be alert for the possibilities. If my little scenario is correct, the rightwing avengers will never be found and brought to justice. This will be used to "prove" the need for broad new powers -- in the hands of the people who wrecked the Sunset Limited.
Don't fall for the anti-terrorism bill in any case. In my opinion, you are already in more danger from a federal Rambo than you are from a bomber or a railroad saboteur.
(Frederic Smith, whose weekly column was a fixture on the Tribune opinion page for many years, got steamed the other day. This column is the result. -- Editor)

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document