All-American Terrorists
The New York Times
February 7, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1438 words
Byline: By JANET NAPOLITANO
Janet Napolitano, president of the University of California, is a former secretary of Homeland Security and a former governor of Arizona.
Body


UNITED STATES OF JIHADInvestigating America's Homegrown Terrorists By Peter Bergen387 pp. Crown Publishers. $28.  Who constitutes a homegrown jihadist, and what distinguishes the terrorist attack in San Bernardino from the mass murder at Sandy Hook Elementary School? In post-9/11 America, questions like these shape our national discourse on terrorism, law enforcement and public safety. Peter Bergen, CNN's national security analyst and the author of four other books on terrorism, addresses these and other salient questions in his excellent new ''United States of Jihad: Investigating America's Homegrown Terrorists.'' Bergen seeks to understand why some Americans choose to become jihadists, how our institutions have responded to terrorism and how American society has been changed by terrorist threats. 
Terrorism has long existed in this country -- Bergen describes the 1970s as the ''golden age'' of terrorism in the United States -- but the horrific attacks of Sept. 11 and the loss of nearly 3,000 lives on American soil were to earlier terrorist attacks as a tsunami is to a high tide. Just as a tsunami leaves a landscape forever altered once it retreats, so too has Sept. 11 fundamentally changed America. The difficulty Bergen faces in mapping and analyzing post-9/11 homegrown terrorism is the ever shifting, contemporaneous terrain of his subject -- it's a bit like writing a history of the 1960s while the Beatles are still singing. Nonetheless, Bergen's book is the best one-volume treatment available on the current state of jihad in America.
  A jihadist is one who adopts militant, violent beliefs to further bin Ladenism, itself an ideology that dictates ''the restoration of a Taliban-style caliphate that will stretch across the Muslim world from Indonesia to Morocco.'' Almost all of the jihadists Bergen depicts are converts to Salafism, an ultrafundamentalist branch of Sunni Islam; as Bergen relates, their Salafism became ''increasingly politicized.'' For them, ''politics and theology merge with the caliphate.'' At the same time, however, many of the 330 militants whom Bergen studied are well educated, a large percentage are married or have children, and a number of those he portrays come from middle- or upper-class households. Their very ordinariness is one of the many obstacles to the early detection of terrorist threats. The dozen or so cases Bergen selects to illustrate jihad in America are wide-ranging and include Faisal Shahzad, who parked a bomb-loaded S.U.V. in Times Square in 2010; Zachary Chesser, who incited an online plot against the creators of ''South Park''; and Najibullah Zazi, who joined a Qaeda plot to blow up the New York subway system in 2009.
  Jihad in America has evolved over time, and as Bergen demonstrates, a recent key mutation in its evolution is ''leaderless'' jihad, which has grown as a threat even as ''leader-led'' jihad efforts remain serious. For example, Zazi and Shahzad, as well as Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the so-called Underwear Bomber who tried to detonate a bomb aboard a Detroit-bound flight on Christmas 2009, were leader-led jihadists directed from overseas. Plots like these that involve travel and communications are difficult, but not always impossible, to interrupt. And although Bergen neither overlooks nor excuses the many mistakes made by American security agencies, he also explains how leader-led plots that might have been successful in the past are now compromised, whether because of the force multiplier effect of greater intelligence sharing (the British tipped off Americans to Zazi); or the publicity given to the efforts of law enforcement and government agencies to connect with commercial vendors whose products might be purchased by would-be terrorists (Shahzad bought a less incendiary fertilizer so that his purchase would not trigger suspicion); or the American security apparatus, which continually adjusts when a new tactic emerges.
  Leaderless lone wolves present different challenges for law enforcement than do leader-led jihadists, and Bergen correlates their recent rise with the long reach of the Internet. As Bergen writes, a new generation of ''English-speaking, Internet-savvy jihadists'' is now just ''a mouse click away''; he quotes a study that terrorist websites increased to more than 4,000 in 2006 from a dozen in the 1990s. Print publications like the 1980s magazine Jihad gave way to online forums, encrypted emails and webzines, which are now complemented by the social media channels that ISIS deftly manipulates. In 2010, Samir Khan, a young man in Yemen, who had been a ''typical teenager'' while growing up in the United States, started Inspire, an online magazine written in colloquial American English that transformed the delivery of jihadist propaganda over the Internet (early on, British intelligence officials hacked it and swapped out its recipes for bombs with ones for cupcakes). Americans no longer needed to wade through Osama bin Laden's ponderous sermons or travel abroad; in fact, Inspire advocated jihadist attacks at home to avoid increased travel security.
  Social media, online magazines like Inspire and the virtual jihadist community also amplified the vitriolic messages of terrorists like the American-born cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, whose incendiary sermons and writings have had a profound effect. Immediately after Sept. 11, Awlaki had appeared as the face of moderate Islam in the United States -- he condemned the attacks on television and even garnered an invitation to speak at the Pentagon. He later fled America and ended up in Yemen, where he became the foremost English-speaking advocate of jihad and, ultimately, the operational leader of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. Many of the jihadists Bergen profiles possessed Awlaki's sermons or writings, and some even corresponded with him or traveled to Yemen to meet him; Nidal Hasan, the lone-wolf Fort Hood shooter, wrote so often to Awlaki without response that Bergen says his correspondence took on ''the tone of an unrequited lover.'' It is in part through his profile of Awlaki and the terrorism he plotted that Bergen effectively counters the narrative that Barack Obama is a ''weak'' president. Bergen notes that President Obama has authorized more military actions in Muslim countries than any previous president and that the most conservative estimate identifies more than 3,000 drone strike fatalities during his tenure, including much of Al Qaeda's leadership. He is the first president since the Civil War to authorize the assassination of another American -- Anwar ­al-Awlaki himself.
  Bergen is perhaps most limited in his analysis of the institutional changes Sept. 11 wrought in America. His sources are predominantly from the F.B.I. and the National Counterterrorism Center; there is virtually no mention of the Department of Homeland Security, the National Security Agency, the director of national intelligence or the increasing role of local law enforcement beyond the New York Police Department. Bergen correctly comments on the F.B.I.'s use (and misuse) of informants and stings to counter terrorism, but the difference between infiltration and entrapment can be elusive, and so too can the balance between monitoring and privacy. Perhaps with an eye toward a future book, Bergen does not explore the difficult decisions that must be made in the post-9/11 world. Should the public-safety exception to the Miranda rule, for example, be expanded in cases of suspected terrorism?
  After reading ''United States of Jihad,'' one can only conclude that where American jihad is concerned, the sole constant is change. Al Qaeda has already spawned numerous spinoffs. The most recent and violent iteration is ISIS. Our security agencies and law enforcement must continue to adjust and improve, and the public itself must play an ever more important role, even as the risk of another attack such as the one in San Bernardino cannot be eliminated. It is important that we remain resolute and neither lower our expectations nor jettison our values out of some misguided belief that jihad presents easy answers or that conventional efforts must be totally scrapped. And we must keep our perspective. After all, an American residing in the United States in the years after Sept. 11 was 5,000 times more likely to be killed by a fellow citizen armed with a gun than by a jihadist. Franklin Roosevelt famously proclaimed, ''The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.'' After listening to too many campaign statements that insult our intelligence, I would add fearmongers to this cautionary end note.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/books/review/united-states-of-jihad-by-peter-bergen.html

Graphic

 
DRAWINGS: From left: Najibullah Zazi, part of a Qaeda plot
Nidal Hasan, the Fort Hood shooter
Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the ''Underwear Bomber''
and Faisal Shahzad, who tried to bomb Times Square. (DRAWINGS BY ELIZABETH WILLIAMS/ASSOCIATED PRESS
BRIGITTE WOOSLEY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 KABRIN/REUTERS)       

Load-Date: February 7, 2016


End of Document