Allies move to prepare U.N. for stiff Libya sanctions
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 24, 1992, Metro Edition


Copyright 1992 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 2A
Length: 859 words
Byline: William Beecher; Staff Writer
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


The United States, Britain and France, having succeeded in getting a unanimous Security Council resolution demanding Libya turn over suspects in the blowing up of two airliners, will begin drumming up support for stiff sanctions if Tripoli rebuffs the U.N. as expected.
 "We never consulted with the other Security Council members in advance of the vote - for obvious reasons," one U.S. policy maker said.
 In other words, Western allies didn't want to spook such countries as China, India and Morocco from taking the unprecedented steps, in effect, of accusing a member state of complicity in terrorism and calling for extradition of suspects.
 In fact, presumably to allay concerns, word was leaked that the sanctions being considered were the relatively mild ones of a cutoff of international air links and an embargo on the sale of aircraft and spare parts. That, in retaliation for bombing Pan Am 103 and a French UTA aircraft with the combined loss of 477 lives.
But, while the three allies have not arrived at a firm consensus on what sanctions to seek, they are focusing on a variety of specific measures to be discussed with other Security Council members. They include:
 An oil embargo. Petroleum is Libya's principal export, earning about $ 30 million a day for 1.2 million barrels of sales. But Germany, Italy and Spain, three of the largest importers of Libyan crude, would have to find alternate sources, bidding up prices at a time of recession. "This sanction is not out of the question but is not at the top of the list," one U.S. official said. "We want to punish Libya, not the rest of the world."
 A ban on sales of weapons and military spare parts. Most of Libya's planes, tanks and air defense missiles come from the former Soviet Union. An embargo on replacement parts would, in time, cause a significant weakening of the Libyan armed forces which help keep Col. Moammar Gadhafi in power.
 A ban on sales of high technology equipment and spare parts for the oil industry. This would increasingly hamper the operation of Libya's main source of hard currency.
 A freeze on Libyan financial assets abroad. This was done with Iraqi assets shortly after Iraq invaded Kuwait. While Libya has shifted some assets home in anticipation of this possibility, its daily transactions on the world oil market require keeping considerable funds abroad, specialists say.
 Diplomatic isolation. This could range from expulsion of suspected Libyan intelligence agents, many said to be working under the cover of the Libyan Arab Airline, to a complete break in diplomatic relations.
 A ban on civil air links. This could be limited to denying landing rights to the Libyan national airline or, more likely, a ban on all commercial air service. Officials say the Libyan airline has often been used to move terrorist agents and explosives, while other air traffic is important for delivering spare parts for its petroleum industry.
 Officials point out that while it's unlikely Libya would turn over two suspects in the Pan Am explosion for trial in U.S. or British courts, or the three suspects in the UTA blast to France, even it if did, that would not satisfy the requirements of the U.N. resolution.
 "Libya is required to cooperate fully with the investigation," one official said. "That means it must produce witnesses, documents, evidence. If one of the defendants testified that a high Libyan official ordered the bombing, he would have to be produced to fulfill the requirement."
 The widespread assumption is that two such politically sensitive terrorist actions would not have been ordered without the personal involvement of Gadhafi. Libya denies complicity in either atrocity.
 Planners say the coordinated, step-by-step moves against Libya, unlike the unilateral U.S. air strikes in 1986 after the bombing of a Berlin disco in which a G.I. died, are designed to convince Gadhafi there's a high price to pay for terrorism and to send a message to other countries - particularly Iran, Iraq, Syria and North Korea - that state sponsored terrorism will no longer go unpunished.
 In retrospect, it's believed the '86 raid not only failed to get Gadhafi but spurred him to try to better mask Libyan involvement in seeking revenge. "We need more than a slap on the wrist in this instance," an official said.
 Planners point out that if economic and diplomatic sanctions fail to produce acceptable results, President Bush has warned that military actions are not excluded.
 Those could range from a naval quarantine, such as was used against Iraq, to bombing the Rabta chemical warfare plant, terrorist bases, command and control facilities and petroleum targets.
 If it comes to force, the allies will have to decide whether the primary objective is to force Gadhafi to cooperate in prosecution of the alleged terrorists or to knock him from power by encouraging a military coup.
 "Has Gadhafi learned anything from the experience of Saddam Hussein?" one official asked. "If he's smart, he'll cave in. He'll hand those guys over. But that will make his security services very nervous. And he'll run the risk that court testimony will point the finger at him personally."

Load-Date: January 25, 1992


End of Document