ALLIES TARGET TERROR;
THE UNITED STATES AND ITS INDUSTRIALIZED PARTNERS ADDRESS THE BOMBING IN SAUDI;
ARABIA, BUT PRESIDENT CLINTON IS URGED NOT TO IMPOSE TRADE SANCTIONS ON;
SO-CALLED ROGUE NATIONS.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 28, 1996, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 882 words
Byline: NANCY MATHIS, HOUSTON CHRONICLE
Dateline: LYON, France
Body


Leaders of the Group of Seven industrialized nations yesterday condemned the terrorist act that killed 19 Americans in Saudi Arabia, called the fight against terrorism their ''absolute priority'' and ordered their defense chiefs to meet next month to consider further steps.
But, while taking a strong public stand against terrorism, U.S. allies voiced concerns privately to President Clinton about U.S. attempts to isolate states that it considers rogue, such as Cuba, Iran and Libya, through trade sanctions on foreign companies.
The seven industrial powers - the United States, Canada, France, Italy, Germany, Britain and Japan - opened their annual economic summit with terrorism at the forefront of the agenda because of the truck bombing Tuesday in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
''We have once again stood united against terrorism. We understand that an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us and that none of us is invulnerable,'' said Clinton, as he stood beside French President Jacques Chirac, the summit host.
Chirac said the Group of Seven was ''united in condemning this dreadful bombing that has taken place.''
Summit members, following a dinner that opened the three-day session, set aside their planned agenda and made the discussion of terrorism their first topic. They issued a declaration condemning the ''cowardly attack in Dhahran'' and all other recent terrorist acts.
''We consider the fight against terrorism to be our absolute priority,'' the G-7 statement said.
''We re-dedicate ourselves and invite others to associate our efforts in order to thwart the activities of terrorists and their supporters, including fund-raising, the planning of terrorist acts, procurement of weapons, calling for violence, and incitements to commit terrorist acts.''
Chirac said the G-7 nations and Russia would send officials in charge of national security and foreign affairs to meetings in Paris in July to ''consider and recommend further actions.''
This latest act of outrage reminds us of one of the great burdens of the modern world. As we become more open, as our borders become freer to cross, as we can move information and money and people and material across national boundaries more quickly, we all become more vulnerable to terrorists,'' Clinton said.
He noted that the group would discuss today 40 security initiatives on such matters as protecting borders, curbing illegal weapons trade and fighting money laundering.
Clinton intends to cut short his stay in Europe on Sunday morning to fly to Florida, where he will attend memorial services for the soldiers killed in Saudi Arabia.
Early yesterday, the president traveled to the French countryside, where he again pledged to hold accountable those responsible for the bombing. Clinton also met privately with Chirac, British Prime Minister John Major and Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto.
Russia's elections, NATO's expansion, U.S. foreign aid and the faltering peace processes in the Middle East and Northern Ireland were among topics Clinton discussed with the Europeans, but terrorism overshadowed them all.
Officials said Chirac warned Clinton of ''a dangerous cycle of action-reaction'' if Congress passes legislation that would place sanctions on foreign corporations investing in Iran and Libya. The measure is sponsored by Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.
Chirac, who has vocally opposed U.S. sanctions on companies investing in Cuba, implied that Europe would consider retaliatory sanctions if the United States seeks sanctions on trade with Iran and Libya.
Clinton signed into law legislation seeking to punish foreign companies doing business with Cuba after the communist nation shot down two unarmed U.S. civilian airplanes in international airspace. The president, however, can issue waivers to prevent punitive actions.
White House Press Secretary Mike McCurry said Clinton told Chirac he had not yet decided whether to invoke waivers. Canada, a trading partner with Cuba, is considering its own sanctions against U.S. companies if Clinton fails to sign waivers.
''The president expressed his concern in the conversation that there has been very little progress on the outstanding trade issues between the U.S. and Japan since the (1993) summit in Tokyo,'' said Laura Tyson, the president's economic adviser.
The 40 anti-terrorism measures to be discussed today and tomorrow were drafted over the past year by experts from the seven nations, sometimes called G-7, plus Russia, at the order of last summer's summit in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Drafted initially to fight international crime, officials here say the same law-enforcement steps also will help against terrorists.
Four basic concepts guide the 40 specific proposals, according to Clinton's national security adviser Anthony Lake. One set of actions aims to show that ''crime does not pay'' such as by making it easier to seize the assets of criminals or terrorists. A second set is known as ''nowhere to hide'' steps to strengthen international cooperation among law enforcers.
 
A third set, Lake said, aims to tighten national borders against penetration by criminals and terrorists. Fourth is a package of reforms aimed at preventing high-tech crimes involving computers and other new technologies.
The Knight-Ridder Washington Bureau contributed to this story.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Michel Euler/Associated Press: President Clinton observes a; moment of silence for those killed in the Saudi bombing while he visits the; French village of Perogues yesterday.

Load-Date: June 29, 1996


End of Document