ALWAYS ON THE ALERT;
With Olympics as lesson, terrorism task force keeps agencies in sync
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
January 20, 1998, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 05D
Length: 758 words
Byline: Ron Martz; STAFF WRITER
Body


The Centennial Olympic Park bombing in July 1996 made it painfully clear to local law enforcement that terrorism in any form can happen anywhere just about any time.
Despite years of planning to prevent major attacks at the Olympic Games, what appears to have been a lone terrorist with a powerful pipe bomb was able to elude the security net and kill one person and injure 111.
The end of the Games did not mean the end of concern about terrorism, however. The city's international status brings with it the very real possibility that Atlanta again could be a target for terrorists.
In an effort to forestall such attacks, and to help local emergency response teams prepare for them should they occur, local, state and federal law enforcement agents have put together an anti-terrorism task force to monitor trends and keep tabs on potential targets in metro Atlanta.
Known as the Joint Terrorism Task Force, the group has been operational since last July and is one of just 14 nationwide. FBI officials say they hope there eventually will be about 25.
The need for such a group became obvious not only during the run-up to the Olympics and the international focus it brought, but months after the Games when two other bombings rocked the city, said the FBI's Jeff Mazanec, supervisory special agent for the Atlanta JTTF.
"Atlanta is now a major crossroads for the international community," he said.  And that brings with it a host of international problems, including international terrorists. In addition, he said, "Florida is an absolute hotbed for domestic terrorism, and a lot of that transits through Georgia."
Trying to counter those threats are seven full-time members of the JTTF. Agents in addition to those from the FBI working on the task force are from the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, the Atlanta Police Department, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Secret Service, the State Department's diplomatic security service and the Customs Service.
The CIA and the Federal Aviation Administration also are part-time members. In addition, the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, because of its work on domestic terrorism, is kept in the loop on cases being worked by the group.
The Georgia Emergency Management Agency also works closely with the JTTF and is kept apprised of potential problems.
"This particular group provides a focal point for all of us to coordinate not only our investigative efforts but also heightens our abilities to respond to actual incidents and manage the consequences," said Steve Schildecker, GEMA director of operations.
One example of that cooperation came before JTTF became active. Last January, after two blasts at a Sandy Springs abortion clinic, the second of which apparently targeted law enforcement and emergency response personnel, federal and state officials thought it prudent to warn first responders of the potential for secondary devices, sometimes known as sucker bombs.
Training sessions were held at the Georgia Public Safety Training Center in Forsyth, in Middle Georgia, where 1,100 emergency response personnel from throughout the state learned about secondary devices. When the Bureau of Justice Assistance heard of the training, it requested a tape of the sessions be made. More than 16,000 copies of that tape, "Surviving the Secondary Device: The Rules Have Changed," have been distributed around the country.
"Local responders will typically be first on the scene, and our overall efforts are directed toward making sure they are well-trained," Schildecker said.
The efforts at cooperation honed by local, state and federal agencies that have worked together during 10 presidentially declared natural disasters in Georgia since 1990 and the Olympics have helped the JTTF get off to a smooth start and virtually eliminated interagency squabbling, federal officials said.
As a result, said Tom Bush, an FBI assistant special agent in charge who oversees the JTTF, "we are much more proactive than we are reactive." Group members won't say exactly what cases they are working on or how they work those cases, but bringing law enforcement agencies into the JTFF gives members much more intelligence about threats than they would have working separately. In addition to concerns about terrorism from domestic groups and international religious extremists, Mazanec said the threat posed by nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, commonly referred to as weapons of mass destruction, remains real.
"People need to think about this," Mazanec said, "because the threat is out there."

Graphic

 
An ambulance rushes from the scene of the Centennial Olympic Park bombing
on July 27, 1996./ GARY KIRKSEY /ASSOCIATED PRESS

Load-Date: January 21, 1998


End of Document