Alyeska told to hold terror oil-spill drills;
PIPELINE: Two scenarios a year to include cleanup after an attack.
Anchorage Daily News (Alaska)
January 10, 2006 Tuesday, FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Anchorage Daily News
Section: MONEY; Pg. F1; Staff
Length: 488 words
Byline: By WESLEY LOY, Anchorage Daily News
Body


Federal regulators are requiring the operator of the trans-Alaska oil pipeline to develop and practice new spill cleanup drills with "terrorist attack scenarios" in mind.
The requirement is part of conditions, reviewed annually, for allowing the pipeline owners to operate the line across federal land.
The pipeline is considered a critical national asset and perhaps the only civilian or military terror target in Alaska. Each day, nearly 900,000 barrels of North Slope crude oil -- 12 percent of U.S. production -- flows down the 800-mile line, with most of it sent out of state aboard tankers that dock in Valdez.
Last month the pipeline reached a milestone -- 15 billion barrels of oil transported.
Jerry Brossia, the U.S. Bureau of Land Management's top representative at the Joint Pipeline Office, a federal-state regulatory agency in Anchorage, informed the pipeline operator of the new drill requirement in a Dec. 27 letter.
"It's a sign of the times," said Rhea DoBosh, spokeswoman for the Joint Pipeline Office. Developing plans to deal with terrorism-related spills, she said, "is a prudent thing to do."
The pipeline has seen what the agency regards as terrorist threats before, including an October 2001 incident in which a rogue rifleman shot a hole in the steel pipe near Livengood. Nearly 300,000 gallons of crude oil jetted out of the hole and into the woods before responders could clamp it shut about 36 hours after the gunshot.
A Livengood man was convicted of oil pollution and criminal mischief and sentenced to 16 years in prison.
Anchorage-based Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. runs the pipeline on behalf of five owner companies, including majors BP, Conoco Phillips and Exxon Mobil.
Alyeska spokesman Mike Heatwole said his company is still assessing exactly what the Joint Pipeline Office expects from the terrorism-related spill drills.
Brossia's letter said Alyeska must develop and conduct at least two drills. One can be a "table-top exercise," while the other must involve the deployment of people and equipment along the pipeline itself.
Alyeska must coordinate with Homeland Security and other security forces, Brossia wrote.
Brossia could not be reached Monday for comment.
Alyeska already conducts security-related drills, and regularly talks with federal, state and local security officials, Heatwole said. Alyeska also uses a private contractor, Doyon Universal Services, to patrol the pipeline.
Heatwole said he was not aware of any credible threats to the pipeline recently.
Stan Jones, spokesman for the Prince William Sound Regional Citizens' Advisory Council, an industry watchdog group, said the terrorism drills likely stem from continuing national security concerns in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C.
The new Alyeska drills are fine so long as the terrorist attack focus doesn't detract from readiness on actually cleaning up oil spills, Jones said.

Load-Date: January 10, 2006


End of Document