Ambassadors visit James Madison U., pledge continued support for war on terrorism
University Wire
December 3, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Breeze via U-Wire
Length: 872 words
Byline: By David Clementson, The Breeze
Dateline: Harrisonburg, Va.
Body


Pledging to continue helping the United States in the joint fight against terrorism and pleading for awareness among academia of their nation's' plight for security, ambassadors from the nation's of Azerbaijan, Georgia, Ukraine and Moldova spoke at James Madison University Thursday in Grafton-Stovall Theatre.
"The elements of terrorism unfortunately are very well known to our countries," said Tedo Japaridze, ambassador of the Republic of Georgia, who was at ground zero shortly after the World Trade Center attacks. "We are quite unfortunately accustomed to this. That's why we have to be together to fight this."
James Madison U.
Ukraine Ambassador Konstyantyn Gryshchenko said, "We hope that we will find support among the academics. We are trying to have grassroots support, and that's why we're coming here."
Before meeting at JMU on Thursday, the ambassadors recently spoke at Harvard University, St. Louis University and Stanford University, according to Almar Mamediara, deputy diplomat of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan.
Japaridze said, "We need your support -- American support and Western support in general. It's really a great privilege to be here at such an exciting place, your university."
The ambassadors consistently stressed the importance of cooperation between the United States and their countries in countering the terrorism originating from separatist movements in their region. "We're talking about how each country could support the United States," Japaridze said. "We are allies. That's how our presidents define this relationship."
Gryshchenko said, "Our region is in the strategic interest of the United States. Without friends, the war against terrorism cannot be won."
The four countries represented, plus the Republic of Uzbekistan, comprise an alliance of post-Soviet republics, called GUUAM (Georgia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Moldova). The organization serves as a counterbalance to Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States. The ambassador from Uzbekistan, Shavkat Khamrakulov, was unable to attend due to his embassy holding constant meetings with the Bush administration, according to Paul Joyal, who moderated the forum. Joyal is the president of Intercon International and editor of Intercon Daily, a publication covering activities of the former Soviet Union.
"Sept. 11 changed a lot in the minds of all people around the world," Mamediara said. He said the cooperative relationship between America and GUUAM is very important for national security interests. "This fight against terrorism is not for one diplomat."
The ambassadors explained many benefits that their nations currently give to the United States in the fight against fundamentalist Muslim terrorism. "We are cooperating in the area of terrorism from extremists," Moldovan Ambassador Ceslav Ciobanu said. "The United States is for us a strategic partner. All GUUAM country members have supported President Bush."
According to Ciobanu, Moldova provides the American military "the right to fly and land on our territory." In addition to providing the United States "flight rights" and "experts of strategic thinking," Gryshchenko said that the Ukraine is "cooperat[ing] very actively in finding the financial support of the terrorist activities."
The nations of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova originally aligned as GUAM in 1997 as an informal union of post-Soviet republics facing developmental issues as they endeavored to become independent of Russia. According to Mamediara, the Republic of Uzbekistan joined later on April 24, 1999, during a NATO summit in Washington, D.C. This added a second U and extended the organization's name to GUUAM.
"Next year we're going to celebrate the fifth anniversary of GUUAM," Mamediara said. The nations' most recent meetings were in June at Yalta. At that conference, the countries adopted a formal charter espousing Western-oriented policies in their continuing dealings with Russia and the CIS.
Japaridze said Russia and the CIS should not have qualms with GUUAM.
Thursday's meetings at JMU were not negotiations, said Mamediara, but rather an opportunity to make presentations and hold meetings. As far as the future of GUUAM, Mamediara said he foresees several goals, like democratic market-oriented reforms, while Ciobanu said he predicts the countries meeting their combined potential by "creating a business council and attracting American investors."
The five nations have historically played an important role in world trade, creating links between Europe and China.
Japaridze said, "We are ancient nations, part of ancient civilizations.
Christianity started in this part of the world." He said that while the five nations are "absolutely different," they're unified by "this mutual threat perception. We come from a very unique empire that dissolved 10 years ago, where terror was a very important part."
Terrorism expert and political science professor Stephen Bowers, who heads JMU's William R. Nelson Institute for Public Affairs and Moldovan Ambassador Ceslav Ciobanu organized the forum. The Nelson Institute studies political violence and terrorism in the former USSR and Eastern Europe.
(C) 2001 The Breeze via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 3, 2001


End of Document