AMBIVALENT U.S.-IRAQ RELATIONSHIP IMPROVING DESPITE DIPLOMATIC RIFT
The New York Times
September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 786 words
Byline: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27
Body


For Iraq, the United States is a source of industrial technology, food and education, but is also the sponsor of a hated enemy, Israel.
For the United States, Iraq is a persistent foe of Arab-Israeli peace, a supporter of international terrorism and a sometime client of the Soviet Union, but it is also a key supplier of oil to the West and a booming market.
The contradictions make a strange relationship.  For 13 years, since United States diplomats were expelled from Baghdad during the Middle East war of 1967, formal diplomatic relations with Iraq have remained in suspension.
AN-A
In the early stages of the Carter Administration efforts were made to restore full embassy relations. Philip C. Habib, former Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, went to Baghdad for talks, but Iraqi leaders rejected an open diplomatic reconciliation.
More recently Iraq has been listed, along with Libya, Syria and Southern Yemen, as a country that supports international terrorism.  As a consequence the Department of Commerce has withheld export licenses for five Boeing passenger planes sought by Iraqi Airways, which had earlier bought 11 Boeing airliners.
 
Iraq Was Close to Moscow
The state of Washington-Baghdad relations stems basically from the militant anti-Israeli stance of Iraq and from the fact that from 1958, when the Iraqi monarchy was overthrown, until the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, Baghdad became increasingly friendly with the Soviet Union, which was the main supplier of arms for Iraq's 150,000-man army.
Iraq's hostility toward any Arab peace with Israel, and active support for Palestinian radicals, as well as its rivalry with Iran, led President Richard M. Nixon in 1972 to provide covert military aid to the Kurdish rebels who were fighting in northern Iraq against Baghdad.
Since 1974, however, as Iraq's oil production rose, reaching 3.5 million barrels a day before the outbreak of the fighting with Iran, a major change has developed in Iraqi trade with the United States.
From a level of $26 million in 1972, United States exports to Iraq soared to $300 million in 1975. During the first half of this year United States exports to Iraq were at an annual rate of close to $700 million.
 
'Interests Sections' Handle Ties
Although formal diplomatic relations are lacking, the trade development has been paralleled by a growth of permanent missions in Washington and Baghdad through so-called ''interests sections'' staffed by American and Iraqi diplomats in the embassies of other nations.
In Baghdad, William L. Eagleton, a senior diplomat who was United States deputy chief of mission in Algeria and Libya, heads the American interest section in the Belgian Embassy. State Department sources said Mr. Eagleton did not have access to Government ministers nor to President Saddam Hussein. But contacts are maintained at lower levels and with numerous private individuals.
Boeing Aircraft has maintained a permanent service and training staff in Baghdad. The Lummus Construction Company, a subsidiary of Combustion Engineering Inc., has been building a petrochemical plant near Basra. American universities have been advising Iraq's education authorities on technological institutes. Fadel Azzawi, a senior Iraqi diplomat, has until recently been attached to the Iraqi interests section in the Indian Embassy. Mr. Azzawi, a friend of Mr.  Hussein, has since been named Ambassador to India and been replaced by a lesser-ranking diplomat.
''Azzawi had regular contact with high levels of the State Department and he was invited to diplomatic functions as if he had been a full ambassador,'' said a United States official.
 
Relations at Stake in War
The future of United States relations with Iraq depends heavily on the outcome of the conflict under way with Iran, United States officials said.
Mr. Hussein has shown a desire in the last five years to reduce Iraq's arms dependence on the Soviet Union, and has increasingly turned to France and Italy.
If the Baghdad Government has refused to make the formal diplomatic move of restoring full relations with the United States, it has denied the Soviet Union something more tangible, which is a naval base at Um al-Qasr, a new Iraqi facility at the head of the Persian Gulf.
Internally, Mr. Hussein has led a purge of Communists active in organizing secret cells in the armed forces. Twenty-one people accused of such activity were executed in 1978 and another roundup took place in July.
Mr. Hussein is scheduled to succeed President Fidel Castro of Cuba in 1982 as leader of the third-world's nonaligned movement. Some American specialists on the Middle East think he might want to make a formal gesture toward resuming diplomatic ties with Washington before then.


End of Document