American Law Tackles Terrorism
The New York Times
August 29, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1321 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Body


THE striking thing about Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman as he was led by guards into Federal court in Manhattan last week was not that he seemed a strange and exotic figure in his clerical robes, dark glasses and red and white turban. Rather, it was that he was entirely familiar -- the one of the 15 defendants accused in a terrorist conspiracy on American soil who was immediately recognizable.
In that sense, Mr. Abdel Rahman symbolized how quickly the United States has absorbed and reacted to the idea that it faces a threat once associated only with faraway places.
Indeed, only a few months ago, just after the bombing of the World Trade Center in February, commentators were saying that the country was ill-equipped to deal with terrorism carried out on American soil. The terrorists themselves seemed to be largely unknown. The freedom of movement and the availability of weapons and explosives in this country along with the porousness of American borders appeared to pose extremely high obstacles to an effective anti-terrorism effort. The country, in short, was vulnerable.
The indictment of the sheik -- on conspiracy charges encompassing the trade center bombing, an unfulfilled plot to blow up New York City tunnels and buildings and the 1990 killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane -- suggests that now law enforcement agencies are at least firmly confronting the threat.
 
Difficult Case
 How successfully is still open to question. The case still has to be proved in court before a jury, and it is subject to a number of tricky legal and cultural interpretations.
Regarding the sheik and several other defendants, the case depends in large part on information provided by an informer's tape recordings of meetings between the blind Egyptian cleric and his followers.
The prosecution interprets the recorded statements of the sheik, who is accused of providing overall guidance to the alleged terrorists who worshipped at his storefront mosque in New Jersey, as approving or disapproving specific acts of terrorism. But defense lawyers maintain that the statements are elliptical and ambiguous and could be construed to show Mr. Abdel Rahman as nothing more than a political zealot expressing his strong wishes and opinions.
In addition, the conspiracy charges against the sheik were brought under a rarely used sedition law that measures guilt by the plotting a terrorist does, not the commission of any overtly illegal act. Because the law does not require the Government to prove that the defendants committed any overt acts to further their conspiracy, or even that they knew of the acts the others committed, some legal experts say the law comes close to threatening freedom of speech and belief.
 
Echoes of Europe
 Appearing with two of the defendants in court last week, one defense lawyer, Ronald L. Kuby, charged that the case was "a government conspiracy from beginning to end." Mr. Kuby's contention is that the Government had, in essence, fabricated a "vast, mythical Islamic conspiracy" in order to further what he called the foreign policy interests of the United States.
"The case," he said, declaiming to reporters on the steps of the courthouse, "is so big and so complicated it's impossible to try and impossible to defend."
Still, whatever the outcome of the trial -- which is not expected to start for at least several months -- the mere fact that 15 suspected conspirators are in custody seemed to represent a forceful law enforcement response to a threat that became conspicuously clear only on Feb. 26, when a huge explosion in an underground garage at the World Trade Center in Manhattan took six lives and injured 1,000 people.  Four men have been arrested and accused of taking part in that attack. The trial is expected to start in mid-September.
There is some similarity between the current response to terrorism in this country and the responses of European countries victimized by Middle Eastern terrorism earlier.
In France, for example, pro-Iranian groups struck in a series of bombings in heavily populated districts of Paris in 1986, killing a dozen people and wounding more than 100. The French response included diplomatic overtures to Iran, which may have helped bring the terror campaign to an end. But the French also did some simple and effective police work that put some terrorists behind bars. Europe in this sense was a few years ahead of the United States in learning to deal with terrorism as another of the routine tasks of law enforcement.
As in Europe, the groups in the United States appear to be made up mostly of recent immigrants and a few naturalized American citizens bent on making the country suffer because of its policies, or its perceived policies, in the Middle East, especially its support of Israel and its cordial relations with the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, a man despised by Sheik Abdel Rahman.
The indictments announced last week indicate, as one prosecutor put it, that the World Trade Center was only a small part of a much larger and more ambitious effort. The conspiracy, or, as the indictment called it, the "war of urban terrorism," involved a host of disparate acts. Among them was a plot to blow up the Federal Building in lower Manhattan, to sabotage the Holland and Lincoln tunnels, which link New York and New Jersey, and to bomb the United Nations. There was a plot to murder Mr. Mubarak during a visit to this country. There were alleged assassination plots against a New York Assemblyman, Dov Hikind, who is Jewish, and a State Supreme Court justice, Alvin Schlesinger.
The sweeping conspiracy case mounted by the Government also links the sheik and his followers with the assassination of Rabbi Kahane, the bitterly anti-Arab Jewish extremist. One of the men arraigned last week was El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was acquitted in a trial last year of Rabbi Kahane's murder, but convicted of related weapons possession charges (and sentenced to a prison term by Judge Schlesinger). The new indictment again accuses Mr. Nosair of the murder, but this time as part of a racketeering conspiracy, in which he is alleged to have tried to elevate his position in the organization by carrying out the murder of one of its enemies.
 
Learning Lessons
 Much of the Government's case against the men was obtained from a single source, namely the recordings of conversations made by Emad Salem, the sheik's driver, who is reported now to have been providing information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 1991. Details of exactly what evidence was obtained through Mr. Salem will have to await the trial of the 15 men. What does seem clear is that the F.B.I. was already monitoring the men around Mr. Abdel Rahman well before any of them became known to the public.
Many questions remain about the authorities' work to date. Why, for example, if the F.B.I. already had Mr. Salem as an informant, did it not learn in advance of the plan to blow up the World Trade Center? There were also signs that law enforcement officials were slow in the months before the trade center explosion to investigate evidence in its possession suggesting that a terrorism cell was already operating in the United States. It seems, for example, that in the wake of the Kahane murder, the F.B.I. did not look into ties that Mr. Nosair seems to have had with Sheik Abdel Rahman.
Experts have maintained for years that the only way to deal with terrorists -- who are deeply, often fanatically committed to a cause that, to them, takes priority over everything else -- is to adopt an uncompromising line of no concessions. The indictment against the sheik and the other alleged conspirators indicates that the United States, after a bit of fumbling and indecision, has made that principle its own. Presumably, if the threat remains active in this country, law enforcement officials will have learned some things from the present case to enable them to react more effectively, and more quickly.

Graphic

 
Photo: Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman after appearing in Federal court in Manhattan last week. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: August 29, 1993


End of Document