America's Use of Drones: The Legality Issue
The New York Times
December 1, 2012 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24; LETTERS
Length: 383 words
Body


To the Editor:
''Election Spurred a Move to Codify U.S. Drone Policy'' (front page, Nov. 25) raises the issue of the legality of the United States' ever-changing drone policy.
As his first term in office draws to a close, and with a vacancy to fill at the top of the Central Intelligence Agency, President Obama has an opportunity to press the reset button on American drone policy.
Over the last four years the use of drones has become ever more permissive. Lethal strikes are no longer restricted to ''high-value targets,'' Guilt, not innocence, is the apparent presumption.
Administration sources have told the media that in the tribal areas of Pakistan, men of fighting age are assumed to be combatant targets in the absence of intelligence to the contrary. If true, this is both unconscionable and a violation of the laws of war.
This can't go on. American drones have taken lives in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia and the Philippines. Meaningful public review of this most secretive of government programs is long overdue. We don't need a new rule book; we just need the existing rules -- international human rights and humanitarian law -- to be applied.
SUZANNE NOSSEL Executive Director Amnesty International USA New York, Nov. 27, 2012
To the Editor:
You report that President Obama is finally expressing some ''wariness of the powerful temptation drones pose to policy makers. 'There's a remoteness to it that makes it tempting to think that somehow we can, without any mess on our hands, solve vexing security problems,' he said.''
What an understatement of the ''mess on our hands'' given how 76 countries now possess drones, having discovered how cheap and easy they are to develop and use! Whose hands will they fall into? More and more people in foreign countries living under American drone strikes have understandably become radicalized. Didn't anyone consider how they would make the perfect weapon of asymmetrical warfare?
Pandora's box has opened wide, adding to our ''vexing security problems.'' We should never have forgotten what Sir Peter Ustinov is credited as saying: Terrorism is the poor man's war, and war is terrorism of the rich.
COLEEN ROWLEY Apple Valley, Minn., Nov. 26, 2012
The writer is the retired F.B.I. agent who exposed intelligence failures before the 9/11 attacks.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/01/opinion/americas-use-of-drones-the-legality-issue.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRENDAN MONROE)       

Load-Date: December 1, 2012


End of Document