America must lead the way in preventing a nuclear Iran
Inside Vandy: Vanderbilt University
September 5, 2012 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2012 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 780 words
Byline: Jacob Grossman and Jeremy Bloomstone
Body


This past week, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nation's nuclear watchdog, issued a report that the Islamic Republic of Iran has more than doubled its capacity to enrich uranium. Iran's claim that this nuclear program is for peaceful purposes, including energy and medical research, is highly suspect.
Time and again, the international community has offered Iran everything that it claims to be seeking through its nuclear program, namely nuclear energy and nuclear technology for medical research, in return for an agreement from Iran to halt its nuclear activity. Amid negotiations this summer, Iran once again rejected this offer. Why would it do this? Perhaps the fact that Iran's enrichment facilities are located under a mountain at Fordow will point to an answer. Perhaps the fact that Iran restricted access to its nuclear facilities at Parchin to international inspectors will bring us closer to the truth. Iran is hiding something; but in hiding, it reveals its true intentions.
Iran, in violation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is seeking a nuclear weapon even in the face of international isolation and unprecedented economic sanction. In the interest of the United States, it must be stopped.
If Iran attains its goal, American troops stationed in military bases all over the Middle East and on the ground in Iraq and Afghanistan would be threatened. Iran, the world's leading sponsor of terrorism, would suddenly be able to arm Hamas and Hezbollah with the ultimate weapon. Even without an intercontinental ballistic missile capability, this represents a threat to the American homeland. All it takes is one man and one briefcase or an arms sale to Iran's allies in Latin America.
If Iran acquires a nuclear weapon, it will weaken U.S. influence in the region. The U.S. will be seen as weaker for having failed to prevent Iran from its objective, and additionally, our allies in the gulf could be bullied into submission by a nuclear-armed neighbor.
It is not hard to see that a nuclear-armed Iran presents a critical threat to the United States and to its allies overseas. Last month, Congress passed legislation formalizing the toughest sanctions ever on Iran. The Iran Threat Reduction Act of 2012 puts sanctions on virtually all of the Iranian energy, transportation and financial sectors. Corporations doing business with Iran in any of these fields lose their access to American markets. By increasing the strain on the Iranian regime, the legislation seeks to bring an end to their nuclear activities.
Even more important than what this law does, however, is how it was passed: The Iran Threat Reduction Act passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 421-6, and the Senate passed the bill unanimously. Getting 421 representatives to agree that the sky is blue can be an impossible undertaking, so when the entire Senate, an institution famed for its inability to act, passes something unanimously, it is worth taking note. In no uncertain terms, Congress recognizes the threat from Iran.
Our political parties recognize this threat as well. As we have seen during the Republican and Democratic Conventions this week and last, our two major parties agree on very little. However, when it comes to Iran, they could not agree more: Iran cannot be allowed to pursue nuclear weapons, and all options are on the table to prevent them from doing so.
The Republican Party Platform, adopted last week, includes the following language: "In solidarity with the international community, America must lead the effort to prevent Iran from building and possessing nuclear weapons capability." It goes on to say that "we must retain all options in dealing with a situation that gravely threatens our security, our interests, and the safety of our friends." In a strikingly similar fashion, the Democratic Party Platform states: "The President is committed to using all instruments of national power to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons." The platform makes explicit that "the window for diplomacy will not remain open indefinitely and that all options - including military force - remain on the table."
Our representatives in government and our political parties are united against a nuclear Iran. They know that an Iran with a nuclear weapons capability represents an acute threat to the United States and to its allies. The United States must continue to lead the international community in increasing pressure on the Iranian regime and we must make sure the world knows that we will not allow a state sponsor of terrorism access to a nuclear weapon.  To paraphrase President Obama, we must show the Islamic Republic that  "we don't bluff."

Load-Date: January 18, 2018


End of Document