Americans should know about threats of terrorism;
Even if everyday folks can't do much about it, withholding information wouldn't be right.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
May 27, 2004 Thursday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2004 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12A
Length: 287 words
Body


Now that they know terrorists are still among us and an attack may come this summer, just exactly what are Americans supposed to do about it?
There are the obvious answers. Everyday folks should keep their eyes open for suspicious activity.
Those responsible for our security, meanwhile, should be taking steps to enhance it, especially around high-profile events like this weekend's World War II Memorial dedication.
Really, though, most Americans will understandably struggle with the question of how to respond to heightened threats from terrorists. If all they're supposed to do is go about their business as normal, then what's the point in giving them the information?
Think about the people whose job it is to analyze threats to the United States, though. They surely see the dilemma, but what's the alternative?
When intelligence and law enforcement agencies have credible information about potential terrorist attacks, it doesn't make sense that they would keep it to themselves. While often specifics have to be left out so as to preserve counter-terrorism options, the American people have a right to this information - even if it's not of particular use to individual citizens.
It's important, too, to keep the risk in perspective. Many more Americans are killed each year by highway accidents, the flu and obesity than have ever perished in terrorist attacks. If we want to reduce our chances of an untimely death we can learn to drive defensively, get a flu shot and lose weight.
Of course, lurking behind terrorism is an evil that is unsettling. The very fact that we can control other risks in our lives makes them more tolerable. So it's not comforting, but it is right that we know of pending terrorist threats.

Load-Date: May 27, 2004


End of Document