Americans are not terrorists
The Parthenon: Marshall University
June 28, 2013 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 408 words
Body


Many smartphone companies use the summer season to announce updated devices and operating systems, but the buzz around new developments has been silenced by news of the National Security Agency's warrantless surveillance of Verizon customers.
In an article published in The Guardian last week, the FBI and the NSA were exposed for secretly obtaining data on calls that went through Verizon's network. Upon hearing the news, many Americans reacted in a knee-jerk fashion and flooded social media with protests.
Much of the outcry was likely due to a misunderstanding that the U.S. government was listening in on calls and recording private information. In reality, information such as phone numbers, call lengths and locations were being logged, but it fails to be seen how cellular metadata counters terrorism.
While many still do not have all the facts, the protests are justified. Do Americans know this kind of surveillance has been routine ever since the Patriot Act was signed into law in 2001? And do they know President Barack Obama recently signed a four-year extension of Patriot Act provisions?
One such provision deals with lone wolves - individuals like the Tsarnaev brothers who are not linked to terrorist groups but suspected of terrorist related activity. This provision should raise concern because the Patriot Act does not define who a terrorist is or what terrorist related activity entails, which means the criteria is subjective and liable to be determined on a case to case basis.
These provisions may prevent the next act of domestic terrorism, but the NSA is meant to be limited to the surveillance of foreign communications. The collection of Verizon's data is a breach of those limitations and an invasion of the privacy the Fourth Amendment entitles all U.S. citizens.
In this, the U.S. government is entering Orwellian - Big Brother - territory.
What can Americans do? Turn off their smartphones? Getting someone to just put their phone down is difficult enough.
In the past decade, the smartphone has gone from being a luxury technology to a device 56 percent of Americans rely on every day.
Organizing a mass blackout may not be achievable or even get the message across, but something must be done to stymie the NSA's prying and protect American's rights.
If unchecked, the U.S. government will continue to gain unnecessary control under the guise of fighting terrorism.
Someone should tell Obama that Americans are not terrorists.

Load-Date: September 17, 2013


End of Document