AMERICA'S SOFT SPOT FOR TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
October 24, 1997, Friday


Copyright 1997 Daily News, L.P.
Section: Editorial; Pg.  44
Length: 768 words
Body


THE TRIAL OF RAMZI YOUSEF, accused mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing, is shining a spotlight on one of this nation's most dangerous shortcomings: its refusal to take seriously the threat of terrorism.
According to a Secret Service agent, Brian Parr, who escorted Yousef back to the United States after his arrest in Pakistan, the defendant had explained that the bombing "was in retaliation for U.S. aid to Israel."
Parr asked the next logical question: So why wasn't an Israeli target selected? And Yousef "said that Israeli targets were too difficult to attack, and he said that if you could not attack your enemy, you should attack the friend of your enemy."
Thus did Parr testify the other day. And once again America was seen through terrorists' eyes as the Caspar Milquetoast of the world. Implicit in the explanation is the certainty that American targets were not difficult to attack. So much for the security blanket in which Caspar and the citizenry wrap themselves.
New York and the nation were very lucky on that bitter day back in February '93. There were only six dead and 1,000 hurt. One can use "only" without insult to the victims because, according to Parr's testimony, the casualty toll was supposed to be infinitely higher. The plan was to topple one tower and send it crashing into the other, slaughtering 250,000 people.
This astronomical figure is nearly inconceivable. But, then, inconceivable too was a terror bombing at the World Trade Center. Until February '93.
Afterward, politicos pummeled each other for privilege of bearing the anti-terrorist standard. It was all just bombast. When it came to actual legislation, they wimped out to the special interests like the National Rifle Association. The anti-terror bill Congress eviscerated last year couldn't thwart a Beanie Baby, much less a bloodthirsty murderer.
Despite the WTC attack, and the horrors of domestic terrorism, Americans and their alleged leaders seem to believe that the U.S. still has some sort of immunity. This is called being in denial. Hopefully, reality can be induced through intellectual argument rather than another bloodbath.
As is becoming evident from the Yousef trial, terrorists have long had our number. Question is, when will that number be up?
The U.S. has been fortunate so far. But a true sense of security will be achieved only when some creep like Yousef is forced to say that American targets "are too difficult to attack." Until then, America, all of America, is at risk.
The nutty professors
A survey of professors of education the teachers of teachers released this week gives a pretty clear indication of why the 3 Rs are endangered species in American schools.
In a poll by Public Agenda, a nonpartisan, nonprofit research group, fewer than half the 900 education profs questioned supported requiring sixth-graders to meet minimum standards before being promoted to junior high school. Only 55% believed high school seniors must know proper spelling, grammar and punctuation to get a diploma.
Those out-of-touch academics deserve a sharp rap on the knuckles with a ruler. Social promotion pushing students from one year to the next only to hand them meaningless diplomas is far more damaging than the supposed stigma of keeping kids back. It robs taxpayers and perpetuates a fraud on employers. And it doesn't do much for the kids either, sending them out into the world with a false sense of their own education and achievement.
With such lax standards, it should come as no surprise that three quarters of the professors complained that their own students wanna-be teachers all make grammar mistakes in homework and classwork. Yet only 4% of the professors polled said their colleges flunk unworthy teacher candidates. No wonder Johnny can't read.
Sixty-three per cent of the profs admitted that their programs don't properly prepare new teachers. Yet few were willing to take responsibility. Two in three blamed bad press coverage for the fall in the public's confidence in the nation's schools.
There is one sign of hope: 84% of the profs said they would like to see their colleagues spend more time in real classrooms. That's a start. For until these ivory-tower theorists get a taste of the world of real kids, the old maxim will have a new twist: Those who can teach, do; those who can't, teach teachers.
Exporting his expertise
From the wires: PARIS (Reuters) Parisians looked skyward Wednesday as 75 parachutists and a dog staged a traffic-stopping display of jumps around the Eiffel Tower, marking two centuries of the sport.
"Traffic-stopping"? We didn't know Chris Lynn was in Paris.

Load-Date: October 24, 1997


End of Document