American spirit not forgotten
University Wire
September 11, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Technician via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 522 words
Byline: By Patrick Ewing, Technician; SOURCE: N.C. State
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C. 
Body


Six years have passed since the traumatic and world-changing events of Sept. 11. It's the defining moment in many of our young lives. Our parents remember where they were when Kennedy was assassinated, and we remember where we were when the Towers fell. And just as Kennedy promised in 1961 that "we will bear any burden," America promised to never forget.
And we have not forgotten -- we can never replace the lives that were lost. We cannot recreate their smiles; we will never share their laughs again. However, the dead live on forever in our memories. We now look at every fireman as a hero waiting for an opportunity to prove their valor. We still see a hole in the New York skyline where the towers once stood.
We were attacked on our soil, at our very core. The American way of life was rattled and shaken to its foundations. Yet, in true patriotic spirit, we rose to meet an unforeseen hardship, to oppose a hidden foe. In the face of crisis and tragedy, we showed that America is strong and resilient. We showed that the American way resides in its people, in our willingness to work hard and our ability to overcome any obstacle.
In six years, much has changed. The Taliban has been overthrown, many of al-Qaida's operatives have been captured or killed, and we have a strong military presence in Iraq. Yet, Osama bin Laden is still hidden somewhere in some mountain. Afghanistan has developed into a mass producer of opium. We recently pledged to sell billions in weapons to both Saudi Arabia and Israel. Tensions continue to run high over Iran's nuclear program. Terrorism and the Middle East dominate our headlines, but the focus has shifted away from the attacks on our country.
So when we pledge to never forget, we must look in the mirror and be honest with ourselves. Are we doing our best to honor the fallen? Have we learned from prior mistakes? Have we accepted blame for the role that our foreign policy had in creating the problems which led to terrorism? Can we extend an olive branch of friendship to former enemies?
The war on terror hinges on our ability to fight hatred. The answer is not bombs or guns -- tanks and armies cannot kill ideas. Occupation only compounds the problem. The war on terrorism needs to be fought with new weapons. This war will be won through compromise, understanding and compassion. The foundations of friendship and acceptance will counteract the hatred that many across the globe feel toward America. Sharing our wealth and good fortune will help defeat the perception of America that the perpetrators of 9/11 had.
Many have said that Sept. 11 is the day that America lost its innocence. I associate innocence with the ability to dream, and the concept of the American dream is woven into our collective mindset. Sept. 11 was a nightmare born out of hatred, but nobody can ever take away anyone's right to dream. Six years have passed since that fateful day, when we were definitely knocked down, but as a country, we got back up to face our adversaries. Six years is a long time, but as promised, we have not now, and never will forget Sept. 11, 2001.
(C) 2007 Technician via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 11, 2007


End of Document