Americans at increased risk of terrorist attacks
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 25, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 284 words
Byline: MICHAEL FECHTER and PHIL WILLON; of The Tampa Tribune
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


U.S. residents should expect more terrorists threats in the future, a senior FBI official tells Congress.
On the eve of the fifth anniversary of the bombing of the World Trade Center, Americans are at an increased risk of terrorist attacks, a top FBI official said Tuesday.
Two radical Islamic groups based abroad recently called on followers to target U.S. citizens around the globe, including one decree to "kill the Americans and plunder their money wherever and whenever they find it."
The chief of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's counter-terrorism unit told Congress Tuesday the threats are being taken seriously.
"We do see increased risk for American targets, not only military but soft targets around the world: U.S. businesses, businessmen, tourists and targets of that nature," Dale L. Watson of the FBI told the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on terrorism.
On Monday, Islamic terrorist financier Usama Bin Ladin, issued a fatwa, or religious edict, calling for attacks on the U.S. and its allies until U.S. forces retreat from Saudi Arabia and Jerusalem. Bin Ladin's threat was published in a London-based, Arabic newspaper.
A similar fatwa was recently issued by a coalition of Islamic groups in England.
This is the first time the two groups have explicitly justified attacks on Americans worldwide, according to a CIA memorandum disclosed by U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., chairman of the terrorism subcommittee.
Bin Laden, an exiled Saudi Arabian believed to sponsor anti-American terrorism, has cells in the U.S. capable of carrying out attacks, terrorism expert Steve Emerson told the committee.
Also testifying Tuesday was Omar Ashmawy, son of a leading Muslim critic of extremist religious groups.

Load-Date: February 27, 1998


End of Document