America's Phony War On Terrorism
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
April 18, 2012 Wednesday


Copyright 2012 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 11
Length: 300 words
Byline: Letters
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


TO THE EDITORS:
Your April 2 article, "Nations to aid rebels in Syria," provided yet another emperor-has-no-clothes moment. It described U.S. intentions to join Saudi Arabia and other anti-democratic regimes in equipping forces seeking to overthrow the Syrian government. Among the rebels are members of al-Qaida.
We shouldn't be surprised the U.S. and its allies are equipping al-Qaida in Syria. The same thing happened in Libya last year, in Kosovo in the 1990s and in Afghanistan during the 1980s. Take a long, hard look at the facts and the conclusion is inescapable: Our government is perfectly willing to work with terrorists as long as they kill the right people.
Yet another example came to light in the recent reporting of Seymour Hersh in The New Yorker magazine. Members of the Mujahideen-e-Khalq (MEK), an Iranian group that specializes in assassinations and was listed in 1997 as a foreign terrorist organization by the U.S. State Department, trained at a government facility in Nevada from 2005-07. The training was conducted by U.S. military's Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC).
While it may not be shocking that government is amoral and will join forces with whomever is convenient, it is shocking that we the people continue to allow ourselves to be scared senseless by this phony war on terrorism. It's a fraud perpetuated by people who feather their nests by making us afraid. At $1.2 trillion a year in federal spending for national defense, there are lots of feathers to be had.
But this grand deception is taking a terrible toll on men and women in uniform, on our civil liberties and on the vitality of our communities. And we can stop it if enough of us simply tell our friends, neighbors and anyone who will listen: "I don't believe it anymore."
Berry Friesen
Manheim Township

Load-Date: April 19, 2012


End of Document