Americans expect attack, poll finds
USA TODAY
July 12, 2005, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 342 words
Byline: Richard Benedetto
Dateline: QUANTICO, Va.
Body

QUANTICO, Va. -- President Bush urged Americans on Monday to maintain their resolve in the face of terrorism, even as a poll suggested that last week's bombings in London rattled U.S. residents.
A USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll taken after explosions rocked the British capital revealed a surge in U.S. anxiety that there will be further acts of terrorism at home.
Taken Thursday through Sunday, the poll found 55% of Americans believe terrorist acts are very likely or somewhat likely in the next several weeks. That's a jump from 35% in a poll June 16-19.
Speaking to about 800 law enforcement officers, FBI trainees and Marines at the FBI Training Academy about 30 miles south of Washington, Bush continued his defiant response to the bombings, which killed at least 52 people.
"The only way the terrorists can win is if we lose our nerve. This will not happen on my watch," he said. "America will not retreat in the face of terrorists and murderers, and neither will the free world."
In London, Prime Minister Tony Blair promised in a speech to the House of Commons a "vigorous and intense" manhunt for those responsible for the attacks.
The White House said Bush's speech was planned before last week's bombings, but the attack gave his remarks more significance.
The latest poll suggests the London bombings have done little to raise confidence in Bush's ability to fight terrorism. Only 34% said the United States and its allies are winning the war on terrorism, down from 36% in a June survey.
Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said Bush is not doing enough to protect the nation. "The simple fact is that the Bush administration has refused to make the needed investments to secure American cities and towns," the senator said in a statement. "We must do more to support the war on terror here at home."
However, Bush's approval rating rose enough that more Americans now approve than disapprove of the job he's doing -- 49% to 48% -- for the first time since late May. The poll of 1,006 adults has a margin of error of +/[ndash] 3 percentage points.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, Color, Robert W. Ahrens, USA TODAY (BAR GRAPH)

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document