American gets 15 years in Cuba terrorism charges
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 27, 1997, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: FLORIDA/METRO,
Length: 362 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


An American accused of trying to overthrow the Cuban government was sentenced to 15 years in prison, his lawyer in Miami said Wednesday.
Walter Van der Veer, 52, had been charged with plotting to attack police and tourists while gathering material for Molotov cocktails before his arrest in August 1996. He was caught carrying a commando knife and U.S. military garb.
An Associated Press report
Prosecutors had sought the death penalty but then asked the five-person tribunal for 20 years.
"We're very grateful he only got 15 years," said Ellis Rubin, Van der Veer's lawyer in Miami.
Rubin said he would seek to have Van der Veer returned to the United States.
At his Nov. 6 trial in Havana, Van der Veer denied plotting to topple the Castro regime. He admitted he had distributed anti-government leaflets
During trial, Van der Veer's Cuban lawyer called no witnesses and made no objections. Dominick Salfi, the only American lawyer allowed to observe the trial, was not allowed to talk to him or his lawyer. The trial was closed to the public.
Van der Veer belongs to Comandos L, a militant Cuban exile group. But his attorneys have said he was in Cuba to distribute food and toys from a Miami humanitarian group, and Bibles.
Van der Veer's legal team in the United States had complained the self-styled militant, who has asked to be executed, is not fit to stand trial.
"I do not want to live in this world anymore," he wrote in an undated letter to his friends and wife in Miami. "In my death my mission will go on."
When he testified at his trial, Van der Veer made little sense and was often contradictory, according to Salfi. He said he was in Cuba on a three-prong mission as a militant, a missionary and to build a bond with the Cuban people.
Tony Bryant, Van der Veer's friend and a onetime leader of Comandos L, said he is relieved that the sentence isn't harsher.
"It's certainly much better than the firing squad in the sense that he's alive, but you also have to remember he's a living zombie," Bryant said.
"Hopefully, God willing, he'll be home soon,"Bryant said. "It would certainly send a message of compassion or at least an understanding that this man posed no threat."

Load-Date: November 28, 1997


End of Document