AMER ICAN SOLDIER IS KILLED IN AN ASSAULT IN TURKEY
The New York Times
November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 514 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Nov. 15
Body


Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an American serviceman in the Mediterranean port city of Adana today as the military authorities announced a new crackdown on left-wing extremists in the area.
Turkish security sources said three gunmen shot the serviceman at 6 A.M. as he was getting into a car outside his home in a residential area used by Americans stationed at the Turkish Air Force base at Incirlik. He died of his wounds at Numune Hospital.
Unidentified gunman kills American serviceman in Adana (Turkey)
(In Washington, an Air Force spokesman identified the victim as Sgt. William C. Herrington, 22 years old, of Buford, Ga., according to The Associated Press. A second serviceman, Senior Airman Jay M.  Perry, 22, reportedly escaped injury.)
No group has yet taken responsibility for the killing. In the past, a radical leftist organization, the Turkish People's Liberation Army, has usually taken responsibility for the killing of Americans, saying it acted to fight ''anti-imperialism.''
 
First American Slain Since Coup
It was the first murder of an American in Turkey since the armed forces seized power on Sept. 12 and launched an all-out offensive against terrorism.
Before that, eight Americans had been killed in a wave of political violence that took more than 3,000 lives in two years.  The martial law authorities announced new arrests today of people suspected of terrorist activities. Twenty-one left-wing terrorists were reported seized in Adana in connection with the killing of a dozen people, including a policeman and a soldier .
In nearby Tarsus, 31 left-wing extremists were reported arrested.  And in the western city of Balikesir, 53 extremists of unspecified political leanings were reported seized on charges of subversion.
 
Drop in Terrorist Killings
The military authorities have apparently achieved positive results in their campaign against suspected terrorists. The Turkish press reported this week that 89 people were killed in the first two months after the military takeover, including 44 terrorists who lost their lives in clashes with security forces. The number of terrorist victims in the same period in 1979 was 156.
The military authorities attribute the decline in terrorism to the expanded powers given to the armed forces to combat terrorist violence. The powers were increased even further today in a series of rulings.
The rulings moved the martial law commanders out of the jurisdiction of the Government and put them directly under the control of the Turkish General Staff.
In addition, only one military judge, not three as previously required, can now decide on all crimes subject to penalty of five years in prison or less. Also, no legal action can now be taken against decisions of the martial law commanders.
An ammendment to the martial law statutes earlier this week gave the military authorities the right to hold a suspect for up to 90 days before taking him to court . Under civili an law, suspected members of terrorist groups must be taken to court within two weeks. After the military takeover, the period was i ncreased to a month.


End of Document