American terrorism suspects extradicted Muslim U.S. citizens arrested in summer
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 15, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5A
Length: 283 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia - Saudi Arabia has handed over "more than three" American terrorism suspects to the United States, the interior minister said in remarks published Tuesday.
In Washington, a Saudi official noted that three Americans were arrested this past summer and turned over to U.S. authorities.
The three - Seifullah Chapman, Khwaja Mahmood Hasan, and Sabri Benkhala - were charged with conspiring to join a Muslim extremist terror group blamed for thousands of deaths in the disputed Kashmir territory of India and Pakistan.
It was not immediately clear whether these three men were the terrorism suspects the interior minister was referring to in his remarks.
The minister, Prince Nayef, gave no details of their arrests, their identities or what charges they face.
"We … handed to America the Americans wanted in cases related to the United States," Nayef was quoted as saying by the Saudi Press Agency. "They were handed over, and they are more than three."
He did not said when the transfer occurred.
Asked if the extradited Americans were wanted in terrorism cases, Nayef replied: "So it was said."
Nayef also said the kingdom arrested four armed men near the border with Iraq on Monday.
"We think they are wanted [suspects], because they were fleeing" Saudi Arabia, he was quoted as saying.
Saudi Arabia cracked down on Islamic militants after suicide bombers struck expatriate housing compounds in the capital, Riyadh, on May 12.
About 200 people have been detained in the crackdown, and more than 10 people have been killed in shootouts with security forces.
Nayef said those arrested near the Saudi town of Arar, close to the Iraqi border, might be wanted in the hunt for Islamic terrorists.

Load-Date: October 16, 2003


End of Document