Americans Look to Israel as Role Model in Fight Against Terrorism
The Forward
November 11, 2005


Copyright 2005 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 3
Length: 1865 words
Byline: Ori Nir
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


After years of criticizing Israel's human rights record, America now finds itself tapping the Jewish state's experience in balancing the need to protect individual freedoms and the need to fight terrorism. And Jerusalem seems happy to help, as the issues of torture and the general treatment of detainees are garnering national attention in the United States.
"In a post-September 11 world, both we and others realize that we have nothing to be ashamed of in this regard," said Amir Ofek, public affairs consul at the Israeli Consulate in New York. "To the contrary, it may be counterintuitive, but we are out there with a positive message."
Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican pushing a legislative amendment that clarifies the rules governing the military's treatment of detainees, has been citing Israel's 1999 Supreme Court ruling that banned torture as an inspiration and a resource. McCain's amendment passed the Senate by a 90-9 majority, despite fierce White House opposition and President Bush's threat to veto the amendment. (The Senator is now negotiating with the White House and with leaders of the House of Representatives to preserve the measure.)
In recent TV appearances, McCain said he consulted with Israelis about his initiative.
"The people in this world that suffer more threats from terrorist attacks and get them every day are the Israelis," McCain said Monday on NBC's "Today" show. "The Israeli Supreme Court outlawed torture, outlawed cruel and inhumane treatment. And I have talked to Israeli officials, and they say they do very fine without it."
In addition to McCain's effort, the Supreme Court announced Monday that it would consider whether the president had exceeded his authority by establishing military tribunals for detainees being held at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba. Also Monday, at a press conference during his trip to South America, Bush denied that American forces tortured detainees. However, he made it clear that the White House was attempting to block McCain's amendment. Vice President Dick Cheney is reportedly working to ensure that if legislation is adopted, it would not apply to CIA interrogations of prisoners.
As American lawmakers and judges wrestle with such issues, Israeli officials have been quite willing to assume the mantle of legal role models in the fight against terrorism. The Forward has learned that in perhaps the most extreme example, during a private meeting two years ago, the chief justice of Israel's Supreme Court, Aharon Barak, scolded members of the U.S. Supreme Court. Barak criticized the American justices for not taking more aggressive steps to place limits on White House anti-terrorism measures.
This week, the American Jewish Congress, together with Washington's Catholic University of America and the United States Military Academy at West Point, will convene a conference at West Point, titled "Humanitarian Laws in the Age of Terror." Featured will be Israeli experts who will share their country's experience in the field.
In September, well-regarded American institutions hosted events with two prominent Israelis - Elyakim Rubinstein and Avi Dichter - who discussed Israel's efforts at balancing security and liberty. During visits to the law schools of Yale and Columbia universities, Rubinstein, a member of the Israeli Supreme Court, argued that the legal system in his country has been more proactive, comprehensive and nuanced than the American legal system at handling terrorism issues. Dichter, former chief of Israel's Shin Bet internal security services, was the keynote speaker at a Washington symposium last month, "How To Win the War Against Terrorism," in which he discussed at length Israel's moral dilemmas in fighting terrorists.
In addition to these events, Israeli diplomats are sending American law schools copies of a new booklet, produced by Israel's foreign ministry. "Fighting Terrorism Within the Law" features a collection of Israeli Supreme Court decisions regarding the war on terrorism.
"There is definitely a great deal of interest in Israel's experience, both among law enforcement agencies and in the legal community," said Marshall Breger, a professor of law at The Catholic University of America's Columbus School of Law. Breger served as the Reagan administration's Jewish liaison, and he is a former alternate American delegate to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.
The growing interest in the Israeli fight against terrorism marks a sharp break from earlier years, when Israel was often the target of American criticism over alleged violations of Palestinian human rights, Israeli diplomats said.
For many years, dating back to the beginning of the first Palestinian intifada in 1987 and even earlier, Israeli politicians and jurists found themselves fending off American criticism - typically expressed in the State Department's annual human rights report or in the daily briefings of White House and State Department spokesmen.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, triggered a significant shift. Official American criticism of Israeli measures in Gaza and the West Bank has not stopped. But the criticism is significantly milder than in years past, and American officials involved in legal aspects of the war on terrorism have started seeking out Israeli advice.
"America suddenly found itself facing challenges and dilemmas that were very similar to those that Israel has dealt with for years, and American jurists had to adjust," said Joel Singer, former legal adviser to the Israeli foreign affairs ministry to the Israeli military.
"The same mistakes that the Americans are making now - arrests without judicial review, prisoner abuse and the like - Israel has made throughout the 50 years of its balancing security needs and human rights," said Singer, who is now a partner at a Washington law firm. "There are lessons to learn from these mistakes."
The fact that American jurists are looking at the Israeli experience is significant, experts said, because American legal scholars and courts traditionally shy away from or flat-out reject constitutional and legal decisions from foreign countries. "Israeli expertise on fighting terrorism has in the past been sought by the U.S. military and other law enforcement agencies, but the growing interest in the [American] legal community is significant," said Oren Gross, a former Israeli military legal adviser who is now a professor at the University of Minnesota Law School and directs its Center for Legal Studies. At the same time, Gross added, he has not seen an example of terrorism-related Israeli rulings, judicial tests or philosophies being incorporated into American jurisprudence. "I am skeptical as to whether we will see that anytime soon," he said. "American courts are typically quite resilient to foreign influence."
Still, America's legal community is particularly interested in Israeli Supreme Court rulings on terrorism and human rights, and in the doctrine of its chief justice, said Richard Schifter, former U.S. assistant secretary of state for human rights and humanitarian affairs.
"I can't see an American court so boldly standing up to the military when security issues are concerned as the Israeli Supreme Court has," said Schifter, who until recently chaired the AJCommittee's International Relations Commission. "American courts usually try to avoid doing that."
Barak, the Forward has learned, told acquaintances that at his meeting two years ago in Washington at the Supreme Court building, he warned the American justices that "history will judge them harshly" for not asserting themselves and for proactively determining what the government can and cannot do while fighting terrorism.
A spokeswoman for Barak had no comment.
"Barak sees himself as an innovator in this field, whose rulings ought to be recognized internationally," said Amos Guiora, director of the Institute for Global Security Law and Policy at Case Western Reserve University School of Law. "In fact, he is recognized as such an innovator that he is invited to present his legal philosophy around the world."
But some critics of Israeli practices say the situation is more murky than the Barak court's decisions would suggest.
"What is happening on the ground, like everything else in Israel, diverts from what the laws and regulations prescribe," said Yoav Leff, spokesman for the Association for Civil Rights in Israel. Even after the court outlawed tortured, he said, Israeli human-rights groups have heard from many detainees, complaining that they were subject to illegal interrogation techniques.
Two recent rulings by Barak's court won praise in American legal circles. On September 15, a nine-judge panel unanimously approved a ruling ordering the government of Israel to reroute part of its West Bank security barrier to reduce Palestinian hardship. Although the court rejected an International Court of Justice opinion that said the barrier was illegal and should be demolished, it did accept the notion that security considerations may have to give way to the rights of Palestinians harmed by the fence. On October 6, the Supreme Court landed a controversial ruling banning the Israeli army's practice of using Palestinian civilians as "human shields" during arrest raids, saying it violates international law.
The military and some right-wing politicians protested the Israeli court's decision, arguing that it puts soldiers' lives in jeopardy. But American legal scholars applauded it as yet another example of Barak's court rejecting Cicero's famous dictum that "in a time of war, the law falls silent."
Guiora, who has just completed an article comparing Barak's activist approach with the hands-off approach of the later U.S. Chief Justice William Rehnquist, said he is sensing a growing rejection of Cicero's credo among American jurists, as well.
Guiora is the former commander of the Israeli army's School of Military Law and the producer of an interactive computer software used by Israeli forces to simulate morally questionable situations while fighting terrorists in a civilian environment. Frequently he is invited to speak before the American military, local American law-enforcement agencies and legal experts nationwide. Many tell him that they would like to see American courts become more active in setting the limits for the government's use of force and administrative authority in combating terrorism.
During a recent appearance at West Point, retiring Justice Sandra Day O'Connor reportedly criticized America's failure to establish clear guidelines for treating detainees captured by American forces in the war on terrorism.
"What law governs the detention and interrogation of terrorist suspects?" the justice asked the future military officers at the event, according to The New York Times. "And how are you to know what standards apply?"
But instead of pointing a finger at the court, she blamed the White House and Congress.
"What does your duty demand? What does your honor demand? And what does your country demand?" O'Connor said. "It is hard enough to answer the first two questions, but harder still when the nation's elected leaders are silent about the last."

Graphic

 
IMAGE
IMAGE

Load-Date: June 14, 2006


End of Document