America remembers Oklahoma's tragic day
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 19, 1996, Friday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18A
Length: 393 words
Body


IN THE ALFRED P. MURRAH building one year ago today, 46-year-old Rick Tomlin, a federal Department of Transportation safety officer, father of two sons, local garden club member, Vietnam War veteran, answered a phone call from his wife, Tina, at 9 a.m. They talked momentarily about a family trip. Suddenly, as Tina recounts in a recent book written about the terrible tragedy, she heard a loud noise and the phone went dead. It was 9:02 a.m.
America pauses today to remember the 168 people, including 19 children, who died because of a despicable act of terrorism that forever altered the lives of more than 2,000 Oklahomans a close family members and relatives of those who were killed or injured. Americans of this generation will remember forever where they were one year ago today when they heard the news of the worst instance of mass murder in American history a just as Americans of the '60s remember where they were when they heard that President John F. Kennedy had been shot or when they heard of Dr. Martin Luther King's assassination. But there is something different about the Oklahoma City specter a a national feeling of vulnerability, a sense that it might have been any one of us.
Everyone wants to do something to help those who are still hurting, to assure that such a thing never happens in America again. Indeed, Congress has passed an anti-terrorism bill that makes it easier to deport aliens suspected of terrorism and authorizes an additional $ 1 billion to fight terrorism.
That is all very well, but it does not soothe our souls. There is little that can, but there are two things to cling to. One is the courageous spirit of the people of Oklahoma. As a state, they have set an enviable community model, known now as "the Oklahoma family."
And there is also our system of justice, cursed and criticized, flawed indeed, but standing still as the fairest the Free World knows. Federal District Judge Richard P. Matsch, in his written opinion on changing the trial venue to Denver, affirmed his faith in the jury system. We can only hope the trial itself, regardless of the outcome, will also help restore faith in American justice.  Those who wish to contribute to the victims' fund may do so by contacting the office of the governor at (800) 518-3601 or writing to Project Recovery OKC, Inc, P.O. Box 850234, Oklahoma City, OK 73185-0234.

Load-Date: July 17, 1996


End of Document