Americans must remain on guard against further attacks, terrorism expert says
University Wire
February 21, 2002


Copyright 2002 Brown Daily Herald via U-Wire
Length: 763 words
Byline: By Shana Jalbert, Brown Daily Herald
Dateline: Providence, R.I.
Body


RAND Corporation Vice President of External Affairs Bruce Hoffman, a self-described "terrorism geek," called September's terrorist attacks unprecedented and cautioned Americans to stay on guard in his lecture "Rethinking Terrorism and Counterterrorism in Light of 9.11,"
Hoffman's lecture focused on what mistakes America made in failing to prevent Sept. 11 and asked, "Where do we stand now?"
"The enormity and horror of that day has yet to wear off," Hoffman said.
In 30 years of terrorist activity against Americans, no more than 1,000 Americans were killed. Only 14 terrorist acts around the world have killed more than 100 people at one time, Hoffman said.
Brown U.
The Sept. 11 attacks also stand out for their sophisticated planning, coordination and synchronization, Hoffman said.
Because experts assumed these kinds of acts were beyond the capacity of terrorists, the United States "did ignore warnings," Hoffman said.
Hoffman said parts of what happened on Sept. 11 remain a mystery. He said no one knows for sure where the fourth aircraft was going, but knowing its destination is key for understanding the mindset of people like bin Laden, Hoffman said. Hoffman said his personal theory is that the aircraft that crashed in Pennsylvania was intended to crash into CIA headquarters in Virginia.
He said writing off Sept. 11 as an intelligence failure is "too simple," arguing that the U.S. made "fatally false assumptions" in its defense against terrorism prior to Sept. 11.
He said Americans thought they understood terrorism better than they really did and assumed any attacks would take place overseas, which led to a "false sense of security."
Before Sept. 11, experts were preparing for two opposite extremes of terrorism: low-end car and truck bombings and weapons of mass destruction, Hoffman said.
Experts ignored the middle range of terrorism, which al Qaeda "identified and exploited," Hoffman said, adding that the prevailing idea that terrorists are more interested in publicity than killing added to a lack of defense.
As for Osama bin Laden, Hoffman said America also "violated the cardinal rule of warfare" to know the enemy.
Bin Laden has "great patience, a vision, the means to implement his vision and organizational skills," Hoffman said, calling him "terrorism's CEO."
Bin Laden's talents for incorporating both a "strict, austere and fundamentalist" version of Islam with modern technology and creating an image for himself through the media were ignored prior to Sept 11, Hoffman said.
"He understands us … better than we understand ourselves," Hoffman said.
Hoffman stressed the importance of seeing bin Laden "not as a crazed fanatic" but as a "venture capitalist," allowing the al Qaeda network to work on many levels.
Al Qaeda's structure, which includes specialized "masterminds," trained amateurs, local "walk-ins" and like-minded insurgent groups, allows for many levels of unpredictable terror, Hoffman said.
Americans also misunderstand the suicide dimension of the attacks, Hoffman said, since these men think of themselves as martyrs, not self-sacrificers.
Hoffman said Americans overemphasize terrorists' socio-economic, family and educational backgrounds in trying to understand the mindset of the attackers, who he called "people from normal walks of life."
Americans want to be able to reach out, transform and intervene to stop terror, Hoffman said, but the men were "highly trained, dedicated, well-educated, stable individuals."
"Al Qaeda has been weakened," Hoffman said, but we "shouldn't breathe a sigh of relief yet."
Hoffman emphasized that although the infrastructure of al Qaeda has been weakened, the leadership is, for the most part, still at large.
Hoffman asked whether the U.S. government's capture of low-level al Qaeda leaders are just "scooping up low-hanging fruit" and ignoring key players.
Hoffman said Americans must prepare for what he called the reality of terrorist threats.
Terrorism is "planned, purposeful and pre-meditated," he said.
It is "fundamentally a form of psychological warfare" attempting to erode society and undermine confidence in leadership, he said.
"The U.S. will remain vulnerable," Hoffman said, and "enmity towards the U.S. will not diminish."
Hoffman stressed that "terrorism is a perennial, ceaseless struggle," adding that the term "war against terrorism" implies finality, which is unrealistic.
"We're getting better, but the terrorists are thinking bigger," Hoffman concluded.
(C) 2002 Brown Daily Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 21, 2002


End of Document