American Bar Association names task force on terrorism and law
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
September 26, 2001 Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; General news
Length: 409 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff
Body


The American Bar Association has named a task force of experts in diverse areas of the law to offer counsel to the country's political leaders as they consider legislation in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks.
The Task Force on Terrorism and the Law, chaired by Robert Clifford, will begin its work at once.
"We need to make sure the mechanisms exist that will permit prompt and effective investigation and prosecution of those responsible for these heinous acts, while at the same time ensuring we preserve the fundamental principles of our system of Constitutional law," said ABA president Robert E. Hirshon. "We need to address quickly as a nation, difficult and complex issues involving electronic surveillance and wiretapping, computer encryption, immigration procedures, etc. As a country, we need to be ready for inconveniences, restrictions and possibly a loss of some liberties, experiences to which we are unaccustomed. There are sacrifices we will need to make because we must find and deal with the terrorists."
The new ABA task force will examine all law-related policy issues implicated in the terrorist attacks, assess existing Association policy on these issues, determine what revisions are needed or additional areas should be addressed, and bring policy recommendations to the ABA board of governors for its consideration.
"We will have a thoughtful basis for all policy recommendations we make to federal leaders on these critical matters," Hirshon said.
Although the ABA task force is still being formed, seven members have been named to date. In addition to Clifford, chair of the ABA Section of Litigation, they are Elizabeth Rindskopf Parker, general counsel of the University of Wisconsin, representing the Standing Committee on Law and National Security; Professor Stephen Saltzburg of George Washington School of Law, representing the Section of Criminal Justice; John S. Cooke, chair of the Standing Committee on Armed Forces Law; Prof. Barry Kellman of De Paul University School of Law, representing the Section of International Law and Practice; Richard P. Campbell, chair of the ABA Section of Tort and Insurance Practice; Esther Lardent, representing the Coordinating Committee on Immigration Law and the Pro Bono Institute; and Michael S. Greco, representing the Section of Individual Rights and Responsibilities.
The last two to be named will represent the sections of Business Law and Science and Technology Law.

Load-Date: May 26, 2005


End of Document