AMERICAN AWAITING SECOND PERU VERDICT;
 TERRORISM SUSPECT GOES BEFORE THREE JUDGES TODAY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 20, 2001 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 560 words
Byline: KEVIN G. HALL, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body


American terrorism suspect Lori Berenson will hear a court verdict today that could free her or return her to a dismal Peruvian prison cell for the foreseeable future.
 Berenson, 31, will read a statement this morning before a three-judge civil anti-terrorism court, which will later hand down a verdict on charges she collaborated with terrorists. Her 1996 life sentence for treason was annulled last August, and for the past three months she has been on trial on lesser charges of collaborating with the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, the smaller of two guerrilla groups that are trying to overthrow Peru's government.
The New Yorker's arrest and subsequent trials have strained U.S.-Peruvian relations because of doubts about the evidence and the procedures.
 Alejandro Toledo, Peru's U.S.-educated president-elect, has said Berenson will get no special treatment in his administration, but that improving Peru's dismal human-rights record is on his agenda. He takes office July 28.
 "Everyone applauds the recent elections, which were clean, fair, and this is a democracy," said Berenson's mother, Rhoda, a New York physics professor. "I hope the justices know the world is watching, know this is the time to show they can follow their own laws and can be just. There is absolutely no evidence that Lori did any of the crimes of which she is being accused."
 In a move that seemed to underscore the political nature of the trial, Justice Minister Diego Garcia-Sayan yesterday visited the Lurigancho men's prison, where Berenson's trial is taking place. Afterward, he said Peru would not let down its guard against terrorists. He defended the trial, saying it "had fundamental guarantees that are part of international standards."
 The United States and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an autonomous arm of the Organization of American States, say Peru's tough anti-terrorism laws lack basic due-process protections for suspects.
 Gina Amatangelo, a fellow with the rights group Washington Office on Latin America, said Peru's laws on terrorism are an aberration in the region because of their "disproportional sentencing to the crimes."
 In the 1990s Berenson and hundreds of others who were accused of treason or collaborating with terrorists faced military courts where hooded judges had little or no judicial training and did not share evidence with defense attorneys.
 During the new civil trial, prosecutors alleged that Berenson, an anthropology student and left-leaning activist, knowingly rented a safe house for the guerrilla group, acquired media credentials to scope out the congress for a planned attack and hired the wife of the rebel group's No. 2 leader as her photographer. They showed maps of the congress building with notes they said were in Berenson's handwriting.
 Berenson denies those allegations and says guerrilla leaders who were using false identities duped her. Her refusal to condemn the rebel group has angered average Peruvians, who suffered under guerrilla wars that left more than 30,000 soldiers, guerrillas and civilians dead over the past two decades.
 Today's verdict is expected to be appealed to Peru's Supreme Court by Berenson or prosecutors. That body, once a political tool of former President Alberto Fujimori, has undergone repeated changes, making it difficult to predict how it might react to the appeal.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Silvia Izquierdo/Associated Press: American Lori Berenson addresses the judges during her civil trial in March at the San Juan de Lurigancho Prison in Lima, Peru. She is accused of aiding a leftist rebel group that was plotting to attack Congress in the mid-1990s. After three months of testimony, a three-judge panel is expected to deliver a verdict this afternoon.

Load-Date: June 20, 2001


End of Document