Americans need to open eyes
University Wire
March 14, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 University Daily Kansan via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 510 words
Byline: By Alison Kieler, University Daily Kansan; SOURCE: U. Kansas
Dateline: LAWRENCE, Kan. 
Body


We are the blissfully complacent.
Even in the wake of 9/11, when we raised our flags and felt thankful to be in a democratic nation, we under-used our democratic abilities.
President Bush pointed his finger at the culprits, and most of America, without a second thought, followed suit. We'd been attacked; this was no time to consider how our past political decisions had helped fuel the tragedy. It was no time to ponder whether our angered reactions would lead to more. Yet our political decisions, inextricably linked to the rest of the world, had both sparked and funded irrevocable hatred and continue to encourage terrorism today.
During the Cold War, the United States government armed and trained Afghani fundamentalists - one of whom may have been Osama bin Laden - to fight the Soviets. These "freedom fighters" became the Taliban. We supported Saddam Hussein's shady actions in the Iraq-Iran War. Months before 9/11, we gave millions of dollars to the Taliban on good faith that they would use it to eradicate poppies. These examples represent a drop in the bucket of scandalous U.S. relations.
Even if these judgments were made in honest error, Americans should be more cognizant of the implications of our actions. Policies and ideologies that are commonplace for us are devastating to others, including our lack of cultural sensitivity, our promotion of capitalism, our propensity to be contradictory, our history of attempting and failing to ameliorate conflicts more complex than we ever realized, and, of course, putting money into potentially dangerous hands.
Our war with Iraq, for better or for worse, increased terrorism. A report issued by the World Policy Institute found that in 2003more than half of the developing countries the U.S. supplied arms to were nations in which citizens did "not have the right to change their own government." In 2006, Sen. Sam Brownback passed a bill to give $50 million to "pro-democracy" groups who wanted to overthrow the Islamic government of Iran. To fund one of these groups, the MEK, we also had to remove it from the U.S. Department of State terrorist list, where it and its cohorts resided for acts of terrorism against the U.S. and Iran. Perhaps these rebels wreak less terror now, but do we really expect these groups to instill peace with their new guns? Do we so naively believe that they will precisely or quickly accomplish their mission, or that Iranians will be thankful for the violence we just sparked?
Using our democratic abilities is not a matter of voting "yes" or "no" for terrorism. It's a matter of opening our eyes to the manners in which America affects the world.
In a nation that provides education and encourages free speech, we have become carefree and soft spoken, and our lack of use of democracy is no small matter. Our national decisions don't merely regard prosaic issues; they may significantly affect how our nation prospers and falters in the world. Those who have targeted us did so for reasons that are important to understand.
(C) 2007 University Daily Kansan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 14, 2007


End of Document