America Held Hostage Again What has been happening in Lebanon - and not happening in Iran - betrays a little-noted condition: President Reagan has no better answer to hostage-taking and terrorism than did President Carter. A shadowy gang, presumed to be a group called Islamic Holy War, has held four Americans for months, presumably to win the freedom of some terrorists. It held a fifth American, Jeremy Levin of Cable News Network, for nearly a year until he escaped last week.
The New York Times
February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; editorial
Length: 270 words
Body


Also noteworthy is the fact that Syria promptly freed the fleeing Mr. Levin, as if to distance itself from the kidnappers in its region of influence. And this brought Mr. Reagan's call of appreciation to a Government that usually appears high on his list of regimes promoting terrorism.
The President plainly hopes for more Syrian help.
Old memories of odd ''private'' ambassadors are really stirred by the recent arrival in Beirut of Muhammad Ali to lend a hand. But there is no point mocking this desperate diplomacy, as there was no point in mocking Jimmy Carter's. These efforts underscore the difficulties of dealing with unscrupulous adversaries who offer no easy target for reprisal. Clearly, Lebanon is not an appropriate target for Secretary of State Shultz's recent desire to ''isolate, weaken or punish states that sponsor terrorism against us.''
But what of Iran, which does have an all- powerful Government? Ten weeks have passed since its soldiers ostentatiously stormed a hijacked Kuwaiti airliner to seize four hijackers who had killed two Americans. It won't extradite them and has made no move to bring them to trial. That is a violation of the Hague Convention against the unlawful seizure of aircraft, which Iran signed.
Harboring hijackers is a threat against all air travelers, and Iran offers an excellent target for lawful and appropriate reprisal: the suspension of air service. Forbidding flights to and from Iran would hurt, and it would hurt even more if pressure is applied to make other nations join the boycott. Action in Lebanon is plainly difficult, but inaction toward Iran seems inexplicable.


End of Document