American double standard terrorism
University Wire
February 3, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1143 words
Byline: By Steven Meck, Daily Targum
Dateline: New Brunswick, N.J.
Body


The principle of universality means applying the same standards to ourselves that we apply to others, if not more stringent ones. A U.S. Army manual defines terrorism as "the calculated use of violence or threat of violence to attain goals that are political, religious, or ideological in nature … through intimidation, coercion, or instilling fear."
This definition works well until applied to the United States. By accepting this elementary truth and holding the United States to the same standards one would apply to any other country, the logical conclusion is that America is a leading terrorist state. When terrorism is carried out, whether by a small group of religious fundamentalists or by the most powerful state in the world, it must be condemned and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. One can see how America fails to uphold the basic morality of the principle of universality and the terrible implications this brings when examining different historical events.
Rutgers U.
Throughout the 1980s Nicaragua was turned into a graveyard by American forces. America attacked Nicaragua because in 1979 the Sandinistas overthrew the illegitimate and murderous Somoza dictatorship, which had been propped up by the American marines and left to reign for nearly half a century. According to "Killing Hope" by William Blum, the Sandinistas did the unthinkable by allowing free elections and giving the workers the means of production. Besides their direct involvement in Nicaragua, the U.S. funded (with at least $ 100 million) Nicaraguan Contras, which started out as a militia comprised of former remnants of the Somoza dictatorship that carried out some of the most gruesome forms of torture to and murder of Nicaraguan citizens and state officials to undermine the current government of the Sandinistas and reestablish their control. By 1984, according to reports by the Sandinista Nicaraguan government, the American-backed contras had assassinated 910 state officials and killed 8,000 civilians. Secretary of State George Schultz stated that Nicaragua was "a cancer, right here in our land mass" as the reason America should overthrow the Nicaraguan government. The irony that this "cancer" was trying to cure the people of Nicaragua from American terrorism was apparently lost on Shultz. But whatever the reason, the fact that America intervened at all and caused such a dramatic loss of life is unnecessary.
For their terrorist actions, the United States was condemned by the World Court for international terrorism in 1986. Anticipating the suit, the Reagan administration announced three days before Nicaragua's filing that the United States would not recognize the World Court's jurisdiction in matters concerning Central America for a two-year period. For good measure, the U.S. stepped up its attacks on Nicaragua and focused on bombing "soft targets" like health clinics, schools, farms, etc. The United States also strangled the country with a complete economic sanction, interfered with elections, and composed the infamous CIA manuals that encouraged citizens to terrorize their fellow Nicaraguans.
Despite all of this, the Sandinistas never once retaliated with terrorism of its own against America. Would it have been right for Nicaragua to bomb Washington, D.C., in revenge?
Nicaragua was a part of Reagan's "Humanitarian campaign" that was nothing less than American terrorism against communists, trade unionists and human rights activists that dared to disobey American orders. Reagan showed his concern of the United Nation's constant condemnation of America's terrorist actions, proclaiming, "One hundred nations in the U.N. have not agreed with us on just about everything that's come before them where we're involved, and it didn't upset my breakfast at all."
Imagine the outrage expressed throughout America if Nicaragua had carried out terrorist attacks on America, ignored World Court jurisdiction, and then knowingly ignored the outcry from the majority of the world. This would elicit some repercussions. But when America is carrying out these terrorist attacks, it is somehow different.
Another example of American terrorism was America's actions in the Dominican Republic, as cited in "The Caribbean: Struggle, Survival and Sovereignty" by Katharine Sunshine. In 1965 America, under the Johnson administration, openly invaded the Dominican Republic, overthrew the elected leader, put in a puppet president, and then gunned down 3,000 people in the streets of Santo Domingo who demanded that their democratically elected president be reinstated into office. However, if the Dominican Republic's army came to Washington, D.C., threw our democratically elected leader out of office, and proceeded to gun down protestors, popular opinion would not deem this a "humanitarian intervention." (Okay so this is a little far-fetched; George W. wasn't democratically elected, but just bare with me for this example.)
America's disregard of the victims of terrorism when terrorism accomplishes more important goals, extends much farther than supporting "colonial and racist regimes." This extends to the disregard of American life as well. For example, in 1967, Israeli planes and torpedo boats opened fired on the USS Liberty for 75 minutes, killing 43 and injuring over 100 Americans. Survivors and many government officials including Secretary of State Dean Rusk and former Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Admiral Thomas Moorer believe the attack was not a mistake like Israel has claimed and feel betrayed that the attack was denied a congressional investigation. They claim that and facts were covered up that prove it was no accident. Another example is when Saddam Hussein attacked a U.S. Navy vessel in 1988, killing over 30 soldiers. America knew he was guilty of this attack. None of that mattered because at the time he was an important ally in control of a country teeming with oil. America consistently proves that when terrorism against its own troops or civilians profits America, American life is just not that important.
In discussion of American intervention, it is presupposed, that the United States acts for the common good. However, America deserves no special treatment in its "endeavors," but deserves the same scrutiny as every other country. The current war on terror is completely hypocritical. Killing civilians in response to killing other civilians does not stop the spread of terrorism, it merely adds to it. Backed by Bush's "with us or against us" philosophy, it seems that one must be either in favor of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 or in favor of U.S. terrorism. Until we learn to follow the principle of universality, and end terrorism carried out by America, America will continue to carry out -- and fall victim to -- terrorist attacks.
(C) 2003 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 3, 2004


End of Document