AMERICANS UNDER ATTACK // A NEW WAR ON TERROR
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 31, 1998, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 2041 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorism wasn't something Bill Clinton expected to spend much time on when  he took over as president almost six years ago.
His hope, repeated often during the election campaign of 1992, was to make  his mark with domestic issues. Foreign policy would be looked after by the  bureaucrats at the State Department, and terrorism - when it was thought about  at all - was considered something best left to the FBI, the CIA and the  military.
But not only was the president challenged by terrorists shortly after  taking office, he has been confronted in recent years with a veritable rogues'  gallery of mass killers, both domestic and foreign. At least one of them has  reportedly even singled out Clinton for assassination.
BOMBS-4
The bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania this month is just the  latest of these challenges. But those bombings, along with the president's  retaliatory cruise missile attacks and, most recently, the extradition of two  accused bombers to New York, are moving the United States into an all-out war  with terrorists that promises to get a lot bloodier and last well into the  future.
And this, according to terrorism specialist Daniel Pipes, may be just  what's needed.
"Terrorists have been at war against us for more than 20 years and with  only a few exceptions, we've never retaliated," says Pipes, a consultant on  terrorism and professor at the University of Pennsylvania. "Until now, the  president and his aides have been saying terrorism was a criminal matter,  something subject to the legal process. Now they're saying this is a war. It's  a different approach and I certainly support the change."
The point Pipes and other terrorism experts emphasize is that Clinton's  cruise missile strikes Aug. 20 will not be enough by themselves. The true test  of whether the administration has adopted a new policy on terrorism, they say,  will be if it keeps going after terrorists wherever they are found.
"The key here," Pipes says, "is that it has to be sustained. A one-time  operation is meaningless."
The Clinton administration's tendency to see terrorism as a law enforcement  issue rather than national security problem existed almost from the beginning.  On Feb. 26, 1993, just over a month after Clinton took office, a team of  Islamic extremists pulled off what a federal prosecutor described at the time  as "the single most destructive act of terrorism ever committed here in the  United States."
Though that judgment would have to be revised a couple of years later, the  explosion of a massive truck bomb under the World Trade Center towers in New  York's lower Manhattan was, indeed, the most daring terror attack on U.S.  soil. Had the bombing gone off as planned, one or both of the 110-story towers  would have collapsed, resulting in the deaths of tens of thousands of people.
Fortunately, the truck bomb was slightly out of place. The Trade Center  towers survived the massive blast nearly intact, and casualties were limited  to six killed and slightly more than 1,000 injured. Almost as luckily, the  four extremists who carried out the attack turned out to be careless. They  were quickly caught and went on to implicate a blind Egyptian spiritual guide,  Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, and the bombing plot's mastermind, a terror  specialist named Ramzi Yousef who was eventually tracked down in Pakistan and  brought back to the United States.
All were convicted on federal terrorism charges and are in jail.
That emphasis on basic police work and law enforcement was reinforced two  years later when another massive truck bomb destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah  Federal Building in downtown Oklahoma City in April 1995, killing 168 people  and injuring hundreds more in what now ranks as the deadliest terror attack on  U.S. soil. Though police initially speculated Middle Easterners were involved,  it turned out the bombing was planned and carried out by home-grown terrorists  - two anti-government extremists named Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols.
Both were brought to trial and convicted, with McVeigh being sentenced to  death and Nichols to life in prison.
A home-grown killer is also suspected in the next major terror attack - a  pipe bombing that killed one and wounded 111 on July 27, 1996, during the  Olympic Games in Atlanta. But despite massive police and FBI resources thrown  into the investigation, the Olympic bombing remains unsolved.
Solid police work was, however, successful in preventing what could have  been another catastrophic terror attack in New York City. Last July, police  arrested two suspected members of the Palestinian Hamas terror gang in  Brooklyn. Officers said the two had explosive materials and planned to bomb,  among other targets, the New York subway system.
Law enforcement and patient diplomacy - along with crucial help from U.S.  intelligence agencies - has also been the Clinton administration's approach to  dealing with Libya over the December 1988 bombing of a Pan Am flight 103 jumbo  jet near Lockerbie, Scot-land, that killed 270 people.
Though U.S. officials quickly became convinced the Pan Am bomb was set by  Libyan intelligence agents - Abdel Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Phimah -  the two have been kept under wraps at home by Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi.  That may change because of a deal worked out last week under which the pair  would stand trial before Scottish judges at a special court in the  Netherlands. But even though Libya says it will go along with this - it did,  after all, first make such a compromise proposal - there are lingering doubts  in Washington that the two men will ever appear for trial.
The suspicion is Gadhafi will find one excuse after another to keep the two  out of Western hands.
As Clinton pointed out in justifying his cruise missile strikes on  Afghanistan and Sudan, there are limits to what traditional law enforcement  and diplomacy can achieve. And Gadhafi, like Saddam Hussein in Iraq, may be a  good example of where those limits are. He is suspected, after all, of  ordering the Pan Am 103 attack in retaliation for America's bombing of his  home and office complex in 1986.
Another example of the limits of law enforcement and diplomacy is Osama bin  Laden, the Saudi millionaire believed to have organized the Nairobi and Dar es  Salaam embassy bombings Aug. 7. Bin Laden has been hiding out in eastern  Afghanistan for more than two years, transforming his place of refuge into an  international terrorist training camp dedicated to killing Americans.
The United States has called on Afghanistan's dominant Islamic faction, the  Taleban, to extradite bin Laden to the United States, or at least expel him  from its territory. So far, those appeals have been rejected.
"I wouldn't count on them ever turning over bin Laden," says Judith  Yaphe, a terrorism expert at the Institute for National Strategic Studies, the  U.S. government's school for national security issues for intelligence and  military officers.
"Bin Laden and the Taleban agree on too many things," Yaphe says. "He's  very comfortable there (in Afghanistan), and I don't think you'll see him  coming out any time soon."
That's too bad because bin Laden and his followers also are suspected in a  string of earlier attacks on U.S. targets. Before this month's embassy  bombings, his name came up in investigations of a 1992 bombing attack on a  Yemeni hotel that was supposed to be housing U.S. soldiers.
Bin Laden's followers also are suspected of complicity in the 1995 bombing  of a Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, military office in which five Americans were killed  and the truck bombing of the Khobar Towers housing complex near Dhahran, Saudi  Arabia, the following year in which 19 Americans died. U.S. investigations  into the Khobar Towers bombing were cut short when the Saudi government  abruptly ended its cooperation.
In addition, bin Laden and his followers are accused of zeroing in on the  biggest U.S. target of them all, President Clinton. One assassination plot  reportedly involved blowing up Clinton's motorcade during a presidential visit  to the Philippines in 1994, and another was said to have been prepared for a  presidential visit to Pakistan that was subsequently canceled.
The man bin Laden reportedly deputized to organize the assassination  attempts was none other than Ramzi Yousef, the terrorist later arrested and  convicted in the World Trade Center bombing.
It's no surprise then that people such as Richard Murphy, a former  assistant U.S. secretary of state and ambassador to Syria and Saudi Arabia,  think Clinton's war on bin Laden's terrorism has to be much more serious than  anything he has done in the past.
"It (the cruise missile attack) mostly delivered a shock message," says  Murphy, now with the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. "But if this  is going to work, it can't be just a one-time event. It has to be followed  up."
However it turns out with bin Laden, there are many other terror suspects  beyond the reach of U.S. law and diplomacy. One of the most notorious,  according to Yaphe, is Imad Mughniyah, an explosives expert who is believed to  have masterminded the truck bombings that killed 63 people at the U.S. Embassy  in Beirut, Lebanon, in April 1983 and another 241 U.S. Marines and sailors at  their barracks near Beirut airport the following October.
Mughniyah, a member of the Hezbollah terror gang, is also suspected of  hijacking a TWA airliner in 1985, in which one American passenger was killed,  and of holding American hostages in Lebanon that same year. He has been hiding  out in various Muslim nations ever since, mainly Iran and Syria.
Three years ago, U.S. intelligence agents thought they might be able to  capture Mughniyah when they learned he was transiting through the airport at  Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. But when U.S. agents tried to reach the airport to  intercept Mughniyah, they were blocked by Saudi security. Washington formally  protested the Saudi move, but to no avail.
The equally notorious Sabri al-Banna, a Palestinian better known as Abu  Nidal, is yet another terror suspect still beyond the reach of U.S.  authorities. He is the suspected mastermind behind a bomb attack on a Pan  American jet at the Rome airport in 1973 and the bombing of a TWA jet over the  Aegean Sea in 1974 that, together, killed 120 people, as well as the  simultaneous attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports in 1985 in which 18  people were killed and 120 wounded.
Though Abu Nidal has been hiding out in Libya for years, there have been  reports in recent weeks that he visited Egypt for medical treatment. The  Egyptian government has denied the reports, and U.S. efforts to learn the  truth of Abu Nidal's whereabouts have been fruitless.
Despite the obvious limitations, the Clinton administration has continued  to rely primarily on law enforcement and diplomacy as the best tools to deal  with terrorism. In fact, this month's cruise missile attacks against  Afghanistan and Sudan marked only the second time Clinton has retaliated  militarily for a terrorist act.
The only other time was in June 1993 when Clinton unleashed 23 Tomahawk  cruise missiles against Iraq's military intelligence headquarters in downtown  Baghdad. The terrorist act that provoked the missile attack was a purported  Iraqi plot to assassinate former President George Bush during a visit to  neighboring Kuwait.
Presumably, that plot was ordered by America's No. 1 adversary of the past  decade, Saddam Hussein. And Hussein, it seems, also remains beyond the reach  of American cruise missiles, American justice and even United Nations  sanctions. 
 
 
 
AUG. 7., 1998 
 
Bombing of U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya. 
 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED: 253 
 
NUMBER INJURED: More than 5,000 
 
AUG. 7., 1998 
 
Bombing of U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 
 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED: 11 
 
NUMBER INJURED: More than 70 
 
APRIL 19, 1995 
 
Bombing of Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. 
 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED: 168 
 
NUMBER INJURED: Hundreds 
 
FEB. 26, 1993 
 
Bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City. 
 
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED: 6 
 
NUMBER INJURED: Just over 1,000 
 
+  +   + 
 
Text for U.S. strategy for fighting terrorism graphic not available  electronically. Please see microfilm.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press file photos, (4); BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (6); BLACK AND WHITE CHART; A scene from the bombing of U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya.; A scene from the U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; The remains of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.; Police help a victim of the World Trade Center bombing.; Ramzi Yousef; Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman; Timothy McVeigh; Terry Nichols; Osama bin Laden; Sabri al-Banna (known as Abu Nidal); U.S. strategy for fighting terrorism graphic includes a graph on U.S. spending to fight terrorism in 1996 and 1997, explains what the CIA and FBI do, includes drawings of their logos, shows maps that locates areas of economic sanctions and locates state sponsors of terrorism, explains the use of military action

Load-Date: September 1, 1998


End of Document