AMERICA IS ON YELLOW ALERT, IN NEW WARNING SYSTEM FOR TERRORISM;
 CODE MEANS "SIGNIFICANT RISK"
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 13, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 473 words
Byline: The Associated Press Phil Sutin And Bill Bryan Of The Post-Dispatch Contributed To This Report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


America is on yellow alert, facing a "significant risk of terrorist attacks," homeland security chief Tom Ridge said Tuesday as he announced a color-coded system designed to end confusion over terrorism warnings.
It will be years before the nation sees green - the lowest threat level - because terrorism may be "a permanent condition" in America, Ridge said.
Ridge and Attorney General John Ashcroft have issued four terrorism warnings since the Sept. 11 hijackings. Local officials have complained the assessments were too vague.
"What we're trying to do is work with the states and local communities (and) also the private sector so we have a common vocabulary," the former Pennsylvania governor said in describing the new system in a speech to the National League of Cities.
The new system ranks threats by colors, starting with green at the bottom and followed by blue, yellow, orange and red as perceived dangers intensify. The warning level can be upgraded for the entire country or for specific regions and economic sectors - such as the nuclear industry, Ridge said.
The system's guidelines give government officials advice on what to do as threats grow. No such guidance is offered for the public.
Ridge said the system is designed to motivate local leaders to develop emergency response plans that would include ways to inform the public about how to react to attacks.
St. Louis County government responded to the yellow alert by assigning additional police officers to patrol the County Administration Building in Clayton.
Garry Earls, director of public works, has been working with Police Chief Ronald Battelle in planning upgrades to the security of St. Louis County facilities.
In St. Louis, the police department has been maintaining heightened security around public buildings since the previous alert was issued. The city has not made any changes in response to Ridge's new system.
Under the color-code system:
* Green is a low risk of terrorist attack.
* Blue is a general risk. Officials are asked to review and update emergency response procedures.
* Yellow is an "elevated condition." There is a significant risk of attack. Increased surveillance of critical locations and implementation of some emergency response plans are called for.
* Orange signifies a high risk of attack. The government should coordinate security efforts with armed forces or law enforcement agencies and take additional precautions at public events.
* Red means a "severe risk" of attack and may require the positioning of specially trained teams, closing of public and government facilities and monitoring of transportation systems.
America is at yellow alert because the al-Qaida terrorist network is trying to re-form after defeats in Afghanistan and has trained thousands of terrorists, some of whom have probably slipped into the United States, Ridge said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Tom) Ridge, Homeland security chief

Load-Date: March 13, 2002


End of Document