American investors may indirectly fund terrorism
USA TODAY
June 26, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 708 words
Byline: Peter Schweizer
Body

Much has been made about the recent anti-drug campaign that highlights the link between drug money and terrorism. According to the ads, if you buy drugs, there is a good chance that your money may find its way into terrorist coffers.
While most Americans are not in the habit of buying drugs, they are invested in the stock market. Yet few, if any, have questioned the connection between terrorism and those companies in which average Americans hold stock via such investment vehicles as their pension funds, mutual funds and 401(k) plans.
Until now. A recently launched research tool, the Global Security Risk Monitor, profiles the operations of about 300 leading, publicly traded U.S. and foreign firms that have activities in any of six countries: Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria, all listed as terrorist-sponsoring states by the U.S. State Department. The Monitor -- a collaboration between the Investor Responsibility Research Center, which provides impartial information to the markets, and the Conflict Securities Advisory Group, which identifies and analyzes the intersection between national security issues and global finance -- sells its information to investment subscribers.
These subscribers, the money managers who invest on our behalf, can use the Monitor's information to determine which companies may lose stock value because of their connections to terrorist-sponsoring states and weapons of mass destruction. Should they be instructed, they will sell the stock we own in such firms.
Check and divest
Such an effort is critical if we are to win the war on terrorism. Individual investors should demand that their money managers check their investments and divest themselves if they are unwittingly investing in any of these terrorist-sponsoring countries.
One of the cornerstones of our war on terrorism has been the idea that without financial backing, terrorists cannot plan, finance and execute their unconscionable acts of violence. It follows that one of the first steps we should take in draining the swamp of terrorism is to identify and incapacitate those who would underwrite and provide safe haven for such predators.
Billions of dollars from U.S. investors now provide working capital for foreign companies to invest in huge projects in countries that actively support and harbor terrorists. For example: A European energy firm attracts capital from American investors. The company then agrees to finance and manage a $ 3-billion energy deal, the proceeds of which are divided with a terrorist-sponsoring regime. That government can use the cash for whatever purposes it wants.
If we stop providing money to these firms through our investments, they're left with a choice between stock values and continued partnering with terrorist-sponsoring governments.
Well-known offenders
Most American firms are prohibited from doing business with countries that sponsor terrorism. However, some of the largest firms in Europe, Asia and elsewhere, while not doing anything illegal, are partnering with terrorist-sponsoring governments. A recent report in the Far Eastern Economic Review noted, for example, that Mitsubishi is active in Iran, Australian Oil & Gas pumps oil in Libya and PetroChina is developing oil resources in Sudan.
If these or other firms doing business with such states are in your portfolio, consider that Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld recently said Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea are developing weapons of mass destruction and will supply them to terrorists.
If enough Americans act, change is possible. In the 1980s, millions of Americans decided not to invest in any company doing business with the South African government, due to its odious apartheid policies. The resulting powerful campaign contributed to the eventual demise of the apartheid regime.
Yet even after 9/11, public pension funds in this country still do not systematically screen for terrorism and other national security concerns when making investment decisions. If investors raise the issue, that will change.
By choosing not to invest in companies that partner with terrorist-sponsoring governments, Americans once again can alter the course of history.
Peter Schweizer is a research fellow at the Hoover Institution.

Load-Date: June 26, 2002


End of Document