America the hysterical
University Wire
July 31, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Western Courier via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 567 words
Byline: By Zane Ecklund, Western Courier; SOURCE: Western Illinois U.
Dateline: MACOMB, Ill. 
Body


When most Americans think of terrorism, images of the Arab world undoubtedly come to mind. The image of Muslim extremists burning flags and discussing jihads and the Western world's decadence always seems to be the focal point of news broadcasts and other propaganda.
There is a glaring error within this process of thought and representation of the global terror threat, however. Americans need to come to the realization that the United States itself is a terrorist nation.
Terrorism is defined as a strategy of using violence or the threat of violence to bring about disruption, generate fear all as a part of an effort to bring religious, ideological and personal demands. The United States has had its fair share of individuals who fit this description. The most notorious of these is arguably Timothy McVeigh. McVeigh detonated a bomb in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 167 people. McVeigh was a self-proclaimed libertarian and his actions were meant to undermine the government.
Another fellow who comes to mind is Ted Kaczynski, more commonly known as the Unabomber. Kaczynski killed three people and injured 29 during his fearful campaign during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Eric Rudolph is another villain born on American soil. He gained notoriety for bombing Centennial Olympic Park in 1996 and has been linked to bombings of abortion clinics and other locales.
Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda are not sympathetic figures and their actions are reprehensible. In their defense, however, at least they never committed attacks on their own soil. McVeigh, Kaczynski, and Rudolph all bombed their fellow countrymen.
America has perpetrated some heinous acts as a governmental entity. Something that comes to mind is the Trail of Tears. This is where the United States Government kicked Native Americans off their own land and marched them out west onto reservations all because those who had put themselves into power did not want them around. Thousands of people died as a result.
Similar actions took place during World War II when thousands of loyal Japanese citizens were put in camps because they were falsely perceived as a threat.
More terror followed during the 1950s and 1960s.
The civil rights movement also sparked acts of terrorism. African-Americans protested because they wanted the same basic freedoms as their white oppressors. What they got for their troubles were assaults with fire hoses and dogs being sent to attack them.
A more recent example of terrorism by the government is the search for Osama bin Laden in the Afghan wilderness. The task itself was a noble cause, but the means were far from acceptable. The United States military thought the best way to rouse terrorists was to carpet bomb the entire nation of Afghanistan. The result was the death of thousands of Afghans and a still-unfound terror kingpin.
The United States is a great country, but one needs to realize during points in history there have been hypocritical actions performed in the name of the country. A terrorist is determined by who is looking at them. One man's terrorist is another's hero and savior.
America's allies of the past have become their enemies in the future. Joseph Stalin was an ally during World War II and Saddam Hussein at one time was given the key to the city of Detroit. Funny how things can turn out, isn't it?
(C) 2006 Western Courier via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 31, 2006


End of Document