America has lost ground to terrorism
USA TODAY
August 12, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 642 words
Byline: Melana Zyla Vickers
Body


As Secretary of State Madeleine Albright accompanies home the
bodies of Americans killed in the bombings at the U.S. embassies
in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, the United States
has posted a $ 2 million reward for information leading to the
conviction of those involved. So far, Tanzanian police have arrested
14 suspects from Sudan, Iraq, Somalia and Turkey. For perspective
on the bombings, assistant op-ed editor Melana Zyla Vickers spoke
with Robert Oakley, coordinator for counterterrorism at
the State Department from 1984 to 1986 and former U.S. ambassador
to Zaire, Somalia and Pakistan. The interview has been edited
for length and clarity. 
Q: Would terrorists think twice about committing their violent
acts if the U.S. had better success in rounding up and punishing
their predecessors?
A: The people who did the bombing in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam
are burning with rage against us. They don't think of the fate
of (convicted World Trade Center bomber) Ramzi Yousef.
The deterrent value of bringing terrorists to justice is vastly
exaggerated. Most terrorists have extreme dedication to their
cause, and so they're willing to run great risks. Also, it takes
a long time to find and lock up terrorists, and this diminishes
the shock effect. Consider that we've not been able to get the
people who blew up the embassy in Beirut in 1983. It's not a good
track record. The effort to bring terrorists to justice is important
and worth making, but it's not a deterrent.
Q: Could there be greater vigilance against terrorists?
A: The net is cast as widely as it can be. We can't know everything.
Look at the man who shot up the U.S. Capitol. You can't lock people
up before they do something. We can't know all things before they
happen.
Q: What about safety? As a former ambassador, do you sympathize
with State Department staffers who may feel shortchanged when
it comes to security?
A: Yes. But the problem isn't with the State Department. Since
the end of the Cold War, there has been a falling off of interest
in State Department activities.
The conditions of life in embassies have gone down overall, and
not just from the security perspective. On security specifically,
the administration could have asked for more money. And Congress
could have provided more money.
Q: How does this apply to Nairobi, where 12 Americans including
Consul General Julian Bartley were killed?
A: People knew it was an accident waiting to happen. I know Ambassador
Prudence Bushnell had been pushing for better security, as had
previous ambassadors. But if the money's not there, there's nothing
you can do.
Q: What's to be done when terrorism suspects hide in countries
that are sympathetic to them?
A: Dealings with those countries can't be exclusively about terrorism,
just as they can't be exclusively about human rights or other
topics. But if you find that a government has deliberately carried
out a terrorist act, you have to get tough. In the case of Libya,
for instance, where we have had conclusive evidence of attack,
we looked at it as much more of a war situation than a judicial
situation.
But that was hard evidence. It's tougher with Iran where, in the
case of the 1996 bombing of U.S. soldiers in the Khobar Towers
in Saudi Arabia, we have suspicions.
Q: The investigations require cooperation from foreign governments.
Is the U.S. good at securing it?
A: Consider the World Trade Center case. We obtained the cooperation
of Pakistan to get Yousef and convict him. Yet afterward, relations
with Pakistan did not improve, although Pakistanis expected them
to. A lot of Pakistanis said the government should not have handed
over Yousef. Cooperation worked against the Pakistani government
and against U.S.-Pakistan relations, even though we got our man.
If you're going to push for cooperation from countries with whom
you don't have the best relationship, you'd better find a way
to reward them.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, John McConnico, AP

Load-Date: August 13, 1998


End of Document