American-Muslim speaks about negative portrayal in media at Kansas State
University Wire
September 24, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Kansas State Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 345 words
Byline: By Katie Morford, Kansas State Collegian; SOURCE: Kansas State U.
Dateline: MANHATTAN, Kan. 
Body


Â 
An American Muslim woman addressed negative media portrayals of Muslims in a speech Tuesday afternoon in theÂ Kansas State UniversityÂ Student Union.
Mahnaz Shabbir, a second generation American, has given more than 100 lectures on diversity issues nationally and internationally. She spoke at K-State as part of the 20th anniversary of Cultural Harmony Week.
Shabbir welcomed lecture attendees with "Salaam alaikum," the traditional Muslim greeting meaning "peace to you" in Arabic. Shabbir emphasized the theme of peace, saying that Islam is a religion of peace given a bad name by the actions of a few.
"There is no religion in terrorism," she said. "There is nothing religious about suicide bombers."
Shabbir said many Americans have misconceptions about Islam and Muslims. She said these ideas stem from negative portrayals and stereotypes of Muslims and Islam by books, television, movies, news sources and other forms of media.
"Knowing about other people and other religions starts with how you're taught," Shabbir said.
Chris Newton, sophomore in advertising, said the event provided great insight into the deeper meaning of following the Islamic faith. He said religions, organizations and clubs will always have critics who will point out a few negative stereotypes.
"It's interesting how many (Muslims) are here," Newton said. "There are so many around us now and we don't even know because they don't live up to those stereotypes."
Shabbir urged students to be more educated and to have an open mind. "Take those filters off," she said, "and try to learn as much as possible."
The event was sponsored by the A.Q. Miller School of Journalism and Mass Communications. Gloria Freeland, JMC faculty member and member of the CCHW board, said she asked Shabbir to speak because she has a "good perspective on some of the [Muslim] stereotypes" and really speaks from the heart.
"I get really tired of seeing Islam and terrorism joined together," Freeland said, adding that she wanted to "help dispel some of the negative stereotypes."
(C) 2008 Kansas State Collegian via UWIRE

Load-Date: September 25, 2008


End of Document