Amid Mutual Suspicion, Turkish Premier Visits Iraq
The New York Times
November 21, 2014 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 887 words
Byline: By TIM ARANGO
Body


BAGHDAD -- When the Turkish prime minister's motorcade made its way along the airport road on Thursday morning to Baghdad's fortified Green Zone, once a terrifying journey with the constant threat of snipers and car bombs, the vehicles instead passed by palm trees, manicured lawns and a fountain -- the landscaping work of a Turkish company.
Elsewhere in the Iraqi capital, from shopping malls to fancy hotels to the shelves of grocery stores, the influence of Turkish business is ample, underscoring an economic relationship between Turkey and Iraq that has flourished even as the diplomatic relationship has soured in recent years.
Now, with the new Iraqi government struggling to keep the country together while under attack from Islamic State militants, and with Turkey dialing back its ambitions of leading a Sunni political axis that would reshape the region, the two countries are trying to come together amid mutual suspicion.
The visit by Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, the first from a Turkish prime minister in nearly four years, was a vivid example of a scramble taking place all across the Middle East, as former adversaries are seeking to mend relationships, or at least try to work together, at a time of unprecedented crisis.
Turkey, chastened by the failures of its Middle East policy and facing rising pressure from the United States and other allies to do more in the campaign against the Islamic State, has been reaching out to the Shiite governments of Iraq and Iran.
Iraq, too, is moving to improve relations with whomever it can, prompting a recent burst of diplomatic outreach, nudged by the Americans, to Sunni Arab countries like Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait. Iraqi is trying to find as many partners as it can in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
Mr. Davutoglu's visit came nearly three months after the replacement of the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, who had a troubled relationship with Turkey. Turkish officials accused Mr. Maliki of alienating Sunni Muslims, a minority in Iraq, while Mr. Maliki was aggrieved over Turkey's support of Sunni opposition lawmakers within Iraq.
''It is an effort to reset the relationship with post-Maliki Iraq,'' said Sinan Ulgen, a Turkish former diplomat and visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Brussels, of Mr. Davutoglu's visit.
In a joint news conference with Iraq's new prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, Mr. Davutoglu referred to the broken relationship of recent years. ''We want, through this visit, to turn the page of the past and improve the relationship with Iraq,'' he said.
The leaders said they agreed on modest cooperation against the Islamic State, such as the sharing of intelligence and, perhaps, some military cooperation. ''Iraq today is facing the dangers of terrorism, and needs support from the world to face terrorism,'' Mr. Abadi said.
He also said: ''We will have security cooperation and the exchange of information with Turkey. We have discussed all the issues to solve all the problems and the unsettled issues between the two countries.''
Experts are skeptical, though, that Turkey will do much to help Iraq fight the Islamic State. After all, the Shiite-dominated Iraqi government is aligned with the Iranian Shiite theocracy and with the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad.
Turkey has made targeting Mr. Assad a greater priority than going after the Islamic State. And it is a widespread view within Iraq that Turkey's policies, such as allowing foreign fighters to pass through its territory to fight in Syria, helped lead to the growth of the extremist group.
At the news conference, Mr. Davutoglu was challenged by an Iraqi journalist, who voiced the frequent charge that Turkey, through its open border policy, had allowed jihadists into Syria.
''This is baseless,'' Mr. Davutoglu said.
He added, ''We do not support terrorism in Syria, and Turkey does not allow any terrorists to pass through its borders into Syria.''
Importantly, though, the visit had implications for the United States, which is simultaneously trying to roll back the advances of the Islamic State through an air campaign and the training and equipping of local forces, while preserving Iraq as a unified country.
On the latter score, the United States has long been put off by Turkey's policy of pursuing gas and oil deals with Iraqi Kurds without input from the central government in Baghdad, a policy that American officials say is illegal and could lead to the breakup of Iraq by promoting independence for the Kurds.
Though the United States has largely failed to persuade Turkey to take on a greater military role in the fight against the Islamic State, there is some hope that Turkey can play a positive role amid the broader crisis by working with Baghdad to calm tensions with the Kurds over oil.
Mr. Davutoglu's visit on Thursday came a week after a tentative agreement between Baghdad and officials in Erbil, the Kurdish capital, that restarted budget payments to the Kurds and allowed the Kurds to export some of their own oil.
But a permanent deal does not appear imminent, and Mr. Abadi stressed on Thursday the need to work ''within international law.'' He pointedly referred to the oil that has been flowing between the northern Kurdish region and Turkey as ''Iraqi oil.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/21/world/middleeast/turkey-iraq-isis-ahmet-davutoglu.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Ministers Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey, left, and Haider al-Abadi of Iraq on Thursday. (POOL PHOTO BY HADI MIZBAN)       

Load-Date: November 21, 2014


End of Document