Amid Blood, Victim Thought of Terrorism
The New York Times
March 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 352 words
Byline: By DAVID FIRESTONE 

By DAVID FIRESTONE 
Body


When Yaakov Schapiro realized bullets were flying through the window of his van and his hands were soaked in blood, his first thought was to wonder whether he was alive or dead. Once he determined he was still alive, he became certain he was under attack by Arab terrorists.
"Right away, I thought the Arabs were shooting at us," said the 17-year-old yeshiva student, a victim of yesterday's shooting attack on the Brooklyn Bridge. "I knew there had been problems with the Arabs because of the shooting in Hebron, and I figured they were taking it out on us because we had beards and hats."
Mr. Schapiro, whose hands were cut by flying glass fragments, said he could not actually tell whether the shooter was an Arab, because he had instinctively ducked to the floor after the first shot whizzed through the van. Others among the 15 students in the van were yelling that the Arabs were attacking, but he said they too were simply assuming that Arabs were involved.
The gunfire came through the right rear window, he said, and immediately struck the two victims most seriously hurt, Aaron Halberstam and Nachum Sossonkin. The two had been sitting near the window in the second-to-the-last row of seats, he said, and neither said anything when hit. By the time others in the van pushed the two students down to the floor after the first few shots, Mr. Schapiro said, it was too late -- they had already been hit in the sides of their heads and were covered in blood.
The driver of the van hit the brakes just after the shooting started, but amid the panic and screaming, the others in the van shouted at him to "go, go go," he said.
When the van reached the Brooklyn end of the bridge, Mr. Schapiro said, he got out and found a police officer on Tillary Street. When he returned to the van, Mr. Schapiro lifted Mr. Halberstam out of the van and put him on the ground.
"There was no sign of life at all in him," Mr. Schapiro said. "But the other one, Sossonkin, he was very much alive and holding onto the van with his hand. I saw them and I just kept telling myself, Thank God I didn't get up. Thank God I didn't get up."

Load-Date: March 2, 1994


End of Document