Amid speculation, caution urged No hard proof of terrorism in TWA crash
USA TODAY
July 19, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 484 words
Byline: Lee Michael Katz; Tom Curley
Body


Even as they weighed the possibility of sabotage, U.S. officials
cautioned that they have no proof that a bomb caused the crash
of TWA Flight 800 off New York's Long Island.
But in the vacuum of official comment, speculation was rife that
the plane might have been blown out of the sky, either by a missile
or a bomb.
FBI spokesman Joe Valiquette said there was no reason to suspect
a bomb, despite the prominent role of the FBI and its terrorism
experts in the crash investigation.
The bureau's involvement is "solely as a precautionary matter
for now," he said, so "we don't get caught short."
National security adviser Tony Lake attempted to douse rumors
in a luncheon with reporters. "When an airplane explodes in midflight,
you naturally think about terrorism," Lake said, "but we do
not have any hard evidence to suggest what the cause is."
Until the FBI and other investigators complete the inquiry, evidence
of a bomb is circumstantial. But signs include:
-- Al-Hayat, an Arab newspaper, received a faxed warning
on Wednesday that an attack against a U.S. target was imminent.
The tract, reported by ABC News, came from the Movement For Islamic
Change, which claimed responsibility for the November bombing
in Saudi Arabia that killed five Americans.
White House spokesman Mike McCurry downplayed the warning, saying
similar tracts appear almost daily. "This falls in the hyperventilation
category," he said.
-- Witnesses said the plane burst into a fireball. The pilots
reported no problems before the plane went down.
Also, the flight originated in Athens, whose airport has a history
of security problems. "It's one of the major airports in the
world where terrorists have been able to get bombs on," says
Karl Seger, a counterterrorism consultant.
Experts disagreed about who has the capability to bring down an
airliner. "You can download from the Internet how to make a bomb
that can do this," Seger says.
But Vince Cannistraro, former CIA counterrorism operations chief,
says it's far more difficult to sneak a bomb onto a plane than
to bomb an unguarded building. "This isn't the aviation equivalent
of Oklahoma City," says Cannistraro. Airline security is "good
enough to deter casual or amateur attempts. Is it good enough
to deter sophisticated terrorist with foreign intelligence in
support? No."
Christopher Ronay, the FBI's former chief of explosives, says
it's possible the plane was downed by a missile, rather than a
bomb.
"That's been a terrorist threat for a long time. We've never
had it happen here. But there's no reason to think it couldn't,"
he says.
President Clinton and others urged Americans not to leap to the
conclusion, as some did after the Oklahoma City bombing, that
foreign terrorists are behind the disaster. "I think the Unabomber
demonstrated that you do have people in this society with the
motivation and the skill to do this," says Peter Sederberg of
the University of South Carolina.
Contributing: M.J. Zuckerman

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Jon Levy; Seeking answers: FBI and police investigators examine recovered parts of the TWA 747 to help determine if terrorism was involved.

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document