AMID TERRORISM'S THREAT, POPE APPEALS FOR PEACE;
 HIS CHRISTMAS DAY MESSAGE INCLUDES GREETINGS IN 63 LANGUAGES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 26, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A12
Length: 470 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body


War must and can be avoided even in a world made fearful by terrorism, Pope John Paul II insisted in a Christmas message that stepped up the Vatican's campaign against a war in Iraq.
"May humanity accept the Christmas message of peace!" he declared Wednesday.
Thousands of tourists and pilgrims stood in a light drizzle at St. Peter's Square to hear the ailing pontiff deliver his annual Christmas Day message, "Urbi et Orbi" - Latin for "to the city and to the world."
They screamed and clapped in delight when John Paul, wearing gold-colored robes, was driven in a white, open-topped vehicle through the square, past a life-size nativity creche and a towering Christmas tree.
The 82-year-old pontiff's voice sometimes trembled and his words often slurred as he read his speech from the central steps of St. Peter's basilica.
"From the cave of Bethlehem there rises today an urgent appeal to the world not to yield to mistrust, suspicion and discouragement, even though the tragic reality of terrorism feeds uncertainties and fears," the pope said.
John Paul deplored the "senseless spiral of blind violence" in the Middle East and called on the world to "extinguish the ominous smoldering of a conflict which, with the joint efforts of all, can be avoided."
Although he did not mention Iraq by name, the pope's comments reflected the Vatican's widely known opposition to U.S. plans for an attack on Iraq if it does not submit to U.N. disarmament demands.
When a U.S.-led coalition prepared to invade Afghanistan last year in response to the attacks of Sept. 11, Vatican officials said there was a moral right to defend the common good against terrorism.
But in recent weeks, the Vatican has said repeatedly that Catholic teaching does not consider "preventive" strikes a justification for taking up arms.
The Vatican fears an unprovoked attack on Iraq could unleash an anti-Christian crusade in the Muslim world.
On Wednesday, John Paul also expressed concern for Latin America, roiled by economic and social turmoil, and for Africa, plagued by "tragic internal conflicts" and famine.
Renovation work on the basilica's central balcony forced the pope to break with tradition and deliver his Christmas message from the steps in the square.
Bowing to health problems and difficulties in walking, John Paul abandoned another Christmas Day tradition a few years ago. He no longer celebrates midmorning Mass in the basilica, allowing him a few more hours of rest after his heavily attended celebration of midnight Mass on Christmas Eve.
But the pope did manage one of his favorite Christmas traditions - wishing the world a joyous holiday in 63 languages.
His voice seemed to gain strength as cheers went up from pilgrims when they heard the greetings, and he began joking with the crowd.
"John Paul II loves you!" he called out in English.

Notes

WORLD

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - At the Vatican Wednesday, Pope John Paul II blesses pilgrims who came to St. Peter's Square to hear his annual holiday message.

Load-Date: December 26, 2002


End of Document