AN 'INTERCOM' DEBATE, 'WHY TERRORISM?'
The New York Times
August 26, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 16, Column 2; Cultural Desk
Length: 460 words
Byline: BY HERBERT MITGANG
Body


AN ill-conceived and ill-matched ''debate'' - one of the least-enlightening 57 minutes of the summer - is offered tonight at 11 on Channel 13. Sadly, the program says more about the lack of news judgment by the management of this metropolitan New York public-television station than about the subject supposedly under discussion.
''Why Terrorism?'' is the title of the broadcast. The question is barely raised and hardly answered. Instead, the program becomes a forum for personal attacks by two men, under the sponsorship of an organization that favors one of them, talking before an almost equally one-sided audience. The problem is not just a matter of balance; news programs don't have to be even-handed as long as they are informative. Rather, it is one of the choice of the two participants and the partiality of the sponsor of the debate.
The two ''debaters'' are Rabbi Meir Kahane, leader of the militant Jewish Defense League, and Paul N. McCloskey Jr., a former United States Representative from California. To have Rabbi Kahane speak for his special constituency, serving as the single voice among many experts on Israel, and to have an intelligent but otherwise unrepresentative ex-Representative without any particular constituency speak as an expert on the Middle East and terrorism makes no sense. Both certainly have a right to be heard. They might have been part of a broader panel; instead Rabbi Kahane was given a platform for his familiar vituperation.
This so-called debate was sponsored by Jewish Idea, described by Channel 13 as ''an organization backing Rabbi Kahane's views.'' Furthermore, the two debated before an audience in San Francisco that was made up of ''largely Kahane supporters.'' The television viewer is not told in advance about these two facts; knowledge of the sponsorship and why an audience boos or applauds are very much a part of such a news broadcast.
And so here is Rabbi Kahane saying, ''I'm not a demagogue,'' and then proceeding to call Mr. McCloskey names. When he repeatedly tells Mr. McCloskey that he speaks ''nonsense,'' the audience strongly applauds him. When Mr. McCloskey tells Rabbi Kahane that ''you don't preach against hatred with hatred,'' Rabbi Kahane calls him one of the Jewish people's ''enemies'' who offer ''absurd, demagogic reasons.'' Mr. McCloskey quotes two Israeli publications on Rabbi Kahane's disagreements with both Arabs and Jews; Rabbi Kahane then calls the Israeli press slanted against him.
So it goes on ''Why Terrorism?'' The executive producer is Mark Phillips Green, the producer Rebecca Stephenson and the director Mike Feeney. The program is part of Channel 13's ''Intercom'' series. Describing the series as a weekly forum on ''a wide variety of views'' does not make it so.


End of Document