An attack on Saddam's Iraq won't help fight terrorism, defeat al-Qaida
Air Force Times
June 10, 2002 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: GEN; Pg. 610
Length: 673 words
Byline: By SCOTT CURTHOYS; Special to the Times
Body


I am going to say something   that many of you will consider   heretical: The United States   should not wage war on Iraq, at   least not any time soon.
Why do I think that going after   Saddam Hussein right now is such   a bad idea? Because it's a stupid   act that can be avoided with a little thought about why we are   fighting in the first place. We   should resist the temptation to follow up successes in Afghanistan   with follies in Iraq. The timing   and reasoning simply are no good.
In the two years before the   bombings of the U.S. embassies in   Africa in 1998, there were no   satellite phone calls from Osama   bin Laden to anyone in Iraq. Since   there is no public evidence to the   contrary, I think we can presume   that this lack of contact continued   through 2001.
It is interesting to note, however, that during the same period   there were 260 calls to Britain.   Perhaps we should conduct a combined operation with the British   against the mosque at Finsbury   Park. That may actually do more   to fight terrorism than going after   Saddam Hussein.
Iraq has been linked to the   events of Sept. 11 by conjecture   only, and Saddam has not been   linked to al-Qaida or bin Laden.
In fact, Saddam and his regime   in Iraq are not the type of allies   bin Laden and his militantly rabid   form of Islam seek. Although Saddam is not a puppet of the West in   the same way that bin Laden considers other Arab leaders to be, he   is the corrupt leader of a nation   that pays only scant attention to   the Sharia and does not place the   Koran at its core.
Our immediate fight is with the   type of Islamic fundamentalism at   the root of anti-American terrorism - the kind we saw last September. Why do we want to undermine our cause by bothering with   Saddam and Iraq?
All this talk about attacking   Iraq may be a salve for those in   our country who need to see fighting progress in the "war" on terrorism because it saves them from   having to accuse this administration of a lack of guts.
But an attack on Iraq will divert   attention from visiting justice on   those who attacked us. The demise   of the Taliban demonstrated to the   world that the United States will   fight any government that supports terrorist attacks; they are as   guilty as the attackers. But Saddam is not among that group.
The fact that the United States   is a victim with a right to defend   itself is recognized by the world.   But that doesn't let us overthrow   governments that have given us   the diplomatic equivalent of the   middle finger.
As we try to portray bin Laden   as a Muslim outcast, strip his religious legitimacy and refute his   videotaped ranting, an attack on   Iraq may have just the opposite   effect.
It would lend credence to bin   Laden's assertion, believed by   many in the Arab world, that our   real goal is to conquer and occupy   the lands of Islam. An attack also   would seriously affect other U.S.   initiatives in the region. And it   would have a pronounced impact   on our efforts to find a peace between the Palestinians and Israel.
Furthermore, most Arab states   will not support an attack on Iraq.   And it could put a strain on the   support of some of our European   allies for our military efforts   against terrorism.
Lastly, Iran may view an attack   on its neighbor - and fellow   member of that elite group known   as the "axis of evil" - as a precursor to operations against itself. It   may not sit idle. North Korea may   take a similar view.
In either case, the short-term   satisfaction of finally sticking it to   Saddam may have long-term   repercussions around the world.
We may eventually have to deal   with Saddam, especially if he continues down his megalomaniacal   path of developing weapons of mass   destruction. But now is not the time   and the "just because" cry produced   from longstanding irritation is not a   good reason. Let's focus on finishing what we began in Afghanistan,   extended to the Philippines, and   likely will pursue elsewhere - the   destruction of al-Qaida.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document