AN ACCIDENT OR TERRORISM? EXPLOSION KILLS 60 IN CHINA
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 10, 2000 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 393 words
Byline: Charles Hutzler, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BEIJING
Body


Investigators believe that a massive explosion near the capital of China's tense Muslim northwest that killed 60 people and injured 173 was likely an accident but have not ruled out terrorism, an official said yesterday.
A truck carrying explosives for disposal detonated during Friday evening's rush hour on a major road in the western suburbs of Urumqi in Xinjiang province. The blast thundered across the city and sent a thick cloud of black smoke shooting upward, residents said.
More than 200 police officers, soldiers and medical personnel sealed off the area, sifting through more than 20 scorched and damaged vehicles and buildings for survivors, government officials and the state-run Xinhua news agency said.
Based on the initial evidence, police believe that an accident caused the blast, although they have not excluded terrorism, said an official with the Xinjiang government's foreign propaganda office, who gave only his surname, Zhang.
But the explosion's timing and location - in the carefully guarded heart of a region with a history of separatist violence - has raised doubts about the government's version and fears that it might be linked to Muslim separatists waging China's most violent internal rebellion.
"This accident is very strange," said Erkin Ekrem, leader of a group advocating independence for Xinjiang's Uighurs, the region's largest Turkic Muslim ethnic group. He said he wondered why so many explosives were near Urumqi.
Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji was in Urumqi yesterday, but Xinhua did not report whether he was in the city when the blast took place. The premier met with a Japanese trade delegation and former U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, now an executive with financial giant Citigroup, to promote a campaign to develop China's hinterland.
Xinjiang is an oil-rich region that has long been China's buffer with Central Asia, now awash with Islamic militancy. Increasingly aided by groups in Afghanistan and other neighbors, Uighur separatists have waged a bombing and assassination campaign against Chinese and suspected collaborators.
Although Urumqi is dominated by Chinese and has recently had little unrest, it was the site of Uighur separatists' most sophisticated and spectacular attack: the nearly simultaneous detonation of bombs on three city buses in 1997. Nine people were killed and 68 injured in the attacks.

Load-Date: February 5, 2002


End of Document