An Act of Forgiveness by a Victim of Terrorism
The New York Times
December 28, 2015 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 479 words
Byline: By LAURA COLLINS-HUGHES
Body


On their way to commit a terrorist attack, Hassan and Khalid spoke of soccer. It was the day of the World Cup final, so they stopped at a cafe to watch.
''In these situations, you can talk about anything,'' Hassan, a Palestinian, says decades later to one of his victims, an Israeli woman named Yael, who has come to visit him in prison. 
  Then he adds a caveat: ''You avoid talking about anything that can make you doubt.''
  In ''Land of Fire'' (''Tierra del Fuego''), the Argentine-born playwright Mario Diament takes the opposite tack, using forthright discussion as a tool to sow doubt and loosen entrenched positions. Presented by Theater for the New City in association with New Yiddish Rep, the play is an earnest yet didactic attempt to confront the intractable hostility between Israelis and Palestinians and nudge hearts closer to peace.
  Like Hassan (Mihran Shlougian), Yael (Dagmar Stansova) was 22 at the time of the attack, which badly wounded her and killed both her friend and Khalid. As the play begins, Yael is 44, a leftist whose nagging sense of Israeli moral culpability butts up against her personal history: What is a broad-brush belief in harmony without the ability to forgive one-on-one? She needs to talk with Hassan.
  Directed by Moshe Yassur, in an English translation by Simone Zarmati Diament, who is married to the playwright, ''Land of Fire'' is structured as a series of conversations between Yael and assorted others. They include Hassan, who tells her he still wants justice for the Palestinians but ''would never again raise a weapon against anyone''; her husband, Ilan (Scott Zimmerman), who thinks that she's been brainwashed, perhaps by someone in the peace group she's joined; her father (David Mandelbaum), whose charge in the 1948 war was to rid Jaffa of Palestinians; and Geula (Marilyn Lucchi), the embittered mother of Yael's dead friend, who sees no point to Yael's dialogue with a murderer.
  A work of fiction, the play is partly based on the life of Yulie Cohen, an El Al flight attendant who was 22 when she was injured in a Palestinian attack in London. She later lobbied for the release of the man who shot her.
  This is interesting material, yet ''Land of Fire'' is strangely flat, its characters laying out points of view that come across more like position papers than like human conversation. Mr. Shlougian works up some passion, but Ms. Stansova seems puzzlingly detached for most of the performance, only to blossom at the end.
  So the exercise feels largely intellectual, though its aim is to influence emotions.
  ''People feel more comfortable with hatred,'' Yael says to Hassan. ''To hate doesn't require any effort. But love demands a lot of work.''
  ''Land of Fire'' runs through Jan. 3 at Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, Manhattan; 212-868-4444, smarttix­.com. Running time: 1 hour 50 minutes.        

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/25/theater/review-land-of-fire-centers-on-a-victim-who-reaches-out-to-a-terrorist.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Land of Fire, starring Dagmar Stansova, left, and Mihran Shlougian, is presented by the Theater for the New City. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RONALD L. GLASSMAN)       

Load-Date: December 28, 2015


End of Document