An Art Exhibition Raises The Issue of Terrorism
The New York Times
January 29, 2005 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 5; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1240 words
Byline: By KIRSTEN GRIESHABER
Dateline: BERLIN, Jan. 28 
Body


An exhibition inspired by the radical leftist Red Army Faction, loathed by many for its violent attacks in the 1970's and 80's yet lionized by some, opens Saturday amid angry debate over the romanticization of terrorism. 
 Critics accuse the organizers of glorifying the guerrilla group's campaign of bomb attacks, kidnappings and assassinations, which left more than 30 people dead. Curators and artists, however, defend the show as a subtle exploration of the ways images can traumatize a society.
  The exhibition, ''The R.A.F.: The Myth,'' is at the Kunst-Werke Institute for Contemporary Art in eastern Berlin. It features around 100 works by 54 artists from Germany and abroad, including such art world luminaries as Joseph Beuys, Gerhard Richter, Jorg Immendorf, Martin Kippenberger, Sigmar Polke, Katharina Sieverding, Scott King and Sue de Beer. In addition, several big-name artists agreed to auction their own work over the Internet last month to cover the costs of the show.
 Such low-key support has aroused wide indignation. While contemporary art should not shy from breaking taboos, the conservative newspaper Welt am Sonntag commented in an editorial, ''some protagonists of today's cultural establishment have not hidden their quiet liking and deep understanding of the R.A.F.'' 
 The debate began in the summer of 2003, when an unauthorized paper explaining the concept of the show suggested that the group's ideas might still have relevance today. The paper was leaked to the press and caused an uproar.
 Organizers of the show quickly distanced themselves from the content of the paper, which they said they did not write, but it was too late. Over the next few weeks, hundreds of often-hostile articles about the show appeared in German newspapers. Many noted that one of its curators, Felix Ensslin, a 37-year-old playwright, was the son of a prominent Red Army Faction terrorist, Gudrun Ensslin, who died in prison in 1977. The mass-market daily paper Bild labeled the show ''a terror exhibition.'' German politicians called for the show to be canceled. Relatives of the terrorists' victims laid out their objections in an open letter to Chancellor Gerhard Schroder.
 ''We are disturbed not only because of our personal embarrassment at this exhibition, but are also worried that the legend of the Red Army Faction will be glorified along with its activities for a younger generation,'' wrote Hergard Rohwedder, widow of Detlev Rohwedder, a high-ranking government official who in 1991 was the group's last victim.
 Born out of the student protest movement in the late 1960's, the Red Army Faction, often called the Baader-Meinhof Gang after its members Andreas Baader and Ulrike Meinhof, came to prominence during West Germany's economic boom years. In the name of class struggle, the terrorists attacked members of the German political and economic elite as well as American military installations, which they saw as symbols of American imperialism.
 ''During the time of the kidnappings in 1977, the impact of the terror on the people was almost comparable to Sept. 11,'' said Gerd Koenen, a historian from Frankfurt who has written several books on the Red Army Faction. ''The difference was that in Germany, the attack came from the inside, not the outside.''
 Nearly three decades after the terror campaign's peak in the 1970's, which caused intermittent public hysteria, the R.A.F. star logo with machine gun began appearing on designer T-shirts, suggesting that the terrorist group had acquired a Che Guevara style of rebel chic.
 But Klaus Biesenbach, one of the three curators, said the exhibition had been deeply misunderstood. ''Our exhibition does not glorify the R.A.F.,'' he said in an interview at the art institute here this week. ''It is about the perception of terrorism in the media and in the arts.''
 Mr. Biesenbach, 38, who resigned as chairman and artistic director last fall to accept a post as curator at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, founded the Kunst-Werke in 1990 in a dilapidated former margarine factory and turned it into one of Germany's most important centers for contemporary art. 
 ''The terrorism of the R.A.F. is one of the most neuralgic issues in Germany,'' he said. ''The society was traumatized by the terrorism that they saw in the images of the media, and our exhibition shows how the artists are dealing with these images.'' 
 The walls of the museum's entrance hall are covered with newspaper clippings from 29 different days, dating from 1967 to 1991, on which the Red Army Faction waged attacks; relevant coverage on television news programs appears on video screens. In a second room in the center of the entrance hall, Hans-Peter Feldmann's work ''The Deads,'' from 1998, displays 90 photographic images of people who died in violence attributed to the Red Army Faction as well as photos of the terrorists themselves.
 But the majority of the artworks, which are spread over all five floors of the museum and in some rooms of nearby St. Johannes-Evangelist Church, focus strictly on the images of the terrorists.
 Gerhard Richter's ''Atlas'' from 1989 consists of nine panels with blurry images of the terrorists. ''Dr. Bonn'' (1978), by Sigmar Polke, depicts Bonn, the former West German capital, as a faceless bureaucrat in an office whose walls are adorned by paintings of Andreas Baader.
 Olaf Metzel, 52, an artist from Munich, created ''Tegeler Weg,'' two 10-foot-tall concrete walls covered with a structure of holes. Mr. Metzel explained that Tegeler Weg is a street in northern Berlin that leads to the county court where the early trials of left-wing protesters took place. He recalled taking part as a young student in demonstrations that led to violent clashes with the police and radicalized some of his fellow students. 
 ''I wasn't really surprised by the debate about this exhibition,'' Mr. Metzel said. ''It is very German: some people idealize everything; others go completely crazy.''
 The three curators, Mr. Biesenbach, Ms. Ensslin and Ellen Blumenstein, say they are mainly relieved that after two years of preparations, their show is finally opening.
 Originally scheduled to open more than a year ago, the exhibition was delayed when political pressure led Mr. Biesenbach to withdraw the museum's application for 100,000 euros (about $130,000) in state aid.
 Determined to defend what they saw as their artistic freedom, the curators sought a different way to finance the project and found support from 14 artists, including Doug Aitken of the United States, Dinos and Jake Chapman of Britain, and the German artists Andreas Gursky and Thomas Demand. None of them are in the show, but they donated works for an auction that brought 250,000 euros on eBay in December. Combined with private donations, the curators eventually secured the 350,000 euros needed for the show a few weeks before its opening date.
 ''I knew about this exhibition for a long time and thought it was impossible what was happening,'' said Mr. Demand, 40, an artist from Berlin who will have his own solo exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, opening on March 4. ''So I decided to help them out with a work of mine depicting a bomb that didn't go off, because you just can't let somebody down like that.''
 ''Whether the show will be good or bad I also can't say, but that's not my responsibility,'' Mr. Demand added. ''I just wanted to make sure it's going to happen.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Klaus Biesenbach, a curator, with a work in ''The R.A.F.: The Myth.'' (Photo by Jan-Peter Boening for The New York Times)                           

Load-Date: January 29, 2005


End of Document