An Arrest Stirs Up Spain's Past
The New York Times
December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk   
Section: Section 1;   ; Section 1;    Page 4;    Column 1;    Foreign Desk   ; Column 1;   
Length: 525 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times   
Dateline: MADRID, Dec. 24
Body


The killings of suspected Basque separatists by right-wing death squads in the mid-1980's returned to haunt the Socialist-led Government this week with the arrest of a top official who led anti-terrorist efforts at the time, provoking debate about the tactics that democratic governments can use against terrorism.
The official, Julian Sancristobal, who served as Director of State Security and head of the anti-terrorist unit in the Basque province of Vizcaya, was arrested along with two other high-level police officials.
The investigating magistrate, Judge Baltazar Garzon, has charged them with attempted murder, kidnapping and the misuse of public funds. The charges link Mr. Sancristobal directly to the death squads known as Anti-terrorist Liberation Groups, or G.A.L., which hunted down and killed 23 people in shootings and bombings in southwestern France from 1983 to 1987. Imprisoned without bail, the three are to stand trial within two years.
The victims were suspected of links to the Basque separatist organization E.T.A., for Basque Homeland and Liberty. Although some of those killed were presumed leaders of the organization, others, including several French citizens, had no connection to the separatists.
The indictment was based on new evidence provided last week by two former policemen, Jose Amedo and Michel Dominguez, who were convicted in 1991 for conspiracy to murder in six killings linked to the death squads. Mr. Amedo and Mr. Dominguez, each serving 108-year sentences, were given parole after talking to the authorities.
The death squad attacks ended four years later when French authorities began to collaborate in rounding up suspected Basque terrorists for extradition to Spain.
Since its founding in 1968, the separatist organization has killed nearly 750 people in its fight for independence for the three northern Basque provinces of Alava, Guipuzcoa and Vizcaya. In the last year, the number of killings attributed to the group has dropped to fewer than half a dozen.
While all politicians denounce state terrorism as a means to combat terrorism, this week's developments have provoked a national debate over the killings.
"Any time democracy is in serious danger, I believe the state must react to maintain democracy," Juan Carlos Rodriguez Ibarra, the Socialist president of the western Estremadura region, told a local radio station. "In 1983 and '84 we had to bear a situation of more than 100 deaths a year carried out by E.T.A., and it is not fair to judge the creation of G.A.L. by the perspective of 10 years later."
Denouncing the justifications of some Socialist leaders as "dangerous," the Basque Nationalist Party president of the Basque region, Jose Antonio Ardanza, warned at a news conference that "a state of law can never justify criminal behavior to combat terrorism."
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez asserted in a briefing to reporters that "there is no proof" of Government involvement in the G.A.L. actions and insisted that his Government has "always used legitimate means" to combat terrorism. Several years ago, however, Mr. Gonzalez said that "sometimes democracy has to be defended from the sewers."

Graphic

 
Map shows the location of Vizcaya, Spain.

Load-Date: December 25, 1994


End of Document