An Artist's Refracted Vision of History and Terrorism
The New York Times
April 12, 2016 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1091 words
Byline: By RANDY KENNEDY
Body


Henry James once described Joseph Conrad's writing as a ''prolonged hovering flight of the subjective over the outstretched ground'' of his stories.
For more than 30 years, the artist Stan Douglas has performed a similar kind of flight pattern with his lush, eerie photographs and films, collected by the Tate, the Museum of Modern Art and many other institutions around the world. But it has often seemed as if Mr. Douglas's own viewpoint were less that of a subjective human than of historical consciousness itself, peering down on the streets of Vancouver, where he has lived and worked his entire life; on the ruins of Detroit; on the economic stasis of Cuba; and on scenes he has carefully constructed to mimic documentary realism. 
  His newest film, ''The Secret Agent'' -- based on Conrad's unusual 1907 novel about a terrorist plot to blow up the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England -- is in many ways one of the most straightforward pieces ever made by Mr. Douglas, 55, whose work can draw deeply and abstrusely on economic theory, linguistics and postcolonial politics. (The art critic Richard Dorment once described him, difficulty-wise, as ''the Mount Eiger of contemporary artists,'' best approached from the foothills.)
  Just as Conrad was coy in describing his novel as a ''simple tale of the 19th century,'' Mr. Douglas's six-channel film -- on view at the David Zwirner gallery through April 30 -- is far from a simple tale of the 21st. It closely follows Conrad's plot, inspired by a real, failed, 1894 anarchist attempt to destroy the observatory. But Mr. Douglas's film transposes the story to Portugal in the ''Hot Summer'' of 1975, in the politically fragile days after that country's dictatorship fell. The target this time is the terminal of an underwater telephone cable that connects Portugal to the rest of the world, an attack that, as one instigator says, would be to ''bomb modernity itself.''
  Mr. Douglas said he was drawn to the novel, which he first read shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001, because it was one of the first to deal with modern terrorism, only the details of which have been updated. ''The cable is the first manifestation of the network, the thing that now defines us,'' he said. And so it seemed disturbingly prescient that the film, which had its premiere in Brussels last year, was playing there when the Paris attacks shook Europe in November.
  In an interview last week during a stop in New York, Mr. Douglas said that such a convergence of art and events was not completely unexpected because the film, like many of his recent works, focuses on years in the 1970s in which certain world orders -- and the Western-dominated narrative driving them -- were beginning to break apart. Former colonies were forging their own destinies. Long-stable cultures were melding and clashing. Globalization, which was to bring progress but also inequality and paroxysms of violence, was gaining speed. And the effects of all these upheavals are still unfolding before us, in ways difficult to predict.
  ''This might be about what's happening to these people in Portugal in the 1970s,'' he said, ''but it's really about what's happening right now.''
  Mr. Douglas was born in Vancouver -- his father was a neurologist, and his mother an administrator -- and as an African-Canadian in a city with a tiny black population, he came to an early awareness of the complex and sometimes insidious interplay of race, culture and power. In conversation, he dislikes questions about his own biography -- he doesn't even much like to have his picture taken -- but his work has often been a mirror of the influences of his native city and upbringing.
  His most recent major work, ''Helen Lawrence,'' a noirish play with multimedia elements, conceived and directed by Mr. Douglas and written by Chris Haddock, centers on the history of Hogan's Alley, a Vancouver neighborhood that was home to a sizable black population for several decades and was demolished in the 1970s in preparation for a highway that was never built.
  Building on an early interest in Samuel Beckett's work for television and film, Mr. Douglas worked through the 1980s and 1990s on disquieting videos that he sometimes placed in advertising spots during regular programming on local Canadian television, exploring the tangled connections between mass culture and art. (In one of the best-known, ''I'm Not Gary,'' from 1991, a 30-second spot, a white man and a black man pass each other on a drab street; the white man greets the black man enthusiastically, saying: ''Hi, Gary! How you doin'?'' The black man stops, turns and says aloofly, as if he had had the same encounter countless times before, ''I'm not Gary.'')
  Mr. Douglas became widely known for work that looked at history refracted through the prism of culture and music. ''Hors-champs,'' from 1992, which has come to be revered in the art-film world, depicts a jazz performance he staged and filmed in a Paris television studio, invoking the rich jazz tradition forged by expatriate African-Americans in France. The musicians play ''Spirits Rejoice,'' the 1965 composition by the free-jazz pioneer Albert Ayler, written after race-related riots in Harlem and other urban neighborhoods.
  ''Stan has a kind of skepticism of the historical document and the straight archive,'' said Naomi Beckwith, a curator at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, who included ''Hors-champs'' in a 2015 exhibition there, ''The Freedom Principle: Experiments in Art and Music, 1965 to Now.''
  ''He seems to be most interested in the way you can't trust the accepted history but he's attuned to how it can still give clues to the past and to the future,'' Ms. Beckwith said. ''Art gives you a way to find those things that sit outside the official story.''
  ''The Secret Agent,'' which makes references to Alfred Hitchcock's ''Sabotage,'' his 1936 adaptation of Conrad's novel, seems to move Mr. Douglas ever closer to something his career has hinted at for years -- a feature film that would cross the divide between the art world and the multiplex. He admitted that he was writing a script for such a movie. But he knows too much about the distance across that divide to hope that it will ever be produced.
  ''Films like that are incredibly expensive, and the more money that's involved, the less control you have,'' he said. ''If someone were to give me 10 million and say, 'Go make a feature film,' I'd do it in a heartbeat. But as far as I can tell right now, nobody seems to be doing that.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/12/arts/design/stan-douglass-the-secret-agent-offers-a-refracted-vision-of-history-and-terrorism.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: ''The Secret Agent,'' Stan Douglas's newest film, based on a 1907 novel. (C1)
 Scenes from ''The Secret Agent,'' the film based on Joseph Conrad's unusual 1907 novel about a terrorist plot to blow up the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England. The film closely follows Conrad's plot, inspired by that real, failed terrorism act. (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA STAN DOUGLAS AND DAVID ZWIRNER, NEW YORK) (C2)       

Load-Date: April 12, 2016


End of Document