AN EXPLOSION OF TERROR
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 27, 1995, Thursday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12B; EDITORIAL
Length: 456 words
Body


On Monday in Tel Aviv, a suicide bomber killed himself and six Israelis when he detonated a bomb on a bus during the morning rush hour. On Tuesday in Paris, a bomb exploded in a commuter train during the evening rush hour and killed seven people. In neither case do authorities know for sure who is responsible. But in both incidents, the terrorists who committed these heinous acts were successful in achieving a fundamental aim of terrorism: disrupting everyday life by killing innocent people at random.
It's no accident that the terrorists chose buses or subways. In Israel, France and all around the world, public transportation is part of the lifeblood of a country. Buses, subways and trains - and their depots - are hubs of activity, public spaces full of people engaged in their round of daily activities. Targeting them at rush hours ensures a blood bath; many people will be injured or killed.
But more than the grisly horror of the event itself are the fear and uncertainty instilled in survivors and the public at large. Once again, people are hit by the realization: No one is safe; nowhere is safe. That, of course, is the essence of terrorism: striking terror in people and their governments - and then manipulating their fears for political ends.
Neither Israel nor France is a stranger to these kinds of attacks, but that doesn't lessen the severity of the crime or the intensity of the public's reaction.
The suicide bombing in Tel Aviv, in Israel proper, was probably committed by an Arab group, possibly Hamas or Islamic Jihad, opposed to the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. The response of the Israeli government has been relatively measured, reflecting Israel's unwillingness to allow the terrorists to get their way. Israel is therefore adamant that the peace talks, while delayed, won't be derailed by this violence. And while Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has once again sealed off the Arab territories, a form of collective punishment against all Arabs, he tried to soften the effect by announcing that it's only temporary. By pursuing peace, Israel is countering terrorism the best way it can.
In France, which hasn't experienced much terrorism in a decade, the government is taking obvious, and thorough, security measures. But the motive is still a mystery: Was the bombing committed by Algerian Islamic militants, other Islamic militants, sympathizers of Carlos or even by Serbs?
The proliferation of potential suspects sadly underscores a central horror of terrorism: All terrorism takes is a frustrated individual or group of fanatics without much money or technological sophistication. As recent history documents in Israel, France, the United States, Germany, Britain, India, Colombia, no country is immune.

Load-Date: July 28, 1995


End of Document