An insidious terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 20, 1989, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Editorials; Pg. 16A; EDITORIAL
Length: 542 words
Body


In the past five days, bomb-filled packages have killed a U.S.    Circuit Court of Appeals judge in the kitchen of his Birmingham, Ala.,    home and a Savannah lawyer in his office.
 
     Between the two tragedies, another bomb was mailed to the Atlanta    office of the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. Fortunately, that    parcel was detected during inspection of the mail and removed safely.
    The following day, a similar bomb was discovered at the    Jacksonville office of the NAACP, and bomb threats and scares caused    several federal buildings throughout Florida cities, including St.    Petersburg, to be evacuated.
 
      The nation should mourn with the families of Judge Robert Vance    and community activist Robert Robinson. Those who lost loved ones and    friends will bear the pain of this perverse violence forever.
 
      Beyond the outrage due these senseless killings, however, belongs    dismay over the ingrained attitude that fueled the nation's immediate    response.
 
      When the mail bomb exploded in the home of Judge Vance on    Saturday, killing him instantly and seriously wounding his wife,    speculation quickly placed blame on the world's cocaine bosses. The FBI    tried to downplay talk that the bombs were related to Colombian drug    operations, but the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals hears many drug    cases, and the connection seemed plausible. Federal drug czar William    Bennett and Drug Enforcement Administration officials also discussed    the possibility of a drug connection.
 
      Then a second bomb claimed the life of Robert Robinson, a black    civil rights activist and city alderman who had been involved in a    desegregation lawsuit against the Savannah schools. Similarities among    the two explosive devices and another bomb package sent to the    Jacksonville NAACP office yielded strong likelihood that racism, not    drugs, was responsible.
 
      The eagerness to overlook an insidious source of violence that is    as old as the country is a disheartening comment on official priorities    and, by extension, on society as a whole. The threat posed by drug    lords is the kind of terrorism against which our leaders like to    posture toughly, and certainly it is a real danger. Up until now, thank    goodness, drug-related acts of terror have been only a matter of    conjecture in the United States. But racially inspired terrorism is a    matter of fact. President Bush, like Ronald Reagan before him, would    rather shove that fact under the rug than deal squarely with its    frightening, damaging consequences.
 
     Racism's roots are deep even though enlightenment over the years    has sheared off some of its more visible shoots. What is terribly    troubling is that the current atmosphere of tolerance toward bigotry    and discrimination has given racism a growth spurt.
 
     It is not yet known what horrible hatred led to the deaths and    scares of the past few days. What is certain is that it is imperative    for all Americans to condemn acts of terrorism no matter what their    cause.
 
     It is equally imperative for government to provide a leadership    that commands full understanding of the deadliness of racism and a    commitment to its eradication.
 
    

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document