An intelligent step; Candor debuts in terrorism progress report
USA TODAY
July 25, 2007 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 706 words
Byline: John Diamond
Body


The Bush administration has had to expend political capital this  past week explaining why six years of warrantless eavesdropping, secret detention, and war in Afghanistan and Iraq have left al-Qaeda as strong today as at any time since 9/11.
But there is heartening news embedded in last week's National Intelligence Estimate on terrorism.  The document could be as important for what it says about the state of U.S. intelligence as for what it says about al-Qaeda. With this report, the intelligence community is saying in no uncertain terms that it will alert the nation to threats even when the reports run counter to the White House line.
There was a time when such frank intelligence reporting could not be taken for granted. The Bush administration spent its first year in a plodding terrorism policy review that finally was ready for action when al-Qaeda struck Sept. 11, 2001. In 2002 we saw the White House push the intelligence community to issue worst-case assessments of Iraq's supposed weapons of mass destruction.  The CIA fought, though not too doggedly, to downplay unsupported allegations that Saddam Hussein was in league with Osama bin Laden and had tried to buy uranium in Africa. These charges, Dracula-like, kept coming back to life in policy papers and presidential speeches.
In some ways, though, the new NIE  report works to the administration's advantage. President Bush, in times of trouble, has repeatedly raised the specter of al-Qaeda as a reminder of his commander-in-chief role. His conflation of al-Qaeda with the largely homegrown insurgency in Iraq can be seen as an effort to imbue a failing war policy with the aura of the war on terror and to equate withdrawal from Iraq with surrender to al-Qaeda. The estimate also signals administration dissatisfaction with Pakistan's efforts to confront al-Qaeda in its remote hideouts.
Nevertheless, the struggles of administration officials to explain why the report should not be seen as an indictment of terrorism policy identifies it as a classic example of a long-neglected intelligence credo: Speaking truth to power.
By issuing its sobering report on al-Qaeda, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence  under Vice Admiral Mike McConnell is saying those days are over. The key official behind the estimate is Thomas Fingar, the nation's chief intelligence analyst. Fingar made his reputation, and earned his current post, by being one of the chief skeptics of some of the Iraq-WMD reporting at the State Department before the war.
Even as it confronts adverse trends in the war on terror, the Bush administration deserves praise on several fronts:
*First, it kept Fingar in government,  rewarding him for his skepticism on Iraq instead of punishing him, as has happened to  many other dedicated military and intelligence officers under this presidency.
*Second, the administration asked for the al-Qaeda report. Recall that Congress, not the Bush administration, requested the October 2002 National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.  The White House, certain of the course it wanted to take against Iraq, worried that such a report might contain views that could undermine the war policy. Though deeply flawed, the estimate included such doubts -- voiced by Fingar, among others -- that afforded an opportunity to question the rush to war even if the administration and Congress chose not to.
*Third, the administration did not try to delay or suppress the report. The 2002 NIE on Iraq presented its "key judgments" in unqualified terms that were not supported in the report's text. An unclassified summary was not released until July 2003,  after the Iraq war had begun.
The nation has paid a high price for the intelligence failures of the past six years in an administration reluctant to let inconvenient facts get in the way of its world view. The intelligence community's politically inconvenient assessment of al-Qaeda brings us no comfort. But the willingness of the intelligence community to produce it, and of the Bush administration to accept it, is  good news.
---
John Diamond, a former intelligence reporter for USA TODAY, is writing a book on U.S. intelligence between the end of the Cold War and the war in Iraq. 

Load-Date: July 25, 2007


End of Document