AN INSULT TO THE ARMENIAN MARTYRS
The New York Times
October 20, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 355 words
Body


To the Editor:
 What can one whose name ends with ''ian'' or ''yan'' say of the bombing on Oct. 12 of the Turkish Mission in New York City and related atrocities around the world? As one whose grandfather fled Turkey in 1899, I am outraged by the act of terrorism and depressed that anyone would perpetrate it in the name of Armenia or Armenians.
he frustration and anguish felt by the surviving victims of the Armenian holocaust and by their many descendants is understandable.  The Turkish Government's stubborn refusal over the years even to acknowledge the crime, let alone apologize, make amends or pay reparations, is base and ignoble. Turkish governmental policies to make life for Armenians living in Turkey unpleasant over the past 10 years have been shameful.
Edward Costikyan letter deplores recent Armenian bombing of Turkish embassy in New York as insult to living Armenians and Armenian martyrs
But none of this justifies the reinvocation of the spirit of terrorism, especially by the descendants of the victims of Turkish terrorism, and especially against innocent people - Turks and non-Turks.
The victims of the explosion on Oct.  12 predictably included visitors to New York who happened to be passing by at the wrong time on a sunny Sunday afternoon opposite the United Nations -supposedly the world capital of peace - and only 11 blocks from the St. Vartan's Cathedral, the center of the Armenian community.
What is most distressing is that these terrorists ''claim responsibility'' in the name of a people that has survived in large part because it has adhered to the Christian faith Armenians embraced centuries ago. Shame! Shame! Shame!
That this great people, which has survived despite the efforts to eliminate it, and earned the respect and admiration of fellow citizens of this and every other country in which Armenians have found a home, should be tarred as terrorists is an insult - an insult to all living Armenians and an insult to the Armenian martyrs, slain by the Turks, in whose name this lawless act was done.
Will we ever learn? Will the vio-lence ever end?  EDWARD N. COSTIKYAN New York, Oct. 14, 1980


End of Document