An out-of-place truck, then screams as deadly Nice attack unfolded; TERRORISM IN FRANCE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 16, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A5
Length: 348 words
Byline: By Colleen Barry andJohn Leicester
Body


NICE, FRANCE - Almost instantly, those in its murderous path could tell that the speeding white truck was all wrong so late at night on Nice's beachfront boulevard whose bright lights glittered along the bay like a string of stars.
The Promenade des Anglais was meant to be closed to traffic, cordoned off with metal barriers and plastic tape, so families and tourists could wander along it worry-free by the azure waters of the Mediterranean and marvel at the Bastille Day fireworks overhead.
The truck sped straight for them, leaving death, screams and horrific injuries in its wake.
"I realized right away it was a terrorist attack when I saw the truck crushing people," said Antonio Arribas, who was strolling with his cousin, Diego.
The rented 21-ton truck zigzagged for a little more than a mile through holiday crowds, leaving a gruesome trail of crushed and mangled bodies. The 84 dead included French and foreigners, children and adults.
Just when Egyptian tourist Nader El Shafei looked like he might be the next to fall under its wheels, the truck stopped and the attacker, a 31-year-old Tunisian who lived in Nice and drove for living, was killed by police gunfire.
Moments earlier, as the fireworks show was ending, El Shafei said he had looked at the large crowds and thought to himself: "If someone crazy want(s) to do something, this is the right place and the right time, among all those innocent people."
He had traveled to Nice expecting to see "paradise," he said. "But I saw something else."
He caught the scene on video - the crackle of gunshots, officers warily approaching the cab with its windshield pockmarked with holes.
El Shafei said he saw the driver, later identified by authorities as Mohamed Bouhlel, fire back through a window.
The truck's murderous journey covered 15 city blocks.
Video showed the truck moving slowly at one point - so slowly that a man in a white shirt was able, at a run, to catch up with it.
There were two sharp sounds as he caught up with it.
It was unclear whether they were caused by him banging on its back doors to get it to stop, or gunfire.

Load-Date: July 16, 2016


End of Document