An oversupply of terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 1, 1996, Monday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 11A
Length: 578 words
Byline: Gary Bertsch
Body


Repeated suicide bombings on crowded streets in Israel. Attacks on the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City's federal office building. Deadly gas attacks on Tokyo's subways.
 
What's next?
Terrorism, at home and abroad, is being made more dangerous by the oversupply of conventional and unconventional a nuclear, chemical and biological a weapons. Consider the situation in the former Soviet Union.
The disintegration of the old Soviet state poses the threat of a massive tide of conventional and unconventional weapons proliferation. Russia and the new independent states (NIS) possess an extraordinary amount of weaponry and the capacity to produce much, much more. Given the desperate economic situation, there is tremendous pressure to sell these weapons. Russia, for example, is doing all it can to boost conventional weapons exports and agreements in weapons-related (nuclear) areas.
Russia tripled its conventional arms exports to developing countries in 1994 and increased them further in 1995. It is also quite willing to sell materials, equipment and technology related to weapons of mass destruction to several countries of concern, including Iran and China.
The Russian media recently reported that military-related exports to Iran currently comprised more than 85 percent of all Russian exports to the Persian Gulf states and could grow to a total of $ 4 billion during the next decade.
Crime and corruption exist in defense industry privatization and the weapons trade. Illegal export is among the most serious domestic problems facing Russia and NIS. Agencies charged with controlling the weapons trade continue to be severely underfinanced and understaffed. The total number of Russian government officials involved on a full-time basis in weapons export control barely exceeds 50 persons. (The United States has more than 1,000.)
At present, the export control offices are no match for the export oriented agencies that are prepared to allow proliferation of weapons- related trade. Victor Mikhailov, minister of atomic energy, elevated to full membership on Russia's security council, may be now even in a better position to promote nuclear deals worldwide, projecting his ministry as a savior of Russia's scientific and technological potential.
It was reported that the atomic-energy ministry made $ 1.65 billion from exports in 1995, which is a significant contribution to Russia's $ 63 billion export total. Mikhailov is the driving force behind Russian nuclear relations with China, which would include cooperative ventures in thermonuclear fusion, uranium mining, processing and enrichment.
Russia and other NIS lack a business culture of nonproliferation that helps restrain individuals and enterprises from transferring sensitive items to countries or groups of concern. Some exporters bypass the export control and licensing process altogether; they simply smuggle the goods through porous borders.
Russia is not alone. The United States also produces and exports too many weapons. The world's two largest producers and suppliers of weapons, the United States and Russia, should work together and do more to reduce the production and spread of weapons. Given present trends, how long will it be before chemical, biological, nuclear and advanced conventional weapons are used by terrorists in the heartland of America?
Gary Bertsch is professor of political science and director of the Center for International Trade and Security at the University of Georgia.

Graphic

 
Illustration: A bear sits behind a pile of weapons. / KEVIN KRENECK /
 Special

Load-Date: July 17, 1996


End of Document