An offer to ease Sri Lanka's tensions
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 5, 1985, Wednesday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Editorial; Pg. 19
Length: 506 words
Body


SRI Lanka now has an opportunity, however difficult, to pull itself back up the slope down which it has been sliding. But to do so would require the militant Tamils to end their terrorism, perhaps under pressure from now-intimidated moderate Tamils. It would require the opposing Sinhalese, especially the undisciplined military, to end their counter-terrorism.
And it would demand that the majority Sinhalese support President Jayewardene's new offer to provide the minority Tamils more autonomy in northern areas where they predominate.
That Jayewardene now would make such an offer, on proviso that Tamil terrorism cease, is surprising. Last year Tamils walked out of negotiations after he made a similar proposal - they demanded total independence. Jayewardene suffered politically from the walkout: His offer had been made despite the opposition of most Sinhalese. Since then he had not indicated willingness to make concessions until Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi became diplomatically involved and the two held a summit meeting this week.
India is the major national player in the region, and it is to India that both sides in the Sri Lankan dispute should look for help in achieving a settlement. There is no role here for other large countries.
Some militant Tamils - by one count splintered into 37 groups - may be more willing to accept the devolution proposal this time. Gandhi appears to be pressing them to make peace, by indicating that he soon will move against the sanctuary and training ground that Tamil terrorists have in southern India, where 50 million fellow Tamils live. Heretofore such action has been politically difficult for Gandhi to undertake: Many of India's Tamils view their militant Sri Lankan brethren as freedom fighters defending Tamils against Army atrocities.
The Jayewardene devolution offer now gives Gandhi the political opportunity to clamp down on the Tamil sanctuary. He can tell India's Tamils that Sri Lankan Tamils have been offered the power in northern and eastern areas to administer programs in areas where they face discrimination - school admissions, employment, local development.
If the Tamil militants do not accept the Jayewardene proposal, they can expect to find it more difficult to conduct terrorism, due to the anticipated crackdown.
Gandhi does not want statehood for Tamils. India's Sikhs seek an independent state; he does not want them to point to the example of a newly-formed separatist state only 30 miles off the Indian shore.
An enigma is the bulk of the Sri Lankan Tamils, who are moderate: Like the militants, they seek more authority over local affairs. They have been almost completely cowed into silence by Tamil terrorists; moderates who speak up often are murdered within a day. Will they now be willing to be counted?
Both the Sri Lankan Army and the terrorists are arming, recruiting, and training more men.  Both are readying for a higher level of violence. The time for settlement is now: The Jayewardene offer ought to be the basis for full-scale negotiations.


End of Document