Analysts: Pressure might prompt Syria on talks; Delays might risk country becoming a target in U.S. war on terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 15, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Tristate; Pg. a7
Length: 652 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body


Recent American moves showing Washington has the military might and political will to get its way in the Middle East appear to have forced a pragmatic softening of Syria's hard-line position toward Israel.
Middle East analysts say Syria's new stance may have been influenced by the presence of 130,000 American troops in neighboring Iraq, threats of U.S. sanctions against Damascus and Washington's decision not to criticize an Israeli strike last year near the Syrian capital.
The analysts say Syria, accused by Washington of harboring terrorists and possessing weapons of mass destruction, understands it must act or risk becoming a target in the U.S. war on terrorism.
Signs of Syria's softening emerged last month when President Bashar Assad used a New York Times interview to express interest in resuming peace negotiations with Israel that broke off in 2000.
Rami Khouri, executive editor of the Daily Star in neighboring Lebanon, where Syrian policy is closely followed, said Assad feels pressure from all sides.
"Israel attacked them with missiles and the American Congress is attacking them and threatening them with sanctions," Khouri said. "This is hardball. … The Syrians are intelligent and realistic people. They are not going to sit there and be the next target. I think they are smart to pre-empt."
It was not lost on Syrian leaders that President Bush gave tacit backing to October's Israeli airstrike on a supposed Palestinian training camp not far from Damascus. The attack came in retaliation for a suicide bombing, and Bush said Israel has the right to defend itself.
Adding to the pressure, the U.S. Congress adopted a measure in November threatening economic sanctions on Syria - whose economy already is in shambles - for harboring anti-Israeli militants.
Syrian officials are quick to point out that their country does not have the pariah status of Iraq before last year's American-led invasion. Still, experts say Assad is looking for a way to secure his country's future.
"He is sensing the pressure, and possibly wants to improve the Syrian position vis-a-vis Washington," said Richard Murphy, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.
The latest peace proposals getting significant attention are aimed only at a Palestinian- Israeli peace. Syria's overtures to renew talks could stem from a fear of being left behind, said Patrick Seale, a British writer and expert on Syria.
"They feel they want to be part of the peace process," Seale said. "They don't want to be left at the end of the queue."
Although Assad has expressed interest in resuming negotiations, actual talks may be far off.
Syria this week dismissed a public invitation by Israeli President Moshe Katsav for Assad to visit Jerusalem, calling it Israeli maneuvering. Syrian officials also have denied Israeli reports that secret talks already have occurred.
Assad had insisted on resuming talks where they broke off in 2000, when most outstanding issues were resolved in indirect negotiations by Assad's late father, Hafez Assad, and former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak. Israel has rejected any preconditions for reopening the talks.
But Tuesday, the Israeli daily newspaper Haaretz quoted Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., who met with Assad over the weekend, as saying the Syrian leader reluctantly agreed to drop his demand to restart the talks from the point they left off.
But Suleiman Haddad, chairman of the foreign relations committee in the Syrian Parliament, denied Syria had changed its position.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon also has said Israel cannot begin talks with Syria until Damascus moves against militant groups, such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad, that have had offices in Syria.
Murphy said Syria's lack of action against the militant groups "makes Washington doubt the seriousness of the overture to open negotiations."
Still, he said, "it could be useful for Washington to probe this overture."

Load-Date: January 15, 2004


End of Document