Analysts: Defining allies difficult in war on terrorism
Air Force Times
June 3, 2002 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: GEN; Pg. 603
Length: 578 words
Byline: By Rick Maze; Times staff writer
Body


It is difficult to tell who is on   America's side in the war against   terrorism.
The State Department issued its   annual terrorism report May 21   that lists seven nations as active   sponsors of terrorism. But witnesses told a House panel that   just because a country isn't listed   doesn't mean it's in America's corner.
Testifying May 23 about terrorism in the Middle East before the   House Armed Services Committee's terrorism oversight panel,   American Enterprise Institute analyst Danielle Pletka said U.S. officials face a basic problem.
"Most Arab leaders do not agree   with us as to what constitutes terrorism," she said. "Some have a   vested interest in allowing it to   continue, and they know that 99   percent of the time they will not   be called to account by the United   States government.
"We can expect help in a battle   here and there, but we should not   fool ourselves into believing we   are fighting the war together.   When it comes to many of our   Arab partners, we are never certain they're going to be with us   when the time comes."
"It is easy to figure out who is   against us," said Frank Gaffney Jr.,   president of the Center for Security   Policy and a Reagan-era defense official. "It is a little more tricky to   determine who is with us."
Gaffney said many nations are   "playing a double game," claiming   to be on America's side but setting   limits on how far they'll go. Saudi   Arabia and Egypt have made   valuable contributions in support   of U.S. operations in Afghanistan,   he said, but "they are not volunteering to do more and our government appears to be reluctant   to ask for them to do more lest it   be turned down."
Francis Taylor, the State Department's coordinator for counterterrorism, said fighting terrorism   means different things to different   nations. For some, it means tighter   financial controls and border security. Others are cracking down on   criminal activity among terrorists.   Some are contributing to U.S.-led   operations in Afghanistan.
A key indicator of support is the   sharing of intelligence, which Taylor said "has prevented numerous   attacks, but it must intensify in   order to expose the criminal   netherworld in which terrorists   operate." He estimated more than   1,600 suspected al-Qaida operatives have been arrested in 95   countries as a result of cooperative law enforcement.
The State Department lists   Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism, yet Taylor said that African   nation has been helpful in the war   on terrorism. "I believe that the   Sudanese are working very closely   with us against the al-Qaida problem," he said.
The other nations on the State   Department list of state sponsors   of terrorism are Cuba, Iran, Iraq,   Libya, North Korea and Syria.
Secretary of State Colin Powell   said nations are being nudged to   combat terrorism more forcefully.
"Country by country, region by region, coalition members have   strengthened law enforcement and   intelligence cooperation," Powell   said. "We have tightened border   controls and made it harder for terrorists to travel, to communicate   and therefore to plot. One by one,   we are severing the financial bloodlines of terrorist organizations.
"Terrorists respect no limits, geographic or moral. The front lines   are everywhere, and the stakes   are high. Every country is vulnerable and every country has the   ability and the responsibility to   contribute to the anti-terror campaign," he said.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document