Andra Ursuta: 'Magical Terrorism'
The New York Times
September 28, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 29; ART IN REVIEW
Length: 332 words
Byline: By ROBERTA SMITH
Body


Ramiken Crucible
389 Grand Street, at Suffolk Street, Lower East Side
Through Oct. 21
Andra Ursuta's rambunctious, haunted shows sure don't look like anyone else's. Her second solo at Ramiken Crucible is partly an all-out assault on the gallery format, of which Ramiken is a small, rough, downscale approximation to begin with. She has opened the gallery's interior to the outdoors simply by knocking out its immense plate-glass windows, a bit of institutional critique worthy of Michael Asher, if somewhat more violent. (Shards of shattered glass remain.)
Meanwhile, in a dioramalike display, the gallery's back wall has been rammed and partly collapsed by a vehicle opulently encrusted with silver foam. This gleaming, quasi-comical thing-in-itself evokes both an ancient cart (a pair of boots embedded in it suggest that it once carried a ceremonial figure) and NASA's moon rover.
In between these two acts of possible terrorism are three life-size Social Realist marble sculptures. The news release provides salient facts and political motivation: the sculptures are based on a news photograph of an unknown Romanian Gypsy woman awaiting deportation from France that Ms. Ursuta, who is Romanian, contracted to have made in China.
Also here are several exceptionally striking female torsos cast (from a sculpture made by Ms. Ursata) in aluminum, iron or a combination of concrete and manure; their geometric, somewhat African mien is undercut by suggestions that the original was partly stitched together and possibly stuffed.
Both the marble figures and most of the cast torsos wear elaborate coin chokers or collars, using equal values of euros and American and Romanian currency, that conjure magic, decoration and armor. The exception is a torso laid on a stack of pallets like a dead warrior on a pier.
This exhibition contrasts systems of belief, economics and display, as well as different states of otherness. The disturbing impression is of time running backward, of civilization devolving.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/28/arts/design/andra-ursuta-magical-terrorism.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: ''Commerce Exterieur  Mondial Sentimental'' (2012),  by Andra Ursuta, part of her  show at Ramiken Crucible. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDRA URSUTA, ULI HOLZ/RAMIKEN CRUCIBLE)        

Load-Date: October 1, 2012


End of Document