Anger and Angst in East Germany
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 21, 1990, Thursday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION; Pg. 18
Length: 780 words
Byline: Werner Lange; Werner Lange is an associate prof of sociology at Kent State Univ.
Body


EAST Germans have been on a high-speed emotional roller-coaster ride for months, and the end is not in sight. The euphoria which greeted the fall of the Berlin Wall in November is now only a memory, albeit a powerful one. Today East Germany sits on a collective powder keg of anger and angst: anger at the past and the perceived waste of 40 years; angst over the future with its many risks. It's a volatile combination of emotions, one that threatens to erupt into even more social unrest following the controversial monetary reunification of Germany in July.
On July 2, the German Democratic Republic (GDR) will be the only state in East Europe with Western currency.
The GDR is in the midst of a grandiose disappearance act, unprecedented in scope. The totalitarian security of the past, a social order that regulated the lives of 16 million people is gone, blown away by the nonviolent power of a church-based revolution of candles.
Now the drama of disappearance has entered its second act. Drastic cuts in prices and frantic buying are currently doing to everyday life in the GDR what democratic elections have already done to its political life. The indigenous consumer goods market is vanishing. Shortly, all pre-market economy goods produced in the GDR will be gone.
Much more is scheduled to disappear. After July 2, there will no longer be an East German mark. Nor will there be any further West German subsidies for GDR immigrants. As of July, West German environmental, social security, and health care policy will be law in East Germany. Subsidized rents, price controls, abortion on demand, pension plans, health care systems, and many thousands of jobs will disappear.
Nothing quite like the social drama now playing in East Germany has happened before. A whole life cycle of social growth has been compressed into a matter of weeks. The birth, marriage, and death of entire social systems have confronted East Germans at once.
In this strange new German world two ''isms'' have raised their ugly heads: racism and terrorism. Therein lies a danger and threat to all efforts at democratic reform in Germany. Thousands of East Germans close to the former regime have lost power. They are desperate. Many are in key positions. Former secret police personnel are an exception. Early this year, the Modrow administration fired over 100,000 Stasi agents. The most desperate segments of the East German population are found among these highly trained unemployed men well versed in weaponry. A paramilitary putsch in East Germany is still possible.
Since terrorists broke into a GDR army depot in May and stole explosives, citizens and religious leaders like Rev. Roland Hoffman of the Thuringen Church Council, have expressed concern over the possibility of a putsch. Others fear the emergence of terrorism.
Whether or not terrorism emerges, one thing is certain: Old social problems are on the verge of a comeback. Some, like racism and crime, have already shown themselves in ways well known in the West. Reports of violent attacks - particularly rape - and racist assaults against nonwhite foreign students have risen sharply. In recent weeks bands of rowdy youth have engaged in vandalism and street fights. In Berlin, a dormitory housing foreign students was attacked by 400 right-wing youth.
Things will likely get worse before they get better. Unemployment may reach staggering proportions. Two million unemployed East Germans is a conservative estimate. Real wages will likely drop. Average pension payments and health benefits will be reduced. A whole new set of taxes on income, property, inheritance and sales are in store. The birth of a new Germany is not painless.
To ease the pain, most East Germans will enter this brand new world of market economy realities with a minimal savings of 4,000 DM. In addition, over $72 billion are earmarked by the West German government as a kind of domestic Marshall Plan. The real hope however, is that the ''economic wonder'' of West Germany after World War II will repeat itself in East Germany after the cold war.
If it does not, if the gamble does not pay off soon enough, then the land once known as the workers and farmers state will become a social battlefield, one which may just achieve exactly what the GDR was supposed to prevent: the emergence of another war from German soil.
No one wants this to happen. Lessons from the past must be remembered. To give peace a chance in the new Germany means to give democracy a chance. For the first time in 50 years all Germans have the tools of democracy at their disposal. Some also have tools of terror. World peace rests, in large part, upon quickly disposing of that second tool set.


End of Document