Annan proposes U.N. changes amid scandals
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 21, 2005 Monday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 524 words
Byline: BY EDITH M. LEDERER The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body


The leader of the United Nations proposed Sunday that the institution make major changes in the wake of fraud in the Iraq oil-for-food program, sex abuse by peacekeeping troops in Congo and the resignation of the U.N. refugee chief under the cloud of sexual harassment charges.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan issued a call for his members to approve what would be the most sweeping changes to the United Nations in its 60-year history. His proposals, he said, would enable the world body to stop war, fight terrorists, fight poverty and put protecting human rights at the forefront of its work in the 21st century.
The report to the 191 members of the U.N. General Assembly was released six months before world leaders meet at U.N. headquarters for a summit called by Annan. In its introduction, he urged the leaders to "act boldly" and adopt "the most far-reaching reforms in the history of the United Nations."
"We will not enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development, and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights," Annan said. "Unless all these causes are advanced, none will succeed."
One of the major proposals calls for creation of a Human Rights Council -- possibly as a principal organ of the United Nations like the Security Council or the General Assembly -- to replace the Geneva-based Commission on Human Rights. It has long faced criticism for allowing the worst-offending countries to use their membership to protect one another from condemnation.
One of the most hotly awaited parts of the report was Annan's recommendation for changes to the 15-member Security Council, the most powerful U.N. body now dominated by post-World War II powers -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France, all of whom have veto power.
The report calls for an expanded, more representative Security Council. But Annan did not endorse a specific plan, instead backing two options proposed in December by a high-level panel. One would add six permanent members and the other would create a new tier of eight semi-permanent members: two each from Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas.
The Security Council's use of force has also been an issue. It refused to authorize the U.S.-led war against Iraq and the war in Kosovo against the forces of former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic -- decisions that angered some countries.
The report said the Security Council already has the authority under the U.N. Charter to use military force, even preventively, but it needs to work more effectively and use specific criteria to make its decisions.
In cases of genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, Annan urged all states to accept that there is a "responsibility to protect" those being killed that requires collective action.
Annan proposed a comprehensive anti-terrorism strategy, urging world leaders to unite behind a definition of terrorism and adopt a comprehensive convention against terrorism by September next year. He also called for swift adoption of a global treaty against nuclear terrorism and swift negotiations on a treaty to halt the spread of highly enriched uranium.

Notes

 PAGE 2  

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Annan 

Load-Date: March 21, 2005


End of Document