ANNAN PUSHES U.N. REFORM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 15, 2005 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 477 words
Byline: Edith M. Lederer, The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


After a year of mounting criticism, Secretary-General Kofi Annan yesterday defended the United Nations and urged global leaders to restore the organization's credibility by adopting broad reforms needed for the world to act together to tackle poverty, terrorism and conflict.
 Addressing a summit that he called a year ago in hopes of winning approval for an ambitious blueprint to modernize the United Nations on its 60th anniversary, Annan told more than 150 presidents, prime ministers and kings that "a good start" had been made.
 But he said sharp differences had blocked "the sweeping and fundamental reform that I and many others believe is required."
Instead of a celebration of U.N. achievements since its founding in the ashes of World War II, the summit was much more a somber reappraisal of its shortcomings and a debate about how to meet the daunting challenges of a world becoming more and more interlinked.
 It began a week after investigators sharply criticized alleged corruption and U.N. mismanagement of the oil-for-food program in Iraq, and on a day when more than 160 people died in attacks in Baghdad -- a harsh reminder of the fight against terrorism that was a highlight of President Bush's speech.
 There were some hopeful signs, such as the handshake between the leaders of Israel and Pakistan, whose countries have no diplomatic relations. But there were also reminders of unresolved problems, among them the U.S. decision to have only two low-level officials attend the speech by Iran's new hard-line president.
 Bush, declaring that poverty breeds despair and terrorism, challenged other world leaders to abolish all trade tariffs and subsidies to promote prosperity and opportunity in poor nations, a move that would be worth billions of dollars.
 His approach -- and his support for achieving U.N. development goals such as halving extreme poverty by 2015 -- was welcomed by many leaders. Palestinian Foreign Minister Nasser Al-Kidwa called it "useful for our common work here at the U.N."
 Irish rocker Bob Geldof, who organized the Live Aid concerts and campaigns against poverty, said he was sitting in the General Assembly chamber with U.N. anti-poverty chief Jeffrey Sachs, and they couldn't believe what they heard.
 "I think he's really throwing down the gauntlet. It's a very bold move," Geldof said of Bush's trade tariff proposal, adding that he was impressed with the president's acknowledgment that terrorism "comes from despair and lack of hope."
 At only the third U.N. Security Council meeting ever attended by the national leaders of the 15 council members, terrorism was also a focus.
 The leaders unanimously passed two resolutions -- one aimed at outlawing the incitement of terrorism and the other at preventing conflict, especially in Africa.
 Annan argued that because the world is imperfect, it needs the United Nations.

Load-Date: September 16, 2005


End of Document