Annan: Terror focus can make things worse;
The U.N. chief bluntly warned the U.S. and others of added tensions and concerns on rights.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JANUARY 24, 2004 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A07
Length: 442 words
Byline: Paul Geitner ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DAVOS, Switzerland
Body


U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan yesterday warned the United States and other rich countries that a too-narrow focus on fighting terrorism could worsen global tensions and threaten human rights.
Addressing the World Economic Forum, the U.N. chief said international terrorism threatened peace and stability and "has the potential to exacerbate cultural, religious and ethnic dividing lines."
Yet in unusually blunt criticism apparently aimed at the Bush administration, he said that the war against terror also carried the risk of aggravating such tensions, "as well as raising concerns about protection of human rights and civil liberties."
The war on terror also has redirected world attention "dangerously away" from other pressing concerns such as poverty, hunger and disease, Annan said, adding that it was "time to rebalance the international agenda."
"The most privileged members" of the United Nations, he said, were "currently and understandably preoccupied with terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. The U.N. must also protect millions of our fellow men and women from the more familiar threats of poverty, hunger and deadly diseases."
The aftermath of the war in Iraq and dealing with the threat of terrorism has been a running theme this year at the annual gathering of global business and political leaders in this Alpine resort.
Hours after Annan's speech, Attorney General John Ashcroft said the "entirety of the world community" was needed to eliminate terrorism and establish freedom in Iraq.
Ashcroft also called for a global effort in rebuilding Iraq, acknowledging that the U.S.-led coalition was facing problems.
"It's not easy to establish freedom in the midst of terror," he said. "Freedom has never been free."
Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi of Iran, branded by President Bush as one of the world's "most dangerous" regimes, told a panel that his country supported the forum's theme of "partnership for security and prosperity."
But he said it had to be achieved through dialogue based on mutual respect.
"We have to promote democracy within countries," he said, "and in parallel, we have to promote democracy on the global scale."
On the sidelines, government ministers sought to revive global trade talks but failed to find a way yesterday.
Annan has appealed for progress on a trade deal "that will help the poor."
Swiss President Joseph Deiss, who chaired the meeting, said he thought it was impossible to conclude a new pact by the end of the year as planned.
"It isn't a question of being negative," Deiss said at a news conference. "It's a question of being realistic. "I think there's too much to be done in order to get through."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Kofi Annan, at a conference in Davos, Switzerland.

Load-Date: August 21, 2005


End of Document