Annan calls for sweeping U.N. changes; Secretary-general wants reforms to help fight terrorism, poverty
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 21, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a6
Length: 470 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


Secretary-General Kofi Annan called on world leaders Sunday to approve the most sweeping changes to the United Nations since it was founded 60 years ago, so it can tackle conflicts and terrorism, fight poverty and put human rights at the forefront of its work in the 21st century.
After a year of scandals over corruption in the U.N. oil-for-food program in Iraq and sex abuse by U.N. peacekeepers in Congo, Annan's report also sets out plans to make the world body more efficient, open, and accountable - including strengthening the independence of the U.N.'s internal watchdog.
The report to the 191 members of the U.N. General Assembly was released six months before world leaders meet at U.N. headquarters for a summit called by Annan. In its introduction, he urged the leaders to "act boldly" and adopt "the most far-reaching reforms in the history of the United Nations."
"We will not enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development, and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights," Annan said. "Unless all these causes are advanced, none will succeed."
One of the major proposals calls for the creation of a Human Rights Council to replace the Geneva-based Commission on Human Rights. It has long faced criticism for allowing the worst-offending countries to use their membership to protect each other from condemnation.
One of the most hotly awaited parts of the report was Annan's recommendation for changes to the 15-member Security Council, the most powerful U.N. body now dominated by post-World War II powers - the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France, who all have veto power.
The report calls for an expanded, more representative Security Council, but Annan did not endorse a specific plan, instead backing two options proposed in December by a high-level panel. One would add six new permanent members and the other would create a new tier of eight semi-permanent members: two each from Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas.
The Security Council's use of force has also been an issue. It refused to authorize the U.S.-led war against Iraq and the war in Kosovo against the forces of former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic - decisions which angered some countries.
On the issue of combating terrorism, Annan proposed a comprehensive strategy and backed the definition of terrorism in the high-level panel's report, saying it should break the impasse on adoption of a comprehensive convention against terrorism that should be approved by September 2006.
The report said the Security Council's decisions on whether to use force should be guided by a set of clear principles, and it urged all states to accept that in cases of genocide, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity, there is a "responsibility to protect" which requires collective action.

Graphic

 
Mug - Kofi Annan

Load-Date: March 28, 2005


End of Document