ANNAN TO AIR ROLE OF U.N. IN BATTLING TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 24, 2001 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 319 words
Byline: EDITH M. LEDERER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


Originally, the United Nations was to be filled today with world leaders and foreign ministers. But that was before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Instead, the General Assembly will listen to Secretary-General Kofi Annan outline the role he believes the world body should play after the strikes on New York and Washington.
 Last week, the General Assembly postponed its annual gathering of global leaders because of security concerns after the attacks. Nonetheless, the 89 nations in the world body are going ahead with their work program at a lower level.
 U.N. officials said yesterday that the secretary-general would address the issues facing the international community and the role the United Nations should play in the fight against terrorism in today's speech, rather than outlining his priorities for the coming years.
 Nearly 60 nations are scheduled to address the General Assembly after Annan speaks. All countries will be represented by their U.N. ambassadors except Russia, who will be represented by its foreign minister, Igor Ivanov.
 U.S. Ambassador John Negroponte, who presented his credentials to Annan on Wednesday, is scheduled to make his maiden speech after Ivanov's address.
 The General Assembly has also scheduled a plenary meeting next Monday to discuss international terrorism.
 Last week, Annan appealed to all nations to join a long-term campaign to defeat terrorism in which he said he expected the United Nations to play a leading role.
 He said U.N. member states must stop providing shelter and logistical support for terrorists, halt the laundering of money used to finance terrorist acts, and share information on terrorists and their organizations.
 "That is the only way we are going to defeat terrorism," he said.
 In trying to build an international coalition against terrorism, the secretary-general has been speaking at churches, mosques and synagogues and talking to world leaders.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE WORLD RESPONDS

Load-Date: September 25, 2001


End of Document