Another front in terrorism war; Analysts: Southeast Asia is fertile region for rebel recruiting
Air Force Times
November 12, 2001 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2001 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: GEN; Pg. 1112
Length: 647 words
Byline: By Vince Crawley; Times staff writer, Associated Press
Body


When many Americans think of the wellspring of Islamic fundamentalist groups, they   think of the Middle East. But a Washington   think tank says those fighting against the war   on terrorism should plan to take action in the   Pacific Rim - especially in Indonesia,   Malaysia and the Philippines.
"Southeast Asia will be another important   front in this war," said Heritage Foundation   analysts Dana Dillon and Paolo Pasicolan,   who study Asian affairs.
"Southeast Asia has a large number of established Muslim fundamentalist groups"   that are sympathetic to suspected terrorist   leader Osama bin Laden, they said in a paper   released Oct. 23.
"Thus, the region is both an ideal safe haven   for him and a potential base of operations   from which he could launch terrorist counteroffensives against the United States," they   said.
President Bush told Congress on Sept. 20   that bin Laden's al-Qaida network was linked   to the Sept. 11 attacks that killed as many as   5,000 people.
"Our war on terror begins with al-Qaida,   but it does not end there," Bush said, promising a wide-ranging campaign that won't end   "until every terrorist group of global reach has   been … defeated."
Dillon and Pasicolan call for the United   States to be more proactive in Southeast Asia,   training regional military leaders and donating excess weapons to governments battling   fundamentalist groups.
"Corrupt law enforcement institutions,   backlogged judicial systems and inadequate   cooperation among its countries make it difficult to eliminate various cells that operate in   Southeast Asia," they wrote.
Indonesia is the world's largest Muslim nation, with 170 million of its 206 million people   following Islam. It also is the world's fourth   most populous nation. Its new president,   Megawati Sukarnoputri, warned Oct. 28 that   her ethnically diverse nation is in danger of   breaking apart amid widespread violence.
Malaysia also is mostly Muslim. Police have   used the war on terrorism to detain suspects   opposed to the government of Prime Minister   Mahathir Mohammad, the Heritage analysts   said.
The Philippines has a 5 percent Muslim   population, but fundamentalist groups "have   clearly established links to al-Qaida," according to the Heritage Foundation paper.
The Abu Sayyaf group, founded by militants   who fought against the Soviets alongside bin   Laden in Afghanistan in the 1980s, is the   most active terrorist group in the Philippines,   the paper said.
In May, Abu Sayyaf kidnapped a group of   tourists, including three Americans, one of   whom was murdered. In 1995, Filipino investigators uncovered an Abu Sayyaf plot to kill   the pope, bomb 11 passenger jets and hijack a   12th airliner with the goal of crashing it into   CIA headquarters in Langley, Va.
The vast majority of people in Southeast   Asia don't support terrorism, the Heritage analysts said. "But they provide fertile ground   for al-Qaida to recruit fighters, raise money   and find safe harbor."
The Heritage report said the United States   should:
** Encourage regional efforts against terrorism by strongly supporting a Philippine-led   regional coalition against terrorism under the   umbrella of the Association of Southeast Asian   Nations.
** Provide counterterrorism support   through financial and military aid, including   funds and training for military units and police.
** Ensure military aid "goes directly to counterterrorist initiatives and not into the pockets   of corrupt military regimes."
The report suggested direct U.S. military action only as a last resort.
"The preferred solution is to use local governments and local security forces to attack   terrorism at its roots," the report said.
Even so, the United States should always   keep open the option of direct military intervention if there is "a clear and immediate   threat to U.S. citizens and property," it said.

Notes

1 b&w photo

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document