Another arrest in alleged plot
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 25, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a6
Length: 342 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


Police said Thursday a 24-year-old man was charged with violating Britain's terrorism law, bringing to 12 the number of people accused in the alleged plot to blow up as many as 10 passenger jets using liquid explosives.
Umair Hussain was charged with having information about a possible terrorist act and not disclosing it, Scotland Yard said. He will be arraigned today.
The decision came a day after Hussain, who was arrested Aug. 10, had his custody extended by 24 hours.
Eight appeared in court this week charged with conspiracy to murder and preparing to commit acts of terrorism. Three others - including the mother of an 8-month-old baby - were charged with lesser offenses, including failing to disclose information.
On Wednesday, British police were given another week to question eight remaining suspects in the plot. Under British anti-terrorism law, detectives can seek a judge's permission to hold suspects for up to 28 days before they must be charged or released.
Five people have been released since the alleged plot was revealed two weeks ago.
All of the suspects were arrested in a series of raids in London, Birmingham and suburban High Wycombe on Aug. 10.
In an unusual move earlier this week, senior officers revealed details of their investigation, saying detectives had recovered thousands of pieces of evidence in searches of dozens of properties and two stretches of woodland.
Police seldom disclose evidence about ongoing inquiries for fear of prejudicing any future trials.
Investigators have found bombing-making chemicals, including hydrogen peroxide, and electrical components during their searches, said Peter Clarke, the head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist department.
Months of surveillance had produced "significant video and audio recordings" about the alleged plot, he said Monday, including "martyrdom videos" by some of the prospective bombers.
More than 8,000 items of data storage, such as CDs, DVDs and memory sticks, were found. A map of Afghanistan, suicide notes and books on explosives also were seized, officials said.

Load-Date: August 25, 2006


End of Document