ANOTHER ACT IN TERRORISM'S DEADLY DRAMA
The New York Times
January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 960 words
Byline: By LESLIE MAITLAND
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


To Oliver B. Revell, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's criminal division, ''Terrorism is a form of theater.'' If that's the case, then the New Year's Eve bombings in New York City were a kind of grisly theater of the absurd, one in which the victims of the violence are randomly selected.
In the New York bombings, since identified as the work of the Puerto Rican terrorist group called the F.A.L.N., three police officers were seriously injured. By week's end, rewards totaling $250,000 were offered for the arrest and conviction of those responsible and Federal authorities issued a warrant for a suspect, Luis Rosado.
Discussion of increase in number of terrorist attacks in US each year, and FBI's response, which is to ask for greater freedom in conducting domestic security operations
Already a fugitive who jumped bail on previous charges, Mr. Rosado was linked to the bombings when a voice - recorded by a radio station that received a call claiming responsibility - was identified as his by a former member of the group who became a witness for the Government (although Julio Rosado, the suspect's brother, said yesterday he could not confirm the identification). Luis Rosado was said to be a friend of William Morales, who lost most of both hands in the explosion of a Queens ''bomb factory'' in 1978. Mr. Morales later escaped from a prison ward and is still at large.
The F.A.L.N. - Fuerzas Armadas de Liberacion National - and other militant Puerto Rican independence organizations now represent the most active and most violent groups operating in this country, according to Mr. Revell, whose criminal division includes the F.B.I.'s terrorism section. In 1982, he said, such groups were identified as having been responsible for 25 of the 51 recorded acts of terrorism. And of those, the F.A.L.N. was reported to have been involved in 10 acts, resulting in three deaths and 19 injuries.
In recent years, violence blamed on terrorism has been increasing.  Compared with the 51 instances recorded by the F.B.I. in 1982, there were 42 in 1981 and 29 in 1980. Officials acknowledge, moreover, that the bureau cannot be sure it is aware of the full extent of terrorist activities and that its statistics may be incomplete.
The Puerto Rican terrorists - some of whom are believed to be receiving support from Cuba - are not alone in being monitored by the bureau as the potential sources of sudden violence. Two Armenian groups - one known as the Asala, or Armenian Secret Army, described as leftist, and the other the rightist Justice Commandos - have been linked by the F.B.I. to seven terrorist incidents in 1982. The bureau lists the other most active movements as including the Jewish Defense League, anti-Castro Cuban groups such as Omega 7, Libyans, Croatians and supporters of the Irish Republican Army who engage in smuggling arms and explosives out of the country to Ireland.
Complaints About Restraints
The bureau's guidelines for conducting domestic security operations are now being reviewed by Attorney General William French Smith with an eye toward giving the F.B.I. a freer hand, as Director William H.  Webster has requested. In Congressional testimony last June, Mr.  Webster maintained that the current guidelines hampered the bureau's ability to conduct domestic investigations by ruling out the penetration or infiltration of a suspect group during an inquiry's preliminary stages. The guidelines also prohibit the bureau from developing new informants for a preliminary inquiry, requiring it instead to rely on established sources.
In the past three or four years, the bureau has significantly increased the number of agents assigned to investigate terrorist activity, according to Mr. Revell. The agency maintains a ''proactive program'' that endeavors to learn of plans of violence in advance, through the regular collection and analysis of information from specially trained agents in its field offices.
In terms of domestic groups, he said, the bureau relies on tips from informants within the organizations, on physical surveillance and, when sufficient evidence has been obtained to warrant a court order, on wiretaps and other forms of electronic surveillance. Other cases have been made through the assistance of undercover agents, he said, citing a recent instance in which supporters of the I.R.A.  unknowingly approached disguised members of the bureau to purchase weapons. In other situations involving terrorist organizations from foreign countries, the bureau is assisted by the Central Intelligence Agency. ''Our biggest problem in attacking terrorism is our strongest asset,'' Mr. Revell said. ''It's easy for terrorists to operate in the United States because it is a free society. They have the ability to move about the country freely.''
Roger S. Young, assistant director of the bureau in charge of Congressional and public affairs, also said that while intelligence gathering was important, ''in a society like ours, we're more likely to find out about a group because it's done something, rather than planning something.'' In a number of cases that have been successfully resolved, the key pieces of the puzzle came not through investigation but through lucky accidents, said Mr. Young, who coordinated the bureau's F.A.L.N. inquiries in the late 1970's. ''In Evanston, Ill., a few years ago, a woman noticed a group of joggers standing around a van and smoking,'' he said, offering an example.  ''She thought it looked strange that joggers were smoking and had the presence of mind to call the police. That led to the arrest of 10 members of the F.A.L.N. The F.B.I. was called in and we located safe houses in Milwaukee and Jersey City. And there we found evidence of further violence they were planning.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Luisi


End of Document