Anti-terrorism laws endanger our rights
USA TODAY
December 2, 2002, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 409 words
Body

How reassuring that Barbara Comstock, Justice Department public affairs director, thinks that the legal standards allowing federal agents to snoop have not been lowered ("Anti-terrorism tools needed," Opposing View, War on terrorism debate, Nov. 22).
However, how sad that she didn't respond to some of the concerns raised by USA TODAY's editorial. They include the problems of giving the FBI more freedom to infiltrate -- or spy, if you will -- on political and religious gatherings and making it easier for federal authorities to eavesdrop on lawyer-client conversations ("Safeguard civil liberties," Our View). What will be next? Bugging priests' confessionals?
What about those two citizens held who knows where because they are suspected of helping terrorists? According to USA TODAY's editorial, no charges have been filed, yet the two are denied their right to legal counsel.
If these heinous violations of the U.S. Constitution are justified by the courts and the Department of Justice as essential to catching terrorists, then a bank holdup may be justified as essential to the financial security of the robber.
Harry Bartlett
Gainesville, Ga.
What about the unemployed?
How shameful that the 107th Congress adjourned after packing obscene amounts of pork into legislation establishing a bloated Department of Homeland Security but without extending unemployment benefits to nearly a million citizens ("New Homeland Security Dept. faces challenges: Unions, budget and computers among concerns," News, Tuesday).
Many of them will lose coverage at year's end. I understand that in January, tens of thousands of Americans will be cast off the unemployment rolls. Somehow, I don't think that attacking Iraq will distract these people from the dismal economy and the corruption of so many of the administration's corporate cronies.
Deborah McAtee Chasteen
Athens, Ga.
Bush is on the right track
At President Bush's urging, Congress took meaningful action by passing a Homeland Security bill, providing terrorism insurance and confirming some of the president's judicial nominees.
All of these initiatives had been stalled in the Democratic-controlled Senate before the election but are now moving forward because a majority of Americans supported Republicans on Election Day last month.
In my view, Bush and the Republicans have been making a real difference for the American people, and I look forward to much more in the next two years.
Silvio J. Parrales
Fairfax, Va.

Load-Date: December 2, 2002


End of Document