ANTI-TERRORISM BILL GETS BOOST; CLINTON ACCEPTS GOP'S LIMITS ON APPEALS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 7, 1995, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 758 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Anti-terrorism legislation inched toward a Senate vote after President Bill Clinton reversed his position and accepted the GOP goal of including in the bill limits on appeals by death row inmates.
The Senate had planned to vote on the full bill Tuesday night, but it scheduled a vote for this morning on ending debate.
Clinton's move was his second conciliatory gesture this week regarding the legislation, which was inspired by the Oklahoma City bombing on April 19. Earlier, he had urged both Democrats and Republicans to "curb politics" and stop trying to amend the legislation.
But the accommodating words from Clinton were not enough to prevent partisan bickering on the Senate floor and a renewed threat by Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., to withdraw the legislation unless Democrats cut back their proposed amendments further.
"We're not going to continue this game," said Dole, a Republican presidential candidate. "The time is running out for this bill to be on the floor, make no mistake about it."
Noting that the Democrats had proposed several amendments related to gun laws, Dole said: "It's an effort by Democrats to bring up all the gun amendments they've been keeping in their closet. . . . I think it's time for them to start supporting their president. They ought to get behind President Clinton on this bill."
Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., retorted: "We care just as deeply as anybody else about what happened in Oklahoma City. . . . We will stay in all night long if we have to, to do it."
If Dole withdrew the measure, Daschle said, the Democrats would append it to the coming telecommunications bill and "every other bill" in coming weeks.
Daschle said the Democrats still had 15 or 16 proposed amendments as of Tuesday afternoon, down from more than 60 when senators returned from their weeklong recess Monday morning. Democrats pared their original list down to about 20.
Democrats said they believed new firearms laws would curb anti-government violence symbolized by the Oklahoma City bombing. They also said their gun-control amendments were partly a response to GOP proposals to limit death-penalty appeals.
The House has yet to schedule hearings or a vote on its bill, but GOP leaders have pledged floor action by the end of the month.
As recently as May 25, Clinton told Dole that he did not want to address limits on death-penalty appeals in the anti-terrorism bill. Although he supported revisions that would ensure swifter resolution of capital cases, Clinton said, he preferred to deal with it in separate legislation.
But Monday night, Clinton said in a CNN interview with Larry King that the issue should be included in the bill "so that it would apply to any prosecutions brought against anyone indicted in Oklahoma."
"We need to cut the time delay on the appeals dramatically . . . ," he said. "It ought to be done in the context of this terrorism legislation so that it would apply to any prosecutions brought against anyone indicted in Oklahoma."
One of the Democrats' gun-related amendments, offered by Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., was adopted by voice vote Tuesday. The provision would increase the statute of limitations on certain gun crimes - including making fully automatic machine guns, possessing sawed-off shotguns and making homemade silencers or bombs - to five years from three.
Boxer said her amendment was supported by 46 police chiefs, including Oklahoma City's.
The overall bill, written by Dole and Sen. Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, encompasses many of Clinton's proposals in the $ 1.5 billion anti-terrorism package he submitted to Congress a week after the bombing. But it does not give law enforcement as much authority for electronic surveillance as Clinton's plan.
Republicans and civil libertarians alike have criticized Clinton's proposals, saying they could erode constitutional protections. But Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick has said the standard for employing wiretaps will not change. Agents must demonstrate to a judge that there is "probable cause" to believe that targeted people have committed or are about to commit crimes.
The Senate bill would authorize the hiring of 1,000 new federal law enforcement personnel, increase federal penalties for terrorist crimes as well as conspiracies involving explosives, establish streamlined procedures for deporting aliens believed to be terrorists, give the FBI access to credit reports and telephone records in foreign terrorism cases and ban U.S. aid to countries that assist terrorist nations.

Load-Date: June 8, 1995


End of Document