ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURE APPROVED, SENT TO CLINTON
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 19, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 308 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Congress passed long-awaited legislation Thursday that
would give federal law officers new powers to use against terrorism,
sending the bill to President Clinton on the eve of the first
anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing.
The bill - which also would limit federal appeals by prisoners,
including death-row inmates - was passed by the House 293-133.
It had
been approved by the Senate a day earlier, 91-8.
Clinton was expected to sign the measure next week, after he returns
from overseas, even though it lacks numerous other law enforcement
powers he had sought.
"Today, Congress took an important step in making our country more safe
and secure from the violent cowards who would tear at the fabric of
civilized order," House Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde said
after the vote.
The bill allows deportation of alien terrorists without disclosing
classified evidence against them, prevent fund raising in the United
States for terrorists, and require taggants, or chemical labels, in
plastic explosives so they can be traced.
To Republican supporters, the bill's key provision is its limit on
so-called habeas corpus appeals by prisoners, primarily because it is
expected to end delays in executions.
"There is no clearer link, no stronger link, between effective
anti-terrorism legislation and deterring criminal acts of violence in
this country than habeas and death-penalty reform," said Rep. Bob Barr,
R-Ga.
On the other side, Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., noted that the only
people eligible for such appeals are already incarcerated.
"We're not talking about anybody walking around," Frank said. "We're
talking about people who are locked up and who are a danger, presumably,
only to other prisoners, but certainly not to general society."
The bill would create some new federal laws, and new federal death
penalties, for international terrorism.

Load-Date: April 19, 1996


End of Document