ANTI-TERRORISM ACTION AGREED UPON: CLINTON PROVISION ON CHEMICAL MARKERS IN EXPLOSIVES REJECTED
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 01, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 396 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - After wrangling with key Republican lawmakers, the White
House has won agreement on a package of anti-terrorism measures that
would expand wiretapping authority and tighten airport security.
But President Clinton's push to study the case for placing chemical
markers in explosives was rejected.
The accord came Wednesday evening after two days of meetings between a
bipartisan lawmakers' task force and administration officials,
including White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta and Deputy Attorney
General Jamie Gorelick.
Panetta said the anti-terrorism measures, several of which were
proposed by Clinton in response to the TWA Flight 800 explosion and
the Olympics bombing, would give law enforcement new tools to confront
"what is an increasing threat in our world today."
But omitted from the agreement was a central part of Clinton's
proposals, a study of chemical markers in explosives, called taggants,
which had been heavily criticized by some Republicans.
Also rejected was a provision to allow the FBI to get information on
suspected terrorists from hotels, telephone companies and storage
facilities.
Clinton said the FBI supported use of taggants to help investigators
trace the origin of explosives after they are detonated. The National
Rifle Association opposes them, saying their presence in black and
smokeless powders could make them unstable and a safety risk.
The agreement also would allow prosecution of suspected terrorists
under federal racketeering laws, which would make anyone convicted
subject to asset forfeitures and longer sentences.
The negotiators, led by Panetta and Sen. Larry Craig, R-Idaho, said
they hoped to have a package ready for a vote by week's end, before
Congress leaves for its August recess.
But Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., said earlier in the
day that final passage before the recess appeared unlikely.
"I don't see how in the world we can get it done" by then, Lott told
reporters.
Lott and other GOP leaders summoned Attorney General Janet Reno,
Panetta and FBI Director Louis Freeh to a meeting today to explain why
some of the FBI's anti-terrorism funds haven't been spent.
"We are increasingly concerned that monies and authorities already
granted to the administration are not being used effectively or at
all," Lott, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., and House Majority
Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, wrote in a letter to Clinton.

Load-Date: August 2, 1996


End of Document