ANTI-TERRORISM BILL THREATENS RIGHTS
 Philadelphia Daily News
October 12, 1995 Thursday PM EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; Pg. 24; EDITORIAL
Length: 622 words
Body


President Clinton is using the outrage over this week's sabotage derailment of an Amtrak train to push for passage of anti-terrorism legislation stalled in Congress.
"Give us the tools we need to fight the problems of today and tomorrow with anti-terrorism," Clinton pleaded. He was careful not to label perpetrators of the crash as terrorists; so far, their motives are as obscure as their identities.
But the "tools" Clinton wants Congress to provide law enforcement are potentially as hazardous to Americans as the threat from terrorists, domestic or foreign. Probably more.
Until law enforcement catches up with the saboteurs, it can't be known whether this sort of anti-terrorism legislation would have prevented the crime - or speeded the capture. It's unlikely, though.
The legislation, inspired by the April 19 bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City, would not have thwarted Timothy McVeigh et al., the men allegedly responsible.
And the expanded law enforcement powers - with a $2.1 billion price - probably would not have aided significantly in the investigation, either.
The results that can reasonably be expected do not balance the risks to personal freedom, not to mention a democratic society.
The legislation was passed in the Senate and by the House Judiciary Committee in June, but has not been voted on by the full House. Not only would it expand the definition of terrorism to include all sorts of crimes, it would widen wiretapping powers, allow the military to be included in domestic investigations and limit death penalty appeals.
No matter when this proposal came, civil libertarians would shudder at the distortion of the Bill of Rights.
Coming as it does when Americans are bombarded daily with fresh evidence of rights violations by law enforcement at all levels, it's no surprise that both conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats raise objections.
This unlikely alliance has stalled the anti-terrorism legislation. It should stay stalled, no matter how much the president pushes it.
TAKING THE FIFTH
In much of the city's 5th Council District, the present does not look good. And where economic renewal is tangible, longtime residents worry about their place in the new day.
For those have-nots and have-too-littles, Philadelphia is a place where the houses are aging and deteriorating, the business base meager, the employment opportunities too few. They're on the sharp buckle of the Rust Belt.
City Council President John Street has represented the district since 1979. He points legitimately to recent improvements, including in the delivery of city services and in useful amenities for a small business strip. He was criticized in a bitter Democratic primary for not doing enough for the neighborhoods, and in an absolute sense that may be true.
But Street clearly understands the imperative to sustain the health of Center City if city government is to garner the resources for the aching places where so many here live.
And he definitely has talents that he has put to good use. As City Council president, he has transformed the council from an object of derision into a forum for meaningful ideas and legislation and a place where the city's business moves forward with dispatch. He has involved minority Republicans in the process, and the council moved expeditiously to facilitate the stabilization of the city's finances.
His Republican opponent in the Nov. 7 election, William Meinel, is well- meaning, but has nothing approaching Street's record of accomplishment. John Street is the clear choice. Perhaps the great challenge for him in another term is to help the city formulate a clearer and more visionary strategy for economic development, including the renewal of the city's public schools.

Notes

IN OUR OPINION

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document