ANTI-ARAB VIOLENCE SETS OFF DEBATE IN ISRAEL
The New York Times
May 9, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 714 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: OFRA, Israeli
Body


-Occupied West Bank, May 8 - The arrest of a ring of purported Jewish terrorists has provoked a debate in Israel over the degree to which the movement of settling the West Bank is responsible.
 Those in custody, now numbering 25, have not been identified, but are said to be settlers from the West Bank and Golan, ultranationalists and Orthodox religious men who have been pioneers in the movement. They are also reported to be activists in Gush Emunim, a militant right-wing organization that has created many settlements.
The radio quoted security officials today as having said that one of those in custody had signed a confession in the 1980 bombings in which two Arab mayors on the West Bank were left disabled. Others, including two brothers who have settled in the Jewish quarter of Hebron, are reported to have confessed to firing into the campus of the Islamic University in Hebron in July, killing 3 people and wounding 33. Confessions have also been reported in the planting of bombs in five Arab-owned buses on April 27.
Arrest of ring of purported Jewish terrorists provokes debate in Israel over degree to which movement of settling West Bank is responsible; 25 people in custody are said to be from West Bank and Golan, ultranationalists and Orthodox religious men who have been pioneers in movement; are also reported to be activists in Gush Emunim, militant right-wing organization that created many settlements (M)
Israeli officials and reporters who have been briefed by security authorities say the accused are part of the mainstream settlement movement. Israeli newspapers quoted the police as having said that one of those in custody was an army major serving in the West Bank military government. The newspaper Hadashot said one man purportedly involved was a friend of Rafi Eitan, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's adviser on terrorism.
Some journalists who oppose West Bank settlement are saying that the movement has been creating an atmosphere in which extreme nationalists feel free to translate their religious- political fervor into anti-Arab violence. They say settlers have consistently refused to cooperate with police investigations of attacks on Arabs.
But Government officials caution against attributing the crimes of a few to the entire setlement movement.
Settlement leaders have denounced terrorism and have refused to provide money for the defense of those accused.
''There is no room for the kind of activity we are talking about,'' said Shifra Blass, a resident of the settlement of Ofra, five miles northeast of Ramallah, speaking for the Council of Jewish Settlements. Anyone who would commit mass murder, she said, is ''a deviant from our ideology.''
Many settlers have ''expressed a moral revulsion'' over the violence, she said, and many feel financial support would suggest that the movement endorsed terrorism. She said educational efforts were planned to make sure that settlers understand the movement's ideal of coexistence with Arabs.
How effective this will be is a question. The West Bank has attracted tough idealists who cloak their violent tendencies in the mantle of patriotism and religious fundamentalism.
''The people who attempted to blow up the Arab buses,'' wrote Roy Isacowitz of The Jerusalem Post, ''are not 'good boys gone wrong.' They are not the bad apples in the cart, but the tastiest, freshest apples of them all. It is the cart itself that is rotten.
''What we have not heard, among the official condemnations and expressions of disbelief, is the simple acknowledgment that the settlement policy itself is at fault; that the immoral and high-handed policies of the Government and Gush Emunim are natural breeding grounds for terror.''
President Chaim Herzog had harsh words for the accused in an Independence Day speech Sunday.
''The events that were discovered recently were the fruit of mad minds,'' he said. ''Unbalanced men would have brought disaster on the people of Israel, the state and the Zionist enterprise. Treasonous acts like these endanger the independence that we celebrate today.''
The Council of Jewish Settlements condemned his remarks, calling them ''a pointed judgment against men who have not been charged, made on Independence Day, which symbolizes the unity of the people above its ideological camps.''


End of Document