ANTI-TERRORISM LAW TARGETS FOREIGN COMPANIES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 6, 1996, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 533 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton signed a bill Monday to punish foreign firms that invest in energy projects in Iran or Libya.
Terming Iran and Libya "two of the most dangerous supporters of terrorism in the world," Clinton said, "You cannot do business with c ountries that practice commerce with you by day while funding and protecting the terrorists who kill you and your innocent civilians by night."
Germany and France denounced the move as a barrier to international trade. The 15-nation European Union also protested. And Iran predicted the new law was doomed to failure because of the allies' objections.
The United States already was under fire from Canada, Mexico and other allies for a measure Clinton signed into law that penalizes foreign businesses that invest in property the Cuban government confiscated from American citizens.
Clinton said he expected that the European nations would eventually come around to his way of thinking. But he also said, "Where we don't agree, the United States cannot and will not refuse to do what we believe is right."
It would be unwise for the Europeans to try to retaliate against the United States, said State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns. "They would be acting contrary to their own self-interest."
"If the Europeans don't want to go along with us, they at least should get out of the way," he said. "There's nothing that the European governments can do to dissuade the Clinton administration from going forward."
The new law, which cleared Congress on July 23, requires the president to penalize foreign firms that invest $ 40 million or more annually in oil or gas in Iran or Libya. "The act will help to deny them the money they need to finance international terrorism or to acquire weapons of mass destruction," Clinton said.
The law covers only future investments, not current contracts.
Among the first firms that could be penalized under the new law is France's Total SA, which signed a $ 600 million deal last year to develop Iran's offshore Sirri oil fields after the United States barred Conoco and several other American companies from investing in the project. "It stops them in their tracks," said David Johnson, White House deputy press secretary.
Sanctions available under the law include:
Denying Export-Import Bank loans or export licenses to sanctioned firms.
Barring U.S. banks from making loans of more than $ 10 million a year to sanctioned companies.
Barring sanctioned financial institutions from being primary dealers of U.S. government bonds or serving as a repository of U.S. government funds.
Banning U.S. government purchases from sanctioned entities, and imposing import barriers.
The bill was separate from legislation that stalled in Congress last week to tag explosives with chemical markers and to expand wiretap authority in suspected terrorist cases.
"I am disappointed, and more importantly the American people are disappointed, that that job was not done," Clinton said.
He said he would press Congress for the legislation after its August recess. Further, he said he would submit a bill to crack down on money laundering and strengthen extradition powers and border controls "to keep more criminals and terrorists out of America."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - President Bill Clinton jokes with Stephen Trachtenberg, president of George Washington University, on Monday. In his speech, the president said the United States would penalize foreign firms doing business with Iran and Libya.

Load-Date: August 6, 1996


End of Document