Anti-terror 'czar' to coordinate $7B effort
USA TODAY
May 4, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 357 words
Byline: M.J. Zuckerman
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- With spending on anti-terrorism efforts expected
to reach a record $ 7 billion next year, the Clinton administration
within weeks will unveil a strategy to coordinate a new federal
war on terror.
Richard Clarke, 47, a career State Department official and special
assistant to the president for national security affairs, will
be named the government's first national coordinator -- a job
dubbed by some as "terrorism czar."
Clarke's job will help develop policy and coordinate anti-terrorism
efforts for every branch of the federal government, including
the FBI, CIA and departments of Justice, State and Defense.
Shaken by bombings in 1995 in Oklahoma City and at the 1996 Olympics
in Atlanta, government spending to thwart terrorism has tripled
and, in some agencies, quadrupled since 1995, according to the
General Accounting Office.
This quick growth has spawned confusion within the government
and criticism by some lawmakers and the GAO that the money is
not always being spent effectively.
"The United States is spending billions of dollars annually to
combat terrorism without assurance that the federal funds are
focused on the right programs or the right amounts," the GAO's
Richard Davis testified last month.
The GAO is Congress' auditing and investigative arm.
Officials at the GAO and within the administration say privately
that there has been duplication of effort in some anti-terrorism
areas -- such as federal training programs.
Clarke's job will be to sort this out.
"The amount being spent is not as important as identifying where
there's a need for spending," says Clarke.
There is concern that some agencies may be citing terrorism to
justify larger budgets.
"When you say 'terrorism,' it makes you relevant and when you're
relevant you can justify added budget," says Larry Johnson, a
corporate consultant and former State Department coordinator of
counter-terrorism affairs in the Bush administration.
At a time when the federal government is shrinking, the war on
terrorism is among its fastest-growing segments: 17 agencies are
expected to spend $ 7 billion in 1999, says a new report from the
White House's Office of Management and Budget.

Load-Date: May 4, 1998


End of Document