Anti-terrorism officials take aim at giant border weed
USA TODAY
April 5, 2007 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 289 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Body


A giant, aggressive weed growing along the border with Mexico is draining massive quantities of water, overrunning roads and bridges and providing cover for illegal immigrants, drug smugglers and anyone else trying to sneak into the country, the Homeland Security Department says.
Called Carrizo cane, the invasive, non-native plant grows stalks up to 18 feet tall and can get so dense it makes roads impassable.
"It's like a big spider web" that stretches for hundreds of miles along the Rio Grande, says Hilario Leal, a Border Patrol agent in Del Rio, Texas.
A "veteran of scratched eyes and hands" who once got so lost in the cane at night that he had to be guided out by helicopter, Leal says illegal immigrants cut trails through the dense stalks and smugglers hide loads of drugs in the cane.
Rep. Henry Cuellar, D-Texas, says the cane will interfere with government plans to install more cameras and ground sensors along the border.
That's why Homeland Security is paying the Agriculture Department $1.5 million this year for help getting rid of the cane, an exotic plant that is native to Mediterranean Europe.
Scientists have found that cutting it down with heavy machinery does little good; the stuff simply grows back. The area in question is too large to spread chemical weed killers.
It looks like the best way to combat the cane may be biological, with bugs collected from Spain, Homeland Security's Gerry Kirwin says.
If early determinations prove right, the predators -- wasps, flies and scale -- would infest and kill both new shoots and mature stalks.
Kirwin says it will take three years to determine whether the bugs really do the trick and make sure there won't be any unforeseen consequences to importing them into the USA. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Theresa Scarbrough for USA TODAY

Load-Date: April 5, 2007


End of Document