Anti-terrorism top federal priority in state
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
November 15, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Inside; Pg. A13
Length: 441 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


BALTIMORE _ Federal agents and prosecutors in Maryland have shifted their priorities since Sept. 11, as countering terrorism assumes the top priority for the U.S Justice Department.
As it pursues anti-terrorism measures, the agency will abandon or reduce manpower devoted to many of its current responsibilities, which include civil rights and environmental prosecution, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft has said.
This week he told federal prosecutors they might have to set aside some major cases to prosecute minor immigration and identity-theft charges that could help root out suspected terrorists.
Officials say many of the 200 FBI agents assigned to Maryland and Delaware have been working full time on terrorism since Sept. 11 and have been drawn off the federal crime cases they usually investigate, which range from white-collar crime to child pornography.
"When Sept. 11 first happened, pretty much everybody was working on terrorism. Right now, I wouldn't want to put a specific number on how many are still working it, but it's very high," said Special Agent Peter A. Gulotta Jr., an FBI spokesman.
Since Sept. 11 the Maryland FBI has responded to 250 calls for "suspected hazardous ma terials," compared with 25 calls in that category during all of last year, he said.
The number of anthraxrelated calls has dropped off in recent weeks, but the FBI investigates all of them, he said.
A "vast majority" of the calls are from people legitimately concerned about anthrax, Agent Gulotta said, but a number are thought to be hoaxes.
When Thomas M. DiBiagio was named Maryland's U.S. Attorney in June, he said his top priorities would be public corruption, white-collar fraud and big narcotics cases. When he took office Sept. 17, he had to shift gears immediately, as FBI agents swarmed Prince George's County on the trail of six of the suspected terrorists.
Since then, Mr. DiBiagio's lawyers have been assisting FBI agents with search warrants and legal advice in Maryland as the federal agents continue their probe of the terrorists.
"That is now in the forefront of everything we do," Mr. DiBiagio said. "September 11 fundamentally altered the way we do our job."
Still, there have been no sig nificant changes in the number of new criminal cases _ including indictments _ filed in the federal courts in Baltimore and Greenbelt since Sept. 11, according to court records.
But many criminal defense lawyers who work with pros ecutors as they evaluate evidence before a case comes to trial confirm that federal inves tigators appear to have little time.
"There's definitely been an impact locally," said David B. Irwin, a former federal prosecutor.

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document