Anti-terror focus turns fuzzy
USA TODAY
November 16, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 543 words
Body

Today's debate: U.S. war on terrorism
Our view: Reforms slowed by complacency in Congress, staff changes at CIA.
On Sunday night, "Anonymous" came in from the cold and into millions of homes, warning on CBS' 60 Minutes that the U.S. is in danger of losing the war on terrorism.
For months, Mike Scheuer, the former head of a CIA unit tracking Osama bin Laden, has been sounding that alarm in a book and interviews under the cover name demanded by his CIA masters.
Last week, Scheuer quit the CIA, complaining about too many restrictions. His TV appearance launched a higher-profile crusade to focus attention on what's needed to prevail against al-Qaeda. In his view, killing or capturing known leaders won't be enough unless the U.S. tackles the root causes of a movement inspiring ever more converts.
Scheuer's message is important in itself. More critically, his leap into public view highlights worrisome developments in the two weeks since the presidential election. The vigorous debate over how to defeat terrorism has died off. And the momentum behind a vital drive to reform anti-terror intelligence capabilities has been lost.
That raises the question: If the terrorism ball is still around, whose eye is on it? The follow-up thought: What will it take to return the war on terror to a front-and-center issue, short of another attack?
Perhaps the fact that a feared pre-election attack never materialized has led naturally to a feeling that it's safe to lower our guard. But that produces only a creeping complacency about the terror threat.
Some signs already are obvious:
 * Fading 9/11 Commission reforms. During the campaign, President Bush and Sen. John Kerry competed over who would be first to embrace and implement changes urged by the 9/11 panel. Its proposals included appointing an intelligence czar with control over how the sprawling intelligence agencies spend their money. It also pushed for a re-examination of U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, which it blamed for spawning anti-Americanism and Muslim extremism around the world.
Now, the urgency is gone. Intelligence reform is languishing in Congress, largely because of turf battles. The Pentagon is fighting to keep its control over 80% of the budget, and lawmakers have balked at a streamlined system of congressional oversight. As for tackling the root causes of terrorism, Scheuer remains a voice in the wilderness as he warns about the U.S. failure to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and its continued support for Middle East dictators.
 * Turnover at the CIA. The recent arrival of new CIA Director Porter Goss has prompted a spate of high-level resignations of seasoned veterans in recent days, including the agency's deputy director and the top two officials in charge of clandestine operations. The exodus has raised worries about the CIA's ability to keep up with continuing threats in the short and medium term.
The presidential campaign forced Bush and Kerry to confront the right questions about how to proceed in the war on terrorism. Among them: How can U.S. intelligence-gathering change to prevent another 9/11? And is the U.S. combating the hatred of America in the Muslim world?
Now the nation needs continued debate and action, not business-as-usual inertia.

Load-Date: November 16, 2004


End of Document