ANTI-TERRORISM ACT GOES TOO FAR
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 11, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. 03B
Length: 871 words
Byline: Hilary Chiz
Body


PRE-NEW YEAR reports that the so-called counter-terrorism legislation
was hopelessly derailed in Congress were premature. The reality is that
Congress faces continued strong pressure from Republican leaders and
President Clinton to act. And, if it does, the danger will not be to
terrorists, but to law-abiding individuals and groups.
Within the next several months, the House of Representatives is expected
to vote on "The Effective Death Penalty and Anti-Terrorism Act."
Although this proposal is touted as a compromise between Congressional
supporters of earlier versions of the bill and some opponents concerned
about government overreaching, it grants broad and frightening new
powers to the federal government in the name of fighting terrorism.
This latest version of the ever-evolving legislation would in the name
of habeas corpus reform take the draconian step of greatly hamstringing
the ability of state and federal prisoners to challenge unconstitutional
conduct by the government that resulted in an unlawful conviction and
sentence.
That is why it is being actively opposed by organizations from across
the political spectrum such as the National Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers, the American Civil Liberties Union, the Irish National
Caucus, Gun Owners of America and the Citizens' Committee for the Right
to Keep and Bear Arms.
Following are some examples of how the Comprehensive Anti-Terrorism Act
would expand governmental powers:
s The secretary of state would have power to designate foreign
organizations as "terrorist," and to make it a crime to give "material
support" to such organizations, even if the support is for legal,
non-violent or even charitable activities. Had this bill been law a few
years ago, it might have been illegal for religious organizations and
relief groups to give anything but medicine and religious materials to
certain organizations in Central America or to the African National
Congress in South Africa.
s The government would be able to use secret evidence in deportation
proceedings against any person accused of terrorism, even if the person
were a permanent resident of the United States. This means that a
long-term legal resident of the United States, married to an American
with U.S. citizen-children in school could be deported on the basis of
false accusations without an adequate opportunity to refute the
charges.
s The FBI would be granted enhanced mandatory access in
counter-intelligence investigation to travel records about any person
who is an agent of a foreign power who may be involved in criminal
activities, even if the facts do not establish probable cause that they
are involved in such illegal activities. The FBI would obtain this
information in secret by means of an ex parte court order.
s The secretary of state would have power to chose which foreign
speakers and performers Americans could listen to at seminars,
conferences and concerts because the bill gives the secretary the right
to bar people from the United States based on their membership in a
group, instead of their activities.
s Federal courts would be required to ignore unconstitutional state
court convictions and sentences, unless the state court decision, though
wrong as a constitutional matter, was "unreasonable wrong."
The risk that an innocent person would be held in prison in violation of
the Constitution - or even executed - would increase dramatically
because the bill imposes unrealistically short limits (for the first
time in history) for filing a claim of relief.
The truth is that the federal government does not need new powers to
protect the public against terrorism.
Timothy McVeigh, the suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, was swiftly
apprehended by the government using the considerable investigatory and
enforcement powers already at its disposal.
Furthermore, had the new law been in place, it would not have prevented
the bombing. Some supporters of terrorism legislation are taking
advantage of the American public's understandable outrage and horror
over Oklahoma City to push through a law that will erode our basic
constitutional rights.
New anti-terrorism legislation is not needed, but if Congress is
determined to do something, rather than nothing, it must at least adhere
to these principles:
s All people residing in the United States, whether they are citizens or
not, have the right to support the legal activities of organizations and
groups of their choice.
That is a fundamental part of our First Amendment freedom of
association.
s People must have a right to examine evidence offered against them,
regardless of the nature of the charges.
That is a fundamental part of our due process of the law.
s Personal records about people - the airline flights they have taken,
the cars they have rented, the hotels in which they have stayed - should
be protected from the government's prying eyes unless there is
sufficient evidence of criminal activity.
That is fundamental to our right to personal privacy.
s Aliens should be barred from the United States as terrorists only
based on their illegal activities, not based on their associations with
others.
Any legislation that disrespects these principles deserves to be
resoundingly rejected.
Chiz is director of the West Virginia Civil Liberties Union, based in
Charleston.

Load-Date: February 15, 1996


End of Document