Anti-Nato terrorists strike in France
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 28, 1985, Monday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 556 words
Byline: By William Echikson, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Highlight: French Defense official killed after French and German groups sign pact
Body


Following the assassination of a high-ranking French Defense Ministry official, a new strain of terrorism threatens France and its European partners.
Gen. Rene Audran was shot Friday night as he returned home from work. A French terrorist group known as Direct Action later claimed responsibility.
Never before has Direct Action resorted to direct murder. In the past, the group's attacks have been mostly symbolic - bombings of buildings of companies or organizations linked with the Atlantic alliance.
As well as a significant escalation in Direct Action's violence, General Aubran's death marks the new cooperation between different European terrorist groups.
On Jan. 15, the French group announced its fusion with West Germany's Red Army Faction. In a five-page text addressed to the press, the new organization declared war against NATO.
Now, for the first time, the target is France, and specifically the heart of the French state. Audray was responsible for the export all French arms sales.
In the past, the French have not worried much about European terrorism. While the Red Brigades traumatized Italy and the Baader-Meinhof Group terrorized West Germany, most terrorism in France was Mideast-related.
Founded in 1979, Direct Action focused its early energies in bomb attacks against banks. Police compared the members to bandits. Not very talented bandits, either. Francois le Mouel, director of French antiterrorism, estimates that between 1982 and 1984, about half of the group was captured. In all, 19 activists are in prison.
But the police have never succeeded in stopping Direct Action's chief, Jean-Marie Rouillan, and his companion, Nathalie Menigon. Recently, Rouillan turned Direct Action more militant and political. In November 1984, the group declared its hate for ''the Americanization of Europe.'' Even before, the group had begun attacking such symbols of the Western alliance as the the Panhard-Lavassor gun firm, the Atlantic Institute think tank, and the European Space Agency.
The growing attacks were mirrored by Rouillan's increased international contacts. Police say he made contact with Basque, Irish, Italian, and Belgian terrorists before signing the pact with the Red Army.
On both sides of the Rhine, terrorist experts saw cooperation as a sign of weakness. After all, at the height of their power toward the end of the 1970s, the different European terrorist groups remained wary of each other.
Only when many of their militants are behind bars and on hunger strike - 30 Germans are refusing food and one of Direct Action's militants recently joined them - did the two groups bridge their differences. Even now, many experts doubt the two groups can stay together.
Other experts, though, see a real danger. They note that American deployment of nuclear missiles in Western Europe continues to anger many young Europeans. In choosing the Western alliance as a target, the terrorists could strike a popular fire which could lead to more violence. That fire, French terrorist expert Eduoard Sablier argues, would provide important benefits to the Soviet Union.
''The terrorists are trying to weaken NATO just while Washington and Moscow are making moves toward negotiations,'' Sablier says. ''They can easily make Europe vulnerable - putting pressure on the continent to disassociate itself with the United States.''


End of Document