Anti-terror crew chases leads big and small
USA TODAY
October 8, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 2173 words
Byline: Toni Locy
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- FBI agents Tony Colantoni and Giulio Arseni dropped what they were doing when a call came in from the local fire department that someone had spread gasoline in a downtown office building and had threatened to light it.
The agents' mission on that hazy day in late August was to determine whether a terrorist was attacking the nation's capital. But the threat turned out to be just gas fumes, probably caused by a car that had idled too long in the building's garage.
It was unclear how fumes materialized into a false report about a possible attack. But in post-9/11 Washington, authorities receive dozens of calls each month from jittery residents who think they see terrorists. One woman recently reported a suspicious-looking man heading into the Pentagon; he turned out to be a lieutenant colonel.
"If two firetrucks go by the White House, someone is on the phone to us asking, 'What's going on?' " says Jim Rice, supervisor of the FBI's National Capital Response Squad, which was formed in 1999 to respond to terrorist attacks across the nation and abroad.
Two years ago, federal agents such as Colantoni and Arseni never would have been dispatched to chase down reports of suspicious smells, packages or people. Local police and fire departments would have handled such tasks. But since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, exposed shortcomings in the FBI's ability to detect potential terrorists, the bureau's role in local affairs has increased, particularly in cities that are known terrorist targets, such as Washington, New York and Los Angeles.
The FBI, long known among state and local officials as an arrogant agency that focused on long-term investigations, is becoming more like a national police force. Nearly 3,000 counterterrorism agents are under orders from FBI Director Robert Mueller to "let no lead go unchecked."
"We no longer treat anything as routine," says J. Roger Morrison, chief of the FBI's year-old National Joint Terrorism Task Force, which coordinates 84 FBI-led terrorism task forces across the nation. "There's no threat, no complaint, no bit of information that's not addressed immediately."
Americans have become accustomed to nationwide terrorism alerts based on tips from captured al-Qaeda operatives, U.S. intelligence or other sources. But for every threat that makes front-page news, FBI agents across the nation check out hundreds of tips that few people ever hear about -- usually because they lead nowhere.
During several days in August, officials at FBI headquarters and at the bureau's Washington field office gave USA TODAY a rare look inside counterterrorism units that are responsible for preventing another catastrophic attack in this country.
Agents continue to do their jobs as they always have -- cultivating informants, following money trails and eavesdropping on criminal suspects. In some parts of the country, agents also are conducting hundreds of electronic and physical surveillance operations to try to identify potential terrorists inside the USA and any Americans who might collaborate with al-Qaeda.
But FBI agents also are acting more like hometown cops, which means that Americans -- whether they know it or not -- are coming in contact with them. Agents are blending into crowds at celebrations on the National Mall in Washington and in Times Square in New York. Some agents carry pager-size radiation detectors that are so sensitive that an alert from one of the devices led to a chemotherapy recipient being questioned on the National Mall this summer.
The FBI also appears to be more willing to work with local officials in dealing with the public.
At a recent town meeting in a Virginia suburb of Washington, Rice and another top FBI official joined the local fire chief to hear residents complain about the noise caused by the late-night destruction of hundreds of Vietnam War-era explosives that had been found in a warehouse near a State Department mail facility.
"Everything is terrorism until we prove it's not," Rice says. "Our motto is: IT -- international terrorism -- or DT -- domestic terrorism -- or men from Mars. We're going to respond to it."
Fielding a steady stream of calls
The calls keep rolling in to the "bullpen," a large room that Rice's unit shares with its sister squad, the Washington field office's Joint Terrorism Task Force. Rice's team comprises 18 FBI agents. The field office's terrorism task force includes FBI agents and representatives from 23 local and federal agencies in the region.
From January through late August, the task force checked out about 800 reports of possible terrorist activity, says the FBI's Paul Garten, the task force's supervisor.
Rice estimates that 75%-80% of the calls are inaccurate because they include exaggerated information reported by edgy residents or government workers. Such reports force agents to spend time separating fact from fiction. The squads also keep watch on possible domestic terrorists, such as white supremacists, and build cases against pranksters who continue to send white powder through the U.S. mail two years after the deadly anthrax attacks.
During a recent week, agents figured out that inmates at a maximum-security prison in Michigan were sending dried toothpaste in anthrax hoax letters to federal agencies. The inmates thought that if they were charged with a federal crime they would be moved to what they believed would be a nicer federal facility. But federal officials referred the charges to state prosecutors. So the inmates, if convicted, could do more time in state prison.
That week, FBI agents also helped local authorities open a "suspicious" box at the Washington Navy Yard. It turned out to be a recently installed government air monitor that no one had noticed before.
"If you park your car illegally on the street in Washington, the first people who look at it will be the bomb squad or a (hazardous materials) team -- not the meter maid," Rice says.
Formed in 1993, the Washington field office's terrorism task force is one of the oldest anti-terrorism units in the nation. It originally helped local police investigate drug gangs and violent crime. As part of Mueller's reorganization of the bureau to focus on preventing attacks, there now are 84 anti-terrorism task forces nationwide, compared with 35 before 9/11.
For the most part, the FBI's field offices and its headquarters used to be 9-to-5 operations. Today, many field offices and the FBI's secret terrorism command center at headquarters are staffed around the clock.
Mueller says that since 9/11, the duties have changed dramatically for FBI special agents, as they are known.
"Agents have learned to look at information in new ways," Mueller says. "Not just to build a case, but to build an intelligence base to help us see trends and prevent acts of terrorism before they happen." But, he says, "the job of preventing terrorist attacks is too big for the FBI to do alone." The bureau needs help from state, local and other federal agencies.
Hoaxes and real threats
Washington's terrorism task force and Rice's squad also are involved in lengthy investigations for which the FBI has long been known. Agents are investigating the source of four anthrax hoax letters from someone they call "the French chef."
In August, typewritten letters containing a white powder were sent to Secretary of State Colin Powell; Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn.; FBI headquarters; and the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives here. The letters were postmarked San Diego, and they ominously urged the recipients to use the powder while cooking sauce. The powder turned out to be harmless.
Not all task forces are like Washington's or New York's. Because those cities were attacked on 9/11, agents tend to run down every tip about possible terrorism, no matter how far-fetched. In other cities, task forces build cases that are unique to their areas. In Chicago, a financial hub, the FBI focuses on tracing terrorism funding.
The nation's 84 task forces are overseen by the Counter-Terrorism Watch and Monitoring Unit, which works out of the FBI's Strategic Information and Operations Center at headquarters in Washington.
At all times, there are eight to 10 "CT Watch" employees collecting and examining every threat against the USA that comes in from around the world. Mueller receives morning briefings on the agents' work. He then passes on information developed by CT Watch to President Bush.
Larry Mefford, the FBI's assistant director for counterintelligence and counterterrorism, says CT Watch works with U.S. and foreign intelligence agencies, searches databases and contacts field offices throughout the night. Each day, he says, the unit deals with eight to 10 threats against the nation that analysts consider serious. "CT Watch makes things happen," he says. "It asks, are we aware of the threat? If so, what are we doing about it? And, if not, can we corroborate it rapidly to determine whether it is a valid threat?"
The unit keeps track of what local terrorism task forces find as they run down leads, and it passes that information to the National Joint Terrorism Task Force, which is in another room inside the FBI's secret operations center. At 9:30 each morning, the national task force briefs its members -- 36 federal, state and local agencies -- on overnight developments.
The goal, Morrison says, is to create "one-stop shopping" for federal, state and local agencies to share information on possible terror threats.
The national terrorism task force has launched several initiatives designed to uncover potential terrorists, including investigations of whether radical Muslims are recruiting in state and federal prisons. So far, there's no evidence of that. But officials worry that al-Qaeda could use ex-cons who are angry at the government to help carry out an attack.
This month, the national task force also is establishing a clearinghouse for police reports of suspicious people who may be conducting surveillance of government buildings in the Washington area. The reason: Al-Qaeda typically monitors its targets years before it launches an assault.
In cities where the FBI has had long-standing relationships with local police, the task forces seem to work well. But in other places, where the FBI has had a history of "big-footing" local law enforcement, authorities are suspicious of the bureau's promises to share information.
But the biggest criticism of the FBI's emphasis on terrorism is that the bureau no longer can help local authorities bust drug gangs and other violent criminals. There simply aren't enough FBI agents to do everything, bureau officials say.
In the Washington region, the huge federal presence has created a close relationship between local authorities and the FBI. But the 9/11 attacks have forced the FBI to become more involved in local matters than ever before.
Working with the locals
On Aug. 20, the bomb squad from the FBI's Washington field office was called after a businessman found about 300 explosives used in fighter-jet ejection seats in a warehouse near the State Department's mail facility in Loudoun County, Va. The FBI and Loudoun County bomb squads, following national bomb-squad protocols, notified the Defense Department that military munitions had been found.
The military's Explosives Ordnance Disposal team then took charge. It found that the explosives were unstable and ordered their immediate destruction. FBI and Loudoun officials had two options: Take the explosives less than 10 miles to a nearby firing range, or shut down major area roads during evening rush hour to take the munitions to the Marine Corps base at Quantico, Va., 43 miles away. They chose the firing range.
The series of blasts that night at the range set off explosions of a different type -- complaints from angry residents who live nearby. In a move that would have been rare before 9/11, Rice and Doug Edmonson, supervisor of the Washington field office's bomb squad, joined the local fire chief at a town meeting where nearly 100 residents complained about the explosions that lasted until midnight. The county closed the range shortly afterward.
"My house did not shake or rattle. It rocked," resident Tim Hubbard, 33, told the officials. "My children didn't whimper or cry. They screamed in terror."
Bob Griffin, the county's fire and rescue chief, took the most criticism. But Rice sat next to him, and Edmonson was in the front row. "That was nice," Griffin said, "because I've been to some of these things where I've been there all by myself."
Rice told residents nationwide rules that apply to local, state and federal bomb technicians do not limit the hours in which explosives may be destroyed, or take into account the effect on nearby residents.
After the meeting, Rice asked Hubbard for a copy of a video Hubbard had made to capture the explosions' effect inside his home. "I can make sure that the tape is used in training . . .  and that every bomb squad in the country sees it," Rice told Hubbard. "I give you my personal guarantee on that."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, James Kegley for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY; Operations center: Representatives of federal, state and local agencies coordinate at the National Joint Terrorism Task Force. <>On call: Jim Rice supervises the FBI's National Capital Response Squad.

Load-Date: October 8, 2003


End of Document