ANTI-TERRORISM TACTICS DEFENDED AS NEEDED
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 29, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 494 words
Byline: KAREN GULLO, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The government's top terrorism prosecutor, grilled Wednesday by senators angry they weren't consulted about new get-tough police tactics, defended the changes as crucial to stopping "sleeper" terrorists waiting to strike Americans.
Assistant Attorney General Michael Chertoff sought to assure a skeptical Senate Judiciary Committee that Attorney General John Ashcroft considered Congress a "full partner" in the war on terrorism.
Meanwhile, the investigation progressed overseas.
In Hamburg, Germany, authorities arrested a Moroccan man believed to have controlled a bank account used to finance the Sept. 11 hijackers. Mounir El Motassadeq, 27, had extensive contacts with the terrorist cell believed behind the attacks, prosecutors said.
Defending measures
At a Senate hearing in Washington, Chertoff repeatedly defended the administration's most controversial permitted tactics authorization of military tribunals, monitoring of jailhouse conversations between lawyers and clients, secret detentions as necessary for national security. He said officials feared quiet cells of terrorist may still be in operation.
"We could continue as before and hope for the best," he said. "Or we can pursue an investigative approach that uses every available lawful technique to try to identify, disrupt and if possible incarcerate or deport sleepers."
But Republicans and Democrats expressed frustration they weren't consulted in advance pointedly noting Ashcroft had once served among them in the Senate.
"How can you talk about a full partnership when no one told us this was coming down?" asked Arlen Specter, R-Pa.
The committee's Democratic chairman, Patrick Leahy of Vermont, said he was concerned some measures may infringe on civil liberties or undercut American justice.
"You didn't feel it was at all necessary" to let Congress weigh in? Leahy asked about the military tribunal plan.
Chertoff countered the president had the power to authorize the tribunals, which come under the jurisdiction of the Defense Department.
"So it's those guys' fault, not yours?" Leahy retorted.
Military tribunals can hold secret trials and afford fewer rights for the accused than civilian U.S. courts, but Chertoff said they can be fair if proper rules are applied. The Defense Department is developing rules now, Chertoff said.
"The presumption that we are going to hold secret trials is an unfair presumption," he said.
Using new tools
Using new anti-terrorism measures passed by Congress last month, investigators have tracked suspects on the Internet and culled through intelligence files that were previously off limits.
But they have yet to use a new power to monitor conversations between suspects detained in the terrorism investigation and their lawyers, Chertoff said.
He said 16 prisoners' conversations with lawyers were being monitored 12 convicted terrorists and four people held on espionage charges. He said none was being held in connection with the Sept. 11 investigation.

Load-Date: November 29, 2001


End of Document