ANTI-TERRORISM TESTS HEART OF A FREE SOCIETY society society
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
May 27, 1997, Tuesday tuesday tuesday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A P1A
Length: 1126 words
Byline: Richard Cole cole cole
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Terrorists based in the Middle East or elsewhere
will someday almost certainly use chemical, biological and possibly
nuclear weapons of mass destruction against U.S. targets, the CIA and
FBI say.
Many of these same suspected terrorists today roam U.S. streets,
communicate through U.S. Internet sites or send U.S. dollars to their
cells overseas.
Can't anything be done?
Yes, and some things are. The military has improved technology to to to
detect the threats. Experts are training emergency personnel to
prevent deaths. The FBI's counter-terrorist staff has been beefed up.
Congress has enacted laws to crack down on visas and finances.
But there are no easy technological fixes. And the legal solutions
almost inevitably run up against the Constitution and the core values
of a society that treasures its freedom.
Last month, the Pentagon launched the $ 46.5 million Chem-Bio Quick
Response Force aimed at training police, doctors and fire officials in
120 cities to react to attacks by weapons of mass destruction.
"The first responders in this country are not prepared to handle a
terrorist attack - we just aren't there," says Robert Canfield, a
blunt-talking former Massachusetts state police official who now
consults on emergency planning with federal and local agencies.
Emergency exercise results support Canfield.
The first 100 emergency workers to arrive on the scene of a 1995 New
York City exercise were "killed" because they were unprepared to deal
with the toxins, according to a Senate report. In a similar exercise
in Los Angeles, doctors conceded defeat after discovering their
hospitals "would have become hopelessly contaminated by the injured
patients."
The U.S. military has an alphabet soup of units - NEST, TEU, SOC -
slated to be first on the scene of a chemical or biological attack.
The Army's Technical Escort Unit stationed in Aberdeen, Md., boasts
equipment that can detect 75,000 compounds.
But a congressional report found the Aberdeen unit "lacks the depth
and robustness to maintain the readiness status expected of this
unique national capability."
And an internal Pentagon study said that, in many cases, the vital
detectors used by such units are one-of-a-kind instruments.
False alarm?
As the U.S. military discovered in the gulf war, spreading detectors
around preventively has its limitations. Many alarms were false, and
some accurate readings were apparently ignored. Such failures could be
disastrous in a civilian society.
"What happens when a detector goes off in the New York City subway and
it's a false alarm?" asks Maj. Gen. George Friel, head of the U.S.
Army Chemical and Biological Defense Command.
There are other technical - and human - limitations to what can be
done to stop terrorist attacks before they occur.
San Jose International Airport uses state-of-the-art baggage X-ray
machines for boarding passengers. But twice in March, slow-acting
security guards allowed passengers to pick up carry-on bags even thou
gh the machine showed a gun inside. One case turned out to be a
child's toy. Guards and police failed to find the second gun, which
presumably flew to its destination on a commercial airliner.
FBI Director Louis Freeh has warned of another danger - virtually
unbreakable security programs that protect terrorist computer files.
It took a year to decode some of the files of Ramzi Yousef, the World
Trade Center bomber.
Aside from the technical problems, terrorism-battling proposals such
as the Pentagon's new Chem-Bio Quick Response Force also raise
troubling constitutional issues.
Bright line
From its birth, the United States has drawn a bright line between the
military and police.
"We think it is a very dangerous idea involving the military in law
enforcement," says Louis Bogard of the American Civil Liberties Union.
"Countries where the military serves in civil police enforcement have
traditionally been the most repressive regimes in the world."
Similar constitutional issues arise in the flurry of anti-terrorist
laws and regulations adopted in the wake of the 1993 World Trade
Center attack and the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing.
In January 1995, President Clinton signed an executive order freezing
$ 800,000 in the accounts of Middle East terrorist groups undermining
the U.S.-brokered peace process. The effectiveness was questionable,
since few terrorists openly label their accounts "Hezbollah" or
"Islamic Jihad."
But the president's order troubles civil libertarians.
Before Nelson Mandela became president of South Africa, his
anti-apartheid group, the African National Congress, was officially
listed as a terrorist organization, notes David Cole, a law professor
at Georgetown University.
"If the law was in place a few years ago, thousands of Americans would
have faced prison terms for giving to the African National Congress,"
he says.
The president not only froze bank accounts, he also effectively
chilled the right to free speech for many Muslims in the United
States, says Muhammad Mehdi, head of the National Council of Islamic
Affairs.
"People felt they were being watched, and they should not talk about
their views," Mehdi said. "The freedom of speech is the most precious
thing they have, not the money they don't have."
While some worry about abuses, others say the FBI and local police are
hobbled by restrictions left over from the 1970s domestic spying
scandals.
The FBI is barred from collecting information on people or
organizations not yet suspected of any specific crime, notes John
O'Neill, former head of the FBI's counter-terrorism office.
"I can't even keep a newspaper clip about a subject in my office if I
don't have an active case," O'Neill says.
Other limits
There are other limitations. The FBI has few Arabic-speaking agents.
Mounds of documents seized from an institute at the University of
South Florida that have possible connections to Islamic Jihad still
await translation.
More ominously, the FBI failed to translate the documents found in the
Brooklyn apartment of an Islamic militant arrested in the 1990
shooting of Jewish Defense League founder Meir Kahane. Only after the
suspect, El-Sayyid Nosair, was linked to the 1993 World Trade Center
bombing did the FBI go back to those papers and find a chilling call
for the destruction of "the towers of the West."
But things are changing. Congress has approved and the president has
signed laws to increase FBI and CIA cooperation, notes Victoria
Toensing, head of anti-terrorism efforts in the attorney general's
office under President Bush.
She cautions, however, that the FBI and CIA have different,
potentially conflicting missions.
"The FBI has to bring a case to trial - their information will
eventually be made public," she says. "But at the CIA, you're going to
find people who are still protecting their sources. The CIA is afraid
of a public trial." trial." trial."

Load-Date: May 28, 1997


End of Document