ANTI-TERRORISM FOCUS MARKS SAUDI CHANGE King picks nephew as likely successor
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 29, 2015 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2015 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 3
Length: 479 words
Byline: Aya Batrawy Associated Press
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia 
Body


Saudi Arabia's King Salman today removed his half-brother from the post of crown prince and named his nephew, the country's Interior Minister, in his place.
 The post of crown prince secures Prince Mohammed bin Nayef as the most likely successor to King Salman. He is widely known internationally as Saudi Arabia's counterterrorism czar and was previously deputy crown prince. He takes over the post of crown prince from Prince Muqrin.
 The royal decree also announced that the king's son, Prince Mohammed bin Salman, has been appointed deputy crown prince. He is believed to be about 30 years old and is also the country's defense minister. As deputy crown prince, the prince is essentially seen as being second in line to the throne.
 The new appointments further thrust a new generation of Saudi princes into the line of succession.
 Prince Muqrin, who was crown prince until today's reshuffle, is the youngest son of the founder of Saudi Arabia, the late King Abdul-Aziz Al Saud. At 69 years old, he once headed the kingdom's intelligence agency, but was largely seen as a transitional figure in his post as crown prince.
 Power has passed among Abdul-Aziz's sons, from brother to brother, since his death in 1953. The crown prince and deputy crown prince are both from among a generation of grandsons of Abdul-Aziz.
 The late King Abdullah had named Muqrin as crown prince in a move approved at the time by the Allegiance Council, a body made up of the living sons of Abdul-Aziz and some of the prominent grandsons who vote to pick the king and crown prince from among them.
SIDEBAR:
EMBASSY BOMB PLOT THWARTED
 WASHINGTON - Saudi Arabia's security forces foiled a suicide bomb plot in March targeting the U.S. Embassy in Riyadh, a top spokesman for Saudi security forces said Tuesday.
 A Saudi citizen and a Syrian were arrested in the kingdom on March 14 for planning "a potential suicide car bombing" on the massive U.S. diplomatic compound in the capital, Interior Ministry spokesman Maj. Gen. Mansour Turki said in a statement.
 The Saudi citizen was suspected of involvement in illegal fundraising for the plot and a third individual, a Syrian living in a gulf state, was also involved, Turki said.
 The timing of the arrests coincides with a U.S. decision to stop consular services at the embassy and at the U.S. diplomatic missions in Jidda and Dhahran in mid-March.
 The foiled embassy plot was part of a wave of arrests in Saudi Arabia over the last five months that netted 93 suspects, many of whom reportedly have ties to Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq, he said.
 The sweep included a cell of 65 people arrested in March who allegedly planned to storm residential compounds and prisons across Saudi Arabia. In recent months, five attacks in the kingdom connected to Islamic State have killed 15 civilians and security personnel, Turki said.
 Tribune News Service

Load-Date: May 1, 2015


End of Document