Anti-Terrorism Coordinator Tells Port Neches, Texas, Audience Vigilance Is Key
The Beaumont Enterprise
March 18, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
Copyright 2004 The Beaumont Enterprise
Length: 456 words
Byline: By Sarah Moore
Body


PORT NECHES, Texas -- On Sept. 9, 2001, one of the terrorists who was to pilot a plane into the World Trade Center went in and paid a traffic fine he'd received in Coral Gables, Fla., the day before.
"Why do you think he did that?" Brit Featherston, anti-terrorism coordinator with the U.S. Attorney's Eastern District Office, asked a group of local business people at the Pompano Club on Tuesday.
The answer, which was to avoid attracting any attention, underscores the need for constant vigilance in the war on terrorism, Featherston said in his address to the Golden Triangle Business Roundtable on Tuesday.
Although there have been no major attacks on U.S. soil Since Sept. 11, 2001, terrorism has increased by 50 percent worldwide, Featherston said. Because terrorists are often well-funded, highly organized and, above all, hate Americans, U.S. citizens should never become complacent.
In addition, the threat of international terrorism can blind people to the continuing dangers of domestic terrorism, he said.
Recently in Tyler, federal agents discovered a huge cache of weapons, sodium cyanide and forged IDs and credentials.
"This guy had enough weaponry to supply a small third-world country," Featherston said.
A traffic stop led officers to obtain a warrant to search the Tyler property.
Featherston praised the cooperative relationship between industry and law enforcement in Southeast Texas. Federal and local law enforcement here likewise has "always had a unique relationship," he said.
Legislation such as the Patriot Act brings America into the modern age in terms of dealing with cellular and satellite telephones and other technology that 1970s era laws weren't adequate to address, Featherston said.
"We're a lot more proactive than we ever were before," Featherston said.
The Patriot Act has drawn criticism from groups like the American Civil Liberties Union and The Nation magazine. Featherston said attacks on the act are politically motivated and incorrect.
"There is not a search of a house, computer or phone that we don't have to go before a judge and show just cause to get a warrant for," Featherston said.
About 250 area business, military and law enforcement officials attended the meeting Tuesday.
"(Featherston's presentation) helps public awareness," Jefferson County Sheriff Mitch Woods said. "It lets people know what they're dealing with and what we're dealing with."
Cmdr. Rod Walker of the U.S. Coast Guard called Featherston's speech "outstanding," and praised him for educating people.
"The message has to be consistent," Walker said. "Everyone has to be aware. Everyone has to be diligent."
-----
To see more of The Beaumont Enterprise, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.southeasttexaslive.com 

Load-Date: March 18, 2004


End of Document