ANTITERROR TALKS JOINED BY ITALIANS
The New York Times
February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 502 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: BONN, Feb. 6
Body


West German officials said today that Italy planned to join in discussions on how to fight terrorism in Western Europe.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Italy's Interior Minister, Luigi Scalfaro, would come here next week for talks with Interior Minister Friedrich Zimmermann.
Italy now heads the 10-nation European Common Market and Mr. Scalfaro discussed the antiterrorist program recently with France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
West German Foreign Ministry spokesman says Italy plans to join discussions on how to fight terrorism in Western Europe; says Italian Interior Min Luigi Scalfaro plans to hold talks in Bonn with Intreior Min Friedrich Zimmerman (M)
There has been a rash of assassinations, bombings and cases of arson in France, West Germany, Greece, Belgium and Portugal. Avowedly terrorist groups have taken responsibility for most of the attacks.
In Brussels, the 16 members of the Atlantic alliance said today after a weekly meeting that they were determined to combat terrorism, which has been directed in part against NATO.
 
 NATO Pledges Action
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization said in a statement:
''We take very seriously our responsibility to our personnel and to NATO institutions. We are determined to prevent and suppress terrorism which seeks to undermine stability and destroy democratic institutions.''
On Tuesday, Prime Minister Laurent Fabius of France was here for talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl and to set up a joint security group to counter political violence. The two governments also said this week that they would set up a direct telex link to coordinate antiterrorist measures.
West Germany's urban guerrilla gang, the Red Army Faction, and a French terrorist group, Direct Action, said last month they would join to fight ''NATO and other imperialist organizations.''
West German officials were noncommittal on whether the Italians would join the new French-West German arrangement or some other form of cooperation.
A spokesman for the West German Foreign Ministry said the French-West German security group would initially ''coordinate investigations of concrete cases of terrorism by Direct Action and the Red Army Faction.''
''But we are seeking cooperation with other European countries as well,'' he said.
West German officials have pointed to evidence that the Red Army Faction is cooperating with the Red Brigades of Italy, Direct Action of France and the Fighting Communist Cells of Belgium.
''We will do everything that is humanely possible to fight this threat to civilization,'' Mr. Kohl said Tuesday at a joint news conference with Prime Minister Fabius.
Recent terrorist actions resulted in the slaying of Rene Audran, a French Defense Ministry armaments official, and of Ernst Zimmermann, chairman of a West German aircraft engine concern; the blowing up of 18 cars belonging to West German servicemen stationed at an air base in Beja, Portugal, and the injury in a bomb blast of 80 people, including 69 American servicemen, in a bar near Athens.


End of Document