Antiterrorist Market Grows
The New York Times
February 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 4, Column 1; Financial Desk
Length: 949 words
Body


When seven dump trucks filled with sand were stationed outside the White House late last year, it reflected a heightened concern about terrorism in the United States that has helped drive up sales for the domestic security industry.
While corporate information on sales and earnings is hard to come by, because most of the companies are privately owned, revenues did grow last year, according to Thomas Serb, editor of Security World, a trade magazine.
 
Widespread Sales Gains
Fourteen out of seventeen companies interviewed, representing new and established concerns and various aspects of the industry, said they recorded increases in business last year, several of them large.
Law Enforcement Associates Inc. of Belleville, N.J., for example, reported a 50 percent rise in sales of antiterrorist devices. These include metal detectors and explosive detectors, bomb blankets and ''road fangs,'' which are designed to stop a car or truck by puncturing its tires.
The Delta Scientific Corporation of Burbank, Calif., produces a hydraulically powered steel wedge that rises quickly from street level to barricade driveways. It sells for as much as $12,000, and sales are up sharply.
 
'An Obsession'
''In the wake of major terrorist incidents around the world, to a certain degree security has become an obsession,'' said Brian Jenkins, a program director for the Rand Corporation, the research group. ''We have imported a fear of terrorism.''
While terrorist acts did not rise in number last year, they became ''much bloodier,'' Mr. Jenkins said. Rand counted 342 acts of international terrorism, causing 730 deaths. In 1982, there were 439 such incidents, causing 221 deaths.
''Corporations see themselves on the front line,'' he said. Indeed, 48 percent of all terrorist kidnappings since 1970 have involved executives, he said. Of all the attacks last year, about 13 percent were directed at corporate workers or facilities.
Law Enforcement Associates sold $18 million worth of gear for protection against terrorists, up from $12 million in 1982, according to Phil Rosen, a vice president.
By late December, the company had orders for 200 of the ''road fangs.'' These aluminum devices, costing $1,200, stretch 21 feet across a road. They bristle with 170 stainless steel spikes that can puncture tires and stop a car or truck. In the United States, buyers include police and government agencies, embassies, computer companies, banks and other companies that terrorists might see as ''the typical American big business,'' Mr. Rosen said.
There was also considerable growth at two companies that rebuild cars to withstand gunfire, grenades and explosives.
Newbuilt Enterprises Inc. of Sand City, Calif., sold 12 armored cars and trucks last year, up from 2 in 1982 when production began, according to its president, Jerry Corbett. Newmayer Industries of Salinas, Calif., opened last June and has taken 14 orders for armored cars, Rickey L. Newmayer, its president, said.
For its most popular model, an $87,000 converted Chevrolet Impala or Capri, Newmayer adds 1,600 pounds of heat-treated steel and laminated plastic and glass to the body. It installs a bulletproof gas tank and cuts ports into the doors, through which guns can be fired. The model is called the Caliber 44.
 
Armored Cars Mostly Exported
The armored car makers said that 95 percent or more of their products are used abroad. But Mr. Newmayer believes that publicity about terrorism has opened the domestic market. By 1985, 40 percent of the company's bulletproof vehicles will remain in this country, he predicted.
As for bullet-resistant clothing, four of the five manufacturers interviewed reported higher sales last year, almost entirely for the police and armed forces.
''The day has not come yet where the public feels they have to have their own flak jacket hanging in the front closet,'' said Richard Armellino, president of American Body Armor and Equipment Inc. of Halesite, L.I.
Certainly, corporations have been aware of the terrorist threat for years, manufacturers and consultants say. It was ''just another year of instability,'' said E.J. Criscuoli Jr., executive vice president of the American Society for Industrial Security. The society consists of security managers of businesses, government agencies and other groups.
Its membership has swelled to 21,000 from 6,000 in 1975, in part as the private sector has tried to handle more of its security needs. Businesses are motivated by the threat of terrorism and the desire to protect computer programs and fund transfers, Mr. Criscuoli said. Members include security personnel for more than 90 percent of the largest 500 corporations in the nation, he said.
 
Incidents in the U.S.
In the United States, there were 31 terrorist incidents last year, down from 51 in 1982 and a peak of about 100 in 1977, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
E. C. Ackerman, a risk analyst based in Miami, does not foresee terrorists leaving their home countries to attack corporate targets in the United States. ''They see a defense contractor or a bank logo in Bahrain or the United Arab Emirates, close to home, and they are more inclined to hit it there,'' he said.
Mr. Ackerman's company, Ackerman & Palumbo, plans to increase its staff by half a dozen, or about 20 percent, and he attributes half that growth to worries about terrorism. The company analyzes risks of political instability and terrorism and helps corporations design defenses. It also conducts hostage negotiations.
But he is not entirely happy about that growth area. ''If I had my druthers, I'd never do another hostage recovery,'' he said. ''I don't need that excitement. I'd rather make my living on the humdrum stuff.''

Graphic

 
photo of Phil Rosen wearing bulletproof vest


End of Document