Anti-war protests alright
University Wire
February 13, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 The Daily Campus via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 456 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Daily Campus; SOURCE: U. Connecticut
Dateline: STORRS, Conn. 
Body


Are you now or have you ever been a member of an anti-war group? If the government has its way, that may soon be a common refrain in our courtrooms.
Recently, Drake University in Iowa ran afoul of the law for just that. A terrorism task force subpoenaed them to hand over all records of all participants and minutes of an anti-war meeting. One of the organizers explains what they could face. It would be a closed trial, without jury, lawyers or press. They could plead the Fifth, but they could then be offered immunity, in which case any refusal to answer questions about the event and name names could have them held for 18 months in contempt of court, all for expressing opposition to a government policy.
This comes at a time when the government and even private individuals routinely attack the rights of protesters. "It can't happen here," goes the saying, but it is happening. Notable protesters can't fly on planes, the Secret Service herds protesters away from the president and calls for peace have even been cause for arrest. Now it comes to this, when just being at an anti-war rally can land you in jail.
The parallels to McCarthyism should be obvious. During the Red Scare, scores of innocent lives and careers were ruined, all in the name of fighting Communism. Just attending a Communist Party meeting out of curiosity or presenting strikers in a favorable light in a movie could force someone to face the power of Congress. Today, in the name of fighting terrorism, we are already willing to persecute anyone who opposes the war in Iraq, or even anyone who attends a rally to satisfy their curiosity or even suggests that peace might be preferable to war. Communism was a real threat that had to be resisted. Scriptwriters who glamorized worker's rights were not. Likewise, today, we must fight terrorism, but we need not fight protest.
The founding fathers should have made this abundantly clear in the First Amendment. People have the right to free speech and to petition the government for a redress of grievances. More presently, people have the right to peaceably assemble. How much more peaceable can an assembly be than one that rejects violence?
People assume that an anti-war rally is "anti-government." Sure, many protesters take potshots at President Bush. But that doesn't mean that they stand against any government, nor that they are actually going to physically attack the president.
The job of a terrorism task force is to fight terrorism, not pacifists. They are not a threat. Agree or disagree with our country's latest war, you have to agree that protesters have the right to protest without any trouble from the government. You can't abridge freedom in the name of freedom.
(C) 2003 The Daily Campus via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 13, 2004


End of Document