ANTI-TERRORISM BILL IS DEFEATED; DEMOCRATS START CRAFTING NEW ONE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 8, 2001 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 30
Length: 369 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate killed a Democratic $35 billion anti-terrorism package Friday as Republicans stood solidly against a plan that the White House called too expensive.
Eager to keep their stamp on the government's response to the Sept. 11 attacks, Democrats immediately began work on an alternative to the $20 billion recommended by President George W. Bush. The president has said he would veto any package exceeding that amount.
The Senate vote capped a showdown in which Democrats had hoped to draw support from Republicans wary of opposing efforts to strengthen domestic security. Democrats accused GOP lawmakers of blocking extra money for border security, food safety and other initiatives to win a political fight for Bush.
"We do not seem to be able to pull together in this town for America, even in this time when the people of the United States are united" against terrorism, said Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., main author of the rejected Democratic plan.
But Republicans backed Bush's insistence on limiting federal anti-terrorist spending, despite the possibility of future attacks.
"The president has told the Senate what his priorities are," said Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas.
White House officials have promised to seek more money early next year. They have said the government has already approved enough money to cover the next few months of warfare in Afghanistan and programs to enhance security at home.
In Friday's pivotal action, the Senate voted 50-50 to derail this year's $318 billion defense bill, to which Democrats had added their $35 billion anti-terrorism package. Republicans got nine votes more than the 41 they needed on the procedural motion upending the bill. Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., was the only lawmaker to cross party lines.
The defense measure seemed sure to be revived quickly when the anti-terrorism plan was rewritten and approved. As Democrats realized they lacked the votes to prevail, they became less willing to hold up a wartime spending bill for the military.
Democrats said that although their smaller package would be within the $20 billion limit, it would contain more money than Bush had proposed for battling bioterrorism and helping areas where the terrorists struck.

Notes

NATION/WORLD

Load-Date: December 8, 2001


End of Document