ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURE GETS LUKEWARM RESPONSE IN ILLINOIS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 17, 2001 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C8
Length: 331 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan wants to change state laws to provide wider police discretion in telephone and e-mail surveillance, quicker approval of search warrants and tougher sentencing in terrorism cases.
"Terrorism has become a clear and present danger," said Ryan, Illinois' highest-ranking law enforcement official and a Republican candidate for governor in 2002. At a news conference Tuesday, he billed the package as the state's first domestic terrorism statute.
But Ryan's proposals didn't draw support from some of his political opponents in the GOP.
"It is my hope . . . that we not give in to temptation and seek to duplicate the powers of the federal government at the state level simply to say that we are doing something," Gov. George Ryan (who isn't related to Jim Ryan) said in a speech Monday. The governor is not seeking re-election.
George Ryan, a fellow Republican whose relations with Jim Ryan have been strained, did not mention the attorney general by name.
Lt. Gov. Corinne Wood, also a GOP candidate for governor, said Tuesday she hadn't seen the proposal. But she questioned the validity of focusing on terrorism investigatory issues, which many believe is a federal responsibility.
"We all want to 'do something.' I believe what we need to be doing is focusing on the safety of our residents" with emergency response planning, said Wood.
The third GOP candidate, state Rep. Patrick O'Malley, R-Palos Park, hadn't yet seen the proposal, said a spokesman.
Jim Ryan stressed that his proposal has nothing to do with his campaign.
On Monday, Gov. Ryan appointed the state's first "Homeland Security" coordinator and said he would soon propose an anti-terrorism package.
Jim Ryan's proposal includes:
* Allowing court-ordered interception of all voice, wire and Internet communication of specific people under surveillance in terrorism investigations.
* Allowing courts to issue emergency search warrants orally if police can show an immediate urgency in a terrorism case.

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document