Anti-terrorism plans falling short
USA TODAY
October 13, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION  Correction Appended


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1712 words
Byline: Fred Bayles
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


BOSTON -- If the drill had been real, the first police officers
and firefighters answering the 911 call would have died quickly,
convulsing on the ground because they lacked the basic gear to
protect them against sarin gas.
Those wouldn't have been the only deaths. Police cadets playing
victims ran in mock panic from the scene. They would have contaminated
city streets and a nearby hospital. Others who played the seriously
injured cried for help that took 90 minutes to arrive. Paramedics
had to wait to treat them until firefighters could find the right
people to struggle into the few protective suits on hand.
The recent drill at a Boston high school football stadium was
part of a nationwide training program to prepare cities for a
terrorist attack, a once farfetched idea first made real by the
World Trade Center bombing in 1993 and the destruction of Oklahoma
City's Federal Building in 1995.
Since then, there have been other warning signs of vulnerability:
the attack in 1995 on the Tokyo subway system; the bombings a
year later of Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia and this year's attacks
on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
In the years since the World Trade Center bombing, the federal
government has spent billions -- $ 7 billion last year alone according
to one estimate -- to create anti-terrorist programs, panels and
agencies. Many have overlapping roles that even government watchdog
agencies can't track.
Confused and worried
This bureaucratic maze has left urban officials confused and worried.
Many told USA TODAY they are no more ready now than they were
two years ago for a terrorist attack using chemical, biological
or nuclear weapons.
Some don't even know which agency to call for help in case of
an attack. All feared the potential of hundreds of casualties
and millions of dollars in damage.
"We don't have sufficient equipment or training for a major terrorist
event," says Bob Canfield of Los Angeles' Emergency Preparedness
Division. "Instead, what we see is a lot of money being used
up by people at the federal level trying to decide how the system
should run."
Canfield is not alone in his complaints. In August, a gathering
of 200 "first responders" -- firefighters, police and urban
managers who would be in the front lines of a terrorist attack
-- told Attorney General Janet Reno and others the system wasn't
working.
They said grants for needed equipment were slow in coming; often
the equipment they got didn't fit their needs. They talked of
a bewildering array of programs and contradictory plans on how
to deal with emergencies that left them unsure how to respond
to an attack or even where to call if they faced one. They begged
for someone to rein in the scattered programs and provide a central
voice to the effort to get them ready.
Federal officials acknowledged the complaints last week. They
say they soon will announce their solution -- the creation of
another anti-terrorism office.
"We have heard the message loud and clear and we agree they have
a legitimate complaint," says Michael Dalich, chief of staff
at the Justice Department's Office of Justice Programs.
Trying to improve
Dalich says a new FBI division, the National Defense Preparedness
Office, will take over coordination of programs in the Public
Health Service, the National Security Agency and the Departments
of Defense and Justice.
"The handling of terrorism issues has been historically very
diffuse," he says. "We're trying to get all the programs in
one place to coordinate it and make it work better."
But Dalich says it will take months before the new system goes
into place.
Local officials remain skeptical. Though Bernard Hicks, deputy
director of the Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency
in Georgia, gives federal training programs an "E" for effort,
he doesn't expect the bureaucracy to get more efficient anytime
soon.
"The red tape I have to go through is unbelievable," he says.
"We have a long way to go."
Urban officials from around the country echo that view.
In San Francisco, police rely on humor to shrug off the immediate
prospect of what a terrorist attack might mean. Right now, only
the police bomb squad has a few A-type protective suits, which
seal the wearer from toxic dangers and provide a self-contained
breathing system.
Police would like to have a dozen more on hand along with detection
and decontamination equipment costing at total of $ 4 million.
But any purchases will have to wait to next year, along with more
extensive training.
'D suits'
For now, police joke about their "D suits" -- regular uniforms
that protect against dirt and little else.
"The firefighters refer to the police officers as the blue canaries
because we'd be the first to die," says Sgt. Mickey Griffin,
the police department's emergency services coordinator.
Others complain they need much more than suits. Their emergency
personnel would have to enter hot zones -- the area of the attack
where chemicals or other lethal agents are still reacting -- without
equipment needed to detect and identify lethal agents. And they
also complain about a lack of equipment to decontaminate victims
exposed to deadly gases, germs or radiation.
At the Boston drill, one team used a car washing wand, garden
hoses and a child's wading pool decorated with cartoon flowers
and snails to wash down supposed victims. Grants for specialized
decontamination tents are stuck in the pipeline and the portable
facilities are in short suppply.
Boston is not an unschooled backwater in this exercise; it's ahead
of much of the nation. The country's largest 120 cities are supposed
to receive anti-terrorist training under the Defense Department's
Domestic Preparedness Program. Mandated by Congress in 1996, the
five-year, $ 150 million program is the most visible of the federal
anti-terrorism schemes.
But the training takes time. The program, in it's second year,
has been to just 34 cities for week-long classroom sessions that
theoretically prepare cities for a dress rehearsal a year later.
Only five cities -- Washington, D.C., Detroit, Philadelphia, San
Jose, Calif., and now Boston -- have taken the next step of a
full-scale drill.
Lessons learned
Although those in charge of the drills say they are learning from
each experience, each experience shows new weaknesses in the system.
-- In Washington, D.C., emergency personnel responded to a Sept.
22 drill using the scenario of a nerve gas attack at an RFK Stadium
rock concert. They found that downdrafts from emergency helicopters
would have spread the gas.
-- In San Jose, fire and police units responding to a supposed
gas attack on City Council offices waited outside for three hours
while personnel struggled to don unfamiliar protective gear before
they could get to victims.
-- In Boston, rescuers waited 90 minutes until personnel with
A-suits could check the scene. Reason for the delay: seven officers
chosen to wear the suits were found to suffer from high blood
pressure and alternates had to be found.
Still, there was little disappointment with the three-hour drill
that involved hundreds of personnel from the fire, police and
emergency medical services along with state and federal agencies.
"This is a success just by the fact we've got all these different
people working here together," says Richard Serino, the head
of Boston's Emergency Medical Services.
National groups of firefighters and fire chiefs are more critical.
They criticize the military style approach to the training with
its doctrine of "acceptable casualties."
"Our people have real problems that they should be prepared for
firefighter casualties in the event of terrorist act," says Fred
Nesbitt, an official with the International Association of Fire
Fighters. "To us, that's unacceptable."
Some city officials say they are disappointed with another aspect
of the Pentagon program -- grants of $ 300,000 in equipment to
each city. The equipment, they say, is mainly for training and
is not what they need to step up their readiness in case of a
chemical attack.
Hicks says much of the equipment his agency received in the grant
either duplicated what Atlanta already has or were training materials
that would be little help in the event of a real attack. "I would
have liked to have the $ 300,000 in hand so I could purchase equipment
to enhance what we already have."
Municipal officials also complain the training program is just
one of a dizzying array of federal programs and duplicative agencies
in the anti-terrorism business.
The Departments of Defense, Justice, Energy, and Health and Human
Services and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) all
have anti-terrorism offices, some offering overlapping services.
All are suppose to fall under the umbrella of the new FBI office.
To those in the cities, such a plethora of programs offers little
more than confusion.
"Everybody seems to have a big program up there in Washington,
but I'm not totally sure what I'm supposed to be doing here in
terms of training, equipment and planning. It makes it all very
overwhelming," says Jim Thacker, director of Nashville's emergency
management office.
Richard Davis, a security analyst with Congress' General Accounting
Office, says the problem is that federal agencies just jumped
on the gravy train when Congress and the White House began showering
money on the anti-terrorism problem. The result, he says, is that
lots of people qualify for funds but no one is coordinating the
effort.
"Terrorism seems to be the popular problem right now," he says.
"If you want to pump up your funding, all you need is a line
in your budget that talks about counter-terrorism and you're likely
to get more money." Davis authored the study that estimated the
federal government spent $ 7 billion on terrorism-related projects
and programs last year.
Estimated is the operative word. Both GAO and the Office of Management
and Budget can't detail which federal agencies are involved, how
much they spend and to where the money goes.
For local officials, the confusion even comes down to which federal
agency to call in the event of an attack.
Some city officials say they would call the FBI, others FEMA or
the Public Health Service. Still others believe their first call
should go to a Coast Guard operation that responds to massive
oil spills.
"My plan is to call FEMA," Thacker of Nashville says. "Then
I suppose I'll get all these other people standing up here, saying,
'I'm in charge.' "
Correction

In a story published Oct. 13 on programs to prepare cities for terrorist attacks, USA TODAY reported that San Jose fire and police units responding to a mock gas attack took a long time to don protective gear before they could respond. Army training personnel who provided that information explain they were talking only about a police bomb squad unfamiliar with the protective suits.
Correction-Date: October 29, 1998, Thursday

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, Color, John Bohn for USA TODAY (2)

Load-Date: September 12, 2000


End of Document