ANTIOCH SEMINARS TO DISCUSS TERRORISM;
Professor lived in turbulent Beirut in 1980s
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 1, 2001 Monday GREENE COUNTY EDITION


Copyright 2001 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GREENE; Pg. 1B
Length: 290 words
Byline: Mark Fisher Dayton Daily News
Body


YELLOW SPRINGS - During his teaching stint at American University in Beirut in the early 1980s, James Malarkey had friends and colleagues kidnapped from the streets by terrorists. Some did not survive.
Malarkey varied his departure times and route to work each day and did not have the kind of face-to-face contact with Middle East terrorism that others did.
But following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States, Malarkey, chairman of the humanities department at Antioch University McGregor, responded by organizing a series of workshops that will delve into the issues behind the terrorism.
The result is a series of four workshops, Terrorism: Impact, Origins, Options, designed to help people gain a better understanding of Middle East-based terrorism.
Participants will track the effect of the attacks during the next few months, analyze strategies the United States adopts to respond to the attacks and form courses of action they can take in response to the crisis.
"It's not a lecture course. It's a discussion course," Malarkey said.
It also will benefit the victims of the attack.
Everyone who registers will make a $20 donation to the American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund.
Each workshop will be from 7 to 9 p.m. at Antioch McGregor at 800 Livermore St. in Yellow Springs, adjacent to its sister institution, Antioch College.
The first session is scheduled for Oct. 10, followed by workshops Oct. 24, Nov. 14 and Dec. 5. Registration is required.
Those who are not taking the series for credit will pay $20 which will be donated to the Red Cross fund, while the cost for those who are taking the workshop for one credit hour is $205 plus the $20 fund donation.
 For information call 769-1818 or go to  http://www.mcgregor.edu .

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document