Anti-terrorism bill appears to clear hurdles in House; $29 billion: Democrats still force procedural votes
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 23, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a7
Length: 405 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A $$ @29 billion anti-terrorism bill edged toward easy House passage after Republican leaders won over enough disgruntled lawmakers to prevail on a pivotal procedural vote Wednesday. 
The package, which would pour money into defense, intelligence, aviation security and other programs, was overwhelmingly popular with legislators from both parties. It also bore the endorsement of President Bush, who asked Congress for $$ @27.1 billion in March. 
Even so, the House ended work for the evening without finishing the bill. Work stopped after Democrats angry that the measure would allow an increase in the federal debt ceiling delivered numerous speeches and forced procedural votes.
In what probably was the measure's sternest test, the House voted by a near party-line 216-209 to approve rules for debating legislation that automatically inserted several contentious provisions into the bill.
With administration officials churning out almost daily warnings of new terror threats, House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, and other leaders finally won over enough wavering Republicans to avoid an embarrassing setback.
"You're voting against our military" by opposing the rules package, Hastert warned the House just before the vote. "You're voting against those people in New York and Washington," where the terrorists struck.
Democrats objected that the debate rules automatically inserted language into the bill that would allow fresh government borrowing, which the Bush administration has sought for months.
Democrats blame last year's tax cuts for renewed red ink and oppose burying the issue in the anti-terrorism measure.
"They are refusing to confront the consequences of their economic plan," said House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo.
Also on Wednesday, the Senate signaled strong bipartisan support for trade legislation, voting to curtail debate on a measure designed to enhance President Bush's negotiating authority while expanding federal aid to American workers hurt by imports.
"Trade is in the interest of our workers, trade is in the interest of job creation, trade is in the interest of developing nations as well as developed nations," Bush said, prodding Congress to act as he left for a trip through three Western European countries and Russia.
In a coincidence of timing, the Senate voted, 68-29, a few hours later to limit debate, with final passage expected no later than today.

Load-Date: May 23, 2002


End of Document