Anti-terrorism bill signed by Bush
University Wire
October 29, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 580 words
Byline: By Gwen Tietgen, Daily Nebraskan
Dateline: Lincoln, Neb.
Body


President George W. Bush signed anti-terrorism legislation Friday that gives law enforcement and intelligence officials more authority than ever to pursue and prosecute terrorists. The anti-terrorism bill passed the U.S. Senate with one dissenting vote on Thursday and cleared the U.S. House of Representatives on Wednesday by a 357-66 vote.
The bill was a hot topic of conversation among members of Congress because of a presidential push to quickly pass legislation against terrorist activities.
U. Nebraska
The two legislative branches compromised on the bill's final version, which was slightly weaker than what the White House administration initially proposed.
Republican Sen. Chuck Hagel of Nebraska said in a press release that he was pleased the bill passed in a timely manner.
"The laws that protect us must be relevant to the dangers that threaten us," Hagel said.
"We have done this without sacrificing the essential civil liberties to which every American is entitled."
Provisions in the bill increase the FBI's wiretapping and electronic surveillance authority and impose tougher criminal penalties for committing terrorist acts, harboring or financing terrorists or terrorist organizations.
Under the bill, the number of crimes considered acts of terrorism are increased, and the punishment for committing these acts are intensified.
Also, national law enforcement can now obtain roving wiretaps on suspected terrorists through the telephone and e-mail.
The roving wiretaps enable officials to monitor any telephone line that a suspected person uses instead of needing separate authorizations for each phone that person may use, which was the procedure before the bill passed.
Lincoln (Neb.) Police Chief Tom Casady said the extended surveillance privileges of law enforcement do not include local officials such as the Lincoln Police Department.
Some controversy arose between the House and Senate about the expanded authority given to the FBI officials.
Members of the House wanted to include time limits in the bill, while the Senate's original bill didn't include any limits.
Under the signed version of the bill, the expanded surveillance powers for telephones and computers will expire in four years.
Democratic Sen. Ben Nelson of Nebraska said in a press release that providing time limits is a key aspect of the bill.
"I think Congress has acted responsibly by including it," Nelson said.
"This clause gives Congress the important authority to modify parts of the bill, should it be deemed necessary, to protect the civil liberties of innocent Americans."
But some have questioned the legislation and asked if the bill's boundaries give authorities too much power.
Michael Combs, a University of Nebraska-Lincoln political science professor, cautioned law enforcement officials not to use the additional authority as a means to discriminate.
Any legislation that grants law enforcement extensive power also carries the possibility for abuse, Combs said.
"The threat is what and how many civil liberties must we give up in order to fight terrorism," Combs said.
The legislation should not be an excuse to engage in racial or ethnic profiling, he said.
"We need to remember we're fighting terrorism," Combs said. "We need to guard against discrimination particularly when talking about Arab-Americans."
"Because even after the threat passes, the legislation is still there for possible use and misuse."
(C) 2001 Daily Nebraskan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 29, 2001


End of Document