ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURE TOO WEAK, RENO CHARGES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 15, 1996, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 426 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A Republican anti-terrorism bill Congress hopes to have on President Bill Clinton's desk before Friday's anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing falls short of what the administration wants, Attorney General Janet Reno said Sunday.
Reno said the bill should contain provisions requiring taggants, or markers, on explosives and should adjust wiretapping rules to conform with changes in technology.
A Republican compromise plan that could be announced as early as today drops both those provisions, although it does restore two other items the administration wanted - the ability to ban fund-raising in the United States by groups linked to terrorism and to expedite the deportation of known terrorists.
Reno, speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press," did not say if Clinton would sign the bill in that form. "The president will need to look at the whole bill, see just what's in it and make an appropriate determination," she said.
Clinton, in his weekly radio address Saturday, charged that House Republicans, under pressure from the gun lobby, gutted the Senate version that he supported. "I urge Congress to change course, put the national interest before the special interest," he said.
Freshman Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., who led the House revolt against wiretapping and other key provisions of the bill, said he supported the compromise being worked out by House-Senate negotiators.
"It will provide the government very necessary tools, narrowly crafted tools, but also, importantly, it will not trample on civil liberties," he said.
Barr, with the backing of the National Rifle Association, and some Democrats, succeeded in removing language that he contended would extend federal powers to restrict individual liberties.
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who appeared with Barr on NBC, said conservatives feared the federal government more than they did terrorist organizations. "That's the problem here, and they have so watered down the bill as it has wended through the process that the bill would virtually do nothing."
Retained in both the House and Senate bills are a number of anti-crime measures, including one that would limit appeals by death row inmates and other inmates and another that would require criminals to pay restitution to their victims.
After the April 19, 1995, bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City that claimed 168 lives, Clinton urged Congress to give him a tough anti-terrorism bill within six weeks.
But the legislation has been stalled by efforts to add anti-crime measures and questions about federal intrusions into individual lives.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot of (Janet) Reno

Load-Date: April 15, 1996


End of Document