Anti-terrorism bill nears vote in House, hits snag in Senate
USA TODAY
October 10, 2001, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 621 words
Byline: Richard Willing
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- An anti-terrorism bill that would greatly expand the federal government's ability to track, investigate and hold suspected terrorists is expected to be taken up by the House of Representatives on Thursday.
The wide-ranging bill would permit the government to track e-mail, hold terrorism suspects without filing charges and make it easier to use wiretap laws aimed at foreign spies to crack down on suspected domestic terrorists.
Several legal barriers that prevent the CIA and FBI from sharing information would be removed.
The Senate had been expected to take up a similar bill today, but the action was postponed after Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis., objected to plans to have the bill voted on without debate.
Both bills, assembled separately after more than 2 weeks of negotiations in both chambers, stem from legislation proposed by Attorney General John Ashcroft after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11.
If the bills pass, the Senate version, which includes more of the items sought by the Bush administration, would have to be reconciled with the House bill before going to President Bush for his signature.
House and Senate negotiators swapped proposals Tuesday night in an effort to narrow their differences. That would make it easier to get a bill to Bush swiftly. Supporters of the bills say the unprecedented attacks on the American mainland by terrorists make it necessary to expand the federal government's power.
"We're trying to get that balance between liberty and security," said Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee and chief sponsor of the Senate bill.
"Is it a perfect bill? No," Leahy said. "Is it far better than the bill originally proposed by the administration? I think so."
Privacy advocates say both bills go too far toward expanding government's abilities to intrude on citizens' lives.
"The House bill isn't privacy-friendly, but it's a bit less unfriendly than the Senate's bill," said David Sobel, general counsel for the Electronic Privacy Information Center in Washington.
"Both are much more far-reaching than is necessary, given the authority (government investigators) already have," he said.
The House and Senate bills have several elements in common.
Both would expand the reach of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which permits secret wiretaps and searches in national security situations.
The bills would allow the wiretaps to be placed on non-U.S. citizens for extended periods and would permit them to be more easily applied to potential terrorists operating here, as well as to foreign spies.
Both bills also would allow the attorney general or immigration commissioner to hold immigrants they suspect of terrorism for up to 7 days without filing criminal charges. And the bills would make it easier for investigators to obtain a target's computer routing and address data, such as Web sites searched and the names of e-mail recipients.
But substantial differences between the bills remain. Many House proposals have "sunset" provisions, which would cause them to expire in 2 years unless lawmakers voted to renew them.
The House bill would require court approval before grand jury information could be shared by law enforcement agencies. And it would forbid surreptitious searches unless a homeowner is promptly informed after the search is conducted.
The House version was approved 36-0 by the Judiciary Committee last week. Tuesday, liberals and conservatives on the panel, led by Reps. Bob Barr, R-Ga., and Barney Frank, D-Mass., lobbied House leaders to permit a vote on that version, before any changes are added to bring it closer to the Senate bill and Bush's liking. Their effort was backed by privacy advocates and civil liberties groups.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Henny Ray Abrams, Agence France-Presse; Stepped-up security: A member of the National Guard joins a Metropolitan Transit Authority officer in patrolling Grand Central Station on Tuesday in New York City.

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document