Anti-terrorism bill heads to governor despite water study concerns
Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)
April 29, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 400 words
Byline: Ray Carter
Body


An effort to conduct new studies of the state's water supply came into conflict with a new anti-terrorism proposal in the Oklahoma House of Representatives on Monday.
Rep. Debbie Blackburn, D-Oklahoma City, urged lawmakers to reject Senate amendments to House Bill 1146, which would exempt terrorism-related water system "vulnerability assessments" compiled by environmental agencies and public utilities from the state's Open Records Act.
Blackburn urged lawmakers to instead amend the bill to specify that it only applied to vulnerability assessments, saying the current bill could allow water agencies to hold "all information about water quantity and quality in Oklahoma in secret."
Blackburn has been active in efforts to require a thorough study of the state's water sources and ability to maintain those sources. She said House Bill 1146 could be used to thwart those efforts by hiding vital information needed to conduct the study.
But Rep. Thad Balkman, R-Norman and author of the bill, said House Bill 1146 would not allow water agencies to remove all water-related data from the view of the public.
He said a terrorism-related exemption was needed for public safety reasons. Under current law, Balkman said a list of vulnerabilities "just sits out there at the city office or wherever it may be and people can come and request that information simply by making an Open Records request."
"And you can imagine the types of people that could get their hands on that information that might not be good people," he said.
Balkman said the bill has already been amended at the request of the Oklahoma Press Association to narrow the scope of the exemptions in the bill and warned against adding new amendments.
"I think we make mistakes if we're trying to add amendments at the last minute," he said.
If problems developed, he said they could be dealt with in the future.
"Let's handle that problem when it arises," Balkman said. "Let's not run off and cast our lot in the wind and just pass an amendment so quickly."
Rep. Ray Vaughn, R-Edmond, said the bill only exempts the actual vulnerability assessments and not the information provided to determine that assessment, such as water quantities and quality information.
The House voted to accept the Senate amendments to House Bill 1146 on a 61-39 vote. The bill then achieved final passage on a 94-6 vote and is now headed to the governor for his signature.

Load-Date: April 29, 2003


End of Document