Anti-terrorism, term limits stall in Congress
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 30, 1995, Sunday,
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 549 words
Byline: David Espo, The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


More than 100 days after the Oklahoma City federal building was blown up, President Clinton's anti-terrorism legislation is stalled in Congress as House Republicans debate the proper federal role in fighting crime.
And a proposed constitutional amendment to establish term limits for Congressmen faces defeat in the Senate. Anti-terrorism legislation cleared the Senate in June by an overwhelming, 91-8 vote after occasionally difficult negotiations between the White House and GOP leaders.
The $ 2 billion package includes provisions sought by the White House to expand the government's wiretapping authority and allow use of the military in emergencies involving chemical or biological weapons. It also contains limits on appeals by death row inmates demanded by Republicans.
The House Judiciary Committee approved its own measure a few days later, but that bill has yet to reach the floor. It has drawn opposition not only from some liberal Democrats but conservative Republicans as well.
''It vastly expands the powers of the federal government,'' said Rep. Bob Barr, a first-term Georgia Republican, involved in trying to rewrite the measure.
He said the committee's bill would expand the definition of terrorism too broadly. ''It federalizes virtually every crime of violence in the country.''
Barr is circulating an alternative that starts with an enhanced death penalty, and proposes stiffer penalties for crimes of violence that are designed to coerce or intimidate the federal government.
Other issues are in dispute as well. The House committee measure expands federal wiretap authority, for example, and gives the Defense Department an expanded role in combatting weapons of mass destruction.
Barr and other members of the 73-member freshman class met last week with Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, who said he was amenable to discussing changes. ''I'm confident we can work this out,'' he said.
Action has been deferred until September, after lawmakers return from their monthlong summer break.
Supporters of term limits for lawmakers held a news conference last week to trumpet strong public support -- 74 percent in a poll commissioned by the Term Limits Legal Institute, a group favoring the concept.
But a proposed constitutional amendment to that end is in for a drubbing when the Senate debates it, probably in September.
One head count shows only 43 senators in favor, with another handful undecided. That's less than a majority, and far less than the two-thirds needed for approval.
''I'm glad on this one we don't have a secret ballot,'' said Sen. Hank Brown, R-Colo., a leading sponsor. He indicated that some senators might vote for the proposal when the roll is called even though they oppose it privately.
As the poll suggests, public support for term limits is strong. And even though they know they'll lose, backers want the issue brought up to put senators on record before the next election.
''The test is whether it makes a difference'' in the elections, said Brown.
It's one test on which he won't be graded. Brown is retiring next year after five terms in the House and one in the Senate.
The measure that will be voted on provides for a six-term limit in the House and two-term limit in the Senate. The House rejected the proposal last summer.

Load-Date: August 2, 1995


End of Document