Anti-terror studies take students to Israel
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 20, 2013 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 1
Length: 600 words
Byline: JEROME R. STOCKFISCH, Tribune staff
Body


Saint Leo group will visit security agencies, learn their tactics
JEROME R. STOCKFISCH
Tribune staff
SAINT LEO For a group of students studying antiterrorism strategies, there are few more significant sites.
Ben Gurion Airport. Hezbollah territory along the Israel-Lebanon border. Sderot, a town under continuous improvised rocket attacks.
Saint Leo University students will be getting a personal glimpse of those places this week, traveling through Israel for nine days in an intense summer course that puts them on the ground in what have been some of the world's hottest spots.
They'll be based in Tel Aviv, Haifa and Jerusalem, learning security and antiterrorism tactics from Israel National Police, Israel Defense Forces, Home Front Command and even Mossad, the country's national intelligence agency.
"This will be the equivalent of if I were a political science student being granted seven days with unrestricted access to the White House," said Bobby Sullivan, a criminal justice professor at Saint Leo.
"If you're going to study terrorism, that's the place. These people have fought terrorism for thousands of years. It's incredible the measures and countermeasures they go through."
Seven students will accompany Sullivan for the twin undergraduate- and graduate-level Terrorism in Israel course, including Christina Jones, 36, a master's candidate in criminal justice and critical incident management from Great Falls, Va. "I'm looking forward to learning a lot from Israel," she said. "They've been doing this a lot more than the United States has."
Also traveling is Courtney Sullivan,19, a sophomore criminal justice major and the instructor's daughter. "It's going to be the experience of a lifetime," she said.
The students will observe how residents and security forces handle the Hezbollah threat in the north, with a stop at the site of the 1974 Ma'alot massacre, in which 22 children were killed.
They will learn how hospitals handle mass casualty events, visit the National Israel Police Museum, and meet with a member ofYamam, the counterterrorism unit of the Israeli police.
They will visit Mike's Place, an American-style bar in Tel Aviv, where a security guard blocked a suicide bomber from entering. The bomb killed three, but the damage could have been significantly worse.
At Sderot, the students will be briefed on security and how people have had to adapt under a continuous terror threat.
The intensity will let up as students have the option of visiting the Old City and various religious and historical sites.
Jones said she is looking forward to possibly using some of what she learns in her own community, perhaps at her local emergency management office in Loudoun County, Va.
Courtney Sullivan admitted many of the students found the itinerary a little intimidating.
"I was very nervous at first," she said. "I was constantly looking up where we were going to see the safety of the places, but the closer we've gotten and the more I've learned, I feel more comfortable."
Nonetheless, participants signed off on a four-page waiver and hold-harmless agreement.
Both Sullivan and her father said the biggest potential lesson will be in observing how Israelis balance security issues with civil liberties.
"To me, that is going to be the most fascinating thing for me to wrap my head around," Bobby Sullivan said. "They're the masters at it. To see where the lines are drawn. That's one of the challenges I'm going to give the students."
jstockfisch@tampatrib.com
(813) 259-7834
Copyright © 2013, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: May 23, 2013


End of Document