Anti-terror squad blazed legal trail; The lawyers set precedent after the 1st World Trade Center attack
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 21, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. c7
Length: 783 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Prosecutors across the country now have a large arsenal of laws to pursue people suspected of ties to terrorism, but that wasn't the case when Ramzi Yousef decided to try to blow up the World Trade Center in 1993.
In the months following the bombing that killed six people and injured more than 1,000 others, a group of young unknown federal prosecutors in Manhattan went to work creating a new frontier in American law enforcement to combat terrorism at home.
Terrorists had hoped to topple the towers and yet the prosecutors learned that applicable laws did not even carry the death penalty.
"We had to struggle to find crimes in the books that fit the conduct here," said Michael Garcia, now U.S. attorney in Manhattan, who helped prosecute six men arrested after the attack.
The group included Patrick Fitzgerald, now a special prosecutor looking into the leak two years ago of the identity of a CIA operative whose husband was critical of the U.S. government's description of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
Before the 1990s were finished, Fitzgerald and more than a dozen other prosecutors in New York discovered a growing international terrorist threat, indicted Osama bin Laden and brought charges against more than three dozen suspected terrorists, winning every major trial. Meanwhile, Congress strengthened laws to address terrorism.
Besides Fitzgerald, who is U.S. attorney in Chicago, several other prosecutors also have taken coveted jobs in the legal profession. Two have been appointed federal judges, three became U.S. attorneys and one became second in command at the Justice Department.
The team also included Andrew McCarthy, who prosecuted Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, a blind Egyptian cleric who the government maintained approved a plot to blow up five New York City landmarks, including the United Nations.
McCarthy searched the law books until he found a seditious conspiracy statute that had been barely used since the Civil War but which criminalizes waging war against the United States.
It was such a novel use of the statute that prosecutors had to go to Washington and make a presentation worthy of a trial to convince the Justice Department it could be used against terrorists.
"The charging ammunition we had was awful," said McCarthy, now a senior fellow at the Foundation for the Defense of Democracy.
McCarthy said there were occasional security threats, but ultimately they were left with "a feeling like you're doing something meaningful for the country."
Fitzgerald, or "Fitzy" as he was called by colleagues, became one of the nation's first experts on al-Qaida, able to spell and define Middle Eastern names for jurors as easily as a baseball fan reciting a player's batting average.
Former U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White, who began in 1993 assembling the team of investigators, which included Fitzgerald, said she chose the "best and the brightest" to focus on terrorism.
"They were a success from day one. I'm very proud of them," said White, who left the job three years ago for private practice.
In 2001, Fitzgerald left the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan to become U.S. attorney in Chicago, just after outlining for the first time in a courtroom the makeup of the al-Qaida terrorism network that days later would strike America.
Jamal Ahmed Al-Fadl, a founding member of al-Qaida, testified during the trial of four men in a conspiracy to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa, that bin Laden in 1989 was thinking about creating al-Qaida to expand the militant Muslim cause.
Fitzgerald was not alone among the terrorism prosecutors who have moved on.
When he took over as U.S. attorney several weeks ago after working in Washington as the Department of Homeland Security assistant secretary, Garcia chose Lev Dassin, who worked with him on the first trade center trial, to head the criminal division.
Kenneth Karas, was appointed a federal judge in Manhattan while another, Joseph Bianco, has bnted to a federal judgeship in Brooklyn and is awaiting final approval.
James Comey, who worked with Fitzgerald in Manhattan on mob cases, became U.S. attorney in Manhattan after Sept. 11 and was appointed the No. 2 lawyer at the Justice Department in 2003. Comey recently resigned to become Lockheed Martin's new general counsel.
David Kelley, who prosecuted Yousef, the architect of the 1993 trade center bombing and a plot to blow up a dozen U.S. airliners over the Far East, recently completed an 18-month stint as U.S. Attorney in Manhattan and has entered private practice.
Kelley said he was not surprised that so many on the team have gone so far.
"The stakes were very high and the field was one that was not yet plowed," he said. "It made everybody better lawyers for it."

Load-Date: January 1, 2006


End of Document