ANTI-TERRORISM BILL INCHES FORWARD IN SENATE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 6, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 574 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Under prodding by President Bill Clinton and Majority Leader Bob Dole, the Senate made strides Monday toward breaking a logjam on the government's response to the Oklahoma City bombing.
The progress was made as Dole, R-Kan., who is seeking the GOP presidential nomination, questioned Clinton's leadership on the anti-terrorism legislation and threatened to withdraw the measure.
The Senate voted, 90-0, to approve a Democratic amendment requiring that tiny traceable materials, called taggants, be placed in chemicals that can be used to make bombs. The taggant would help authorities track down bombing suspects.
The provision, sought by Clinton and proposed by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., was limited shortly before the vote to exclude smokeless and black powder, which are used to propel bullets.
The National Rifle Association had opposed Feinstein's proposal.
The taggants requirement would apply to dynamite, TNT, plastic explosives and other forms of explosive chemicals such as those used to make the fuel and fertilizer bomb that killed 168 in Oklahoma City.
The Senate also adopted, by voice vote, an amendment by Feinstein to ban any teaching, demonstration or distribution of bomb-making information if the person doing it knows it would be used for a criminal purpose.
The statements by Dole and Clinton followed days of partisan sniping in which each side blamed the other for the delay on the legislation.
"I haven't seen any evidence of any active engagement by the White House," Dole said on the Senate floor. "What we need from the president is not words, but leadership."
At about the same time, Clinton exhorted Democrats and Republicans at the White House to "curb politics" and stop trying to amend the legislation.
Republican senators have pushed for a crackdown on death row appeals, and Democrats have sought expanded authority for electronic surveillance by law enforcement.
As the Senate resumed debate on the measure after its weeklong recess, Clinton said, "You can be sure terrorists around the world are not delaying their plans while we delay this bill."
Behind the scenes, both Democratic and Republican senators were scaling back the number of amendments they would offer, a move that could speed up action on the bill.
The legislation, written by Dole and Sen. Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, encompasses many of the proposals in the $ 1.5 billion anti-terrorism package that Clinton submitted to Congress a week after the April 19 bombing. It does not give authorities as much authority for electronic surveillance as Clinton's plan.
Republicans and civil libertarians alike have criticized Clinton's proposals, saying they could erode constitutional protections.
The Senate bill would authorize the hiring of 1,000 federal law enforcement personnel, increase federal penalties for terrorist crimes as well as conspiracies involving explosives, establish streamlined procedures for deporting alleged alien terrorists, give the FBI access to credit reports and telephone records in foreign terrorism cases, and ban U.S. aid to countries that assist terrorists.
In private, Clinton and his staff worked with Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., to pare down the Democrats' proposed amendments.
"We believe that this measure could pass; it should pass by the end of the week," said Mike McCurry, the White House press secretary.
Some Republican senators also agreed to drop their proposals.

Load-Date: June 7, 1995


End of Document