ANTI-TERRORISM; BOMBPROOF TRAINING; SWAT teams train to battle weapons of mass destruction
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 8, 2009, Thursday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 534 words
Byline: Rusty Marks, Staff writer
Body


Terrorists disguised as concession workers have been spotted with a bomb inside the Charleston Civic Center. One of them waits, dressed in blue pants and a brown hooded jacket, a bomb strapped to his chest.
Suddenly, members of the SWAT team burst through a steel door, dressed in full chemical-protection suits and bristling with submachine guns. They order the suspect to stop, but he doesn't comply.
The officers, members of the Kanawha County Sheriff's Department and Charleston Police Department SWAT teams, shoot the suspected terrorist dead. But not before his finger can squeeze the trigger of the bomb, setting the device off in a downstairs hallway.
In real life, the explosion could have cost untold lives. In the training scenario underway Wednesday, it served as a lesson on how to approach suspected terrorists and a reminder of what can go right - and wrong - during an emergency.
"We're used to shooting at people who are pointing a gun at us," said Lt. Sean Crosier, head of the sheriff's department SWAT team. Bombs and chemical weapons are another matter.
"It could be a bomb, it could be anthrax, or it could be chemical," said Christian Fernley, Homeland Security Training and Exercise Coordinator for the state Department of Homeland Security. The department set up Wednesday's training session, one of a series of sessions for local law enforcement agencies.
Training is conducted by crews from Louisiana State University, which conducts only 12 such sessions a year across the nation. Fernley said this is the first series of training sessions in West Virginia. Training is paid for by the federal Department of Homeland Security.
Lt. Preston Hickman, who leads the Charleston Police Department SWAT team, said the joint training exercise helps city and county team members learn to work together. "It would take both our teams to respond in an incident like this," he said.
"We know that if something happens, we're all going to be working together," agreed Crosier.
Fernley said the county and city SWAT teams have good reputations for professionalism and training standards around the country.
In one training scenario on Wednesday, SWAT members went after a man with a bomb. In another, they went after suspects who released a powder like anthrax, forcing the team to take action to contain the chemical.
SWAT members broke out a plastic blanket and threw it over the chemical to contain the spill, then broke out a test kit to determine what kind of poison might have been released. After each scenario, team members regrouped. Their actions would be analyzed to determine what to do and what not to do in real life, or what to do better.
The joint SWAT teams will also simulate responses to terrorist attacks on a local chemical plant and an airplane at Yeager Airport.
Lawrence Pierce | Gazette photo
A mock terrorist releases a cloud of an anthrax-like powder (really baby powder) after being shot by members of the Kanawha County Sheriff's Department SWAT team during a training exercise Wednesday. Members of the county and Charleston Police Department SWAT teams were staging terrorist attacks at the Charleston Civic Center.
Reach Rusty Marks at rustymarks@wvgazette.com or 304-348-1215.

Load-Date: October 8, 2009


End of Document