Anti-terrorism bill heads to House floor;
Barr supports reworked measure
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 4, 2001 Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 336 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- U.S. Rep. Bob Barr (R-Ga.) joined his Judiciary Committee colleagues Wednesday night in endorsing an anti-terrorism bill for consideration by the full House of Representatives.
Barr had been a leading critic of several provisions of the bill advanced by the Bush administration, contending it did not adequately safeguard civil liberties. But he said Wednesday that he went along with the compromise bill after the administration made concessions on some key points.
Cox Washington Bureau
"The worst provisions of the bill have been taken out," Barr said, "and I appreciate that good-faith effort."
He said he remained somewhat uncomfortable: "It's not the bill that I would craft."
The proposal is one of many being considered to deal with terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks in New York and Washington. The House is expected to take up the bill next week. The Senate also is working on anti-terrorism legislation.
The House bill deals with a variety of issues and would expand the government's authority to combat terrorism in areas ranging from electronic surveillance and immigration to money laundering and criminal procedures.
U.S. Rep. Bill Delahunt (D-Mass.) said the bill the committee approved represented a "thoughtful consensus" and was superior to the original proposal.
Committee debate on the bill and amendments was lengthy and occasionally contentious, with long discussions of issues such as probable cause, legal jurisdiction and constitutional rights, participants said.
Changes Barr said influenced his decision to support the bill included limiting law enforcement's ability to access the contents of Internet communications, eliminating a provision to permit use of unconstitutionally obtained foreign evidence against U.S. citizens and stopping the government from being able to execute search warrants without giving notice.
At the end, when the committee's roll call vote --- 36 in favor and none opposed --- was announced, several representatives and staff members applauded.

Load-Date: October 4, 2001


End of Document