ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORTS WORKING, POWELL SAYS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
May 2, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a5
Length: 362 words
Byline: GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- International cooperation against terrorists is increasing and paying off, Secretary of State Colin Powell said, noting the tightening of U.N. sanctions against Afghanistan and a conviction in the Pan Am 103 bombing.
"State sponsors of terrorism are increasingly isolated," Powell said Monday. "Terrorist groups are under growing pressure. Terrorists are being brought to justice.
"We will not let up," he said, commenting as the State Department released its annual report on terrorism trends worldwide.
Another breakthrough Powell cited was the trial of the accused perpetrators of the 1998 East Africa embassy bombings. He also said there has been forward movement in the investigation into the bombing to the USS Cole last October in Yemen.
The State Department report, which reviews terrorist activity during 2000, said 19 Americans were killed last year in terrorist attacks, all but two in the Cole bombing.
The 19 dead was the highest for Americans for any year since 1996, the report said.
The number of anti-U.S. attacks rose from 169 in 1999 to 200 in 2000, the study said, largely because of an increase in pipeline bombings in Colombia. These attacks, though numerous, rarely result in casualties.
The report said Iran was the most active sponsor of terrorism worldwide last year, offering assistance for groups opposed to Israel.
A State Department official said Iran has occupied the No. 1 spot for a decade although it has not always been officially designated as such in the annual reports.
"Statements by Iran's leaders demonstrated Iran's unrelenting hostility to Israel," the report said. "Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei continued to refer to Israel as a 'cancerous tumor' that must be removed."
The report said terrorism by Palestinian groups opposed to the peace process increased during Israeli-Palestinian clashes that began in September.
Nations that repeatedly provide support for actions of international terrorism are required by law to be placed on the State Department's terrorism list. Those so designated are subject to economic sanctions.
The countries on the terrorism list are Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Cuba, North Korea, Syria and Libya.

Load-Date: May 2, 2001


End of Document