ANTI-TERRORISM COURSE BEYOND SELF-DEFENSE;
Everyday items can become weapons
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 20, 2003 Sunday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B3
Length: 339 words
Byline: Shannon Joyce Neal Dayton Daily News
Body


CENTERVILLE - Gary Dill is the guy you want sitting next to you on your next flight.
His mission is to take down terrorists.
The former Marine and federal intelligence agent spent much of his career teaching agents stationed abroad how to thwart a terrorist.
His philosophy is simple, Dill said: It's kill or be killed.
Dill doesn't claim to teach his students how to detect a terrorist cell or understand the workings behind a terrorist act. He shows students how to use hand-to-hand combat techniques and basic, everyday weapons.
More than a dozen police officers, marital arts instructors and others attended Dill's anti-terrorist course Saturday at Dees Taekwondo Ltd. in Centerville.
"I give a lecture before we start to make sure everyone understands a terrorist is different from a criminal," Dill said.
"This is not self-defense."
Before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Dill focused on martial arts and self-defense courses.
He started teaching the anti-terrorist class two weeks after Sept. 11, and travels nearly every weekend demonstrating techniques to law enforcement officers and business executives.
Dill, a Vietnam veteran now of Bartlesville, Okla., studied martial arts for 40 years and holds black belts in several disciplines.
He served in the U.S. Navy as a naval intelligence agent, in the Marines and taught courses in firearms and police defensive tactics.
In class, Dill is careful to show his students the difference between a move that will hurt and one that will kill. Thumbs, cell phones, airplane blankets and ballpoint pens become deadly weapons. Students learn numerous ways to break a person's neck.
The techniques go beyond the standard self-defense course, teaching students to possibly kill, rather than just debilitate, the aggressor.
Terrorists have long been a threat abroad, Dill said, and U.S. citizens still are adapting to the elevated threat.
"People don't want to feel like a helpless victim," Dill said. "Any place can be a target."
Contact Shannon Joyce Neal at 225-2436 or sjneal@coxohio.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, (1) INSTRUCTOR GARY DILL (right) shows those attending his course Saturday how to handle an attacking terrorist.,(2) ROY BARNETT GRABS John Lowe as they practice moves taught by Gary Dill.,CREDIT: PHOTOS BY RON ALVEY/DAYTON DAILY NEWS

Load-Date: April 22, 2003


End of Document