Anti-terrorism plan fuels death penalty feud
Chicago Daily Herald
May 23, 2002, Thursday Cook,Lake


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 441 words
Byline: Heath Hixson Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


SPRINGFIELD - The death penalty for terrorists could be back on the table and may become the first test of Gov. George Ryan's position on capital punishment since his death penalty commission released its report.  
Without opposition, a key House panel voted Wednesday to advance an anti-terrorism package that includes a provision making terrorists convicted in Illinois eligible for the death penalty.  
State lawmakers overwhelmingly approved a similar plan last fall. But Ryan rejected that plan Feb. 8, in part because he objects to the death penalty provision.  
He gained international acclaim by halting executions in Illinois in January 2000. Since the 1977 reinstatement of the death penalty, 13 men on the state's death row have been exonerated while 12 have been put to death.  
Citing his lack of faith in the system, Ryan enlisted a panel to look at possible fixes. Last month his commission released its findings and proposed sweeping reforms to Illinois' death penalty system, but stopped short of calling for a ban on the practice. Ryan has since endorsed the panel's suggestions.  
Supporters of the terrorism-fighting plan say the death penalty is a crucial part.  
"Obviously, Illinois' death penalty system is undergoing great scrutiny," said Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan, the leading proponent of both anti-terrorism plans. "I am convinced that no murder is more deserving of the death penalty than one committed in the course of domestic terrorism."  
The Senate already approved the new plan, and the House could vote as soon as today. If approved, it would go to the governor for consideration.  
This could set off a showdown between Gov. Ryan and state lawmakers and Jim Ryan, who is the Republican nominee for governor. Democrat and Republican lawmakers alike have been pushing the plan to show voters they are tough on terrorism.  
In his Feb. 20 budget address, Gov. Ryan said he opposed any expansion of the death penalty until he was certain the system was flawless.  
That was before his commission released its findings, but a spokesman said Wednesday that the governor will wait to see the final form of the new anti-terrorism plan.  
Sponsors said they would look to override the veto if the governor again rejects the plan.  
Regardless of what Ryan does, the one-year anniversary of the Sep. 11 attacks comes at the last leg of the campaign for the Nov. 5 general election. This juxtaposition could inject the anti- terrorism issue into the campaign for governor.  
U.S. Rep. Rod Blagojevich of Chicago, the Democrat nominee for governor, also supports the death penalty for terrorists, a spokesman previously said.

Load-Date: May 24, 2002


End of Document