Anti-terrorist expert survives bombing
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 28, 1990, Saturday, North Suncoast Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A
Length: 440 words
Dateline: BONN
Body


A week after West Germany warned that the Red Army Faction (RAF) guerrilla group would soon try to retaliate against the recent arrest of several of its members, the terrorists struck.
 
    This time, the group bombed the car of West Germany's top anti-terrorism expert, state secretary Hans Neusel, as he drove to work Friday at the Interior Ministry in Bonn. The bomb destroyed the interior of Neusel's unarmored blue BMW. Neusel suffered only F a few cuts on his arm and face.
Compiled from Wire Reports; wWashington Post; New York Times   Less than four hours after the attack, Neusel, 62, appeared at a regularly scheduled government press conference. He was obviously upset and gritted his teeth, but regained his humor quickly.
 
    "I'm sure you can imagine that I am especially happy that I could be with you today," Neusel said. He appealed to the RAF to abandon violence at a time when Europe is becoming more peaceful.
 
    The bomb intended to kill Neusel was triggered when his car broke a light beam set up across a busy highway exit ramp the same method the Red Army Faction used last November, when it claimed responsibility for killing Alfred Herrhausen, the head of West Germany's largest bank. The RAF left a claim of responsibility at the scene of Friday's bombing.
 
    Last week, Neusel's boss, Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble, released his annual report on terrorism, warning that despite the recent arrest and extradition to West Germany of several Red Army Faction members who had been given refuge by East Germany's former Communist government, the guerrilla group was still alive and could be expected to respond to the arrests.
 
    Disclosures by a former East German Communist secret police officer have also led to the arrest of a former Libyan citizen on charges of organizing the 1986 terrorist bombing of a West Berlin discotheque that killed two American soldiers and led President Reagan to order the bombing of Tripoli and Benghazi in Libya, West Berlin authorities said Friday.
 
    Neusel was saved by two strokes of luck: Much of the impact of the bomb was apparently absorbed by a guardrail between the explosives and the road. And the bomb was aimed at the passenger seat of Neusel's car, which is where he normally sits. But Neusel's chauffeur was on vacation and Neusel had decided to drive himself to work.
 
    Although Neusel recently gave up his bodyguard, he still varies his routes to work. After the bombing, Neusel got out of his car, moved it off the ramp with the help of other motorists, and walked to work.
 Information from the Washington Post and the New York Times was used in this report.

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document