Anti-terrorism bill may stall Congress
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 12, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 654 words
Byline: Alan Fram The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - The Bush administration and congressional Republicans hope to boost defense spending as House-Senate bargainers begin writing a compromise $ 20 billion anti-terrorism bill.
Negotiators from the two chambers begin work this week as part of Congress' drive to finally adjourn for the year. Political and policy differences could, however, keep the bargainers working well into the week before Christmas.
Senate Republicans forced Democrats last week to settle for a $ 20 billion anti-terror package instead of the $ 35 billion they preferred.
But the bill the Senate approved - written mostly by Democrats - contained an additional $ 2 billion for the Pentagon to use on construction and the war or terrorism. That's $ 5.3 billion less than Bush wanted and the GOP-controlled House approved.
Democrats shifted the money to initiatives for domestic security and the New York and Washington areas, which are still rebuilding from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"We want … to ensure that all defense needs are met and this bill returns to the president's request for defense," said Amy Call, spokeswoman for the White House budget office.
But Democrats are showing no desire to play along.
By shifting money from defense to programs like disaster aid, Amtrak and combating bioterrorism, Democrats put their stamp on a measure they have used to argue that they are doing more than Bush for the security of Americans at home. That political battle is likely to continue during upcoming negotiations.
Underlining the Democrats' emphasis on domestic spending in the bill, Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va., said the Senate's slimmed-down bill "at least does something for the cities and rural areas of this country."
That was a reference to the $ 9.5 billion the bill had for the New York and Washington areas - $ 3.1 billion more than the House - plus items the Senate added, such as $ 109 million for research and security at some Agriculture Department labs.
The Senate measure also contained $ 2.2 billion more than the $ 6.3 billion the House included for domestic security initiatives. That included $ 246 million to help state and local law enforcement - the House had $ 17 million - plus more funds for the FBI, immigration agents and airport security.
Senate passage came despite a letter Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld sent the chamber's leaders shortly before final approval.
Rumsfeld wrote that cutting the $ 7.3 billion Bush wanted for the Pentagon would "reduce our ability to sustain the operational intensity we will need in the effort to defeat terrorism" and would "send the wrong signal to our armed forces and our adversaries."
The Senate approved its package by voice vote anyway. Even the administration's GOP supporters said afterward that whatever the final defense figure in the anti-terror package, the Pentagon will get a huge increase this year.
"He's keeping the pressure on everybody," Sen. Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, said Monday of Rumsfeld's letter. But Stevens said lawmakers are providing so much money for the Pentagon that the secretary "can't possibly spend it" until early next year, when the administration is expected to seek additional defense funds.
The Defense Department's budget was nearly $ 300 billion in fiscal 2001, which ended Sept. 30. It is so far getting almost $ 344 billion this year - a 15 percent increase - even if the final anti-terrorism bill is limited to the $ 2 billion for defense that the Senate approved.
The anti-terrorism money is attached to a $ 318 billion defense bill that also must be negotiated. One key difference is over Senate language establishing a plan to lease 100 Boeing 767's over a decade and convert them into refueling tankers for the Air Force. The price tag is expected to exceed $ 20 billion.
The House approved only $ 150 million to buy one 767, plus $ 190 million more to test it as an intelligence-gathering aircraft.

Load-Date: December 12, 2001


End of Document