ANTI-TERRORISM LEGISLATION NEEDED
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 8, 2001 Monday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2001 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A10
Length: 759 words
Byline: Dave Zien and Bob Welch
Body


The Wisconsin State Journal used harsh and misleading rhetoric in criticizing our anti-terrorism legislation in an editorial last Monday. When the president asked that we return to business as usual, we don't think this is what he had in mind.
We were referred to as "craven" for proposing legislation aimed at keeping Wisconsin communities safe from terrorism. We thought it would be interesting to see how many readers meet the Wisconsin State Journal definition of "craven."
Zien, Eau Claire, and Welch, Redgranite, are Republican state senators.
1. Should Wisconsin have a usable law against terrorism?
2. Should criminals face tougher sentences if their crimes involve terrorism?
3. Should Wisconsin have a law against aiding and abetting terrorists?
4. Should Wisconsin have a law against soliciting others to commit acts of terrorism?
5. Does it make sense to look to the New York and Oklahoma legislatures for guidance in developing a response to terrorism?
6. Should courts have the option of the death penalty for a person convicted of first degree murder while committing an act of terrorism?
7. Should retired law enforcement officers who undergo an FBI background check be allowed to continue to carry a concealed weapon to raise uncertainty among terrorists and other criminals?
8. Should private security personnel who are trained, licensed and background checked be allowed to carry a concealed weapon when protecting terrorist targets?
9. Should the military police being called up to protect Wisconsin airports have the option to carry a concealed weapon?
10. Should Wisconsin wait to have this debate (as the State Journal editorial wants) or act soon (as the New York Legislature did six days after the attack)?
These are the major points of our Community Protection Act. If you answered yes to all the questions, you are as craven as we are. If you answered yes to most of these questions, you are probably like most of the people in Wisconsin who are waiting to see their Legislature respond to the new level of threat we face from terrorists.
If you answered no to most of these questions, you probably agree with the editorial.
We came up with our proposal by looking at legislation passed in New York. Anything that was worth the efforts of New Yorkers six days after what they suffered is worth considering in Wisconsin. Has anyone accused the New York Legislature of "craven opportunism" for their response to terrorism?
We looked at federal law, which allows the death penalty for terrorism. We also looked at Oklahoma, where state laws, including the death penalty, may be all that keep convicted terrorist Terry Nichols from getting off on a technicality.
The State Journal inferred that we proposed the death penalty for some broad, unspecified list of offenses. Our legislation says the district attorney and the judge should have the option of a death penalty only for a person convicted of first degree intentional homicide
committed as part of a terrorist act. We propose increasing the penalties for all crimes related to a terrorist act. The only penalty greater than life in prison is the ultimate penalty.
We also disagree that the only people guilty of murder in the World Trade Center attack were the suicide hijackers. Those planning, financing and facilitating that attack are as guilty as the hijackers. When they are caught, death is the penalty available to federal prosecutors. The same penalty should be available under Wisconsin law.
Our final provision allows professional law enforcement personnel to undergo a back-ground check and be licensed to carry concealed weapons as a proven deterrent to crime. It was not opportunism that led the airline pilots union to call for arming pilots; it was not opportunism that made Israel train and arm teachers to end attacks on children in school. It is common sense that leads us to propose that trained law enforcement officers have the tools to protect our communities.
Patrick Henry spoke to another state legislature during another time in our history when some called for action while others called for delay. He said: "Shall we gather strength by irresolution and inaction? Shall we acquire the means of effectual resistance by lying supinely on our backs, and hugging the delusive phantom of hope, until our enemies shall have bound us hand and foot? Sir, we are not weak, if we make a proper use of those means which the God of nature hath placed in our power."
Let's consider, debate and then "make a proper use of those means which the God of nature hath placed in our power."

Graphic

 
Photos of Dave Zien and Bob Welch.

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document