Anti-terrorism legislation dangerous, un-American
University Wire
November 9, 2001


Copyright 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 420 words
Byline: By Jessie Childress, Montana Kaimin
Dateline: Missoula, Mont.
Body


In this time of national unity, few dare to question government measures and motives dedicated to "anti-terrorism" for fear of appearing un-American. Because of this, the most un-American legislation yet has sped through Congress and passed into law right under our noses.
The sweeping anti-terrorism bill, nicknamed the U.S. Patriot Act, places unprecedented powers of surveillance and search in the hands of law enforcement.
U. Montana
Legislators pushing for the bill maintained that it's OK to temporarily disembowel Americans' civil liberties because, they say, a few of the most controversial measures will expire in 2005.
Most of the measures won't expire though. They are now a permanent part of the American legal landscape.
One of the most important measures to escape notice is a section of the act authorizing police to sneak into someone's house or office and search the contents without ever telling the owner. The search would be authorized by a court that could delay notification of the search indefinitely. Funny how more than 200 years of the 4th Amendment can suddenly become so irrelevant.
Another big one allows the FBI to force any Internet provider or phone company to turn over customer records without a court order if the FBI says the "records sought are relevant to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism." The company will not be not allowed to tell anyone that the FBI is investigating.
Yet, another measure allows any U.S. or state attorney to order the installation of the FBI's Carnivore surveillance system to record a person's Web and e-mail activity without going to a judge.
One can only hope that someone with appreciation for the U.S. Constitution will bring these measures to court and get them struck down. The Supreme Court thus far has banned searches relying on thermal imaging devices, and it appears likely they would find the government's attempt to run around the 4th Amendment unconstitutional.
These dangerous measures aren't the only ones to go through, and more are on their way. It's not a good time for foreign citizens in America, as they are seeing former rights fly out the jail-cell window, where they can now be held for up to six months without being charged.
The nation faces a difficult task in securing its nation and citizens, but by trampling on the Constitution and ignoring the role of the judicial branch, the government is quickly becoming more dangerous than virtuous.
(C) 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 9, 2001


End of Document