Anti-terrorism bill asks for action, not thought
University Wire
October 19, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Daily Athenaeum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 797 words
Byline: By J.R. Jewell, The Daily Athenaeum
Dateline: Morgantown, W.Va.
Body


Last week, after a month of urging by Attorney General Ashcroft and President Bush, the Senate passed an expansive anti-terrorism bill. The following day, the Senate's little sister, the House of Representatives, passed a similar measure. Reconciling the few but important differences between the two versions of the bill may take time, which, as the president correctly points out, is a precious commodity.
While the Senate and House wrangle out the details, perhaps the public should consider what new and wide-ranging police powers the law, when passed, will include. Both versions grant the nation's police and intelligence gathering agencies enhanced surveillance powers, expanded access to individual records, increased authority to detain foreigners without charges and harsher penalties.
West Virginia U.
Specifically, the new law would allow for roving wiretapping warrants, where any telephone used by a suspect may be tapped, and not just those described in a traditional warrant. To expedite the records gathering process, law enforcement agencies will be allowed greater access to grand jury testimony as well as such items as school and medical records. Ostensibly designed to stifle the freedom of movement by potential terrorists within the country, the various police agencies will be allowed to incarcerate foreigners for seven days without charges or initiating the deportation process. During that process, which can take months, those under arrest will remain in jail.
As a number of legislative watchdog organizations have noted, much of what is included in the two bill versions is from the standard FBI/CIA wish list. Those presents, until now, however, have been turned back every time for clearly violating civil liberties. Thus, the problem facing Congress is that despite the need for more effective surveillance and evidence gathering methods, some elements of the bills cross the very thin line that is our Constitution.
Consider the Senate's plan to grant law enforcement agencies the right to search one's property, photograph and record all that they find -- including searching your computer -- without informing anyone. Law enforcement officials rather whimsically refer to this gift as the "sneak and peak" law. Essentially, that means the FBI can break into your house, rummage through whatever they deem necessary and leave without your knowledge.
Perhaps the Senate should have been reminded that "the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated," which as some of them may have forgotten is at the heart of the Fourth Amendment. The House of Representatives, apparently a bit more knowledgeable on constitutional matters, left this section out of their bill.
The power to detain and then deport foreigners without charges is likewise rife with constitutionality questions. In 1798 Congress passed a number of acts designed to thwart subversive activity by foreign agents and public criticism of the government by Americans, known collectively as the Alien and Sedition Acts. The act empowered the president to order the arrest and either imprisonment or deportation of foreigners. It, like a portion of the current bill, clearly violates the basic principle of the Sixth Amendment: "The accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial … be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with witnesses against him, to have the compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense."
Ashcroft and others point out that the new powers are a long overdue modernization of surveillance laws, which were designed for a different era (and in accord with the Constitution). Isn't it interesting that the Constitution and the amendments need to be overhauled to better apply to the modern world? For example, that same logic might be applied to, let's say, the Second Amendment. This revelation is illustrative of the duplicity of Ashcroft's thinking, and it emphasizes the difficulty in balancing civil liberties against the needed strengthening of police powers to combat terrorism.
By urging Congress to pass this new legislation quickly in order to assist the efforts to thwart terrorist activities, the president is asking our political leaders to act, not think, and that too is dangerous. In recognition that there has not been time to properly reflect on this bill, the House placed an unnatural five year limit on their version. Although time will be the real determinant, for now it is obvious that anything that brings the ACLU, House Republicans, Free Congress Foundation and I together must be flawed.
(C) 2001 The Daily Athenaeum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 19, 2001


End of Document