ANTWERP GEM DEALERS TRY TO RECOVER FROM BLAST
The New York Times
October 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 667 words
Byline: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANTWERP, Belgium, Oct. 22
Body


''It will be business as usual when we reopen next Monday, that's for sure,'' said Jaak Nutkewitz, president of the Diamond Bourse, the largest of the four diamond exchanges near the central station that make Antwerp the hub of the world's diamond trade.
Downstairs, workmen were fitting new sheets of bulletproof glass into the windows of the trading room, blown out Tuesday by the parcel bomb that went off outside a neighboring synagogue, killing 3 and injuring nearly 100.
In small groups escorted by the police, diamond dealers, mostly Orthodox Jews in long coats, were picking their way back to their offices to see what remained and to gather up the millions of dollars worth of diamonds they abandonded when they fled.
''I know the business is dominated by Jews and they look conspicuous to visitors because of their ringlets, their hats and beards,'' Mr. Nutkewitz said, ''but the people here are quite used to them. They belong here. They are part of Antwerp folklore.''
Diamond dealers in Antwerp (Belgium) work to clean up after bomb explosion October 20, that killed 3 and injured over 100 others
Not everyone was sure that it would be business as usual when the diamond exchanges reopen or that the Jewish diamond merchants would slip easily back into old ways and attitudes. Many said the explosion had done more than take innocent lives and destroy property. It shook the merchants' sense of security, their sense of belonging here.
''We always felt Antwerp was very calm, that things like that couldn't happen here,'' said Marcel Sterngold, one of the 3,500 registered diamond dealers, about 70 percent of whom are Jewish. ''I suppose we were a bit isolated really.''
In fact, only a year ago a Jewish girl was killed when a Palestinian terrorist threw a hand grenade at a party of schoolchildren. Mr. Sterngold said the Jewish community had shrugged off that warning. ''It happened once, so we thought it won't happen again,'' he said.
Other comments betrayed the same feeling of an innocence rudely shattered.  David Yosefson was waiting outside the makeshift police headquarters near the site of the explosion for permission to enter the diamond trading district and see what remained of his business.
''It will make a worse breach with non-Jews,'' he said. ''They will think we are dangerous for them now.'' Rabbi Joseph Kreiswirtz, speaking with a shrug that implied that Antwerp's Jews must reconcile themselves to the ways of the world, said: ''There is terrorism against Jews everywhere else. And now there is terrorism here.''
The last year has seen an increase in anti-Semitic incidents in Western Europe, including bomb attacks on synagogues in Paris and Vienna.
Antwerp's Jewish community is certainly visible and not just because most of the men are distinctively dressed. On workdays they crowd into the two or three narrow streets that make up the diamond district. And on weekends and holidays, the better-off among them throng the sidewalks of the nearby residential area of Belgielei, where the two main synagogues are situated.
''We call this town the third Jerusalem after New York,'' one Jewish merchant remarked.  Security has always been tight in the diamond area, where some $3 billion worth of stones change hands each year. But while wary of robbers, the merchants never seem to have imagined that they would be the target of an anti-Semitic bomb attack.
''The proof is that we all have insurance against theft and fire, but few are insured against a bomb explosion,'' Mr. Nutkewitz said.  The merchants charge that the police failed to check out the van that contained the bomb. Despite a ban on parking in the area, the van was allowed to remain overnight outside the synagogue with its windows papered so that no one could see the lethal charge inside. A back wheel had been removed and a jack placed under the axle to make it appear that the vehicle had been caught in a blowout without a spare tire.
''You could say that there was some imprudence'' Mr. Nutkewitz said.


End of Document