AP Explains: Qatar's ties with Iran and Islamist groups
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 12, 2017 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 884 words
Byline:  By AYA BATRAWY and SARAH EL DEEB Associated Press  
Body


DUBAI, United Arab Emirates - The political crisis engulfing Qatar stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. Qatar denies the allegations, but its ties with Iran and embrace of various Islamist groups have brought intense scrutiny, made it a regional outlier and created enough smoke to spark a fire.
Last week, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain severed ties with Qatar amid a slew of punitive measures. On Friday, the four Arab states upped the pressure by naming 59 people and several charities linked to Qatar on a terrorist list.
Qatar said the moves were politically motivated: "We do not, have not and will not support terrorist groups," the Foreign Ministry said.
It can be a matter of perception. Governments in the region routinely cite terrorism as justification to clamp down on political opposition and rights activists.
Some groups Qatar has backed - such as the Muslim Brotherhood - are seen by many as a legitimate political force. Others, including some hard-line Sunni rebel factions in Syria, are not that different ideologically from groups that Saudi Arabia backs there.
President Donald Trump firmly positioned himself Friday with Arab states in their standoff against Qatar. Speaking from the White House, Trump said Qatar "has historically been a funder of terrorism at a very high level."
Here's a look at the various groups Qatar's accused of supporting and its relationship:
AL-QAIDA, ISLAMIC STATE
Qatar's Arab neighbors have accused it of backing al-Qaida and the IS group's ideology across the region, from Syria to the Sinai Peninsula.
Experts and groups in Syria say Qatari finances have indirectly propped up militant groups. Similar accusations were leveled at Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries in the early days of Syria's 2011 uprising, but experts say these governments amended their official stances and financing laws.
Some express concern that the row between Saudi Arabia and Qatar could undermine all finances to the Syrian opposition - where, on the ground, the lines are blurred over which groups cooperate with radicals.
Hassan Hassan, a Syria expert, said Qatar has never supported al-Qaida or IS directly. However, he said Qatar has supported Ahrar al-Sham, whose founders are linked to al-Qaida. For its part, Saudi Arabia once hosted members of Ahrar al-Sham at a Syrian opposition conference in its capital.
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
The Islamist Sunni group remains one of the region's most polarizing. Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Egypt view it as a direct threat to their rule and deem it a destabilizing force. However, the Brotherhood's offshoots remain active in Jordan and Tunisia.
The Brotherhood was elected to power in Egypt after protests toppled longtime autocrat Hosni Mubarak in 2011 and Qatar aided the Brotherhood-led government in Cairo with billions of dollars. It was a key supporter of the group's offshoots in Syria and Libya.
Qatar argues it supported Egypt as a whole, and not one particular faction, when the Brotherhood was in power.
Egypt's military ousted the Brotherhood and unleashed a lethal crackdown against its members amid mass protests in 2013. Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Egypt outlawed the group and branded it a terrorist organization, accusing it of plotting attacks. Brotherhood affiliates in the Gulf have been arrested.
Gulf monarchies accuse Qatar of providing financial support, a haven and even citizenship to Islamist opposition figures from their countries.
HAMAS
The Palestinian group, an offshoot of Egypt's Brotherhood, is considered a terrorist organization by Israel and its Western allies. The group, which rules the Gaza Strip, has fought three wars with Israel and is seen by some in the Arab world as an armed resistance force against Israeli occupation.
Saudi Arabia says Qatar must sever ties with Hamas.
Qatar has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in roads, housing and a major hospital in the Gaza Strip offering a lifeline for jobs in the devastated area that is under an Israeli-Egyptian blockade. Its support for the territory makes Qatar one of its few foreign backers.
Qatar says its work in Gaza is "purely humanitarian" and its engagement with the group has been in the context of internationally backed peace talks.
RANSOM PAYMENTS
A deal negotiated recently to release kidnapped members of Qatar's ruling family has been a source of anxiety for Gulf leaders, particularly in Saudi Arabia, which views Iran as its top adversary.
Qatar reportedly paid hundreds of millions of dollars to an Iranian-backed Shiite militia that had kidnapped the 26 hostages on Dec. 16, 2015, from a desert camp for falcon hunters in southern Iraq.
Egypt has asked the U.N. Security Council to investigate reports that Qatar "paid up to $1 billion to a terrorist group active in Iraq" to free the hostages, which would violate U.N. sanctions.
Qatar says it supported the Iraqi government financially only for its efforts in the release of hostages and that it did not deal with armed groups there.
Several people close to the negotiations say Qatar also paid a hefty sum to Islamist groups in Syria, including one linked to al-Qaida, for the evacuation of the residents. They told The Associated Press that the talks were probably the region's most complex and sensitive hostage deal.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Sept. 21, 2012 file photo, a Syrian boy shouts slogans against the Syrian government in front of a flag of the armed Islamic opposition group, the Nusra front, during a demonstration in Aleppo, Syria. Qatar's isolation and the political crisis engulfing the country stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. Qatar's Arab neighbors have accused it of backing al-Qaida and the IS group across the region, from Syria to Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. (AP Photo/ Manu Brabo, File)  FILE -- In this May 21, 2017, file photo, President Donald Trump, right, holds a bilateral meeting with Qatar's Emir Sheikh Tamim Bin Hamad Al-Thani, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Qatar's isolation and the political crisis engulfing the country stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. Trump on Friday, June 9, 2017, firmly positioned himself with Arab states in their standoff against Qatar. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci, File)  FILE - In this Feb. 18, 2011 file photo, senior Egyptian cleric Sheik Youssef el-Qardawi speaks to the crowd as he leads Friday prayers in Tahrir Square in Cairo, Egypt. Qatar's isolation and the political crisis engulfing the country stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. On Friday, June 9, 2017, the major Arab states added al-Qaradawi to their list of so-called terrorists. He is widely seen as the Brotherhood's spiritual leader and has been based in Qatar's capital, Doha, for years. (AP Photo/Khalil Hamra, File)  FILE -- In this Oct. 23, 2012 file photo, then-Emir of Qatar Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, center right, and then Gaza's Hamas Prime minister Ismail Haniyeh, third left, arrive for the corner-stone laying ceremony of a center providing artificial limbs, in Bait Lahiya, northern Gaza Strip. Qatar's isolation and the political crisis engulfing the country stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. Qatar denies the allegations, but its ties with Iran and embrace of various Islamist groups have brought intense scrutiny, made it a regional outlier and created enough smoke to spark a fire. (AP Photo/Ali Ali, Pool, File)  FILE- In this April 21, 2017 file photo released by the Qatar News Agency, the Emir of Qatar Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, second left in front row, receives released kidnapped members of Qatar's ruling family at the Doha airport in Doha, Qatar. The isolation and political crisis engulfing Qatar stems from accusations by its Arab neighbors that it supports terrorism. Qatar reportedly paid hundreds of millions of dollars to an Iranian-backed Shiite militia that had kidnapped the 26 hostages on Dec. 16, 2015 from a desert camp for falcon hunters in southern Iraq. (Qatar News Agency via AP, File) 

Load-Date: June 15, 2017


End of Document