AP Exclusive: Bridge collapse survivor linked to IS in Syria
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 28, 2016 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 471 words
Byline:  By AMY FORLITI Associated Press  
Body


MINNEAPOLIS - Mohamed Roble was weeks shy of his 11th birthday when the school bus he was on plummeted more than 30 feet as the bridge beneath gave way.
Now, according to court testimony in a federal terrorism trial, Roble - one of the 145 people injured in the Minneapolis bridge collapse that killed 13 people - is believed to be in Syria with the Islamic State group.
Roble and four of his siblings were on the bus that was carrying 52 students and several adults when the Interstate 35W span collapsed on Aug. 1, 2007, sending shockwaves nationwide about the safety of the country's infrastructure. All of the occupants of their bus survived.
His injuries included headaches, arm, neck and back pain, nightmares and post-traumatic stress disorder, records show. One letter from a therapist said Roble "seems the most traumatized of all the siblings" and "he worked on his spiritual belief that ‘God had saved him for a purpose.'"
For his injuries, a 2009 state court order says, Roble was due to receive a lump sum payment of $65,431.22 on his 18th birthday - roughly a month and a half before federal prosecutors say he left the U.S. for Istanbul.
Roble's name surfaced in federal court last week during the trial of three Minnesota men accused of conspiring to travel to Syria to join the IS group. Testimony has suggested that at least some of the men in the group knew Roble had money and asked him to fund their own trips. One man believed Roble had gone to Syria with thousands of dollars and used it to pay for fighters' weddings and cars.
The bridge collapse was not mentioned during the trial. The Associated Press made the connection using state court records to trace the bridge collapse victim to a Minneapolis high school, then matched the victim's yearbook picture to a photo the government has provided of the young man believed to be in Syria. A handful of people who knew the family also confirmed the match.
According to evidence presented in federal court last week, Roble flew to Istanbul in October 2014 as part of an itinerary that included a trip to China. He was due to return to the U.S. in June 2015, but never did, FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force Officer Joel Pajak testified.
"We received information that Mr. Roble ended up in Syria with his uncle, Abdi Nur," Pajak testified.
Nur is among 10 men charged in the case and is believed to be fighting with the Islamic State group; six others have pleaded guilty, and testimony in the trial of the other three wrapped up on Friday.
Prosecutors say the men were part of a group of friends who recruited and inspired each other to join the Islamic State group. Roble has not been charged, but prosecutors included his picture in a court exhibit that contains the photos of 16 men who authorities say joined or conspired to join militant groups in Syria and Somalia.

Graphic

 
 This undated photo provided by the U.S. Attorney's Office shows Mohamed Roble. According to court testimony in a federal terrorism trial, Roble, who was one of 52 passengers that survived when the school bus they were on plummeted more than 30 feet after the Aug. 1, 2007, Minneapolis bridge collapse, is now believed to be in Syria with the Islamic State group. U.S. Attorney's Office via AP)  FILE - In this Aug. 12, 2007 file photo, workers remove a school bus from the interstate 35W bridge collapse site in Minneapolis. The school bus was carrying 52 children from a visit to a water park when it dropped with the bridge during the collapse. All the children survived the fall. According to court testimony in a federal terrorism trial, Mohamed Roble, who was one of the passengers on the bus, is now believed to be in Syria with the Islamic State group. (AP Photo/Nati Harnik, File) 

Load-Date: May 30, 2016


End of Document