Apartments are raided in terrorism probe in N.Y.
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
September 15, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 511 words
Byline: Tom Hays and Devlin Barrett Associated Press
Body


 WASHINGTON ? FBI agents and police raided three apartments in New York City before dawn Monday during an investigation of a man suspected of being an al-Qaida associate. The searches came after the man, who was under surveillance for possible links to the terror network, visited New York City over the weekend and left the area, Rep. 
Peter King, R-N.Y., said after receiving a briefing on the operation from federal law enforcement officials Monday. Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who also was briefed Monday, said a terrorist attack was not believed to be imminent. He added that the law enforcement action was unrelated to President Barack Obama's visit to the city Monday. "The activity in Flushing earlier this morning was related to an ongoing Joint Terrorism Task Force investigation," said NYPD spokesman Paul Browne. Residents on Monday described officers armed with search warrants swarming their immigrant neighborhood at about 2:30 a.m. One, Afghanistan native Akbari Amanullah, said when he arrived home from work afterward, he was told that one of his roommates had been hauled away. Authorities raided two apartment buildings blocks from each other in a working-class residential area. One is a three-story building at 41-16 Parsons Blvd., the other a six-story apartment building at 144-67 41st St. Residents of the 41st Street apartment building said a man living there was arrested Monday morning. He returned later in the day, they said. No arrests were announced.  Neither the FBI nor the NYPD would discuss the whereabouts of the al-Qaida suspect or whether anyone was being held for questioning in New York. A White House spokesman said Obama, who spoke on Wall Street on Monday, had been briefed on the investigation. Two U.S. intelligence officials, who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the case publicly, said the target of any purported attack ? or who would carry it out ? remained unclear. Authorities have not found any weapons ready for use that would indicate an attack was imminent, they said. Nevertheless, one of the officials called the threat very real and emphasized the urgency of it. Another person briefed on the matter, who was not authorized to discuss the case and requested anonymity, said the raids were the result of previous law enforcement surveillance of people. The investigation was continuing. Schumer said he couldn't discuss much of the case because many of the details were still classified. "There was nothing imminent, and they are very good now at tracking potentially dangerous actions, and this was preventive," he said. Resident Kabir Islam said he saw FBI agents and police officers surrounding the three-story apartment building when he arrived home after 3 a.m. Amanullah, a taxi driver, said about a dozen FBI agents went to his nearby fifth-floor apartment, which he shares with four other Afghan natives, at about 2:30 a.m. Contributing: Eileen Sullivan, Lara Jakes, Pamela Hess and Adam Goldman, Associated Press; and Anthony M. DeStefano and Zachary R. Dowdy, Newsday  

Load-Date: September 15, 2009


End of Document