APEC officials discuss trade, terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 22, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 407 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CABO SAN LUCAS, Mexico
Body


Officials from countries on both sides of the Pacific Ocean called for greater efforts to battle terrorism on Monday as they began a weeklong summit in this Mexican beach resort.
Last year's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Shanghai, China, came shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks and the participants pledged to help the United States fight terrorism.
From the first day, it was clear the battle against terrorists would be a major theme at this year's summit as well.
"Terrorism is a common enemy of mankind, and a big threat to trade and business," said Li Baodong, the Chinese Foreign Ministry official in charge of APEC issues. "There is no safe place in the world if we cannot strengthen our fight against terrorism."
APEC delegates also condemned the recent deadly terrorist bombing attacks on the island of Bali in Indonesia and at several locations in the Philippines.
President Bush is expected during the leaders' summit this weekend to push nations with large Muslim populations to crack down on extremist groups, and to seek support for a possible war with Iraq.
Monday's meetings of representatives from APEC's 21 members were intended to finalize the summit's agenda. Delegates were discussing ways to encourage trade between APEC member nations and to spur economic development amid a sluggish global economy.
Delegates on Monday discussed the recent corporate scandals in the United States, saying countries need to standardize and strengthen their accounting practices to ensure corporate stability.
After the delegates' meeting Monday and Tuesday, ministers from member nations were to meet on Wednesday and Thursday. Heads of state were to arrive on Friday and meet Saturday and Sunday.
In addition, more than 400 chief executive officers from companies around the world were scheduled to hold a parallel meeting starting Thursday, sending government leaders recommendations on how to help the private sector.
Francisco Gutierrez, a Mexican member of APEC's business advisory council, said the private sector wanted guarantees that the war against terrorism won't hurt free-trade initiatives.
"What worries us is that … it will affect the possibility of making commerce easier," he said.
APEC members are: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, the United States and Vietnam.

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document