Apologizing For Suspicions Unnecessary In Post-9/11 World
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 11, 2007 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 8
Length: 542 words
Body


Six years after the Sept. 11 attacks, we remain at war abroad and on edge at home, a reality known to the two University of South Florida students indicted recently for transporting explosives across state lines.
Yet the families of Ahmed Mohamed and Youssef Samir Megahed maintain the men are being discriminated against because they are Egyptians. "If he were a different nationality, this would not have happened," said Ahmed's father in Cairo. "This happened because he is Muslim and Arabian."
In alleging discrimination, supporters blow past the grand jury's indictment, which says the men were transporting explosives across state lines - a crime no matter your nationality.
We applaud the law enforcement officers who followed their instincts, looked under the hood and took these students to jail.
And frankly, people of Arab descent who visit America should be sensitive to our fears - and follow our laws.
We no longer live in a world where people - no matter their dress, headwear or skin color - have the luxury of acting suspiciously. Act oddly at the front gate of MacDill Air Force Base and see what happens. Show up at the airport with a box cutter in your carry-on and see what federal authorities do.
In this era of terrorism, everyone must be aware of how their actions might be interpreted because to shrug off suspicious behavior would only invite history to repeat itself.
The need to manage perceptions applies especially to our Arab guests because frankly, Americans will not easily forget that it was Islamist extremists who flew airplanes into our buildings. Neither can we ignore the steady messages of hate and destruction sent our way by Muslim radicals in the Middle East. So you can understand why citizens would get nervous when they hear that people of Arab descent were found carrying explosives.
Our judicial system will determine whether these two men are guilty of terrorist acts, but without question, they are guilty of using terrible judgment in their host country. They are only fortunate that America guarantees the right to a fair and speedy trial, a guarantee they wouldn't receive in their native Egypt - the native home of Osama bin Laden's chief lieutenant, Ayman al-Zawahri.
While some are ready to lock up the students and throw away the key, most Americans have become more restrained in rushing to judgment, given that the government has been prone to dramatics in making terrorism arrests. Still, the justice system can be counted on to sort facts from hyperbole.
Like the mens' families and advocates, we are eager to see the evidence. Authorities should be more forthcoming with details now that an indictment has been handed down.
Mohamed and Megahed are not the only ones who hope their arrests are a big misunderstanding. To think that Florida has again become home base for people who support terrorism - as it was in the Al-Arian case and with the majority of the Sept. 11 hijackers - is chilling.
If only someone who came in contact with the hijackers had looked under the hood. It might have been a misunderstanding. But then again, 3,000 people might not have been killed, six years ago today.
Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: September 16, 2007


End of Document