Appeals Court Throws Out Sentence in Bombing Plot, Calling It Too Light
The New York Times
February 3, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 721 words
Byline: By JOHN SCHWARTZ
Body


A federal appeals court on Tuesday threw out the 22-year prison sentence imposed in 2005 on Ahmed Ressam, known as the Millennium Bomber, who plotted to set off explosives at Los Angeles International Airport on New Year's Eve in 1999. The court said the sentence was too light.
  A three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, said Mr. Ressam did not deserve the ''substantial reduction'' in his sentence from the minimum of 65 years in federal sentencing guidelines because he backed out of his agreement to cooperate with investigators. 
  The court also took the unusual step of calling for a new trial judge to consider the next sentence, because the federal judge who issued the original decision had already once declined to increase Mr. Ressam's prison term.
  It was the second recent ruling in which an appeals court called for consideration of tougher sentencing in a terrorism-related case. In November, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, sent the case of Lynne F. Stewart, a lawyer found guilty in 2005 of aiding terrorism by smuggling information from an imprisoned client to his violent followers in Egypt, back to a trial judge to determine whether she should receive more than her 28-month sentence.
  Experts in national security law said the Ressam decision on Tuesday showed that the federal courts could handle terrorism issues, in the face of recent criticism that plea deals and defendant protections could make it difficult to convict and sentence terrorists. 
  ''Some might have pointed to the relatively low sentence Ressam received as evidence that somehow civilian prosecution does not pack enough of a punch in these cases,'' said Robert Chesney, an expert on national security law at the University of Texas Law School. ''This reversal shows that the appellate process can police for such things, to at least an extent.''
  During two years of cooperation under his plea agreement, Mr. Ressam provided information on Al Qaeda's organization, recruitment and training, and also testified against one of his co-conspirators, Mokhtar Haouari. But he stopped working with investigators in 2003 and later recanted his previous testimony. 
  In 2005, after a long delay, Judge John C. Coughenour of Federal District Court sentenced him to 22 years in prison with five years of supervised release.
  Both Mr. Ressam and the government appealed the decision, with the government asking for a tougher sentence. 
  In 2007, the Court of Appeals struck down the 22-year sentence and sent the case back to Judge Coughenour for resentencing. But in December 2008, the judge handed down the 22-year sentence once again.
  The appeals court, taking up the case once more, demanded another round of resentencing, and in the opinion issued Tuesday concluded that the lower court erred in not justifying the sentence.
  ''It is unclear what reason there is to reward a defendant at all for cooperation, at the same time that the defendant is disavowing having intended to cooperate and loudly proclaiming that his statements should not be believed,'' Judge Arthur L. Alarcon wrote for the majority of the panel. Judge Coughenour's previously expressed views, he wrote, ''appear too entrenched to allow for the appearance of fairness.''
  In a dissent, Judge Ferdinand F. Fernandez wrote that the court had overstepped its authority and should defer to lower court sentencing decisions. ''Even if we have to grit our teeth to do so, we should let it be,'' he wrote.
  Andrew C. McCarthy, a former federal prosecutor who has tried terrorism cases and who has been critical of the Obama administration's decision to try terrorism suspects in civilian courts, said Mr. Ressam's case was one that was properly channeled through the criminal justice system -- especially since he was arrested in 1999, before the Sept. 11 attacks and thus before Congress passed the authorization for the use of military force that put the nation on a war footing.
  Mr. McCarthy said defendants facing life sentences might be happy to take a deal at first, but after years of being asked for additional information and testimony might ask, ''When does this ever end?'' But, Mr. McCarthy said, ''The fact is, it never ends -- because it's very valuable to get out from under a life sentence.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ahmed Ressam (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)                                         

Load-Date: February 3, 2010


End of Document