Appetite for terror cover growing among buyers; TRIA's end could shrink market, surveys suggest
Business Insurance
December 20, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 1087 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


The market for terrorism insurance is alive and well, according to studies released last week by the two largest insurance brokers.
In fact, the reports, released separately by Marsh Inc. and Aon Corp., showed that risk managers' appetite for adding terrorism insurance to their programs has grown considerably over the past year or so.
However, both reports also warn that congressional inaction on extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act through the end of 2007 could wreak havoc in the marketplace. TRIA, which created a federal backstop for private insurers faced with losses arising from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire on Dec. 31, 2005.
New York-based Marsh's analysis of 754 U.S. companies that renewed their property insurance policies between July 1 and Sept. 30 of this year found that 43.9% took up terrorism coverage, whether backed by TRIA or not. That represented a slight decrease from the 46.2% of the companies surveyed in the second quarter of this year and the 44.2% that reported doing so in the first quarter. Nevertheless, the percentage of companies taking up terrorism insurance in the third quarter of this year marked a significant increase over the 26% that reported taking up terrorism coverage in the same quarter of 2003, according to the report.
Aon's study, based on a sample of about 500 U.S. companies, found an even greater take-up rate for all types of terrorism coverage, including non-TRIA-backed policies. According to the Chicago-based brokerage, 57.1% of the companies studied had purchased some sort of terrorism coverage by the end of the third quarter of this year, compared with only 24% during the first quarter of 2003, when TRIA-backed coverage first became available.
The Aon white paper asked ''What is causing the increased take-up rates?'' and provided its own answers.
''One reason could be that risk managers have become more familiar with the risk and their risk transfer options. A more compelling argument can be made that after the chaotic rollout of TRIA, with its attendant pricing confusion, a more rational market has fostered rational decision making. More importantly, pricing for TRIA and associate coverages dropped during the period examined,'' according to the white paper.
Marsh's report also found that more than 95% of the companies that reported buying terrorism coverage in third quarter of 2003 renewed the coverage during the third quarter of this year.
Pricing for terrorism coverage continued to soften during the third quarter, Marsh's research found. The median terrorism rate as percentage of total insured value fell to 0.0053% during the third quarter of this year, compared with 0.0076% in the second quarter and 0.0080% in the first quarter.
''Interestingly, this price is virtually identical to that of a year ago, just as the second quarter's rates were similar to those of a year ago,'' the report says. ''This suggests that insurers renewed terrorism coverage in both quarters on, essentially, a flat-rate basis.''
The Aon white paper found an even steeper decline, with median quarterly terrorism pricing as a percentage of total insured values dropping from just under 0.0070% during the fourth quarter of 2003 to slightly more than 0.0040% during the third quarter of 2004.
As a percentage of overall property premium, terrorism coverage represented a median of about 4.2% during the third quarter, down from 5.0% during the second quarter of this year, Marsh found. During the third quarter of 2003, terrorism coverage amounted to about 3.7% of total premium, while the median percentage for the past 12 months stood at 4.7%, said Marsh.
Steve Lundin, a managing director at Marsh in New York and one of the study's authors, said, ''If you peel the onion back one level deeper,'' the industry in which a company falls appears to be one of the most important factors in determining whether the company buys terrorism cover.
''Take-up rates among financial institutions (75%), educational institutions (59%), and the habitational/hospitality sectors (52%) continued to rise,'' the report notes. The real estate and retail sectors also reported take-up rates of more than 50% for the third quarter.
The take-up rates for financial institutions in the second quarter had been 59.5%, for education institutions 37.5% and for habitational/ hospitality 45%. Real estate's take-up rate for the third quarter dropped somewhat from 69.2% to 60.5%, but retail nearly doubled, to 54.8% from 31.3% in the previous quarter. Changes for other sectors were generally not as dramatic.
In contrast, utilities reported a significant drop in the take-up rate from the second to third quarters, falling to 25% from 62.5%. ''However, compared to the same quarter a year ago, the take-up rate of 25% was virtually unchanged,'' the report said.
''It is worth noting that a large number of the utilities renewing in this quarter are situated in the Western region,'' said the report. This region has consistently had the lowest take-up rates and...now has the highest pricing. The low take-up rate in the utility industry for this quarter may be a function of these regional and pricing factors.''
Aon's white paper also places special emphasis on the issues raised by the uncertainty surrounding TRIA reauthorization.
''TRIA's importance as a backstop cannot be overstated,'' according to the white paper. It warns that ''obviously, another terrorist event in the U.S. could kindle a massive increase in demand, perhaps after the opportunity to reauthorize TRIA has expired,'' Aon said.
''We think this is going to be a very big problem for the market,'' said Aaron Davis, New York-based vp-Aon Risk Services and one of the authors of the study. ''We would anticipate substantial market disruption without the $100 billion annual aggregate backstop. We fully support the renewal of TRIA....If you take a look at the available capacity in the market from a surplus standpoint to respond to property and casualty losses, there's approximately $116 billion of surplus available. If you look at the $100 billion of annual aggregate capacity that's being offered with the TRIA backstop, it's quite clear that the loss of that $100 billion would have a dramatic impact on the industry's ability to write terrorism insurance.''
For more information on ''Marketwatch: Property Terrorism Insurance Update-Third Quarter 2004,'' contact a Marsh office. Aon's ''Terrorism Risk Management & Terrorism Risk Transfer Overview'' can be accessed at www.aon.com. 

Load-Date: December 22, 2004


End of Document