APPROVAL BY U.N. CALLED KEY FOR BUSH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 24, 1990, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 13A
Length: 398 words
Body


ANDREWS AIR FORCE BASE, Md. (AP) - President George Bush would have a far better chance of getting Congress to approve the use of force in the Persian Gulf if the United Nations first backed such a move, congressional leaders said Friday.  ''It would have some significant impact if the United Nations granted such a resolution,'' House Speaker Thomas Foley, D-Wash., said after arriving home from a Thanksgiving visit to U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.  Foley and other leaders said they had no commitment from Bush to seek congressional approval before ordering a military action in the Persian Gulf, should the president choose that option.  Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell, D-Maine, said a U.N. resolution authorizing force against Iraq would improve Bush's chances but not necessarily guarantee congressional approval if the president sought it.  ''It would depend upon the circumstances that exist at the time,'' he said.  Senate Republican leader Bob Dole said he would urge Congress to reconvene immediately if the United Nations endorsed the use of force to free Kuwait from Iraqi occupation.  ''Then I would hope Congress would reconvene and take similar action,'' the Republican from Kansas said.  In addition to joining Bush for Thanksgiving dinner with U.S. forces at several posts around Saudi Arabia, the congressional leaders met Thursday night with Saudi King Fahd. Dole said Fahd told him he planned to visit soon with some of the American troops.  The leaders said they came away from their trip impressed with the readiness of U.S. troops and their morale after more than three months in the Saudi desert and other gulf areas.
''It was a morale booster for us,'' Dole said.  ''We found their readiness to be excellent and their morale to be high,'' Foley said.  The speaker said he did not believe Bush planned any imminent policy switch. Dole agreed with that assessment but said he believed conditions at the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait, where diplomats are running low on food, could be a ''flashpoint'' in the coming weeks.  Democratic leaders Foley and Mitchell gave Bush high marks for his handling of the crisis to date, although Mitchell said he had ''grave reservations'' about Bush's meeting with Syrian President Hafez Assad.  Mitchell said Assad's Syria has ''condoned terrorism and engaged in terrorism, and he certainly has an absymal human rights record.''

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document