AQUINO REBUKES U.N., SAYING IT FAILED THE FILIPINOS
The New York Times
September 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 909 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 22
Body


President Corazon C. Aquino, delivering her first speech at the United Nations on the same podium where Imelda Marcos stood a year ago, criticized the organization today for not supporting the Filipino struggle to oust Ferdinand E. Marcos.
''We took power to implement so many of the ideals that the U.N. stands for,'' she told the 41st session of the General Assembly on its opening day of debate. ''We have restored human rights and liberated our people from the oppression and corruption of a government that had long since lost their support.
''Yet like so many other leaders before me, I am obliged to say we did this by ourselves.
''It was the Filipino people alone who braved intimidation and cheating at the polls, and when their victory was stolen from them, turned out in the streets by the millions to reclaim and secure it.''
 
King Speaks on Terrorism
Earlier, King Juan Carlos of Spain opened the Assembly session by urging nations to unite against the ''universal scourge'' of terrorism and isolate those countries that tolerate it.
Another national leader, Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway, told delegates that despite the promises made during the gala 40th anniversary session last year, ''the political and economic problems on the agenda of the United Nations persist, and there has over the last year hardly been any progress on major issues before the organization.''
She focused on the budget crisis of the United Nations, calling it ''a manifestation of a fundamental crisis of credibility which has been festering for some time.'' She urged a reform process, ''which will be painful and which will necessarily take time.''
Seven foreign ministers also addressed the Assembly.
 
A Contrast in Styles
Mrs. Aquino, recalling that just a year ago Mr. Marcos's wife, Imelda, stood on the same spot as the representative of the Philippines, said, ''Indeed, as our country bled at the hands of a government that had lost all respect for the rights of our people, its leader's wife came to this podium piously to call for a new human order, this when thousands of Filipinos were political prisoners.''
President Aquino's style today was in marked contrast to that of Mrs. Marcos. Last year Mrs. Marcos, as her country's special envoy and acting Foreign Minister, gave an impassioned speech in which she told the Assembly that the problems of the world were rooted in ''injustice, intolerance, greed and domination by the strong.'' She came dressed in an orange floor-length gown; Mrs. Aquino wore a simple beige suit and maroon blouse.
''There are many ways to run a country, but there is only one way to treat people: with decency and respect for their uniqueness as individuals,'' Mrs. Aquino said.
While people struggling for freedom can ''effectively appeal to international standards of human rights set by others such as the United Nations, yet in the end to vindicate those rights to achieve freedom you are on your own.''
Although she acknowledged that the United Nations Charter precludes the organization from interfering in the internal affairs of sovereign countries, she said that the stricture ''has also been an invitation to hypocrisy.''
 
South Africa Singled Out
''There should be concern about allowing this chamber to be abused by those who claim one standard of behavior and behave according to another back home,'' she said. ''The U.N. would lose all purpose if it were to set about judging one political system against another. Yet equally, if the U.N. does not notice how governments treat people, it is nothing.''
Mrs. Aquino called on the United Nations to ''carefully avoid becoming an unwitting partner'' of the oppressors, adding that the organization must ''take equal note and action of oppression wherever it occurs.''
She singled out South Africa, comparing the imprisonment of Nelson Mandela, the black South African leader, to the imprisonment of her husband, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., under the Marcos regime.
In a message to the people of South Africa, she said: ''Don't waver in your unity. Look only to your own strength and determination. If there was one tactic that served us above all others in our movement for freedom, it was espousing a program of action that kept us united.''
The audience applauded when she said: ''In the end, human values cannot be held down. They couldn't in Argentina. They couldn't in the Philippines. They won't be in South Africa.'' Terrorism the 'Supreme Assault'
King Juan Carlos, in urging nations to unite against terrorism, defined it as the ''supreme assault against the most primary and at the same time most profound of human rights.''
Terrorism ''preys on innocent lives, stimulates catastrophic visions and deprives citizens of their peace,'' the King said.
Terrorism is a critical problem for Spain's young democracy. A recent surge in terrorism by the Basque separatist group E.T.A. has underlined how the group remains one of the most effective and elusive terrorist organizations in Europe.
Without mentioning any country by name, King Juan Carlos condemned those nations that support or tolerate terrorism. ''Support for, and even tolerance of, terrorism disqualifies any state as a member in good faith of the international community,'' he said.
He praised the resolution approved unanimously by the General Assembly last year that condemned terrorism, calling it ''a hopeful step which should be followed by concrete and effective measures of international cooperation.''


End of Document