Arab efforts to fight terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 14, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8A
Length: 411 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


A look at some of the measures Arab nations have planned to fight terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks:
SUMMITS: Saudi Arabia plans an international counterterrorism conference Feb. 5-8, and Egypt is hosting a Nov. 22-23 summit on Iraq's security and future with Arab and G-8 countries as well as the United Nations and other interested parties.
IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS: Fearing Iraq's insurgency will spill over, neighboring governments consult regularly on how to secure porous borders. Syria, Jordan, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey, along with Egypt, agreed with Iraq in July to hold an unprecedented meeting of their interior ministers and security chiefs in Tehran to coordinate security activities. They have yet to set a date.
ISLAMIC FORCE FOR IRAQ: Political heavyweight Saudi Arabia proposes a Muslim security force to help the interim Iraqi government stabilize the country. Yemen and Bahrain offer to help, under certain conditions. Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco and Pakistan consider the idea, which has stalled as violence has worsened in Iraq. Iraqi insurgents warn "swords will be drawn" against any Muslim nation that participates.
GULF SECURITY PACT: Six Gulf Arab states signed a security pact in May aimed at improving intelligence-sharing to combat Islamic terrorists. The pact - its details still undisclosed - will take effect 30 days after it is ratified by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. YEMEN-SAUDI ARABIA: Al-Qaida's roots run deepest in the two neighboring nations, which have greatly increased security cooperation following terror strikes in both countries. The attacks were seen as a backlash against their governments' cooperation with the United States after Sept. 11.
BAHRAIN-SAUDI ARABIA: In July, Bahrain promised its full support to protect citizens and foreigners in neighboring Saudi Arabia and has stepped up security on the 15-mile causeway connecting the two countries.
JORDAN-SYRIA: A bilateral security pact reportedly is nearly complete. Jordan long has worried about arms and drug smuggling into the kingdom via Syria.
IRAN-SAUDI ARABIA: Signed a 2001 pact to work together against terrorism, drug trafficking. Iran also has increased security cooperation with Egypt, Jordan and Turkey. It doesn't cooperate directly with the United States, but says it has returned more than 500 suspected al-Qaida operatives detained in Iran, most of them Saudis, to their home countries.

Load-Date: November 15, 2004


End of Document