Arab nations held to unfair standards
University Wire
July 18, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Kaleidoscope via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 285 words
Byline: By Stephanie Self, Kaleidoscope; SOURCE: U. Alabama-Birmingham
Dateline: BIRMINGHAM, Ala. 
Body


If I were a Muslim in the world today, I would be offended every time I turned around.
The Western world seems to view all Muslims as terrorists who are out to destroy the United States and possibly the world. As with any stereotype, this is not true of most Muslims.
Since Sept. 11, 2001, there has been an attitude of contempt, condescension, hate and revenge toward the Islamic community.
This hatred cannot possibly make sense to innocent Muslims affected by it.Blaming Muslims for the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11 is like blaming all Christians for the genocide caused by Hitler during World War II.
Comedians have made jokes about Arab nations and the Islamic faith. There has been a fear of the entire Muslim world, and some have claimed Islam is an intolerant and evil religion.
If I were in Iran, I would wonder if the United States had learned its lesson in Iraq by going in on unsubstantiated evidence and spending enough to feed millions of starving people on a war fought for an idea.
Terrorism is not a country. Iran is not terrorism. Iranians may think the war on terror is actually a war against Islam.
President Bush has mentioned North Korea as part of the so-called Axis of Evil, and many non-Arab nations view the country this way, yet Iran might see it differently.
How much sense would it make to an Iranian that the world's largest nuclear power is telling you that you cannot develop nuclear energy for your own purposes? It doesn't make any sense at all.
It all goes back to Iran being a Muslim nation. If England were working on nuclear energy, it would not be looked at the same way.
If I were in Iran, I'd probably tell Americans to practice what they preach.
(C) 2006 Kaleidoscope via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 18, 2006


End of Document