ARABS, ISRAELIS RESOLVE TO FIGHT TERRORISM;
DESPITE ISRAEL'S ACCUSATION, THE MIDDLE EAST SUMMIT DID NOT SINGLE OUT IRAN;
BUT IT PLEDGED TO CUT TERRORISTS OFF FROM FINANCING, ARMS, RECRUITMENT AND;
SAFE HAVENS.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 14, 1996, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 724 words
Byline: TERENCE HUNT, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt
Body


Shoulder-to-shoulder in a historic show of solidarity, Arabs joined Israelis at a summit of world leaders yesterday to vow unequivocal support for the bomb-ripped Middle East peace process and an unrelenting war against terrorists.
 
''From all around the world, we have come to the Sinai to deliver one simple, unified message: Peace will prevail,'' President Clinton said as kings, presidents, prime ministers and princes - 28 in all - gathered for what was billed as ''the summit of the peacemakers.''
Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, whose nation was thrown into turmoil by four attacks that killed 62 people over nine days, was visibly moved by the outcome. He spoke of watching ''with an unbelieving eye'' as former Arab enemies pledged to end the scourge of terrorism.
Afterward, Clinton and Peres flew together on Air Force One to Israel, where Clinton met with President Ezer Weizman.
Reflecting on the summit, Clinton said, ''I feel much better about our prospects for presenting a united front against terror and for security.''
Today, Clinton will visit the grave of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, slain by a Jewish militant who opposed his peace efforts. The president also will deliver a speech of sympathy and support for Israel as it grieves the deaths of men, women and children in the bombings.
Clinton was accompanied to Egypt and Israel by CIA Director John Deutch and Secretary of State Warren Christopher. When Clinton returns to Washington today, they will remain behind to work out an anti-terrorism and intelligence agreement between the United States and Israel.
In a political sense, Clinton's advisers hope his trip will enhance his election-year image as a world peacemaker. The summit outcome also could give a boost to Peres, struggling to hold power in May 29 elections.
The hurriedly arranged meeting in this Red Sea scuba-diving resort was aimed at wresting the momentum from the suicide bombers of Hamas, whose attacks stunned Israel and left the peace process in tatters.
''This terrorism is not anonymous,'' Peres said. ''It has a name, it has an address, it has bank accounts. . . . It is spearheaded by a country - Iran. Tehran has become the capital of terror.''
Yet, the summit's final communique did not single out any country by name. Instead, it pledged to crack down on terrorists by cutting them off from financing, arms, recruitment and safe havens. Only Peres and British Prime Major John Major of Britain accused Iran in their speeches.
Notable by his absence was President Hafez Assad of Syria, a nation accused by Washington of supporting terrorism yet a key player in the slumping Middle East peace process. Clinton said he wished that the Syrians had attended but added: ''I wouldn't overread their absence here. It's part of a general pattern of going their own way.''
The leaders pledged to reinforce the peace process with political and financial assistance and with special attention to the ''current and pressing economic needs of the Palestinians.''
They also pledged to convene a working group to chart ''maximum efforts'' against terrorists. Delegates are to meet in Washington within two weeks to draw up recommendations that each country can take through legislative and executive actions.
Short on bold steps, the summit was remarkable for the symbolic message it sent of Arabs standing with Israelis, two ancient foes united now for peace and against terrorism.
Gathered around a long, rectangular table covered with green felt, leaders spoke one by one with varying fervor - some mentioning Israel by name, others speaking more generally about the peace process. They spoke for three hours.
Saudi Arabia's foreign minister, Saud al-Faisal, spoke warmly of hopes to ''energize the peace process.''
Apparently referring both to the suicide bombings and to Israel's closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, he said, ''We equally and unanimously condemn the violent acts which took place in Tel Aviv and the occupied territories.''
He called for ''firmness and serious action'' against terrorists.
Faisal was the most senior Saudi official ever to meet with an Israeli leader. Away from cameramen, he shook hands with Peres.
While condemning terrorists, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat complained about Israel's crackdown, saying it was strangling the Palestinians' economy ''to the extent of famine.''

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Photo: Joe Marquette/Associated Press: SYMBOLISM IN THE; SINAI/President Clinton warned Palestinian terrorists yesterday that ''your; day has passed'' as he addressed a summit conference, attended by more than; two dozen world leaders and delegations from much of the Arab world, aimed at; countering the deadly reality of bomb blasts in Israel with the hopeful; symbolism of peace.; At front from left: Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, President Clinton,; Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Russian President Boris Yeltsin and; Palestinian President Yasser Arafat.(Photo, Page A-1)

Load-Date: March 23, 1996


End of Document