Arabs miss chance to achieve unity
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 13, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 898 words
Byline: By Mary Curtius, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Damascus, Syria
Highlight: Leaders fail to adopt concrete response to threat of American military action against Libya
Body


Even the threat of United States military action against Libya is not a powerful enough incentive to unite the fractured Arab world.
That became clear over the weekend. The Islamic Conference Organization, meeting in Morocco, condemned the US's imposition of economic sanctions against Libya but failed to adopt any concrete response. The ICO's annual meeting ended Saturday without adopting a resolution on the Iraq-Iran war.
What emerged from the ICO meeting and an earlier meeting of Arab League foreign ministers in Tunis last week was a picture of an Arab world that remains both deeply divided and reluctant to offer much support to Libya's erratic leader, Muammar Qaddafi. The United States has linked Libya to terrorist attacks at Rome and Vienna airports Dec. 27.
Western diplomats say they believe some Arab leaders were concerned that the US sanctions may only serve to bolster Colonel Qaddafi's image in an Arab world that is growing increasingly anti-American. Faced with an external threat to an Arab state and a Qaddafi who is holding almost-daily news conferences to broadcast his defiance, more moderate Arab regimes had little choice but to go along with strong condemnations of the US sanctions and its refusal to rule out a military strike against Libya.
The ICO's condemnation of sanctions was considered a diplomatic victory for Libya. But Libya failed to extract a resolution from the ICO or the Arab League calling for an end to investment in the US and a boycott of US products. Libya also failed to persuade Arab foreign ministers to meet immediately to debate Libya's dispute with the US. The ministers will meet, but not until the end of the month.
''The US-Libyan confrontation has turned out to be a war of words, nothing else, and the ICO's resolutions were made in the same context,'' says an Egyptian journalist. ''The Islamic nations don't have a common practical stand to take. They will go no further than statements because there are too many interests at stake.''
Because of the world oil glut, Arabs no longer have an effective economic weapon to use against the US.
Libya is generally disliked. Qaddafi has made, and broken, a series of alliances in the Arab world over the years. He has often been accused by other Arab states, including Tunisia and Egypt, of trying to destabilize their governments. He has been implicated in the assassination of Libyan dissidents in Europe and has only uneasy alliances with Syria and Iran. The regimes in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia, and even Iraq cannot be expected to sympathize much with Qaddafi's predicament, analysts here say.
Internal Arab divisions remain deep. The Saudis have been working hard to mend fences so that a long-delayed Arab summit can be called. They have had at least one success - the reconciliation of Jordan and Syria. But the Saudis have not been able to reconcile Iraq and Syria, or find a way for Iraq and Iran to start peace talks, or reconcile Syria and Libya with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. A large part of the ICO's meeting was spent trying to cobble together a statement on the Iran-Iraq war. But in the end, the representatives were unable even to agree on a bland call for an end to hostilities.
Although even moderate regimes such as Jordan's have expressed exasperation with the US's Middle East policy of late, there is no consensus in the Arab world on how to deal with the superpower.
The threat to Libya has diminished. Immediately following the Palestinian attacks on Israeli airline counters in Vienna and Rome, much of the Arab world believed that either Israel or the US would hit Libya militarily. But it now seems unlikely that there will be a military response - at least not against Libya.
What the US sanctions have done is to illustrate the difference between US and Arab perceptions of what terrorism is. Egypt and Jordan condemned the Vienna and Rome attacks almost immediately. But to many Arabs, the attacks were understandable, if not justifiable.
''I think the governments of Egypt and Jordan were only bowing to the American and Zionist pressure when they condemned those attacks,'' says a Jordanian newspaper editor. ''Those attacks were not terrorism. They were military strikes by a people who have lost all hope.''
For Americans, the killing of innocent passengers standing at airport check-in counters is a brutal act of terrorism that could not have justification. But many middle-class, moderate Arabs, when pressed about the Vienna and Rome attacks, said in interviews that the US takes too narrow a view of what terrorism is.
Jordanians, Syrians, and Palestinians alike often justify Palestinian attacks by citing Israeli incidents starting with the Oct. 1 bombing of PLO headquarters in Tunis and going back to the blowing up of a section of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem by Menachem Begin's Irgun forces in 1946 during the British mandate.
The US treats what the Arab world views as acts of terrorism by Israel as justified, while condemning Palestinian acts, Arab officials and journalists say bitterly.
It is unlikely that the US-Libyan feud will help bridge the widening gaps between US policy in the Mideast and against terrorism, and Arab views of the same issues. But it is also unlikely that the dispute, as long as it does not lead to a military confrontation, will permanently damage US interests in the region, analysts here say.


End of Document