ARAB LEAGUE LEADER WARNS WEST NOT TO PURSUE "HIDDEN AGENDAS";
 HE CRITICIZES ATTEMPTS TO LINK ISLAM, TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 16, 2002 Sunday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 408 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: VIENNA, AUSTRIA
Body


The United States and its allies should not pursue "hidden agendas" in their widening war on terror because the campaign is not the world's overriding concern, the head of the Arab League said Friday.
Rather, the Arab world's major worry is "the Israeli military occupation of Arab territories and the infringement of the rights of Palestinians," Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa said.
Moussa warned Washington and its allies against using their worldwide hunt for terrorists for "settling accounts and imposing a different world order" - an apparent reference to Arab fears of a U.S. attack on Iraq.
Even though Middle East countries also consider terrorism "evil," joining the Western campaign against it was not the region's top priority, Moussa said.
Moussa spoke at an international conference planning anti-terrorism strategies that was convened by the Austrian Defense Ministry. His comments appeared to indirectly criticize Western participants, who depicted the need for worldwide mobilization of resources against terrorism as the main concern of the international community.
He also argued that terrorism is not linked to any one region, race or religion.
"We see an attempt to link Islam to terrorism," Moussa said. He also criticized unspecified nations and governments for allegedly "accusing all Arab or Muslims of terrorist intentions and cultures."
In separate comments, NATO Secretary General Lord Robertson said the alliance - traditionally focused on conventional warfare - now is paying increased attention to the threats from nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.
Robertson said a NATO summit in Prague, Czech Republic, in November will endorse concrete measures to "sharpen the alliance's terrorist-fighting potential," including approving a "military concept for defense against terrorism."
"Terrorism is no longer a domestic problem," Robertson declared in urging a worldwide alliance against a "threat to international security."
NATO, created in 1949 to counter the threat of a large-scale Soviet-led attack, shifted its focus after the Cold War ended in the 1990s, putting more emphasis on political pressure to prevent conflicts and on the ability to respond to small-scale conflicts like that in Kosovo in 1999.
Since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, the 19-member alliance has moved quickly to join the war on terror, Robertson said, including sending early warning aircraft to patrol American skies after the strikes.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Amr) Moussa; Says Arabs are worried about Israel

Load-Date: June 17, 2002


End of Document