ARABS ERUPT IN PROTEST OVER CRACKDOWN ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 31, 1996, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 625 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Civil disorders, most of them in response to crackdowns on terrorism, broke out throughout Israel and the West Bank Saturday.
In Bethlehem, Israeli Arabs marched and held strikes to protest Israel's periodic confiscations of Arab land and its month-old sealing of Israel's borders with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
In Gaza City, the Palestinian Authority called for an immediate session of the U.N. Security Council to address the closure, said Yasser Abed Rabbo, an associate of Palestinian president Yasser Arafat.
Israel sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip after a series of suicide bombings by members of the militant Palestinian organization Hamas killed 58 people in Israel between Feb. 25 and March 4. The closure bars thousands of Palestinians from jobs in Israel and is straining the Palestinian economy.
In Nablus in the West Bank, 500 Palestinian Authority police broke up a pro-Hamas student demonstration at An-Najah University protesting the arrest of several Hamas members.
"There was a rally organized by the students' union in which Hamas people were criticizing Arafat and his Authority for arresting Hamas activists," a Hamas activist at the rally said.
"Suddenly, policemen entered the campus and started beating up people with clubs and tried to disperse them by shooting in the air and firing tear gas," he said.
In response to the raid, university officials called a two-day strike to protest against what they said was illegal action taken by the police.
"The academic staff will cancel studies for two days in protest over the Palestinian police raid," said Bilal Salami, chairman of the academic staff union.
"There is no justification at all for the break-in. The union has called for the establishment of an inquiry committee in order to avoid future raids," he said.
Palestinian police, at the urging of Israel, have arrested hundreds of Muslim activists since a series of suicide bombings, starting Feb. 25, killed 58 people in Israel. Hamas's military wing has claimed respon sibility for three of the attacks.
An-Najah, with 7,000 students, is the largest university in the West Bank. Palestinian sources have said it is a base for Hamas activities.
Arab residents in 53 Israeli villages went on strike Saturday, while rallies were held in three villages in northern Israel to mark Land Day, an annual memorial to six Arabs killed in 1976 riots protesting Israeli land seizures.
Since Israel captured the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Mideast war, it has confiscated land to build Jewish settlements.
And over the years, Israeli Arabs have used Land Day to demand equal rights and adequate funding for their municipal services and schools and to express solidarity with the Arabs of Palestine.
Bethlehem officials said Saturday that Israel planned to confiscate about 1,750 acres of land from the city and two surrounding villages for road construction. Israeli confirmation was not available.
"Land confiscations are killing the peace, and they are pushing us into a corner," said Shouki Assah, director of the Bethlehem Land and Water Institution.
In the Galilee village of Arabeh, about 2,000 Israeli Arabs called for an end to Israel's closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and raised Palestinian flags and banners that read "Free Palestinian Land".
Such signs of Palestinian nationalism are likely to cause concern among Israeli Jews who have often suspected their Arab neighbors of dual loyalties.
Lebanese Rocket Attack
Hezbollah guerrillas fired rockets into northern Israel on Saturday in retaliation for an Israeli helicopter gunship attack that killed two Shiite Muslim civilians earlier in the day.
The Israeli army confirmed that several rockets hit the western Galilee region. It said there were no injuries.

Load-Date: March 31, 1996


End of Document