Arab Named To U.S. Panel On Terrorism
The New York Times
July 31, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 6; Column 6; National Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 613 words
Byline: By LAURIE GOODSTEIN 

By LAURIE GOODSTEIN 
Body


A Justice Department civil rights lawyer, an Arab American, was named yesterday to serve on a national commission on terrorism as a replacement for another Arab American, whose nomination was withdrawn under pressure from Jewish organizations.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, withdrew the original nomination of Salam Al-Marayati, executive director of the Muslim Public Affairs Council in Los Angeles, on July 9, after an outcry from Jewish leaders, who accused Mr. Al-Marayati of condoning terrorism.
The new appointee, Juliette N. Kayyem, is the last of 10 commissioners to be named to the panel, which has been given six months to review national policy on preventing and punishing terrorism.
Mr. Gephardt maintained that he had removed Mr. Al-Marayati from the commission only because it would have taken too long to get him a security clearance. But Mr. Al-Marayati pointed out that he had already gone through security checks, in order to visit the White House and fly on Air Force II, and because his wife serves on a State Department commission.
Ms. Kayyem already has a security clearance. She has served as counsel in the office of the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights. There, she developed policies to insure that airport antiterrorism measures did not unjustly focus on, or "profile," Arabs and Muslims. She also reviewed Federal policy on using classified information in deportation proceedings.
James Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, said: "She understands the disparate impact that some of this antiterrorism legislation has had on Arabs and Muslims in this country. She understands when biases become bad policy.
"We still think that Salam was a remarkable choice and are very disappointed in the way this was handled," Mr. Zogby said, "but we feel that Juliette is a very competent attorney with sound perspective on civil rights."
Ms. Kayyem, 29, grew up in Los Angeles and is of Lebanese Christian descent. She is married to a Jewish lawyer who recently became a professor at Harvard Law School. The couple just moved to Cambridge.
Ms. Kayyem said, "My experience in civil rights and profiling and security issues is what brought other people's attention to me for this commission, and no one group endorsed it, or said it was O.K., or she'll pass. I don't think that happened."
Jewish groups opposed Mr. Al-Marayati because of statements he or his associates had made that blamed Israel for inciting Palestinians to terrorism, and condoned actions against Israeli troops in southern Lebanon. Mr. Al-Marayati says that he is unequivocally opposed to terrorism but believes it is important to examine its causes.
Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said of Ms. Kayyem's appointment: "We have nothing against her personally, but we're disappointed that the commission won't have a Muslim representative. This leaves the issue of Muslim exclusion from the political process unresolved."
Mr. Al-Marayati and Ms. Kayyem spoke together by telephone yesterday. He congratulated her and said he would be glad to cooperate with the commission, and she asked for his input, they both said.
Mr. Al-Marayati asked Mr. Gephardt to address the lack of Muslim American perspective in public policy. Mr. Gephardt responded in a letter that he and Representative David E. Bonior, Democrat of Michigan, would establish a forum where political leaders could "discuss key issues" with Muslim leaders.
"The unsettled issue," Mr. Al-Marayati said, "is that we have to focus on the selection process and insure there are no litmus tests in the future on any candidates for Government commissions."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 31, 1999


End of Document