Arabic translations challenged;
 Evidence questioned in terrorism investigation
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
August 1, 2003 Friday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 862 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


Lawyers for a Moscow, Idaho, graduate student who's being held in an
 international terrorism investigation are raising questions about government
 translations of his intercepted calls and e-mails, just weeks after a national
 news program highlighted problems with the FBI's language division.
 Sami Omar Al-Hussayen is awaiting trial on 11 counts of immigration fraud
 and false statements. In court documents filed this week, his defense
 attorneys say some of the government's evidence against him may include
 incorrect translations of the Arabic language.
 After reviewing summaries of English translations of 66 intercepted phone
 calls and e-mails, along with the original Arabic, Al-Hussayen's defense team
 concluded ''that many of the summaries are inaccurate, misleading and in many
 instances, outright false," said a motion filed by his attorneys late
 Wednesday. Furthermore, they wrote, ''False statements regarding these
 communications were presented by a government witness to this court at the
 detention hearing."
The CBS News program ''60 Minutes" broadcast a program July 13 titled
 ''Lost in Translation" alleging that the FBI division responsible for
 translating intercepted communications of suspected terrorists is ''riddled
 with incompetence and corruption."
 The report, which noted problems  from unqualified translators to delays
 and conflicts of interest, highlighted the story of a whistleblower who was
 fired from the division after raising concerns. The TV report also noted that
 the FBI says it has now dramatically beefed up its translation capabilities.
 ''Recent news reports indicate that the FBI language division is fraught
 with misconduct, corruption, and incompetence," the defense motion states. It
 asks the court to order any information about such problems that may affect
 Al-Hussayen's case turned over to the defense.
 ''Translation is an important part of the case," said David Nevin,
 Al-Hussayen's Boise attorney. But he declined to comment on the questions
 raised in his motion. ''We will discuss it in court at an appropriate time,"
 he said.
 The motion asks for full translations of all the intercepted communications
 to be turned over to the defense, along with other documents.
 Terry Derden, assistant U.S. Attorney for Idaho, said Thursday that he
 hadn't reviewed the motion, ''But are there a limited number of people in
 America who are qualified to translate Farsi and other languages in the Middle
 East? Of course, the answer is yes. … There's just a limited number of
 people that are available and qualified to translate those languages, and so
 we're working toward that goal."
 Derden said when FBI Special Agent Michael Gneckow testified about the
 intercepts at a detention hearing for Al-Hussayen in March, the agent made it
 clear that he was referring only to summaries.
 ''He testified that those were merely summaries of the conversations and
 were not verbatim transcripts, so a verbatim transcript will be different than
 a summary," Derden said. ''But that doesn't mean they're wrong."
 At the two-day detention hearing, Gneckow offered extensive testimony about
 Al-Hussayen's contacts with associates of international terrorists, and
 suggested that the Moscow computer science student used his student status as
 a cover. Al-Hussayen's real purpose in being in the United States, the agent
 suggested to the court, was more nefarious and included funneling money to
 charities suspected of terrorist ties and operating Internet sites for an
 array of suspect organizations.
 Al-Hussayen, former president of the Muslim Students Association at the
 University of Idaho, maintained he is a peaceful student who was horrified by
 the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. A Saudi citizen, Al-Hussayen is married
 with three young sons. He had nearly finished his doctorate in computer
 science when he was arrested in February.
 Although a federal judge agreed to free Al-Hussayen on house arrest pending
 his trial, he remains in jail because of pending immigration proceedings.
 Authorities also have begun deportation proceedings against his wife and
 children.
 In an order issued Tuesday, U.S. District Judge Edward Lodge set
 Al-Hussayen's trial for January. The trial previously had been scheduled for
 last spring, but was put off because of the case's complexity.
 Derden said thousands of documents and an array of motions are at issue.
 ''I'd say we've already turned over 60,000 documents, something like that,"
 he said. He said federal authorities also have submitted the contents of 21
 computer hard drives, each of which, if printed out and stacked, would exceed
 the height of the Washington Monument.
 ''There's just a lot of potential information that needs to be gleaned and
 reviewed by both sides," Derden said.
 Al-Hussayen's attorneys said in their motion that the English translations
 that authorities plan to use at trial should be provided in full for the
 defense to review.
 But U.S. Attorney for Idaho Tom Moss, in a July 15 letter in response,
 noted that the original Arabic communications were provided.
 ''As in other foreign language related-cases, you are in as good or better
 position to address the translations," he wrote.

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached at (208) 336-2854 or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net.  

Load-Date: August 2, 2003


End of Document