Arab TV tackles terrorism
USA TODAY
October 20, 2005, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 832 words
Byline: Souheila Al-Jadda
Body

Beautiful virgins with white complexions and large black eyes are waiting in heaven. These fair-skinned lovelies are what a growing number of Muslims in Iraq, New York and London believe will be their reward for exploding themselves and killing civilians in the name of Islam.
Muslim scholars and leaders rightly complain that such ideas offer a warped version of Islam that glorifies political violence. But it seems that these same leaders have failed to stem the spread of such ideologies as well as the rise of radicalization in the Arab and Islamic worlds.
In today's TV culture, veteran terrorists such as Osama bin Laden or amateurs such as London bomber Mohammed Sadiq Khan are using video recordings to incite followers to use indiscriminate violence as the only option to bring about political change.
Now, the Arab entertainment industry has started broadcasting its own message about terrorism, using fiction to examine the causes of terrorism while warning against it. During Ramadan (which began earlier this month), when Muslims fast for 30 days from sunrise until sunset, Arab satellite channels compete to capture a hungry Arab audience by debuting the newest TV dramas. Ramadan for television in the Middle East is like November sweeps in the USA.
Drama, Syrian-style
One drama is certain to steal the spotlight by tackling the issue of terrorism and Islam. The new Syrian series Hoor Al Ayn is now premiering on Middle East Broadcast Center (MBC). The Syrian director and producer of the series, Najdat Anzoor, told Abu Dhabi TV that the drama looks at the rise of radicalization in the Middle East by highlighting the lives of terrorists and their victims.
Normally, Arab entertainment remains either apolitical or portrays history long past, such as the Ottoman occupation of the Levant or the French occupation of Syria. But recently TV producers and filmmakers are daringly addressing modern-day issues while carefully trying not to aggravate regional authoritarian governments that don't take criticism well, especially on current affairs.
Hoor Al Ayn, a term found in the Quran, refers to the black-eyed virgins that all male Muslims are promised for performing jihad, or struggle for the sake of God. Jihad has multilayered meanings, most of them peaceful, relating to struggles in life, spirit and religion. But in today's post-9/11 world, jihad has come to mean only one thing: terrorism.
Already stirring controversy with images of violence, Hoor Al Ayn depicts young Arab men wearing suicide vests, carrying machine guns and participating in military exercises, as often seen in archives of al-Qaeda training videos. While splashing graphic scenes of violence, this drama also portrays the aftermath of terrorism and its effect on the Muslim victims.
Fatima Khair, a Moroccan actress in the drama, says the show aims to steer people away from extremism. According to an Egyptian actress in the TV show, Sana Yunis, it is a warning to the audience.
Dissecting terrorism
"We look for what is inside of us and touch upon it, telling people be careful, be careful, be careful," Yunis told Abu Dhabi TV. The message to the audience is clear: Terrorism is wrong.
Another daring Ramadan drama, The Rocky Road, portrays the lives of a cell of resistance fighters worldwide, exploring the phenomenon and logic behind suicide bombings in the Middle East and beyond.
In Jordan, a film is being produced titled #1 Most Wanted, about a college student accused of being a terrorist. The director and lead actor in the film, Samir Khudr, said that the film tries to address both the issues of terrorism and legitimate resistance fighting.
"We always differentiate between terrorist acts with the aim to kill and acts of noble resistance," Khudr said. But many in the West (and the East) struggle with the distinction of these two disparate terms, used by some to further whatever cause they espouse.
Last year, a Ramadan drama titled Road to Kabul highlighted this confusion by portraying the Afghan resistance to the Soviet invasion during the 1980s. Perhaps this program represented too recent a history, or was too closely tied to bin Laden, or it sent the wrong political message glorifying jihad. After only the eighth episode, Kabul was suddenly yanked off the air for reasons that still aren't entirely clear.
These portrayals of current reality indicate the start of a new era in Arab entertainment. The industry is maturing by addressing modern political conflicts throughout Islamic and Arab societies, examining the root causes of terrorism while not shying from self-criticism. These dramas are teaching an important lesson that indiscriminate political violence in the name of Islam is a futile experiment in self-destruction.
For the sake of the security of the Mideast and the world, let's hope that this lesson is being learned.
Souheila Al-Jadda is a journalist and associate producer of a Peabody award-winning news program, Mosaic: World News from the Middle East, on Link TV.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Alejandro Gonzalez, USA TODAY (Illustration)

Load-Date: October 20, 2005


End of Document