Arafat Must Take Greater Steps To Halt Terrorism, Albright Says
The New York Times
September 11, 1997, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section A;  ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 1238 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER  

By STEVEN ERLANGER  
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Sept. 10
Body


Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright made a public show of support today for Israel and for Israeli victims of Palestinian terrorism and accused the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, of not doing nearly enough to crack down on the support network for the terrorists.
In a hospital visit to speak to Israelis wounded in the last two suicide bombings, in a tour of the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial and in her public statements, Ms. Albright used the first day of her first official trip to the Middle East to underline America's close relationship with Israel, its security and its people.
"I will be seeing Chairman Arafat tomorrow, and my message will be clear," Ms. Albright said at a news conference alongside the Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. "It is essential that Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation be serious, sustained and effective.
"At the same time, the Palestinian Authority must take unilateral steps and actions to root out the terrorist infrastructure. If we are to create and sustain an invigorated and accelerated negotiating process, there is simply no other way."
Senior American officials said they agreed with Mr. Netanyahu that Mr. Arafat "is not doing nearly enough" to crack down on radical Palestinian groups like Hamas and Islamic Holy War despite a series of arrests in the last few days.
They said they based that judgment on the evidence provided by an American intelligence officer who sits with the Israeli and Palestinian security chiefs when they meet.
But in private talks with Mr. Netanyahu, Ms. Albright warned him that putting too much pressure on Mr. Arafat would deprive the Palestinian of any political leeway and could force him to defy the Israelis.
In another private discussion, the Israeli President, Ezer Weizman, urged her to be firm with Mr. Netanyahu, a move that drew criticism from Israelis when the conversation was disclosed.
But Ms. Albright is a firm believer in public diplomacy, and it was her public stand that drew immediate cries of bias from Palestinians.
A senior Palestinian official, Hanan Ashrawi, was sharply critical of the way Ms. Albright had begun her one-week visit to the region, saying she had displayed "a wholeheartedly one-sided approach."
Speaking in the West Bank city of Ramallah, Ms. Ashrawi said, "At some point the United States has to decide whether it wants to serve only Israeli interests or whether it wants to serve the interests of peace in the region."
On the other hand, Mr. Arafat had been eager for Ms. Albright to visit the region, as he can use her diplomacy to his advantage. If he decides, for example, that he must respond to pressure for a firmer crackdown, he could present it as a response to the Americans.
Senior American officials rejected Ms. Ashrawi's complaint. They repeated Ms. Albright's assertion that "security is the sine qua non" for progress in restoring genuine mutual confidence and real peace talks, and they said the American strategy had been drawn up with the interests of all parties in mind.
In her public comments, they noted, Ms. Albright insisted on the preservation of the Oslo accords and the need for both sides to keep commitments, including two further Israeli troop withdrawals from the West Bank, which aides to Mr. Netanyahu say Israel would prefer to skip.
She told the Prime Minister to refrain from "unilateral actions" that would pre-empt peace talks.
"Clearly Israel also has a responsibility to shape an environment which will give that process a chance to succeed," Ms. Albright said at the news conference with Mr. Netanyahu. "This means that Israel should be taking steps that build confidence and refrain from actions that undermine confidence and trust."
But she was much harsher and more specific in her comments about Mr. Arafat's need to be convincing on his promises of security cooperation, and American officials said the tack was deliberate.
The officials acknowledged that establishing Israeli confidence about Palestinian security commitments would take some time, and that any serious discussion of political issues -- like peace talks on a final settlement between the two sides -- was many weeks away.
Mr. Arafat, they said, will have to choose between preserving Palestinian unity and making progress in peace negotiations, they said.
"Unless he moves hard against the enemies of peace, who are also his own enemies, there can be no peace process," an American official said.
But in their closed session, American officials said, Ms. Albright also told Mr. Netanyahu that Mr. Arafat needed "more political space" in which to carry out a sustained crackdown on terrorism.
She said Mr. Netanyahu should move quickly to respond to early steps by Mr. Arafat with an easing of the economic pressure that Israel has put on the Palestinian Authority.
The United States has criticized Mr. Netanyahu for holding back tax revenue that Israel owes the Authority, and Ms. Albright asked him to consider "how the long-term fight against terrorism could occur in an environment where Arafat's political space and funds are tightened."
A senior Israeli official said Mr. Netanyahu and Ms. Albright had discussed a list of Israeli actions, which the official did not describe, that could reciprocate Palestinian steps on terrorism. But he emphasized that Mr. Arafat would have to move first, and convincingly.
Having conducted a series of arrests in Gaza this week, the Palestinian Authority moved today to shut down the Islamic Bloc Youth Union there. The organization represents thousands of students and is identified with Hamas.
But Mr. Netanyahu dismissed such moves as the arrests of "sardines, not sharks."
For her part, "Albright thinks a lot more needs to be done by Arafat," an American official said. "She will say to him, 'What more do you need to know that these people are destroying your chance of making peace?' "
At breakfast with President Weizman, Ms. Albright was urged to "be ready to put pressure on Netanyahu" and "bang some heads together, not now necessarily, but later," an American official said. Mr. Weizman, a former Defense Minister, also criticized Mr. Netanyahu's humiliating treatment of Mr. Arafat and said that it was "dangerous to have hungry neighbors," the official said.
Disclosure of that conversation set off a furor among Israeli politicians, some of whom accused Mr. Weizman of privately departing from the political neutrality he is supposed to keep as President. Ms. Albright was visibly moved by her conversations with victims of the suicide bombings at Hadassah University Hospital-Mt. Scopus.
She thanked the 11 patients, most of whom suffered burns and shrapnel wounds, for letting her have what she called "a chance to see real people with tremendous injuries" and added, "I will carry this in my heart."
Daniel Williams, 19, a young seminary student from Miami, was in Israel for only 23 hours before the Sept. 4 bombing but intends to stay. He gave Ms. Albright a letter urging her to be tough on Mr. Arafat and urged her to remember the victims "when you go to embrace Arafat."
Appearing a little annoyed, the Secretary said, "I don't intend to embrace Arafat."
Ruth Sultan, 20, suffers from severe burns and thanked Ms. Albright for coming to meet her and her mother. "I hope her visit will help," Ms. Sultan said, "but I know and feel that those things will happen again and again. I will go on. We don't have a choice; this is our country."

Graphic

 
Photo: Madeleine K. Albright visited bombing survivors after she arrived in Israel yesterday. (Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: September 11, 1997


End of Document