ARAFAT IS SHUNNED BY BUSH, WELCOMED BY OTHERS AT U.N.;
 PALESTINIAN LEADER DEVOTES SPEECH TO MIDEAST CRISIS, ACCUSES ISRAEL OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 12, 2001 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 628 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


Shunned by President George W. Bush and under attack for not doing enough to combat terrorism, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat found a warm audience at the United Nations on Sunday and the ear of the secretary-general.
Arafat was escorted to the podium at the General Assembly's annual debate, an honor reserved for presidents and prime ministers, and many delegates - although not the Israelis - broke out in applause even before he began his speech. Even Bush was not met with the same enthusiasm when h e addressed the 189-nation assembly.
While many world leaders who addressed this year's debate focused heavily on the terrorist attacks on the United States, Arafat devoted his time to the current Mideast crisis and accused Israel of "state-sponsored terrorism."
Despite being unable to secure a meeting with Bush, Arafat praised the president for his recognition Saturday of a future Palestinian state next to Israel.
"We will exert every possible effort to achieve these objectives and will continue to exert our efforts to provide the best conditions for this endeavor," Arafat said, calling for the resumption of peace negotiations as soon as possible.
The Middle East has dominated the agenda here for nearly a decade. But while world leaders focused on terrorism and Afghanistan this year, many - including Bush - made a point of mentioning the crisis in their speeches.
China's foreign minister, Tang Jiaxuan, said in his address Sunday that the unabated violence "not only poses a grave threat to the Middle East peace process and regional stability, but also exerts an increasingly negative impact on world peace."
Much has changed for the 73-year-old Arafat since he addressed the General Assembly last year. In September 2000, he spent three days in New York meeting with Israel's Ehud Barak and then-President Bill Clinton, who made a last-ditch effort to forge a peace settlement ahead of the U.S. presidential election.
But the sides were unable to agree and went home without a deal. Two weeks later, violence in Jerusalem sparked what has come to be known as the Palestinians' second uprising against Israel. Unable to offer his people a way out, Barak lost re-election. Bush's administration kept a low profile on the Middle East in its first months in office and the president has refused to meet with Arafat during his first year in office.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, however, met with Arafat on Sunday and dozens of world leaders turned out for a reception in Arafat's honor at the delegates' dining room.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, who has met several times with the Palestinian leader, was holding another round of talks with him Sunday afternoon. Last week, Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said Arafat was not taking seriously enough the U.S. war on terrorism. Still, Bush told the General Assembly on Saturday that Washington "stands by its commitment to a just peace in the Middle East."
"We are working toward the day when two states - Israel and Palestine - live peacefully together within secure and recognized borders as called for by the Security Council resolutions," he said.
Deputy Israeli Ambassador Aaron Jacob praised Bush's speech but not Arafat's. "He did not mention attacks against Israel or refer to Bush's comments that violence and terror need to end before there can be a state," Jacob told The Associated Press.
Arafat condemned "all forms of international terrorism and state-organized terror," for which he later blamed Israel. But Arafat also said: "I realize the Israeli people … are looking toward peace." And he called on the international community "to exert every possible effort to transfer this vision into a realistic political track in order to enable the Palestinian people to live in peace."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Yasser) Arafat - Calls for resumption of peace negotiations

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document