ARAFAT ARRESTS 35 SUSPECTED MILITANTS / THE PALESTINIAN LEADER PLEDGED TO FIGHT TERRORISM. / THE HAMAS ARRESTS CAME A DAY BEFORE ALBRIGHT'S TRIP.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 9, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 480 words
Byline: Said Ghazali, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERICHO, West Bank
Body


Under pressure from Israel and the United States, Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat pledged yesterday to fight terrorism, and his security forces arrested 35 suspected Islamic militants in the first such sweep since last week's terrorist bombing in Jerusalem.
Many of those detained were members of Izzedine el-Qassam, the military wing of Hamas, which has claimed responsibility for suicide bombings in Jerusalem on July 30 and the one last Thursday. Twenty Israelis and five bombers died as a result of the blasts.
In a message to Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy, Arafat said he would "not tolerate violence and terror, committed either by Palestinians or Israelis." The message, including a renewed Palestinian commitment to peace with Israel, was relayed by senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat.
The Hamas arrests came the day before Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright was to leave the United States on a mission to the Mideast to try to rescue Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking.
Albright is expected to pressure Arafat to do more to fight Islamic militants, especially Hamas. At the same time, members of Congress have turned up the heat on Arafat, some threatening to end U.S. aid to the Palestinian Authority.
In the last few days, Israel has arrested about 100 suspected Islamic militants in West Bank areas still under Israeli control. Israel long has demanded that Arafat carry out mass arrests and crush militant groups.
Arafat has rounded up Islamic militants before, usually in response to Israeli and U.S. pressure after suicide attacks. But he recently had been trying to bring Hamas into the political fold, and had refrained from actions that would alienate its followers.
In addition, Israel has complained about what it calls Arafat's "revolving-door policy," illustrated by the mass arrests of about 900 members of Hamas and Islamic Jihad in the spring of 1996, after a series of four attacks in nine days. Most of those arrested were released in the following months.
After the latest attack, Israel said it would freeze the scheduled handover of West Bank land until Arafat took action.
Arafat has said he would arrest suspected militants only when there was evidence to tie them to attacks on Israel. He also has said he believes the perpetrators of the last two bombings came from abroad, not from areas under his control.
However, yesterday's arrests of Izzedine el-Qassam activists suggested that the bombers, even if they came from abroad, received help from Hamas activists in the West Bank.
Israel radio quoted Israeli investigators yesterday as saying the explosives used in the two Jerusalem bombings were prepared in a Hamas bomb factory in the West Bank town of Beit Sahour, near Bethlehem. Beit Sahour is in an area under Palestinian control.
The bomb factory was uncovered in July when one of the explosives went off by mistake, killing a Palestinian.

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document