Arafat tries to rein in radicals as Israelis vote
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
November 1, 1988, Tuesday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 1
Length: 948 words
Byline: E. A. Wayne, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: MAN ON THE SPOT
Body


Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), is reportedly trying hard to keep Palestinian radicals in line for the weeks ahead.
But he faces a difficult task, both with his friends and his enemies.
Mr. Arafat is seeking to present a moderate Palestinian image during elections in Israel and the United States and before an important Palestinian meeting that follows. He apparently hopes the right outcomes will allow progress in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
As part of this effort, says a well-informed European terrorism expert, Arafat has been using threats, persuasion, and money to prevent an international terrorist incident in the weeks ahead. The PLO and the clandestine United Command in the occupied territories have urged votes for moderation in today's Israeli elections.
But Arafat and his allies face dissent inside the PLO, and possible efforts by Arab radicals to scuttle the process.
This weekend's firebombing of a civilian bus in Israel, and arrests last week in West Germany of Palestinians accused of plotting terrorism, highlight the problems he faces. (Israeli Labor Party hurt by bombing, Page 7.)
The PLO considers attacks on Israel proper as legitimate military operations, which continue. Arafat, however, recently ruled out the use of arms in the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories. The firebombing, which killed a mother and three children, seems to represent a more radical approach, and underlines how difficult it is to control the popular uprising.
In parallel with pressure on radical elements, Arafat is coordinating with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak a move toward reconciliation with Jordan's King Hussein.
The goal, informed Arab diplomats in Washington say, is to show that there is an Arab partner with which Israel can negotiate.
Arafat's moderation is also designed to pave the way for a successful meeting of the Palestine National Council (PNC) later in November, these sources say. PLO and Arab moderates hope the PNC will adopt ''realistic and clear'' decisions that can move the peace process forward, a senior Arab diplomat says.
US Middle East specialists are skeptical that Arafat will overcome the deep divisions inside the PLO at the council meeting.
But the arrest of 13 Palestinians in Germany last week for planning terrorist attacks suggest that some Arab radicals outside the PLO fold may be trying to throw a bigger wrench in Arafat's plans.
Some of those arrested are reportedly linked to a Syrian-supported terrorist group - the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC). Heavy weapons and explosives were found with those caught.
Some US terrorism specialists speculate that the group may have been planning to attack a coming commemoration of the 1938 ''night of broken glass'' in West Germany. On Nov. 9-10, 1938, 30,000 Jews were arrested in what proved to be the beginning of organized Nazi persecution leading to the Holocaust.
The Palestinians arrested last week had reportedly rented an apartment near a Jewish cultural center in Frankfurt where the Nazi roundup is to be mourned. A number of prominent Israelis and West Germans are invited to the ceremony.
Israeli terrorism specialists suggest that those held may also have been building an infrastructure for an attack later in November during the PNC.
At least one of the alleged ringleaders reportedly flew to West Germany from Syria. The PFLP-GC is an anti-Arafat Palestinian group based in Damascus, Syria. Its leader, Ahmed Jabril, was formerly a Syrian army officer. The group is considered by many Western specialists to be a Syrian proxy, but it also has strong ties to Libya. They say the PFLP-GC has not been active in Europe for years, but has worked in Lebanon and Israel.
Syrian President Hafez Assad is a longtime rival of PLO leader Arafat. US Mideast specialists say he strongly opposes Arafat's moderate tilt and growing influence since the start of the Palestinian intifadah in the occupied territories.
President Assad has in the past used terrorism and violence against the PLO. If the PFLP-GC link is confirmed, however, Syria will be in danger of undermining its carefully rebuilt relations with the West. Syria was ostracized for its support of terrorism in the early and mid-1980s.
Washington experts are waiting for more information before drawing firm conclusions about a Syrian role or the plans of those arrested. One well-placed US specialist, however, says that, based on past practice, he and others have been expecting Palestinian splinter groups and their state sponsors to attempt to undermine Arafat's efforts at moderation.
Indeed, Arafat has the least influence over Palestinian dissidents, such as the PFLP-GC or the Abu Nidal Organization based in Libya. He has more clout within the PLO, the European terrorism expert says.
For example, he says, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a PLO member, is very unhappy about Arafat's dealings with Egypt and Jordan. The PLO chief's efforts at moderation are, however, supported by popular sentiment in the Lebanon refugee camps and in the occupied territories, the European expert adds.
''These people want to see if this is really an opportunity for peace, and for a first step toward a Palestinian state,'' he says.
''They are waiting to see who wins the Israeli election and what happens if the PNC declares a Palestinian state and offers conditional recognition of Israel.''
If the current hopes are crushed in the aftermath of Israel's elections, the radicals will feel free to resume their actions, the European predicts, and there may well be a wave of terrorism such as has not been seen for a number of years.

Graphic

 
Picture, Arafat and Jordan's King Hussein met Oct. 22 to bridge differences, AP


End of Document