Arafat needs to be held accountable accountable
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
August 02, 1997, Saturday saturday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A P4A
Length: 688 words
Byline: A.M. ROSENTHAL rosenthal
Body


EVERY time Israeli citizens are murdered by Palestinian terrorism, the
world's leaders respond by spitting on their graves.
They do it by blaming "enemies of the peace," as if the terrorists
were entirely outside the responsibility and control of Yasir Arafat,
anointed as the champion of peace.
And they do it also by continuing to refuse to acknowledge and punish
Arafat's failure to carry out commitments he has made, again and
again. Those commitments might have defeated Palestinian terrorism and
saved the lives of Israelis slaughtered in the latest carnage.  carnage.
The first desecration perverts the truth about how the bombings became
possible. The second permits the United States and other Western
nations to keep pouring money into Arafat's treasury. The distortions
are not only an insult to the Israeli dead, but make more bombings
inevitable.
Arafat is not an enemy of peace, of a kind. Already the peace talks
have given him more than anybody thought he could accomplish by now -
a Palestinian state the world will recognize when he chooses.
Now he is maneuvering on how much territory the state will have, how
free he will be to increase his over-limit army still further, how to
make sure Israel's security conditions do not bring real guarantees to
the Israelis - and for Jerusalem.
In these maneuvers, terrorism is an invaluable weapon. It increases
Western pressure on Israel to soften security conditions "to avoid
war."
He does not, as far as is known, select specific targets. But he seeds
and nurtures terrorism by having his Palestinian Authority invite
violence through sickening anti-Jew propaganda. He allows Hamas, the
terrorist group that says it carried out Wednesday's bombing, to
operate in territory he controls. He allows it to keep its arms and
get more, and to hold political rallies.
He permits his officers, including police chiefs, to take part in
terrorist plans and attacks. He jails terrorists only occasionally and
briefly.
And in case there is any doubt, he gives his imprimatur to Hamas. From
his May 27 interview with Novoye Vremya, a Russian newspaper:
Q: Is Hamas a terrorist organization?
A: The Hamas is one of many patriotic organizations.
Q: Even its military wing?
A: Even its military wing.
All this is in violation of commitments he made against terrorism four
years ago in Oslo to the Israeli Labor government. He made them again
seven months ago to the governments of Benjamin Netanyahu and
President Clinton, as the price for Israeli withdrawal from Hebron.
They are part of a longer list of commitments. It includes the
rewriting of the Palestinian Charter vowing the destruction of Israel,
and the strengthening of security cooperation between Israel and
Palestinians. He broke every one.
The broken commitments make Arafat pragmatically responsible for the
Jerusalem bombing. He does not have to specify targets, just point
toward Israelis, knowing the abundance of Palestinian terrorists.
Sometimes terrorists do inconvenience him a bit by breaking his
political rhythm by their bombings, as when he wants a round of talks
with Israel. But he carries on; encouraging terrorism can be a tricky
business, but worth the trouble.
Among all the nations, only the United States and Israel would even
think of making Arafat pay for his deserted commitments on terrorism.
President Clinton can carry out his own commitments against terrorism
by releasing the full story of Arafat's betrayals. Now they are
coppered over so the United States can give Arafat millions. Whether
or not Clinton gives that order, Congress should cut off U.S. funding
of the Palestinian Authority.
Israel's responsibility is not to be a victim. Arafat is unlikely to
carry out Israeli demands that he disarm and imprison terrorists, for
real, paying particular attention to Palestinian police terrorists.
Then Netanyahu will have to use Israeli troops if he wants the job
done.
The world will denounce Israel, as now customary when Israelis act in
their own interests, even the interest of living. But it might stop
Arafat from digging more graves with his pointing finger - at least
while the world can see.
Rosenthal is a columnist for The New York Times.  times.

Load-Date: August 4, 1997


End of Document