Arafat accepts Israeli offer Small step may lead to broader deal
USA TODAY
September 30, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 479 words
Byline: Lee Michael Katz
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat said Tuesday that
he accepts an Israeli offer to pull back from an additional 13%
of the West Bank of the Jordan River.
"We agreed to it to facilitate the negotiations for a (peace)
settlement," Arafat said after a one-hour meeting with President
Clinton at the White House. "Peace is a Palestinian need, Israeli
need, Arab need, international need."
Asked if a broader deal could be reached next month in Washington
talks with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Arafat replied,
"We hope so."
U.S. officials have cautioned that several key issues remain unresolved,
particularly Israeli concerns about Palestinian efforts to crack
down on terrorism. But Arafat's comments added to hopes of ending
a long stalemate in Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. They reinforced
diplomats' notion that the contentious West Bank withdrawal issue
has been largely settled and that negotiators are now focusing
on the issue of the Palestinian fight against terrorism.
The land Israel has offered to hand over would give Palestinians
full or partial control over about 40% of the West Bank territory
Israel won in a 1967 war.
Arafat conditioned his acceptance by insisting that 3% of the
territory -- a desert nature reserve -- be under joint Israeli-Palestinian
security control. Israeli officials, who had wanted sole control
of security in the nature reserve, hinted they could accept a
compromise. And they said talks now center on fighting terrorism,
not on territory.
Israel wants Arafat to jail terrorists, cut down on his armed
police force, collect illegal arms and formally revoke a Palestine
Liberation Organization charter calling for the destruction of
Israel.
White House spokesman Mike McCurry said a Palestinian crackdown
on terrorism was a focus of Arafat's talks with Clinton and "a
central element" of peace talks.
There has been no breakthrough in Israeli-Palestinian peace talks
since January 1997, when Netanyahu and Arafat agreed upon a pullback
from the city of Hebron.
U.S. officials cautioned that no final agreement has been reached,
despite signs of optimism after Arafat and Netanyahu's visits
to the White House this week.
McCurry said while issues remain unresolved, "momentum" has
been added to the talks.
Netanyahu and Arafat met separately with President Clinton, and
also together with him, Monday. Before Sunday, when the two leaders
met with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright in New York, they
had not been together in a year.
Both leaders agreed to come back to Washington in mid-October
for intensive discussions aimed at finalizing a peace agreement.
"I think the president is determined to see an agreement arise
from this exercise," McCurry said.
U.S. officials are so far discouraging any speculation that the
summit could be at the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md.
That was where an Egyptian-Israeli peace agreement was forged
in 1978.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Mike Theiler, Reuters

Load-Date: September 30, 1998


End of Document