ARAFAT DETAILS ACTIONS AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 7, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 370 words
Byline: DAN PERRY, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Trying to deflect intense pressure, the Palestinian Authority has handed the United States a detailed written response to allegations that it has not acted against terrorism.
 The 17-page document, obtained yesterday by The Associated Press, says the Palestinians have arrested 195 militants, blocked 56 suspect bank accounts, closed 15 illegal munitions factories and 79 unregistered charities and clamped down on militant mosque preachers.
 Yasser Arafat's government "remains committed to peacefully negotiating an end to Israel's occupation of Palestinian territories," said the document, which seemed to be part of a concerted Palestinian effort to convince Western nations that it is sincere in trying to find a way to end 16 months of violence and restart peace talks.
Earlier this week, Arafat wrote an article in The New York Times condemning Palestinian "terrorist groups" who attack Israeli civilians and saying he was "determined to put an end to their activities."
 Israel has dismissed the overtures, and violence has continued, with each side blaming the other.
 "As far as we know, there are no actions, and there are no results," said Danny Ayalon, a senior aide to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. The claims of arrests are especially misleading, he said, because those arrested were "small-fry" who were not on a list of 33 militants who the United States and Israel have demanded be arrested.
 Also yesterday, two armed Palestinians infiltrated the Hamra settlement in the Jordan River Valley, killing three people and wounding four others before soldiers shot and killed one of the attackers, officials and residents said.
 Israel hit back early today. Witnesses said an Israeli warplane fired two missiles at a Palestinian government complex in Nablus. Eleven people were injured, none seriously.
 Earlier, a Palestinian youth was shot and killed in the Gaza Strip by Israeli soldiers, witnesses said. They said he was among youths who gathered near an Israeli military position. The Israeli military said a Palestinian threw a grenade at the post.
 Israeli police in the West Bank seized a Palestinian man on a bus who was wearing an explosives belt, arresting him and defusing the weapon, police said.

Load-Date: February 8, 2002


End of Document