ARAFAT JOINS ISRAEL'S WAR ON TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 07, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. C1
Length: 396 words
Byline: AP
Body


GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip (AP) Under pressure to prove their people want peace, Palestinian lawmakers took a crucial step today toward gauging that commitment.
By holding their first meeting, the lawmakers set a two-month deadline for deleting references to Israel's destruction from the PLO charter.
For Israel, the need to revoke those clauses has grown more urgent since Muslim militants began a suicide bombing campaign late last month, killing 61 people in nine days. Until the charter is amended, Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel warned on Wednesday, peacemaking is on hold.
Under the terms of the Israel-PLO accords, the Palestinians have two months from their legislature's first meeting to revise their charter. That clock started ticking today when Yasser Arafat convened his parliament in Gaza City for its inaugural session.
"We decided to have the meeting despite the difficult circumstances," legislative council member Marwan Barghouti said Wednesday. "We insist on showing the other face of Palestinians the democratic face. The bombings only reflect a small minority, and the majority of Palestinian people condemn it and reject it."
But while the charter amendment is tied to the council's first meeting, it is not the council that will amend it. The Palestine National Council a different body that includes Palestinians from outside the West Bank and Gaza Strip must convene in the next two months to revise it.
The Palestinian legislative council was elected Jan. 20 in voting won overwhelmingly by Arafat and his supporters. The bombing war launched a month later by Hamas militants has forced him to join with Israel in arrest sweeps and raids designed to crush terror cells.
Israeli troops have blockaded 465 towns and villages in the West Bank and increased their presence in the partly autonomous rural areas. They have arrested dozens of Palestinians, sealed militants' homes and shut universities and other institutions linked to Hamas.
An Israeli newspaper reported today that the army has deployed tanks along the line between Israel and the West Bank for the first time since 1967 to keep out Palestinians.
Moshe Elad, an Israeli army colonel, dismissed the report, saying the newspaper might have witnessed a routine transfer of tanks in the West Bank.
"Tanks are in the West Bank all year long," said Elad, the chief liaison officer with the Palestinians.

Graphic

 
The Associated Press * Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat reviews troops upon arrival at the Parliament building in Gaza City today for the first session of the Palestinian Parliament. The legislative council, which was elected in January, convened as Arafat joined with Israel to fight militants threatening peace with a wave of suicide bombings.

Load-Date: March 7, 1996


End of Document