Arafat Tells Christopher He'll Act Against Terrorism
The New York Times
December 8, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section A;  ; Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 858 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  

By ELAINE SCIOLINO,    Special to The New York Times  
Dateline: GAZA, Dec. 7
Body


Yasir Arafat said the words he was supposed to say today.
In conciliatory language praised by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization pledged to do whatever he could to end attacks against Israeli troops and civilians, which have increased over the last two months.
If that happens, the American thinking goes, Israel might be less reluctant to withdraw its occupation troops from Palestinian towns and villages in the West Bank, as required under the agreement signed with the Palestinians on the White House lawn 14 months ago. Such a withdrawal would pave the way for elections that would legitimize Palestinian rule in the territories that they will be allowed to control.
In a news conference with Mr. Christopher after their hourlong meeting, Mr. Arafat made clear to those Palestinian militants who carry out terrorist acts that only the political organization that governs in his name is in charge.
"We are proud of our democracy," Mr. Arafat said, speaking in English. "But everybody has to understand that there is one authority. It is the Palestine National Authority in the Palestinian territories, and everybody has to respect the law."
Mr. Arafat essentially acknowledged that he understood that unless Israel felt secure, the troops would not withdraw and the elections would not take place.
"We are looking to have very quickly the elections," Mr. Arafat said. "But at the same time, we are putting into consideration the needs of security for the Israelis, and we are ready to discuss it in detail with them."
Ninety-four Israelis have been killed by Palestinian militants since the agreement was signed in September 1993.
The atmosphere in today's meeting between Mr. Christopher and Mr. Arafat was dramatically better than when they met at the seat of Palestinian rule in Gaza in July. During that meeting, Mr. Arafat angered the Israelis when he asserted that they had usurped his role by inviting King Hussein of Jordan to Jerusalem, and he frustrated his American visitors by failing to get his financial house in order.
Today, by contrast, Mr. Christopher praised Mr. Arafat for better fiscal management in recent months, which has convinced donor states to send previously committed funds and pledge even more.
Eight days ago the United States, Russia and the European Union promised to provide $105 million by the end of March to cover the budget deficit of the Palestinians' fledgling administration and to speed up aid to Israeli-occupied territories. Palestinians have complained that they have reaped few financial benefits from making peace.
"It was the best meeting I ever had with Chairman Arafat," Mr. Christopher told President Ezer Weizman of Israel, an aide to Mr. Christopher quoted him as saying.
"Excellent! Terrific!" a State Department official who attended told CBS News.
Even the ever cautious Mr. Christopher told reporters that he and Mr. Arafat had closed the philosophical divide that has characterized their earlier meetings.
"I encouraged the chairman today and his colleagues to create a rule of law and other institutions which will give Palestinians an effective government, an accountable government, the kind of government they deserve and need," Mr. Christopher said.
"The chairman also made it clear that he understands the responsibilities and commitments that he has undertaken in the Declaration of Principles and that he intends to carry out those responsibilities against terrorism and violence."
The question that Palestinian leaders sometimes pose quietly is this: If the forces of the Israeli Army cannot stop terrorism in the occupied territories how can they? But the Declaration of Principles signed by the Israelis and Palestinians requires Mr. Arafat to curb Palestinian violence.
Under extraordinarily tight security, Mr. Christopher and his entourage drove in armored vehicles through Israeli and Palestinian checkpoints to Mr. Arafat's modest, one-story headquarters on the Mediterranean.
The meeting went so well that Mr. Christopher's praise of Mr. Arafat seemed to soften remarks made upon his arrival in Israel Tuesday evening that were widely interpreted as a sign of Washington's mounting frustration with Mr. Arafat for failing to end terrorist attacks by Palestinian groups on Israeli targets.
But Mr. Christopher suggested again today that Israel cannot be expected to withdraw its army from the occupied West Bank until Palestinian attacks on Israel come to an end.
"No one who is familiar with Israel's history can reasonably expect Israel to move toward the objective without insuring that their security remains a constant companion of the peace and the efforts to succeed in peace efforts," Mr. Christopher told reporters after a meeting this morning with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
Contrary to earlier suggestions that Israel might not live up to its agreement to withdraw its troops from the West Bank, Mr. Rabin said at the same news conference, "I believe that the Government of Israel should continue to stick to its policy, to do whatever we are committed by our agreements with the Palestinians and Jordanians."

Graphic

 
Photo: Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., pledged yesterday to protect Israelis from terrorists. He invited Secretary of State Warren Christopher to join him for a news conference after their meeting in Gaza City. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: December 8, 1994


End of Document