Arafat must choose between peace and terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 6, 1990, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 22A; COLUMN
Length: 632 words
Byline: Anthony Lewis
Body


Are Yasser Arafat and the PLO committed to seeking a political destiny for the Palestinians by political means? Or do they condone terrorist acts by Palestinians?
 
    That is the issue posed by last week's attempted guerrilla attack on the Israeli coast. It is a fateful issue for Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian cause.
 
    The guerrillas, in two speedboats, were stopped by Israeli forces.  Responsibility for the raid was taken by the Palestine Liberation Front, a faction headed by Abul Abbas, who is a member of the PLO executive committee.
   Arafat said the PLO was "not responsible" for the raid and had "no connection with it." But he declined to condemn it, and he rejected the idea that he remove Abul Abbas from the executive committee, saying that could be done only by the PLO's exile parliament, the Palestine National Council.
 
    In the days since the raid much attention has focused on whether it will lead the United States to stop talking with the PLO. Inside the PLO there has been resentful comment about American calls on Arafat to condemn the raid. A leader cannot act to please the  United States, it was said.
 
    But what is at stake is not the pleasure of the United States. It is the hope of the Palestinian people for an end to Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, the hope for a chance to govern themselves.
 
    The speedboat raid was a devastating blow to those Palestinian hopes. That is so for a reason that most leading Palestinians well understand: Palestinians can make political progress only by convincing Israel of their desire for negotiation and peace.
 
    The raid was devastating, too, for Israeli peace groups. Its effect was to give powerful support to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and the extreme right, who depict Palestinians as terrorists not fit to meet in negotiations.
 
    Professor Yaron Ezrahi of the Hebrew University, a leader of Israel's Peace Now movement, said: "I doubt that there will be much capacity for Israeli moderates to push for negotiations with the PLO after this. It is as if the PLO factions have decided to play the role assigned to them in a drama written by Yitzhak Shamir."
 
    All that is surely clear enough to Arafat. He knows that terrorism cannot force concessions from Israel, that to the contrary every terrorist act strengthens those in Israel who want to keep the occupied territories forever. Yet he hesitates to speak clearly.
 
    There is a reason in history for Arafat's reluctance to choose. He has built up Palestinian national consciousness precisely by avoiding ideological disputes by making the PLO an umbrella that covers all in the Palestinian cause.
 
    But the time for fudging has run out. Abul Abbas is a terrorist, and he does not belong on the executive committee of an organization committed to negotiation and peace with Israel. PLO organizational technicalities are unimportant. Yasser Arafat can speak. That is what leaders are for.
 
    The Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza feel powerless and abandoned now. Since the May 20 shooting the Israeli army has put down protests with tactics deplored by Israeli human rights groups.  At least 16 have been killed; hundreds of thousands of Gazans have been confined to their homes for days.
 
    The United States sharply increased the feeling of hopelessness when it vetoed a Security Council resolution to send a U.N.  investigating mission to the occupied territories. Secretary of State James Baker had indicated that he would agree to the mission. At the least he owed a gesture to West Bank leaders, the moderates who have been in the eye of U.S. policy.
 
    But that does not affect Arafat's responsibility. It is his choice: to condemn terrorism or to let the faint hopes of peace flicker out.
 New York Times News Service

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document