ARAFAT SETS OUT TO WOO AMERICA;
HIS TERRORIST PAST IGNORED IN TORRENTS OF SUDDEN GOODWILL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 15, 1993, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 672 words
Byline: RUTH SINAI, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


Yasser Arafat set out yesterday to charm America. In Congress, a bastion of anti-PLO sentiment for 20 years, he was given a gift and told he was ''very welcome.'' And at the National Press Club he wooed his audience with humor and pathos.
His message was clear: ''Let us speak for the future, not for the past.''
Arafat's past -- as guerrilla leader and sometime-terrorist -- seemed drowned in an outpouring of goodwill.
From the senators with whom he had breakfast, Arafat said he won promises that they would ''do their best'' to drum up financial aid for the Palestinian self-government about to be established in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
To be sure, the lawmakers also told Arafat they not only would have to find the money but would have to repeal laws that ban U.S. aid to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, said he had ordered ''a complete review and identification'' of anti-PLO laws. He then sent Arafat on his way with a small gift: a decorative pewter box.
And House Speaker Thomas Foley declared Arafat had ''a very engaging personality and was very well informed on all the issues involved.'' He said the Palestinian was ''very welcome here.''
''I love you,'' shouted a neighbor of the Rev. Jesse Jackson to Arafat when he called on the civil rights leader. Terrell Madison was rewarded with a bear hug from the Palestinian.
It was all music to the ears of the man who had for 19 years been denied entry into the United States. He returned later in the day to the United Nations, where in 1974 he offered an olive branch in one hand and a pistol in the other.
Yesterday, the pistol was nowhere to be seen although Arafat still declined to condemn ongoing terrorism against Israelis in the Gaza and West Bank. Asked why, Arafat merely said that in signing the mutual recognition agreement with Israel he had pledged to renounce terrorism.
''We are looking to strengthen more and more the relationship with the American people and we are counting on you'' to help, he told a National Press Club luncheon.
Setting aside a prepared text, Arafat appealed to the emotions of his audience of journalists -- and other viewers watching on C-SPAN -- saying: ''Maybe some of you don't know what it means to be a refugee … as myself, still far away of my country,'' and others, ''homeless, stateless, even without an identity card.''
He struck a conciliatory tone toward his new partner in peace -- Israel. While insisting that the PLO was demanding Israel's withdrawal from Arab East Jerusalem, which the Israelis captured in the 1967 Mideast war, Arafat also did not rule out some form of international control over the holy city.
Told that Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin had flatly rejected any non- Israeli sovereignty over the city, Arafat responded, ''If there is a will, there is a way.''
And he reiterated that even though he expected the five-year interim self- government to result in an independent Palestinian state in Gaza and the West Bank, such a state would immediately confederate with Jordan.
That's the solution preferred by Israel's Labor Party, which views a confederated Palestinian-Jordanian state as less of a threat than a free- standing Palestinian one.
But it wasn't so much what Arafat said as how he said it -- apologizing several times for his ''poor language'' which nonetheless was clear enough to make jokes setting off gales of laughter.
Asked about Iranian-led opposition to the accord he signed with Israel Monday, Arafat responded, ''slogans, slogans,'' saying the only alternative to the agreement was confusion and Balkanization.
Asked whether he would ever discard his trademark military uniform, Arafat answered, ''I am not a lizard.'' And when he realized the audience could not understand his pronunciation, he added, ''I am not a chameleon.''
Would you ask Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to take off his uniform? he asked. ''I am commander-in-chief of our army and I am proud to have this dress.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document