Arafat Applies for Visa to Visit U.N.
The New York Times
November 26, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 732 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 25
Body


Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, confronted the Reagan Administration with a difficult political decision today when he applied for a United States visa so he can address the United Nations next week.
Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, said that applications for Mr. Arafat and three associates had been submitted to the United States Embassy in Tunisia.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz is expected to decide on the applications, perhaps after consulting the White House, but it is not clear when an announcement will be made. In Tunis, aides to Mr. Arafat said he hoped to address the General Assembly on Dec. 1 or 2, during debate on the Palestinian question.
State Department officials said the decision rested on difficult political, legal and factual questions, like whether Mr. Arafat had been involved in terrorism and posed a security threat.
 
'A Policy Call'
Aides to Mr. Shultz said he had received conflicting advice from different parts of his own department, much of it opposed to issuing a visa for Mr. Arafat. A key figure in the debate, the State Department legal adviser, Abraham D. Sofaer, has apparently not taken a firm position for or against.
An official involved in the debate said Mr. Sofaer had advised Mr. Shultz that the decision was essentially ''a policy call'' and that it was possible under the law to justify either granting or denying a visa for Mr. Arafat.
At the American Embassy in Tunis, Zehdi Labib Terzi, head of the P.L.O. observer mission to the United Nations, handed in Mr. Arafat's Algerian passport. He also sought a visa for himself and for Jamal al-Sourani, a member of the P.L.O. executive committee. He told reporters that he would return later with an application for Mahmoud Darwish, a Palestinian poet who serves on the executive committee.
Mr. Redman said, ''We will severely scrutinize Arafat's application for a visa in the light of applicable law and regulations and other pertinent circumstances.''
 
Reasons to Approve or Deny
Israel, many members of Congress and some American Jewish organizations have urged Mr. Shultz to turn down the application on the ground that Mr. Arafat is responsible for terrorist acts around the world.
On the other hand, Egypt and several other Arab countries, several European countries and some Middle East experts in the State Department have urged Mr. Shultz to approve the issuance of a visa. They argue that the United States could enhance the prospects for peace in the Middle East and encourage the P.L.O. to move in a more moderate direction by permitting Mr. Arafat to speak at the United Nations.
American officials said that rejecting the application would cause an uproar of protest at the United Nations and in the Arab world, but that granting it might have the effect of encouraging Mr. Arafat to visit frequently. On his last visit to the United Nations, in 1974, he said that he came ''bearing an olive branch and a freedom fighter's gun.''
Under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement of 1947, the United States is not supposed to ''impose any impediments to transit'' of people invited to the United Nations on official business. But the United States has always reserved the right to exclude such people if they posed a ''security threat.'' Terrorism and the P.L.O.  The United States has invoked that right to bar the entry of people who have engaged in espionage here or in other countries.
State Department officials said that Mr. Shultz would be criticized for whatever decision he might make on a visa for Mr. Arafat. ''It's a difficult issue, and there are down sides all the way around,'' said a department official.
In a speech this week, L. Paul Bremer 3d, head of the department's counterterrorism office, hinted that he would not welcome a visit by Mr. Arafat. Some journalists and even some governments have concluded that the P.L.O. renounced terrorism at its meeting in Algiers last week, but ''this is nonsense,'' Mr. Bremer said.
The P.L.O. reaffirmed support for a statement that it made in Cairo in 1985, Mr. Bremer said. The statement condemned terrorism but endorsed ''the Palestinian people's right to resist the Israeli occupation of their land in any way possible,'' he said. ''By explicitly excluding Israel and the occupied territories from coverage, the Cairo declaration by implication endorses terrorism in these areas.''


End of Document