ARAFAT VOWS NEW EFFORT TO COMBAT TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 14, 1996, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7D
Length: 545 words
Dateline: EREZ CROSSING, GAZA
Body


U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher won a fresh commitment from Yasser Arafat Saturday to try to stem political violence by Palestinian groups. Christopher also hailed the "important steps" the PLO chief already has taken.
"I was very pleased this morning to have Chairman Arafat emphasize his complete commitment to combatting terrorism in all the territories of the West Bank and Gaza," Christopher said after a one-hour meeting with Arafat in Gaza.
Christopher is on a Middle East shuttle aimed at pushing forward negotiations between Syria and Israel.
"The chairman has been speaking out against terrorism and has been taking very important steps to work with authorities in the region to ensure that violence and terrorism shall be kept to a minimum," Christopher said at a news conference.
Former Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon charged in a Jerusalem Post article Friday that Arafat had "consistently broken" his commitment to stop Palestinian acts of violence. Since 1993, 162 people have been killed in such violence.
A U.S. State Department report last month credited Arafat with helping to avert violence, although it criticized him for appearing to support guerrilla actions in some speeches.
Arafat did not mention the issue at the news conference and evaded a question about last week's assassination of Yahya Ayyash, a master bombmaker for the militant Hamas movement.
The cellular telephone that exploded and killed Ayyash is widely assumed to have been booby-trapped by Israeli intelligence agents. Israel declined to officially comment on the case.
Later in the day, Christopher briefed Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres on his four-hour meeting Friday in Damascus with Syrian President Hafez Assad.
Christopher said the leaders of Israel and Syria were determined to reach an agreement by the end of the year.
t Talks are scheduled to resume near Queenstown, Md., on Jan. 24.
Peres took a more restrained view of the outlook for an accord. "Things are moving ahead," he said. But he added, "You cannot achieve everything in one jump."
Christopher was to fly back to Washington on Sunday.
Pope's Warning
In Vatican City, Pope John Paul said Saturday that Middle East peace could be dashed if differences persisted over the status of Jerusalem. He called for international guarantees to preserve its multi-religious nature.
In an annual state of the world address, he criticized Muslim states that he said denied religious freedom and said that African leaders would condemn their continent to pariah status unless they mended their ways.
His speech, to ambassadors from more than 160 countries that have relations with the Holy See, included a call for a swift end to nuclear testing. French President Jacques Chirac will visit the Vatican this week.
Discussing Jerusalem, the pope said the city, sacred to Jews, Christians and Muslims, should be the subject of negotiations between Israel and the new Palestinian Authority during 1996.
While the Vatican and Israel established full diplomatic relations in 1994, both sides are still formally at odds over the status of Jerusalem. Most countries, including the Vatican, do not recognize Israel's claim to Jerusalem as its "united and eternal capital" following annexation of the Arab eastern sector in 1980.

Load-Date: January 14, 1996


End of Document