ARAFAT TRIES TO END RIFTS WITH MUSLIMS;
ISRAEL SAYS PALESTINIAN LEADER IS 'APPEASING TERRORISM' BY SETTING UP MEETINGS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 20, 1997, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 04A
Length: 519 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Instead of cracking down on Muslim militants, Yasser Arafat is sending out peace feelers to Islamic and other opposition groups, calling on them to join in a national dialogue.
Arafat has scheduled two sessions with opposition groups, one in the Gaza Strip today and another in the West Bank town of Ramallah on Thursday.
Hamas, the largest Islamic group and the one Israel blames for numerous suicide attacks, including the market bombing in Jerusalem on July 30, is expected to attend with the Iran-backed Islamic Jihad faction and some leftist factions.
Israeli officials have reacted by accusing Arafat of "appeasing terrorism" with sweet talk instead of tough action.
They demand that Arafat arrest the militants and close offices that raise money and recruit new members.
Khalil Saqa, prayer leader of the Hamza mosque in Gaza City and a Hamas supporter, praised the call for unity. He said it was an opportunity to confront Israel, which has imposed tough economic sanctions and travel bans on Palestinians because of the Jerusalem bombing.
"Arafat is rejecting the Israeli demand to outlaw the Islamic movement," Saqa said.
"This is a good start, and we can now sit together to see what we will do in order to face this challenge," he said.
Still, some militants are skeptical of Arafat's motives and fear he is using them to improve his image, which has been undercut by charges of widespread corruption in his government and by the lack of progress in the peace process.
Khaled Suleiman, a Hamas activist in Hebron, warned that Arafat's effort could backfire unless he gives Islamic groups real power.
"If they want it to succeed, they have to share decision-making power with all Palestinian movements," Suleiman said.
 
'This Is A Game . . .'
Perhaps the main reason Arafat is using the carrot instead of the stick on Hamas is his own weakening political position.
"This is a game that Arafat has played over the years," said Abdel Sattar Qassem, a political science professor at An Najjah University. "Each time he faces hard times, he tries to get the Palestinians together.
"Once the pressure is relieved, Arafat will turn his back on everyone."
Qassem said Hamas - which commands no more than 30 percent support - got a brief surge of popularity after the July bombing, but Palestinians are not enthusiastic about any of the political groups.
Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian peace negotiator, said Arafat's message to the militants will be that "political pluralism" is welcome, but violence is not.
After suicide bombings killed about 60 people in Israel last year, Arafat began a crackdown that struck at the roots of Hamas and the smaller Islamic Jihad group.
By May 1996, he had jailed hundreds of activists, including the political leaders of Hamas, whose beards were shaved off in prison.
Political offices were closed, arms caches were unearthed, pro-Hamas prayer leaders were removed from mosques, and money from abroad was monitored.
About a year ago, Israeli security officials say Arafat began loosening the reins, releasing Islamic activists from jail and allowing funds to flow again to Hamas organizations.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Photo headshot - (Yasser) Arafat

Load-Date: August 21, 1997


End of Document