Arafat will get not one tear
University Wire
November 10, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Cornell Daily Sun via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 926 words
Byline: By Jamie Weinstein, Cornell Daily Sun; SOURCE: Cornell U.
Dateline: ITHACA, N.Y. 
Body


For nearly four decades Yasser Arafat has plagued the world as the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). He has been credited by some as the father of modern terrorism.
His "success" can only be attributed to the world community's inability to punish and condemn terrorism. From the late 1960s through the 1970s, when Palestinian terrorists were hijacking planes and killing Israeli Olympians with Arafat's aid, the world community -- most notably the Europeans -- did little to show that terrorism moves one backward, not forward, in rectifying any grievance these terrorists claimed to be acting on behalf of.
One startling survey cited by Alan Dershowitz in his book Why Terrorism Works indicated that, "of the 204 terrorists arrested outside the Middle East between 1968 and 1975, only three remained in prison at the end of 1975." Translation: Commit terrorist acts and there will be no punishment.
Quite the opposite, in fact. Because of Arafat's strategy of terrorism, the world community not only didn't meet out any real punishment against the PLO, but began to embrace the Palestinian cause and Yasser Arafat himself. By advancing Arafat's agenda the world was saying that if you commit terrorist acts we will reward you. This only provided more incentive to Arafat to continue his strategy of terrorism and laid down the framework for other aggrieved groups to attempt to advance their agenda by resorting to the heinous tactic of terror.
Throughout his life, Arafat jumped from Arab country to Arab country, causing problems in the host country and continuing his sponsorship of terrorism abroad. Was he a successful revolutionary? Undoubtedly. A successful terrorist? You bet ya. A man of peace? A laughable notion.
When the late Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin brought Arafat from the depths of his political exile after supporting Saddam Hussein in Gulf War I to bring him back to Israel in the hopes of creating a peace partner to negotiate with, he showed a bit of idealism and his own deep longing for peaceful tomorrows in the region. But in line with his character, Arafat deceived the world, pretending to be serious about peace while indoctrinating Palestinians with hate and the unreal notion that one day from "sea to sea, all of Palestine will be free."
Nothing could be more characteristic of his disinterest in peace than his rejection of the phenomenal deal offered to him by former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak at Camp David in 2000. Barak went out on a limb and offered more than anyone could have imagined, risking the condemnation of some Israelis in an effort to make peace. The Palestinians would have had a state in well over 95 percent of the West Bank and all of Gaza, with Jerusalem to be shared.
Saudi Ambassador to the United States Prince Bandar bin Sultan told Arafat that if he rejected this deal, it would not only be a "tragedy," but a "crime" against the Palestinian people. But what criminals do is commit crimes, so Arafat rejected the deal and again resorted to terrorism in the form of the so-called Palestinian "intifada." Today, thousands of innocent people have died who did not have to because of Arafat's decision at Camp David.
Over the last four years, Arafat both directly and indirectly sponsored destructive terrorism against innocent men, women, and children inside Israel, while trying to claim otherwise to the international community. For his efforts, the Palestinians may have grasped the world's attention, but they are much further from statehood and far worse off in every measurable standard than they were four years ago.
President Bush rightly broke off United States contact with Arafat in 2002 after he lied directly to the President about his knowledge and role in the Iranian arms shipment to the Palestinian territories. Those who know anything about Arafat know his life is one of deceit. Perhaps with Arafat gone the United States will be able to engage with a leader of the Palestinians who truly seeks peace; that is if such a leader ultimately is empowered and if the territories don't break out in civil war.
Arafat's demise has elicited different emotions from different people, with the European community especially overflowing with sadness and one BBC correspondent openly admitting on air that she wept when Arafat was transferred from Ramallah to Paris. While Arab tyrants may mouth niceties and condolences about Arafat in public, behind the scenes many of them probably aren't particularly broken up about his demise either -- all Arafat was for them was a hassle to deal with while they used the Palestinian issue to distract their populaces from the great inequities that they were committing upon them.
Arafat's legacy is not a pretty one. He showed the world how terror can be used effectively to advance a political agenda. Though he supposedly lived his life for the Palestinian people, he was never able to better their condition, though he had his opportunities. Presented with such a chance in the twilight of his life, the life-long terrorist turned his back on it and opted for "revolution," all the while hoarding away hundreds of millions, if not billions, of dollars that were earmarked by the international community to help his people. Not the record of man who history will look kindly upon. Far from it.
God alone will ultimately decide upon the fate of Arafat's soul. As for here on Earth, his death won't be mourned by those who seek peace and deplore terrorism. From us, he will get not one tear.
(C) 2003 Cornell Daily Sun via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 10, 2004


End of Document