ARAFAT BATTLING FOR ISRAEL ACCORD IN HIS FATAH GROUP
The New York Times
September 4, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Column 3;
Length: 1292 words
Byline: By ROGER COHEN,

By ROGER COHEN,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: TUNIS, Sept. 3
Body


Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, struggled today to rally his mainstream Fatah movement behind proposals for peace with Israel, a first step to gaining the support of a sharply divided P.L.O.
Palestinian officials said several members of the Fatah Central Council had expressed vehement criticism of the content of the peace proposals and of the secretive manner in which they had been drafted. But they added that Mr. Arafat expected to secure the backing of Al Fatah, the most moderate group in the organization.
The fact that the peace proposals did not address the status of Jerusalem and the future of Jewish settlements on the West Bank were among the concerns voiced at the Fatah meeting, which began last night and continued today.
 
Concern Over P.L.O.'s Future
 There was also concern over the future of the P.L.O., which some officials suggest should be transformed into a provisional organ of Palestinian self-government. Others have feared that the peace initiative may lead to a civil war among Palestinians in the occupied territories.
"In the P.L.O., we have our opponents," Bassam Abu Sharif, a senior aide to Mr. Arafat, said in an interview. "That is not a secret. There are extremists on our side, as there are on the Israeli side. But the overwhelming majority is for our proposal, and Mr. Arafat will get the support he needs."
If Al Fatah endorses the plan, as is expected, Mr. Arafat will seek the approval of the P.L.O. executive committee, which includes representatives of opposition groups like the Damascus-based Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. It seems inevitable that this will take at least a few days.
But although Mr. Sharif and other Palestinian officials continue to express optimism over the rapid signing of a mutual recognition agreement between Israel and the P.L.O. and of an accord in principle for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, there are growing signs of substantial disagreements within the mainstream of the organization.
One such conflict centers on the issue of whether Israeli recognition of the organization is necessary before the signing of the proposed accord on Gaza and Jericho.
Mahmoud Abbas, a close associate of Mr. Arafat, told Al Khaleej, a daily in the United Arab Emirates, today that Israeli recognition of the P.L.O. was an essential condition for moving ahead on the Gaza-Jericho plan for Palestinian self-government.
 
Another View of Recognition
 But Mr. Sharif disputed that view. "Mutual recognition only affects who will sign the agreement in principle on the Gaza Strip and the West Bank," he said. "If there is recognition, the P.L.O. will sign. If not, the Palestinian delegation at the peace talks in Washington will sign. Obviously, we would prefer that it be the P.L.O."
[Two committee members, Mohammed Jihad and Subhi Abu Kirsh, stormed out of the meeting after protesting Mr. Arafat's plan, saying he had settled for too little and left too many issues unaddressed, The Associated Press reported.]
 Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, who is in Paris today pursuing European backing for the peace plan, also said that mutual recognition and the accord on Palestinian self-rule were separate issues. "The recognition chapter is completely detached," he told Europe One radio.
Behind the verbal acrobatics on this issue stand substantial political questions whose resolution is extremely complex. The P.L.O. does not want to be seen as trading essential elements of its claims in return for recognition from Israel, while the Israeli Government must demonstrate clearly to its citizens that it has not transformed its longstanding view of the organization as a terrorist group without a reason.
Palestinian officials do not hide the fact that recognition from Israel is now a cornerstone of Mr. Arafat's policy.
In effect, he has gambled that after recognition from Israel, he can quickly get similar recognition from the United States and West European governments, opening the way for funds to flow to his cash-strapped organization.
The money could be used to bring about the sort of tangible improvements in the lives of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip that have the power to elicit support for the peace plan and stanch the growing popularity there of the Islamic Resistance Movement, or Hamas, and other fundamentalist groups.
But problems remain. As a condition for recognition of the P.L.O., Israel wants it to formally renounce terrorism, and officials here say the Israeli Government understands terrorism to include the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, known in Arabic as the intifada. This demand is unacceptable to the P.L.O.
Moreover, the organization wants some statement on the status of East Jerusalem and on future statehood in any agreement on mutual recognition.
 
Position on Terrorism
 It also contends that it has renounced terrorism and acknowledged Israel's right to exist, as well as superseded its 1964 covenant calling for the dismantling of Israel, in statements made by Mr. Arafat in Geneva and Paris in December 1988 and May 1989.
But Israel views those statements as insufficient and is pressing for formal acts and statements from the P.L.O. to make its positions unequivocal.
If it can secure such unequivocal statements, the Israeli Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin should be able to make a convincing case for the peace agreement with the Palestinians, Western officials said. In effect, Mr. Rabin would be able to say that he has secured the first formal statement of Israel's right to exist from its sworn enemy, and with that the prospect, albeit distant, that Israelis may one day be able to lead normal lives.
"The Israeli Government is also worried that if the P.L.O. is weakened further or disappears, extremist groups like Hamas will fill the vacuum," one Western diplomat said. "This may be its last chance to deal with a secular, political organization over the future of the West Bank and Gaza."
Given both sides' interests, and the distance already traveled, officials and diplomats here say they believe that an accord for mutual recognition will be reached. But it appears that it will not be easy, and could take some time.
 |||
|--------------------||

4 PROTESTERS REPORTED SHOT
 GAZA, Sept. 3 (Reuters) -- Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip said today that Israeli troops had shot and wounded four Arabs, three of them at a march organized by Muslim militants who oppose the peace efforts by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The Palestinians said the soldiers had opened fire as more than 1,000 demonstrators were taking part in a procession, chanting: "Death to Israel. Death to America."
The march began after prayers in Beit Lahiya, about one mile from Jabaliya refugee camp. The protesters, referring to Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, chanted, "Arafat, tell Rabin that self-rule will not be!"
In a separate episode, Palestinians said, soldiers shot and seriously wounded an Arab identified as Mahmud Ayyad of Gaza City. The Israeli Army said it was checking both reports.
Members of the P.L.O.'s Fatah group opened fire on members of a radical faction who had painted graffiti opposing the agreement in the Gaza Strip refugee camp of Rafah, Palestinian sources said. One person was wounded.
The Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas, said today it killed an Israeli soldier in the West Bank Thursday as part of a campaign to wreck a peace agreement.
United Nations Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali offered today to send peacekeeping troops to the strip and the West Bank city of Jericho after an Israeli withdrawal envisioned in the self-rule deal.

Graphic

 
Photo: Palestinian refugees from a camp in Jabaliya in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip running from Israel Army vehicles after protesters had gathered, shouting anti-Israel and anti-United States slogans. (Associated Press)(pg. 2)

Load-Date: September 4, 1993


End of Document