ARAFAT MUST CONDEMN RAID ON ISRAEL BEACH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 8, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 533 words
Byline: Anthony Lewis  BOSTON
Body


Are Yasser Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization committed to seeking a political destiny for the Palestinians by political means? Or do they condone terrorist acts by Palestinians? That is the issue posed by the attempted guerrilla attack on the Israeli coast. It is a fateful issue for Arafat and the Palestinian cause.  The guerrillas in two speedboats were stopped by Israeli forces.  Responsibility for the raid was taken by the Palestine Liberation Front, a faction headed by Abul Abbas, a member of the PLO executive committee.  Arafat said the PLO was not responsible for the raid and had no connection with it. But he declined to condemn it and rejected the idea that he remove Abul Abbas from the executive committee, saying that could be done only by the PLO's exile parliament, the Palestine National Council.  Since the raid, much attention has focused on whether it will lead the United States to stop talking with the PLO. Inside the PLO there has been resentful comment about American calls on Arafat to condemn the raid. A leader cannot act to please the United States, it was said.  At stake is not the pleasure of the United States. It's the hope of the Palestinian people for an end to Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, the hope for a chance to govern themselves. Palestinians can make political progress only by convincing Israel of their desire for negotiation and peace.  The raid was devastating, too, for Israeli peace groups.
Its effect was to give support to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and the extreme right, who depict Palestinians as terrorists not fit to meet in negotiations.  All that is clear to Arafat. He knows that terrorism cannot force concessions from Israel, that to the contrary, every terrorist act strengthens those in Israel who want to keep the occupied territories forever. Yet he hesitates to speak clearly.  There is a reason in history for Arafat's reluctance to choose. He has built up Palestinian national consciousness precisely by avoiding ideological disputes - by making the PLO an umbrella that covers all in the Palestinian cause.  But the time for fudging has run out. Abul Abbas is a terrorist, and he does not belong on the executive committee of an organization committed to negotiation and peace with Israel. Arafat can speak. That is what leaders are for.  The Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza feel powerless and abandoned now. Since a deranged Israeli killed seven Palestinians on May 20, the army has put down protests with tactics deplored by Israeli human rights groups. At least 16 have been killed; hundreds of thousands of Gazans have been confined to their homes for days.  The United States sharply increased the feeling of hopelessness when it vetoed a Security Council resolution to send a U.N. investigating mission to the occupied territories. Secretary of State James Baker indicated that he would agree to the mission. At the least he owed a gesture to West Bank leaders, the moderates in the eye of U.S. policy.  But that does not affect Arafat's responsibility. It is his choice: to condemn terrorism or to let the faint hopes of peace flicker out.  Copyright 1990 New York Times News Service

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document