Arafat reduces peace process to blackmail
USA TODAY
April 14, 1997, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 729 words
Byline: Jesse Helms
Body


In the past month, Yasser Arafat has led a terrorist Palestinian
group to assume it has his approval for acts of terrorism against
Israel. He has urged the Arab League to resume its boycott of
Israel. As a result, the peace process has plummeted to its lowest
ebb in recent memory.
The behavior of Arafat and his cohorts has reduced the "peace
process" to scarcely more than blackmail. The Palestinians and
their Arab partners have formulated a dangerous either/or threat:
Peace on their terms or suffer their boycotts, bombs and stones.
All of this seems to be based on the weird presumption that it
will have no impact on relations with the United States.
This presumption is terribly wrong. For years it has been obvious
that certain realities have been unclear to the Arab parties to
the peace process. The Department of State, constrained by the
meaningless rhetoric of diplomacy, is ill-equipped to convey those
very clear realities. It is long past time that Arafat and Company
wake up and smell the coffee.
The American people are not likely to be bullied away from their
friendship and support for the state of Israel. Americans want
a foreign policy dictated by values, not by
realpolitik. They respect democracy, and they like Israel
because they feel comfortable with a system of majority rule,
of elections, of civil and political freedom.
Congress needs no pro-Israel lobby to instruct us as to why we
should support Israel. The U.S. cares about Israel because the
values held dear by Americans are reflected in Israel. Those who
undertake to subvert these values earn our enmity. We should not
engage with them; we should not trade with them; we must do our
utmost to isolate them. (Witness U.S. policies against Iran and
Cuba.)
The Palestinians, led by Arafat, have labored too long under the
delusion that because they are engaged in an illusory, on-again,
off-again peace process with Israel, they have no obligation to
abide by the standards expected of other nations in partnership
with the United States. The Palestinians must understand the choice
confronting them: They can adopt our values, reject further terrorism,
and embrace democracy; or they can join the pariahs.
For other participants in the Arab League's recent hate-fest in
Cairo, similar conditions apply. There are indeed relationships
with many Arab states that are important to us. But if they undertake
to revert to the old boycott days, there are U.S. laws to restrict
the scope of our relations, and they will be applied.
These realities must be made completely clear throughout the Middle
East, especially in light of the impending final status talks
between Israel and the Palestinians. There is little doubt that
once the peace process clears this current hurdle, discussions
of the ultimate disposition of the West Bank and Jerusalem can
and will commence. On this, the views of the Congress are clear:
Jerusalem is the united capital of the state of Israel, and the
U.S. will support its remaining so forever. If this is unacceptable
to the Arab parties to the peace process and if they resort to
terrorism, boycotts and other failed policies of the past, relations
with the United States will surely deteriorate.
U.S. acceptance of the Palestine Liberation Organization as a
negotiating party in the peace process became possible conditioned
on the PLO's decision to renounce terrorism. For those willing
to embrace the fantasy that terrorists are, somehow, freedom fighters,
the PLO's words alone were enough. For the rest of us, renunciation
of terrorism demands that Arafat and the Palestinian Authority
must not merely condemn acts of terror, but must also actively
prevent such acts and imprison the perpetrators.
I confess disinterest in the exigencies of Palestianian balance
of power politics that "require" Arafat to entertain Hamas and
Islamic jihad.
If, during the final status talks, we are obliged to look forward
to PLO-sanctioned acts of terrorism and a chorus of threats from
the Arab League, Israel and its friends will have little incentive
to attend such talks. That would not, of course, reflect any change
in the U.S. relationship with Israel, which is based on shared
values. But it will bode ill for the U.S.-Palestinian relationship,
which, after all, is based on the peace process and little else.
Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., is chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee and author of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Reuters

Load-Date: April 14, 1997


End of Document