ARAFAT'S 'JIHAD' FOR JERUSALEM BETRAYS A PHONY PEACE PROCESS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
MAY 23, 1994, MONDAY,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 816 words
Byline: CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


While in South Africa last week, Yasser Arafat called for ''a jihad (holy war) to liberate Jerusalem.'' Since Arafat had pledged himself to peace, not war, at the great White House handshake last September, this sent American and Israeli officials into a tizzy.
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres called it ''shocking and unacceptable.'' Secretary of State Warren Christopher asked for ''an immediate clarification.'' Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin complained that this was a ''serious violation'' of the letter Arafat had sent him pledging an end to violence.
Rabin's trust in the written word is touching and no doubt sincere. But his faith in Arafat's word is comically misplaced. End violence? Last month Arafat refused even to condemn the terror bombing of a civilian Israeli bus in Afula (which is within Israel proper, not in the occupied territories) that killed eight and wounded 44.
As Arab leaders from Beirut to Amman to Cairo can testify, Arafat's actions bear no relation to his commitments. He has violated so many agreements with Jordan's King Hussein, for example, that Hussein barely bothers talking to him anymore. What did Rabin and Peres and Christopher expect?
Rabin warned that if the tape of Arafat's South Africa speech was authentic (Arafat later admitted it was), it would ''place in question'' the peace process. But what is happening in the territories now is not a peace process. It is a retreat. The letters and documents, the signings and ceremonies, the handshakes and benedictions are there mainly to give retreat the appearance of orderliness and mutuality.
But in reality it is a one-way street. What has Israel gotten in return for granting the Palestinians self-government for the first time in their history -- something the Jordanians, Egyptians and Turks, all fellow Muslims, never granted?
They were supposed to get an end to terrorism -- that letter, remember, that Arafat sent to Rabin last September. But when the terrorism continues and Arafat is silent, Israel issues a few feeble protests, then moves on lest the ''peace process'' be disrupted -- by its violation by Arafat.
Take that call for jihad. Arafat has now ''clarified'' it by saying that by ''jihad'' he meant a peaceful crusade. He added: ''I will continue my jihad for peace,'' a smarmy oxymoron that Shimon Peres -- the human punching bag, the planet's most easily mollified negotiator -- meekly bought. He expressed happiness that Arafat had reaffirmed his commitment to peaceful means.
Israel has come to accept that the terror will continue and that Arafat will do nothing about it. And why should he? Terrorism serves his purposes. The more terrorism, the more pressure on the Israelis to hasten their retreat from the rest of the West Bank, from Jerusalem, and who knows from where else after that.
The other thing Israel was supposed to get from the PLO in return for Gaza, Jericho, recognition and self-government was recognition of Israel's legitimacy. The theory was that if the Palestinians, the aggrieved Arab party in the Arab-Israeli dispute, finally recognized Israel, the rest of the Arab and Muslim world would have no excuse not to follow suit.
But PLO recognition has been so halfhearted, so disingenuous, so obviously expedient and calculated, that not a single Arab or Muslim state has followed suit. The Arabs have not even deigned to lift their economic boycott of Israel. Israel's pariah status remains such that Miss Lebanon is hauled in for questioning on charges of treason for posing at a beauty pageant with Miss Israel and Malaysia banned ''Schindler's List'' for being too sympathetic to Jews (and too hard on the Nazis!).
While Rabin and Peres have to count among their major post-September triumphs a prime ministerial visit to Morocco, Arafat has pocketed tangible gains of immense significance. This week, Gaza and Jericho. Next, the Palestinians will extend their control to all but a small fraction of the West Bank. Then on to Jerusalem.
Moreover, a Palestinian state, Arafat's ultimate goal, is now inevitable: the flag, the stamps, the passports, the border controls, the paramilitary force are in place. There is no turning back. Arafat's speech in South Africa simply made plain what any sentient observer has known since Sept. 13. The battle for Palestine is over. The battle for Jerusalem -- and then Israel itself -- has begun.
Some will object that I am viewing this all as a zero-sum game. Was not the spirit, the point of the September handshake that henceforth Israel and the Palestinians would mutually benefit by building a secure future based on accommodation and mutual respect?
Of course. And Israel signed precisely because it bought into that vision. Arafat buys in when Western cameras are rolling. Among Muslims, safely (he thought) out of earshot of Israelis and Americans, he calls for holy war. Nothing is more zero-sum than holy war.

Notes

Charles Krauthammer is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post.

Graphic

 
DRAWING, Yasser Arafat

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document