Arava Journal;
On the Road to Peace, a Gate Is Thrown Open
The New York Times
August 10, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 584 words
Byline: By CHRIS HEDGES, 

By CHRIS HEDGES,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: ARAVA CROSSING, Jordan, Aug. 9
Body


As the first sunburned visitors straggled toward his small trailer, lugging bulky backpacks and vinyl bags, the Jordanian border official placed a stack of free postcards on the shelf in front of him. He also set out a collection of maps of Aqaba.
"Here they come," said the official, Nidal Ali Mohammed. "I hope my English will be O.K. It is much better to be invaded by tourists than soldiers."
This morning, in one of the tiny moves that presage a new Middle East, Jordanian officials, for the first time in 46 years, insisted that visitors coming from Israel through the new Arava border post have the green Hebrew exit stamp in their passports.
It was a triumph of reality over illusion on the first day of this border crossing connecting Jordan and Israel.
Before today, anyone with an Israeli stamp in his passport who tried to enter Jordan was not admitted. Some travelers used a second passport that did not have Israeli stamps. And those with only one passport were issued their entry and exit stamps by the Israelis on special forms, which could be discarded or hidden.
But all these ruses were swept aside, like a great gust of fresh air, at this dusty, sweltering little strip of asphalt. Tourists, some oblivious to the twists and turns of history, others in awe of them, stood in line outside the whitewashed Israeli caravans, received their Israeli exit stamps and walked a few hundred yards into Jordan. Altogether, about 70 people crossed from Israel into Jordan and 40 from Jordan into Israel today.
"This is major history and we want to be part of it," said Rodney Fund, who was visiting Israel from Miami with his sister Melody.
Israelis and Jordanians, dozens of whom came to the crossing to peer through the cyclone fencing and take pictures, could not cross. And those who tried to use passports from other countries were stopped when their names were punched into computers and they were shown to have dual citizenship.
Lilly Cohen, who was born in Israel and now lives in Denmark, stood with her husband, Michael, under a tin roof that protected visitors from the glare of the sun on the Israeli side. She had tried to get into Jordan on her Danish passport but had been refused entry.
"As soon as I knew the border was open I came down," she said. "I think of all the years we have had war. This is a victory for the Jewish people. No one believed 10 years ago that we would ever have peace."
The border crossing, which was built in the last four days, is open from 8 A.M. to 2 P.M. It is straddled by a minefield. The Israelis and Jordanians have white caravans set up on either side of the crossing and tourists must walk across a no man's land. Only vehicles with license plates from outside the Middle East can travel between the two countries.
Tourists who wanted to travel between Aqaba and Eilat in the past had to travel through Egypt, a trip that takes anywhere from 6 to 15 hours, depending on Egyptian bus and ferry schedules.
Brig. Gen. Yossef Mishlab, the Israeli military commander in the south, in the area around Eilat, said: "My job of getting the grounds ready for peace is in fact done, since the cutting of the ribbons. From now starts the very serious and responsible task of stabilizing the security arrangements."
"We have to remember that our main enemy is terrorism," he said. "Now terrorism has become the joint enemy for us and for the Jordanians, and this is where we will invest our main efforts. Now we have to prepare the means for peace and not arms for war."

Graphic

 
Photo: The tourists are coming! On the first day of a border crossing at Arava, two Italians, Franco Rabezzana and Lia Taddei, waved goodbye to an Israeli soldier as they crossed into Jordan. (Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)
 
Map shows the location of Arava Crossing, Jordan.

Load-Date: August 10, 1994


End of Document