Are lawmakers' bills patriotism or politics? Legislatorshave rushed in with anti-terrorism proposals since the Sept. 11attacks -  Correction Appended
Chicago Daily Herald


  Correction Appended

Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 908 words
Byline: Heath Hixson Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


SPRINGFIELD - When state Rep. Jack Franks proposed requiring elementary school students to say the "Pledge of Allegiance" each morning, he said he was doing his patriotic duty as a lawmaker after Sept. 11.  
Franks, a Woodstock Democrat, floated the proposal last October that also would have allowed students who object to reciting the pledge a moment of silence.  
Franks is no longer pursuing his pledge measure despite putting out several news releases and gaining considerable publicity on the issue because state law already mandates the pledge in schools.  
"I don't want this to be about some politician trying to profit politically off of 9/11," Franks said. "There has to be some respect for what occurred that day. There are people who play politics with everything, and I don't want that to happen."  
Yet Franks' colleagues in the General Assembly have proposed more than 30 other measures related to Sept. 11.  
In fact, the Senate last week approved a proposal requiring high school students to say the "Pledge of Allegiance," and sent it to the House. Senate President James "Pate" Philip, a Wood Dale Republican, pushed the measure.  
House members may consider the Senate pledge proposal when they return.  
Given that it's an election year, some political observers say some of these proposals border on politicians pandering for votes.  
Chris Mooney, director of the University of Illinois at Springfield's Legislative Studies Center, said that pushing terrorism proposals is "a way of serving your constituency and also very practical and useful to use on campaign mailings."  
Since Sept. 11, lawmakers have proposed requiring schools to post "In God we trust" somewhere in school buildings, allow local governments to close otherwise public meetings in the name of homeland security, and to let taxpayers voluntarily give up part of their state tax refunds to help fight terrorism.  
Other examples include a downstate lawmaker's proposal that says the display of the U.S. flag on a state-owned building cannot be prohibited. And state Rep. Suzanne Bassi, a Palatine Republican, wanted to require schools to teach about historic documents such as the Federalist Papers and Declaration of Independence, but halted her effort after teachers said they already do those things.  
"There is no doubt that a number of people have sought to link their cause with the cause of Sept. 11," said Ed Yohnka, spokesman for the Illinois chapter of the ACLU. "We have seen it across the country, both state and federal, a host of activity that clearly seems to be ill-conceived and less than thoroughly analyzed."  
Yohnka pointed to an anti-terrorism package pushed by Attorney General Jim Ryan as an example. The plan passed the General Assembly in November. In February, Gov. George Ryan vetoed it.  
The governor objected to provisions allowing terrorists to receive the death penalty and making it easier for law enforcement to wiretap and eavesdrop in the name of fighting terrorism.  
Even before Jim Ryan's anti-terrorism plan had been unveiled, the governor warned politicians not to rush to action.  
"It is my hope and my expectation that we will not give in to temptation and seek to duplicate the powers of the federal government at the state level simply to say that we are doing something," the governor said in an Oct. 15 speech.  
The next day, Jim Ryan unveiled his plan that the governor would later veto.  
But Jim Ryan has said the issue was thoroughly researched and has called on lawmakers to override the governor's veto.  
"Quite frankly, the (proposal) that we originally passed did take into consideration some of the suggestions of the ACLU," said John Pearlman, an attorney general spokesman. "We acted quickly with the (measure) that we put forth and we were one of the first in the country."  
Pearlman said the fact that only one lawmaker voted against it should show it wasn't ill conceived.  
Other lawmakers have attempted to revive previously failed proposals in the wake of Sept. 11.  
Last year, state Rep. Karen May, a Highland Park Democrat, attempted to ban the sale of .50-caliber weapons in Illinois, but her effort failed. In February she tried again, thinking the post- Sept. 11 mood would help her cause.  
"This actually was because of Sept. 11," May said. "I thought it was more important this year than last year."  
May's proposal is stalled again. In fact, nearly half of the more than 30 terrorism-related proposals have not advanced in the General Assembly. Many have failed without ever being considered for a vote or debated.  
However, one suburban lawmaker took issue with the notion that Sept. 11-related proposals are all politically motivated.  
"The people that think that we are all pandering for votes, that is an individual opinion," said state Rep. Tim Osmond, an Antioch Republican. "Each individual voter should look at the legislation submitted and make their own decision."  
Osmond is the sponsor of a plan to make trespassing at a nuclear facility a felony offense punishable by one to three years in prison and up to $25,000 in fines. His plan is pending in the House and could be considered when lawmakers resume their session after the March 19 primary election.  
Also on lawmakers' plates is a resurrected anti-terrorism plan pushed by Jim Ryan. After the governor's veto, the state Senate approved essentially the same terrorism fighting proposal and sent it to the House for consideration.
Correction

To correct a story in Tuesday's editions, State Rep. Patricia "Patti" Bellock, a Hinsdale Republican, was the sponsor of legislation to require the teaching of certain historic documents in public schools.
Correction-Date: Mar 15, 2002 Friday

Load-Date: May 16, 2002


End of Document