Are We Fostering Terrorism?
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 29, 2002, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 396 words
Byline: The writer is the 1973 Military Wife of the Year for the U.S. Army Security Agency, Augsburg, Germany.
Body


I have read about the domestic violence at Fort Bragg, N.C., and am deeply concerned. What steps have been taken to remedy the recent sparks that have caused military families to ignite into violence upon a return from an unaccompanied tour of duty?
If no steps have been taken, please consider these:
Enforce mandatory counseling for those families facing separation and reconnection after an unaccompanied tour.
Let our soldiers and their families know the pitfalls of a separation - the good and bad that each will experience and where to go for help.
Give these unsung heroes an opportunity to learn the value of communication in their unique situation.
Let them know that this form of emotional support should be expected by them and considered a part of a soldier's duty.
I was an officer's wife for 24 years and can relate to the feelings going on between a wife and a husband before and after temporary duty and short tours. The one staying home has been alone with the children without a break. She is not looking forward to more laundry, unsolicited suggestions, more expectations and essentially someone else needing her time and patience. The soldier has been away and has missed the family experiences and the luxury of living in the United States of America. Resentment has built up between them. Neither fully realizes that the other has also experienced heavy responsibility, long hours, fear and loneliness.
Most soldiers believe that to seek counseling for marital or family problems can negatively affect their careers. If every soldier facing an unaccompanied tour had to attend a counseling session with his spouse, this would take away the fear of its adversely affecting his career. It would be an opportunity to let him know what feelings he may experience, how to contend with difficulties and where to go for help.
We now have soldiers coming back from a country that has little regard for life and women. We may think that culture does not influence our soldiers, but we should think again. Danger, fear, loneliness and vulnerability are real, and we should do something to prevent these realities from affecting our soldiers and their families.
We are a civilized country and need to understand that terrorism can take place in the homes of our soldiers if we do not take some necessary precautions.
I am hoping that someone will hear me.
KAREN ZACHAR
Palm Harbor

Notes

LETTERS

Load-Date: September 30, 2002


End of Document