Are drone strikes needed to fight war on terrorism?
USA TODAY
April 27, 2015 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 431 words
Body


On Thursday, the White House revealed that two hostages held by al-Qaeda, including one American, were killed in a counterterrorism drone strike in Pakistan last January.
People seem to forget that we are at war! Good people die in wars. We all pray for families that have lost loved ones in any war, no matter whether they are civilian, military or volunteers.
Ron Williams
Drone strikes killing innocent people are creating terrorists out of their relatives. Is it any wonder that people of the Middle East hate us?
David Toland
Condolences to the friends, family members and loved ones of these two men killed in the January drone strike. Hopefully, their deaths via this tragic accident will not be in vain and the families will be allowed to grieve in peace. The real question is why did it take nearly three months to report the deaths?  On a plus side, the counterterrorism operations did kill two Americans who joined al-Qaeda.
Michael R. Smith
How many troops have been killed by friendly fire in past wars?  Yes, things happen in war, often  more bad than good.
Ron Woodworth
A call for more transparency
Twitter
There is no excuse for killing someone and not telling his family right away.
@Whatfour
If President Obama had used special forces on the ground, he could have accomplished the same thing without killing the hostages.
@JoeMGoldner
It is tragic when an American and an Italian are killed by a drone strike, but what about the countless other civilians who are killed?
@dmcnay19
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter for more discussions
List
U.S. casualty
WHO: Warren Weinstein, 73
WHAT: The U.S. aid worker was killed accidentally in a counterterrorism drone strike in Pakistan in January.
WHY: Intelligence assessments had found "near certainty" that no civilians were in the compound targeted in the strike.
Letters
The discussion about drones is healthy for our society. Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., is right about constantly re-evaluating our strategy ("Sen. Kaine: The problem isn't drones. It's the mission," Capital Download, News, Friday).
But he is jaw-droppingly wrong about the length of the war being a surprise. Anyone could have seen on Sept. 12, 2001  -- and I did see -- that the war would last years, perhaps 50 or more.
That is because we can only hold firm against an evil ideology such as militant Islam. We must firmly oppose it until all the proponents of that twisted and corrupt version are dead, either from war or old age.
A new generation will then Recognize that fighting against us in the West will only bring  defeat and destruction.
Lynn Johnson
Salt Lake City 

Load-Date: April 27, 2015


End of Document