Are we any safer?
University Wire
September 12, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Daily Egyptian via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 584 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Daily Egyptian; SOURCE: Southern Illinois U.
Dateline: CARBONDALE, Ill. 
Body


Under a high blue sky, President Bush stood on the South Lawn of the White House Sunday at 8:46 a.m. to observe a moment of silence, marking the fourth anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Later that day, Bush flew to New Orleans, where he was to spend the night, thus beginning the day by acknowledging his greatest political asset and ending it in the middle of what might become his greatest political liability.
What was on Bush's mind during that silent moment? There is certainly a lot for all of us to think about as we reflect on the events of Sept. 11, 2001.
At the Pentagon, thousands gathered for a march that, according to The Associated Press, "mixed commemoration of the Sept. 11 anniversary with a call to honor those in the armed forces."
The Defense Department organized the demonstration. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld spoke before the march at Arlington National Cemetery about terrorism and the murder of innocents, moving seamlessly to a defense of Bush's policy in Iraq. Surrounded by people who support the president's policies, Rumsfeld underscored the implicit link between the Sept. 11 attacks and the war in Iraq.
It is a persistent theme in the rhetoric of the Bush administration that the war in Iraq was undertaken to combat terrorism, and the war was sold in part by frightening people into believing Saddam Hussein might one day get his hands on nuclear weapons, if he hadn't already.
And even if he hadn't, he had weapons of mass destruction and a relationship with al Qaeda, right?
Well, no. The Bush administration has tried to have it both ways with Saddam Hussein, loudly proclaiming that he was a threat to the United States while quietly admitting that he didn't have anything to do with the Sept. 11 attacks.
In a cynical and extraordinarily successful effort to manipulate public opinion, Bush administration officials began every discussion, every statement, every debate about the need to invade Iraq by evoking the image of the collapsed twin towers and the scarred Pentagon.
Republicans took decisive control of Congress in the 2002 mid-term elections by portraying the Democrats who had lined up in support of the president after Sept. 11 as al Qaeda sympathizers. Bush won a second term by portraying himself as a strong, courageous leader who could protect the nation from terrorism.
The Department of Homeland Security, which is supposed to be the means by which Bush protects us from terrorism, is a hulking behemoth that vacuumed up numerous government entities, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The DHS was supposed to eliminate redundancies and provide better communication between agencies such as the FBI and the CIA.
It was supposed to make us safer.
This was all done in the shadow of fear generated by Sept. 11.
The stumbling and fumbling that was the government's response to Hurricane Katrina makes it clear that DHS is cracking under its own weight. There are some alarming faults in the foundation ^ such as serious questions about the qualifications of its top officials.
Bush's plummeting approval ratings suggest that many people who support his policies may now have doubts about his boasts to keep us safe. Some are even pointing out his weakened position with glee.
We don't think it's anything to be gleeful about. Our nation has showed its hand. Our lack of disaster preparedness is obvious to the entire world.
When pausing to reflect on the Sept. 11 disaster, it is a terrifying thought.
(C) 2005 Daily Egyptian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 12, 2005


End of Document