Area Muslims express relief tinged with anxiety for future Bin Laden's death helps counter 'the perversion of our peaceful religion.' THE DEATH OF BIN LADEN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 446 words
Byline: BY DOUG MOORE • , dmoore@post-dispatch.com,  > 314-340-8125
Dateline: 0 
Body


st. louis - Muslims in the St. Louis area joined others around the country in declaring the death of Osama bin Laden as welcome news, serving as justice for the murderous terror on American soil a decade ago.
Many Muslims in America have long decried the acts of bin Laden and other terrorists, saying they do not reflect the true nature of Islam but instead distort it.
The relief on Monday, though, was tempered with anxiety, with area Muslims unsure of what comes next and what bin Laden's death ultimately means in the war on terrorism.
"Obviously, I'm relieved that one less leader of al-Qaida" is out there, said Dr. Khaled Hamid, who runs an allergy and asthma practice with offices in St. Charles and Des Peres.
But a decentralized organization "with a common, stupid ideology" is still present, and it's premature to celebrate the end of a reign of terror, said Hamid, an American citizen born in Egypt.
"Tomorrow, if al-Qaida is gone, I will be celebrating," he said.
The Islamic Foundation of Greater St. Louis commended President Barack Obama and the troops who carried out the mission.
"Bin Laden's ideology has cost the lives of thousands of people of all nationalities and faiths," the group said in a statement. "His death is an important step in the fight against the perversion of our peaceful religion, but there is still much work to be done to defeat the ideology that allows terrorism to continue."
The foundation, which runs a mosque and school in west St. Louis County and a mosque in St. Louis, said it was pleased the president stressed that bin Laden was a mass murderer of innocent people, including Muslims.
The Council on American-Islamic Relations sees the death of bin Laden as an opportunity to revive community discussions about Islam and Muslims in America.
"Now that he is dead, we have another avenue to condemn his actions and distance ourselves from him," said Faizan Syed, executive director of the local chapter of CAIR. "After Sept. 11, there were a lot of community outreach programs. That died down through the years."
Dr. Ghazala Hayat, a St. Louis University professor of neurology and psychiatry, said the death of bin Laden brought a collective sigh of relief, along with hope that there is not a return volley of violence.
"The ideology (of al-Qaida) is rooted in so many parts of the world," said Hayat, a Pakistani-American. "We don't know what's in the future. You hope it's good, but you have to be realistic."
The sentiment was shared by the Islamic Foundation, with which Hayat has been long associated.
"We should not lower our guard at this time, as with the death of bin Laden, the creed of terrorism is not dead," the foundation said.

Load-Date: May 4, 2011


End of Document