ARENS, OPENING TALKS IN U.S., SEES TIES 'BETTER THAN EVER'
The New York Times
May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 819 words
Byline: By LESLIE H. GELB
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 30
Body


The Israeli Defense Minister, Moshe Arens, said today that the relationship between Israel and the United States was ''probably better than it ever has been before.''
 Israeli officials acknowledged later that the primary target for the comment was Israel's own parliamentary contest set for the end of July. An Israeli government's ability to get along well with Washington has usually been an important factor in Israeli elections, as an American government's ability to get along with Israel has been important among Jewish voters in the United States.
In a news conference, Mr. Arens said his statement was not intended to have any effect on the November elections here. He added that relations were ''always good,'' have been ''getting better,'' and are ''very good now.''
Israeli Defense Min Moshe Arens, opening in talks in Washington with US officials, says relationship between Israel and US is 'probably better' than ever before; Israeli officials acknowledge that prime target for comment is Israel's own parliamentary contest set for end of July; Arens says statement is not intended to have any effect on US's November elections; meets with Defense Sec Caspar Weinberger; illustration (M)
Mr. Arens met for 45 minutes today with Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to discuss the situation in the Middle East and new purchases of American-made F-16 fighter aircraft.
The meeting was scheduled before the Administration announced that it had sent 400 portable Stinger ground- to-air missiles to Saudi Arabia in light of its ''grave concern'' about the spreading Iran-Iraq war.
 
Concern About Terrorists
Pentagon officials said that the discussion of the issue between the two defense chiefs lasted two minutes, during which Mr. Arens was said to have repeated concerns that the missiles might fall into the hands of terrorists. According to the Pentagon officials, Mr. Weinberger retorted, ''If the threat of terrorism prevents us from sending help, then terrorism has succeeded.''
Mr. Arens also reiterated his rejection of suggestions that he knew about or was involved in the beating deaths of two Palestinian bus hijackers several weeks ago by Israeli soldiers.
He also denied that Israel had been supplying weapons or spare parts to Iran, as has been reported.
Asked about the basis for his judgment about the state of Israeli-American relations, Mr. Arens said that aid levels were higher, that conditions for aid were better, that there were closer and more frequent consultations on political and military matters, and that there was a ''smaller gap'' in views regarding a Middle East peace.
As for Israel's elections, Mr. Arens's Herut Party and the ruling Likud coalition are locked in a tight race with the Labor Party. The question of which party can better manage relations with Washington is bound to be a factor.
 
$1.4 Billion Grant Favored
For the fiscal year that begins in October, the Administration has asked Congress for an outright grant of $1.4 billion in military aid compared with last year's total of $1.7 billion, half of which had to be repaid. The economic aid request is for a grant of $850 million, compared with about $910 million in the current fiscal year.
In 1972 Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli Ambassador to the United States, was criticized by some politicians in this country when he traveled around the United States making public speeches that flattered President Nixon. These were widely seen as an effort to tip the Jewish vote toward Mr. Nixon, although he denied this was his intent.
Mr. Arens said that in his meeting with Mr. Weinberger today he stressed Israel's continued opposition to the sale of advanced weapon systems to Saudi Arabia, which he said had engaged in hostilities against Israel in the past.
He argued that the Stinger missiles were unnecessary and that the Saudis already had the ability to defend against Iranian attacks. He said the Saudi failure to act so far was more a question of desire than ability.
 
Missiles Said to Fill Gaps
According to Pentagon officials, Mr. Weinberger told Mr. Arens that the Stingers were needed to ''fill gaps'' in Saudi air defenses that have been left by the F-15 fighter aircraft and by Hawk antiaircraft batteries. The Hawks are high-altitude missiles, while the Stingers are low-altitude missiles.
Asked about the possibility of future joint Israeli-American military action in the Persian Gulf, he responded this was ''not at all being considered at present.'' Israel's general approach to the gulf has paralleled that of the United States. Both have been against a victory by either Iraq or Iran.
Mr. Arens also said that he could not confirm ''100 percent'' reports that the Soviet Union has supplied Iraq with new SS-21 ground-to-ground missiles capable of reaching Iran's oil-loading center at Kharg island from Iraqi territory. But he did confirm there had been new and substantial Soviet arms shipments to Iraq.

Graphic

 
photo of Moshe Arens


End of Document