ARGENTINE JUNTA GIVES ACCOUNTING OF WAR AGAINST LEFTISTS IN THE 70'S
The New York Times
April 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 978 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, April 28
Body


The Argentine Government, in an accounting today of its war against leftist terrorism in the 1970's, justified the actions that led to the disappearance of thousands of people as legal and necessary to defend the nation.
The long-awaited accounting, however, fell far short of the demands by human rights leaders and opposition politicians for details about what happened to those who disappeared and how many there were.
The statement said the Interior Ministry would issue a list of all the requests about missing people that it has received since 1974 and would indicate which cases had been solved. News reports said the list would be made public Friday.
BUENOS AIRES, April 28 - The Argentine Government, in an accounting today of its war against leftist terrorism in the 1970's, justified the actions that led to the disappearance of thousands of people as legal and necessary to defend the nation.
But the number of people subject to such requests is different from the number of people who actually disappeared. Court suits for information on 6,000 missing people last seen in the hands of state security forces are pending, human rights groups have said. Some estimates of how many people disappeared run to more than 20,000.
 
'Only History Can Judge'
The 45-minute statement, read tonight over national television while scenes of past terrorist actions were shown, said, ''Only history can judge with precision who is directly responsible for unjust methods and innocent deaths.''
It acknowledged that some errors were made in the ''almost apocalyptic panic'' of the times that ''might have trespassed the limits of respect for fundamental human rights.''
But in a list of declarations at the end, the military junta said all actions by the military and the police in the campaign were ''acts of service.'' That appeared to set the ground for a law the junta has been considering in recent weeks requiring that only military courts handle prosecution of military men or the police for illegalities in the campaign.
The fate of those who disappeared is a central issue between the military and opposition political leaders as Argentina moves toward national elections in October. The military took power in March 1976, when it overthrew President Isabel Martinez de Peron in the midst of the terrorist crisis.
 
Accounting Was Delayed
For the last six months, the junta of three service chiefs -Lieut.  Gen. Cristino Nicolaides of the army, Adm. Ruben Franco of the navy and Brig. Gen. Augusto Jorge Hughes of the air force - has consulted with church and political leaders on today's statement. The military has delayed a promised accounting since early last year.
Human rights groups have long maintained that the military must have secret files on the many people known to have died in torture cells and whose bodies were disposed of without a public accounting.  Numerous such cases have been recounted by survivors of the cells.
Today's statement did not address that charge. It said any of the missing not in exile or hiding ''are for administrative and juridical purposes considered dead.''
 
Most on Lists Said to Be Alive
The junta, however, said most of the people on lists of the missing were in fact alive, either in exile or living in Argentina under other names.  It said others had been killed by their comrades for treason or by the military in urban terrorist incidents and rural guerrilla fighting, but could not be identified because they used false identification.
The junta was critical of the parents of the missing and of human rights groups here and abroad for not understanding or for ignoring the leftist threat at the time.
''The typical case,'' the statement said, ''is when members of a family denounce a disappearance whose cause they cannot explain or, knowing the cause, they do not want to explain.''
 
Says 2,050 Were Killed
It said that from 1973 to 1979, terrorists killed 2,050 people, excluding soldiers and the policemen, and that thousands of others were kidnapped and robbed. It did not specify whether the violence was by right- or left-wing groups.  Right-wing terrorists battling the leftists were suspected of being linked to the security forces.
The statement said no secret jails existed in Argentina today. It said a list of all the prisoners in Government custody would also be issued by the Interior Ministry. Some 400 political prisoners are being held, according to past Goverment statements. They are being released at a steady pace.
The statement did not directly address the more than 1,500 unidentified bodies that have been uncovered in cemeteries around the country in recent months. But it said the military had used the cemeteries to bury unidentified people killed in battles.
 
A History of Terrorism
The bulk of the statement was a historical accounting of the rise of leftist terrorism, which it said began in the the 1960's.  It said there were three leftist groups: the Montoneros, the Revolutionary People's Army and the Revolutionary Armed Forces. They varied in tactics between urban and rural warfare, the statement said, growing in power until they began attacking military bases in the mid-1970's.
It said the leftists infiltrated the Peronist Government until former President Juan Domingo Peron ousted the Montoneros from the Peronist Party in May 1974.
The succeeding Government of his widow, Isabel Martinez de Peron, with a vote of Congress, declared a state of siege in early 1975, calling the military into an antiguerrilla campaign that had been in the hands of the police. The Congress, in two laws that year, called on the military to ''annihilate'' the terrorists in Tucuman, a rural province in the northwest that was a center of leftist activity, and then in urban centers.
The statement said these laws and the state of siege, which suspended many civil liberties, legalized many of the military's actions.


End of Document