ARGENTINE BATTLES THE POLITICAL POWERS
The New York Times
September 19, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 902 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Sept. 18
Body


Raul Alfonsin, a leading candidate in next month's presidential elections, has accused Argentina's military rulers of corruption and of murdering thousands of people who disappeared during the army's ''dirty war'' against terrorism in the 1970's.
At the same time, Mr. Alfonsin, the candidate of the Radical Party, has attacked Peronist union leaders, calling them ''bullies.''
Argentines say the 56-year-old former congressman has walked into the ''devil's throat'' by taking on the nation's two most powerful institutions.
But in doing so, Mr. Alfonsin has emerged as the white knight of Argentina's large middle class. He is seen as the first candidate with a chance in an open election to beat the Peronists and break a Peronist-military power struggle that has led to political instability and economic decline for the last 40 years.
Raul Alfonsin, leading candidate in next month's presidential election in Argentina, has emerged as hero of country's middle class by accusing military rulers of corruption and murder and attacking Peronist union leaders as 'bullies'; he is considered first candidate with chance to break the Peronist-military power struggle that has led to political instability and economic decline for last 40 years; photo (M)'Too Many Years of Suffering'
''Democracy has been revalued by the Argentine people,'' Mr. Alfonsin said in an interview last week. ''It is the most important social development today, and whoever misunderstands this, fails.''
''There have been too many years of errors and suffering to follow the same roads again,'' he said. ''Now there will be no more fraud.''
The military overthrew the Government of Isabel Martinez de Peron amid terrorism and economic chaos in 1976, but is itself discredited today, partly because of its loss to Britain in the war over the Falkland Islands last year and partly because the economy is again in disarray. Inflation is running at more than 300 percent a year.
Juan Domingo Peron founded Peronism in the 1940's, building it on the power of the unions, but he died in 1974 and Mrs. Peron, who took over the presidency on his death, is in self-exile in Spain. Former Senator Italo Luder is the Peronists' presidential candidate while union bosses have taken over much of the party.
 
Peronists Are Still Favored
Because of their near-mythic appeal and grass-roots organization, the Peronists are still considered slight favorites to win the elections set for Oct. 30. But Mr. Alfonsin has been leading in early polls.
The latest poll, published last week by Mercado, a business weekly, was taken in major urban areas, where Mr. Alfonsin won the ''sympathy'' of 47 percent of the respondents compared with 45 percent for Mr. Luder.
Mr. Alfonsin won the Radical Party nomination in August by sweeping away his party's aging, main-line leaders. A middle-class party that had dominated Argentina in the early decades of this century, the Radicals had been fading because of repeated divisions and an inability to respond to the demands of the rising working class.
Mr. Alfonsin, whose populism has lead some analysts to describe him as a middle-class Peronist, said his chances in the elections now ride with his ability to attract workers.  ''I will win many more than is imagined,'' he said with characteristic optimism. ''Otherwise, I lose.''
 
Firebrand Image Belied
Mr. Alfornsin has barnstorned with all the verve of a country preacher, but up close he belies his firebrand image. A stooped man with a drooping mustache, he seems rumpled even when not. One reason may be that for years he has worn the same reversible trenchcoat.
The son of a shop owner, he is a lawyer by training. But he has been a professional politician since his early 20's, when he became an assistant to the mayor in his home town, Chascomus, a farming center on the pampa 70 miles from here.
Mr. Alfonsin was suffering from a cold during the interview and his eyelids hung heavy, the result of nearly a year of tireless campaigning. His answers, however, were direct and strong-willed, showing hints of what associates say is a quick temper.
A leader of the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, he was one of the few politicians who actively fought for human rights in the first years of military rule. Today, he has one of the most defined and hard-line positions on the issue among major politicians.
He has promised to prosecute military leaders and overly zealous local commanders over the disappearance of more than 6,000 people in the army's antiterrorist campaign. But he says he would leave alone the soldiers and policemen who carried out the orders.
''We cannot go backwards, seeking revenge,'' he said. ''But to behave as if nothing happened would mean abandoning our principles.''
 
Asks End of the Draft
Though a graduate of a military preparatory school, he has called for ending Argentina's longtime draft and cutting back arms purchases to provide more money for education, health and development.
Peronists have charged him with being a ''creature of the American Embassy,'' while conservatives have accused him of being ''a leftist in sheep's clothing.'' He described himself as a left-of-center social democrat.
He is an admirer of former President Jimmy Carter but critical of President Reagan. ''Instead of calling us to defend democracy, the United States today is calling us to defend a capitalism that has been evil to our country,'' Mr. Alfonsin said.

Graphic

 
photo of Raul Alfonsin


End of Document