ARMENIA OBSERVES 3 DAYS OF MOURNING AFTER ATTACK;
GUNMEN TELL THEIR TALE ON TV, SURRENDER; THEY FACE TERRORISM CHARGES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 29, 1999, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 345 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: YEREVAN, ARMENIA
Body


President Robert Kocharian declared three days of nationwide mourning on Thursday to honor the prime minister and seven others killed by gunmen in an attack on parliament.
The assassinations stunned the nation. Armenians gathered to discuss the killings in offices, on the streets and at bus stops. Some openly wept.
"I have never approved of the government's policy, but this cold-blooded murder was a beastly action," said Levon Grigorian, an engineer.
The gunmen surrendered Thursday morning after they were allowed to speak on national television and were promised a fair trial. They turned over their weapons and freed about 40 hostages taken after they burst into the parliament and opened fire Wednesday.
Three days of mourning begin today to honor Prime Minister Vazgen Sarkisian, parliamentary speaker Karen Demirchian and the other dead lawmakers and officials.
In Washington, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright directed her deputy, Strobe Talbott, to return to Armenia and offered the nation assistance in its troubled transition to a post-communist era.
The five gunmen were charged with terrorism and attempting to weaken state power.
In his television address, the group's leader, Nairi Unanian, accused the country's elite of sapping the economy through corruption, and he called for a national renewal.
As in many other former Soviet republics, Armenia's economy has stumbled from crisis to crisis, stuck between the failed Soviet system and largely unsuccessful efforts to build a market economy. Corruption is said to be rampant, with some officials allegedly diverting public funds.
There were no indications that the premier or the other dead officials were involved in any corruption. And while many Armenians sympathized with some of the gunmen's complaints, people said they were appalled by the violence.
Justice Minister David Arutyunian said the gunmen reached the parliament chamber because legislators were too trusting.
The Defense Ministry on Thursday demanded that the prosecutor-general, interior minister and national security chief be fired.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE Photo - A television image from Russian channel NTV shows Armenian deputies embracing after being released by gunmen holding them hostage in the parliament building in Yerevan.

Load-Date: October 29, 1999


End of Document