Armies of sensors deployed in war against terrorism
Federal Times
July 26, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: HOMELAND SECURITY; Pg. 9
Length: 302 words
Byline: By KAREN ROBB
Body


The Homeland Security Department's Science and Technology Directorate is trying to make security at airports, bridges and city streets as unobtrusive as possible.
"We have been successful in the best possible way," said Marc Hollander, deputy assistant secretary for plans, programs and budget.
"People walk right by our sensors, don't notice them and don't have to think about whether there is a chemical, biological or radiation threat."
The directorate, in existence a little more than a year, has fielded devices that sense whether there are dangerous elements in the air. For example, Washington-area commuters give little notice to devices placed on subway platforms. "It made a humming noise, and people would glance at them, but nobody realized they were chemical sensors," Hollander said July 20 at an Industry Advisory Council forum in Washington.
Newer sensors are much smaller. Law enforcement officers wear biological and chemical sensors the size of beepers, Hollander said.
The directorate also has sensors at ports that peer right inside shipping containers that might hold hazardous material. "We have been amazed by the things people have tried to sneak in," Hollander.
The directorate has a budget of $987 million in 2004, and House and Senate appropriators have approved more than $1 billion for 2005.
The directorate has more technology in the works aimed at protecting the public.
One project is focusing on detecting suicide bombers. "We are looking at how they think," Hollander said. "The human side of terrorism is the hardest to understand."
Another pilot program, being tested on the Arizona border, is an acoustic device that can hear gunshots.
The directorate is also working with the Energy Department's supercomputers to analyze how various explosives will react when set off in specific areas.

Load-Date: August 3, 2004


End of Document