ARMS-REDUCTION EFFORT WITH RUSSIA MUST CONTINUE, OBAMA SAYS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 4, 2012 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 321 words
Byline: Joe Sobczyk, Bloomberg News
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama appealed to Russian leaders to maintain joint efforts aimed at ensuring that nuclear material doesn't fall into the hands of terrorists.
At an event to mark the 20th anniversary of a program set up with the goal of securing and dismantling nuclear weapons and materials left in former Soviet republics, Mr. Obama said the threat of unsecured weapons material hasn't receded.
"Nuclear terrorism remains one of the greatest threats to global security," the president said in remarks to the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction symposium at the National Defense University in Washington. "Let's work with Russia as an equal partner."
The program was initiated under a 1992 law sponsored by former Sens. Sam Nunn, a Georgia Democrat, and Richard Lugar, an Indiana Republican, who were hailed Monday by Mr. Obama as "two visionaries."
The law led to deactivation of 7,610 nuclear warheads and elimination of all nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, according to Mr. Lugar's website.
Russia in October said it would not renew its participation in the program, which provided financing, mostly from the United States, to disarm and safeguard nuclear and chemical arms in the former Soviet Union. Russia wants to take more control over securing its nuclear arsenal. The agreement is scheduled to expire in May.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has disagreed with Mr. Obama over U.S. plans to put part of a missile-defense system in Eastern Europe. The United States has said it is aimed at thwarting attacks from rogue states such as Iran. Russia contends that the defense system would alter the strategic balance.
The arms-reduction program had a budget of $508 million in fiscal 2012, and the Obama administration asked for $519 million for this fiscal year. The program has expanded beyond the former Soviet Union to include countries such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan and China.

Load-Date: December 5, 2012


End of Document