Army remains committedto health of servicemembers
USA TODAY
May 20, 2011 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDIT; Pg. 8A
Length: 583 words
Body


USA TODAY's article  "Could dust be the cause of war vets' ailments?" attracted our attention because it omits current and past investigations conducted by military researchers into the possible relationship between dust inhalational  in Southwest Asia and clinical disease in deployed personnel (Cover story, News, May 12).
The  U.S. Army Public Health Command has been conducting surveillance of increased airborne particulate matter since 2005 and concluded it had a similar composition to other desert regions. Additional published peer-reviewed research by Army infectious disease experts  has failed to demonstrate a connection between bacteria in the soil and infections in servicemembers.
In June 2010, a group of military and civilian investigators organized a Pulmonary Health Task Area under the direction of the  U.S. Army Medical and Materiel Research Command to direct further studies and funding priorities in the areas of basic science, epidemiology and clinical research related to inhalation exposures and pulmonary health. The health of our servicemembers has been and remains a top priority for the Army Medical Department and our Department of Defense colleagues.
Lisa Zacher, M.D.
Pulmonary consultant
Army Office of the Surgeon General
Fort Sam Houston, Texas
Our troops deserve better
There are many reasons to bring our military home. Eliminating Osama bin Laden  is just one ("The war in Afghanistan: Time to leave?" Cover story, News, May 11).
We have been sending our young men and women into Afghanistan,  where they are targets of improvised explosive devices, without adequate body armor and IED detection devices.  Also, USA TODAY reports  that some scientists say these same servicemembers  are inhaling a toxic stew of bacteria, fungi and  metals released in excess from the ground by heavy military vehicles pounding the desert's protective crust into silt, and dust made worse by droughts.
As if that isn't enough, a recent federal appeals court ruling ordered the  Department of Veterans Affairs to dramatically overhaul its mental health care system due to "unchecked incompetence" in handling a flood of  post-traumatic stress disorder and other mental health claims. The judge said it well when he ruled that "no more veterans should be compelled to agonize or perish while the government fails to perform its obligations."
Until we can support our military men and women in a much more adequate way, not one of them should be expected to serve the United States.
Kate Dahlstrom
Clarkston, Mich.
War on terror continues
With some people  constantly wailing about Afghanistan being the longest war in U.S. history and calling for us to  pull out, the public might be misled into believing the war on terrorism will be over soon.
In reality, the war on terrorism has been going on for  more than 30 years, and terrorism will likely be with us at least 30 more.  The USA and the rest of the world dealt with it as a law-and-order problem until Sept. 11, 2001.  Terrorist organizations  always considered it war.  They will continue to consider it war, and most likely Israel and the USA will always be their  top enemies. Should we at any point in time consider the war on terrorism over, we will again suffer serious consequences.
We must do everything possible to support our military.  However, with respect to Afghanistan and Pakistan,  we should keep doing what we can to permanently eliminate terrorism wherever  we find, locate or suspect it.
Frank McMahon Sr.
Branson, Mo. 

Graphic

 
photo DAVID FURST By David Furst, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: May 20, 2011


End of Document