AROUND THE WORLD;
Italy, Assailing Terrorism, Vows to Solve Bologna Case
The New York Times
August 6, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 511 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: ROME, Aug 5
Body


Italy promised today that it would do its utmost to track down and punish those responsible for Saturday's Bologna train station explosion, which the Government described as an attempt to encourage the rise of Fascist subversion.
The Government, in a statement issued after a Cabinet meeting called to discuss the incident in which 76 people were killed, called for support in its fight against ''terrorism in all its forms.''
So far the police have made little progress in their search for those they believe are right-wing extremists who set a bomb. The Bologna police chief, Italo Ferrante, said today that a search of 200 houses throughout Italy had not yielded any ''appreciable results.''
AN-AShow-Cause Order Is Issued In Israel Over Lansky Visa
 
Special to the New York Times
TEL AVIV, Aug 5 - Israel's Supreme Court, which eight years ago ordered Meyer Lansky out of the country, ordered the Government today to show cause why the 79-year-old reputed underworld figure should not be admitted as a tourist.
The court gave the Interior Minister, Yosef Burg, 30 days to explain his rejection of Mr. Lansky's applications.Mr. Lansky, an American citizen now living in Miami, Fla., said in his petition that he had very strong Jewish feelings and wished to visit Israel before his death. He said he was suffering from cancer and that it was inconceivable that a month's visit by an ailing old man could harm Israel.
 
Gunman in France Hurts 4 In Turkish Consulate Attack
LYONS, France, Aug. 5 (AP) - A gunman walked into the Turkish consulate here today and fired six pistol shots at a group of people standing at the reception desk, wounding four of them, the police said.
An anonymous caller told Agence France-Presse that an Armenian underground group was responsible and that the shooting was an act of revenge for the 1915 massacre of Armenians.
Three of the victims were reported in serious condition.  In Ankara, Foreign Minister Hayrettin Erkmen, noting that it was the second armed assault against Turkish diplomatic personnel in a week, called the attack today ''a murderous act that can never be justified.'' A Turkish diplomat and his 14-year-old daughter were killed by a gunman in Athens last week.
 
11 Communists Are Arrested In Crackdown in Pakistan
KARACHI, Pakistan, Aug. 5 (AP) -The secretary general of Pakistan's underground Communist Party and 10 party members were arrested today in a continuing crackdown on opponents of President Zia ul-Haq's military regime.
The police charged that the secretary general, Dr. Aizaz Nazir, and his associates were planning ''subversive activities.'' It was reported that several members of the Pakistan People's Party were arrested Sunday and several leaders of the Tehrik Istiqlal Party yesterday.
The Pakistan People's Party was the party of former President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who was overthown by President Zia in a military coup in July 1977 and subsequently hanged after being convicted on a murder-conspiracy charge involving a plot against a political foe.  Tehrik Istiqlal is a democratic Islam-based group.


End of Document