AROUND THE WORLD ;
Britain to Make Public Conclusions on Bombing
The New York Times
October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 295 words
Dateline: LONDON, Oct. 16
Body


Viscount Whitelaw, the Deputy Prime Minister, said today that ''some of the general conclusions'' of an investigation of the bomb attack last Friday on the British Cabinet would be made public. Most such security investigations in Britain remain secret.
British Deputy Prime Min Viscount Whitelaw says some 'general conclusions' of investigation of bomb attack on British Cabinet will be made public; Sir Geoffrey Howe warns American businesmen against supporting IRA (M)
Speaking in the House of Lords, which began its fall session this afternoon, he disclosed that security at the Palace of Westminster, where Parliament meets, had been greatly augmented.
Meanwhile, Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Foreign Secretary, who emerged unscathed from the attack although the sitting room of his suite was destroyed, warned United States businessmen against supporting the Irish Republican Army, which, like the Beirut bombers, he said, ''challenges the values that are seen as fundamental in Britain and the United States alike.''
''I take this opportunity,'' he told an American Chamber of Commerce meeting in London, ''to say again, with all the force at my command, that those who provide funds to the I.R.A. through any of their front organizations in the United States, in the profoundly mistaken belief that they are romantic nationalists fighting in an honorable cause, should rid themselves of such delusions. Let them make no mistake - they are supporting and promoting terrorism.''
In his speech, Lord Whitelaw said, ''Total, impregnable security is not compatible with the free society we enjoy.'' He added, ''We must continue to search for improvements in security arrangements - but without calling into question the basis on which public life in this country is conducted.''


End of Document