AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Greece Discuss Ways to Ease Tensions
The New York Times
July 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 294 words
Dateline: ATHENS, July 11 (Reuter)
Body


Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou and the United States Ambassador, Monteagle Stearns, met for two hours today to try to ease Greek-American tensions.
A statement issued later said the two men ''had a direct and sincere discussion on all matters of concern to the two countries, but no solutions could be found at this stage.''
Greek Prime Min Andreas Papandreou and US Amb Monteagle Stearns meet in Athens to seek ways to ease Greek-American tensions; statement following meeting says no solutions have been found (S)
Mr. Stearns was quoted as having said that ''on some issues our perspectives are different, but I think our interests are common and we are trying to adjust our interests and our perspectives.''
The Greek Government has been upset by press reports saying Washington was thinking of barring the transfer of surplus United States-made F-5 warplanes to Greece from Norway, and authorizing their transfer to Turkey.
The Reagan Administration has criticized Greece for what it sees as anti-American policies and a failure to help combat international terrorism. Athens, in turn, has accused the United States of interfering in its domestic affairs and trying to strengthen Turkey.
ATHENS, July 11 - The Greek Government informed the Libyan Ambassador today of ''its deep concern following the assassinations and shootings of Libyan citizens living in Greece,'' a Government spokesman said.
The spokesman, Dimitrios Maroudas, said Foreign Under Secretary Karolos Papoulias had summoned Abdalla Abu Mahara, the Libyan envoy, to discuss incidents in Greece involving supporters and opponents of the Tripoli regime.
Over the last six weeks, four Libyans have been shot, apparently by countrymen acting on orders from the Government. Three of the four were killed.


End of Document