AROUND THE WORLD;
Commonwealth Nations End Weeklong Parley
The New York Times
October 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 283 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times
Dateline: NASSAU, the Bahamas, Oct. 22
Body


The Commonwealth heads of government ended a weeklong meeting here today with a call for international cooperation in fighting drug trafficking and terrorism.
In a communique that also touched on several other international issues, the leaders of 46 countries, including Britain and most of its former colonies, said they were ''deeply concerned'' by ''the extent to which the profits made by drug traffickers were used in criminal and subversive activities'' and by ''the increasing toll on innocent lives'' of interntional terrorism.
At a news conference on the communique, several reporters questioned Prime Minister Lynden O. Pindling of the Bahamas, the host and chairman of the Commonwealth meeting, about charges that he has received large amounts of money from unidentified sources in connection with drug trafficking in the 700 islands of his country.
Nearly a year ago, a Royal Commission of Inquiry reported that Mr. Pindling's income far exceeded his official salary. But the commission, which focused on the illicit drug trade, said it was unable to find a connection between Mr. Pindling and any drug traffickers.
Mr. Pindling said he had previously ''answered adequately'' questions on these charges. When a reporter persisted, Mr. Pindlinhg said:
''This is a question, really for the Bahamas people to decide. The opposition believes that your press and the readers of your press vote in the Bahamas. I know that is not so.''
In the 25-page communique, the leaders repeated their condemnation of South Africa's racial policies. They said they welcomed the coming arms talks between the United States and the Soviet Union and urged a ban on nuclear testing and all aspects of chemical weapons.


End of Document