Arrest of 'Carlos the Jackal' signals that world politics has
shifted under terrorists
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 17, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U. S.; NATIONAL; WHAT IN THE WORLD; GLOBAL REPORT; Pg. 7
Length: 511 words
Byline: Peter Grier
Body


IN the 1970s and early '80s terrorists in the world's
imagination spoke with a vaguely European accent. They were
well-educated, refined in their own way, but heedless of human life
in their pursuit of Marxism or some other sort of secular religion.
Those were the decades of the Red Brigades, Black September, the
Japanese Red Army.
Today the terrorist bogeymen speak Arabic. They are dedicated to
their versions of religion with a fierceness that no secular
''ism'' could engender. The followers of Hizbullah and Hamas seem
poorer and less well-taught - but in their own way, more
frightening. Terrorist violence seems less targeted, more random,
more brutal.
''You're seeing an evolution in terrorism,'' notes a United
States official who tracks the issue for the State Department.
''Terrorism today tends to produce more acts of spectacular
impact,'' such as the recent bombing of a Jewish community center
in Argentina.
This week's capture of Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, the infamous
Carlos the Jackal, was probably the result of this shift, note
experts. Son of a prominent Venezuelan lawyer who himself was a
dedicated communist, Carlos was once a feared assassin. He was a
useful weapon for Soviet bloc countries and secular revolutionary
Arab regimes.
But his time was past. Radical Islamic groups dedicated to the
destruction of Israel and the rejection of modernity have little
use for Carlos' brand of commitment.
Thus Sudan - itself a nation added to the State Department list
of terrorist supporters last August - felt no compunction about
handing Carlos over to France once he wandered into its clutches.
A State Department report on patterns of terrorism pointedly
notes that five of the 15 suspects arrested in the wake of the 1993
World Trade Center bombing were Sudanese citizens.
With further Trade Center bomb trials starting soon, Sudanese
leaders may have thought that ''here's an opportunity for us to
score points with the international community,'' the State
Department official says.
The capture of Carlos and a spate of bombings in the wake of
Israel's recent rapprochement with Jordan may give the impression
that terrorism as a whole is on the upswing. While developing peace
moves in the Mideast may yet produce a spasm of violence, the trend
in recent years has in fact been a decline in the number of
worldwide terrorist acts.
Anti-US attacks fell to 88 in 1993, down from 142 the year
before. About 21 percent of world terror takes the US as its
target.
The spectacular bombing of the World Trade Center was, in a way,
an anomaly - it was the only incident in 1993 that resulted in US
fatalities.
But the Trade Center attack may be a glimpse of the future. The
number of drive-by shootings and pipe bombs may be going down,
while big assualts against large targets that garner flamboyant
publicity may be on the horizon, especially if terrorists grow
desperate in the face of Middle East peace efforts.
''The worst is yet to come,'' claims Yonah Alexander, director
of the terrorism project at George Washington University in
Washington. ''Terrorism today is much more vicious and
dangerous.''

Load-Date: August 19, 1994


End of Document