Arrest Renews Debate About Rights of Suspects in Terrorism Cases
The New York Times
May 5, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 986 words
Byline: By PETER BAKER
Body


WASHINGTON -- The arrest of a suspect in the attempted Times Square car bombing revived the volatile political debate over terrorism policy on Tuesday, as President Obama's supporters and critics squared off over how the nation should handle those plotting against it.
  The suspect, Faisal Shahzad, was interrogated without initially being read his Miranda rights under a public safety exception, and provided what the F.B.I. called ''valuable intelligence and evidence.'' 
  After investigators determined there was no imminent threat to be headed off, Mr. Shahzad was later read his  rights to remain silent, but he waived them and continued talking, the F.B.I. said. Authorities charged him as a civilian on Tuesday, but postponed plans to bring him to court.
  The handling of Mr. Shahzad touched off the same sort of argument that followed the attempted Christmas Day bombing of a passenger jet bound for Detroit. Some Republicans urged the Obama administration to interrogate Mr. Shahzad without affording him Miranda rights and to classify him as an enemy combatant, which would allow authorities to detain him indefinitely. But Democrats said his quick arrest and his reported confession showed the system can respond to threats of terrorism without resorting to extraordinary tactics.
  ''The American people can be assured that the F.B.I. and their partners in this process have all the tools and experience they need to learn everything we can,'' Mr. Obama said. ''That includes what, if any, connection this individual has to terrorist groups. And it includes collecting critical intelligence as we work to disrupt any future attacks.''
  Republicans quickly accused the administration of worrying too much about legal niceties and not enough about public safety. 
  ''We've got to be far less interested in protecting the privacy rights of these terrorists than in collecting information that may lead us to details of broader schemes to carry out attacks in the United States,'' Senator Christopher S. Bond of Missouri, the ranking Republican on the Senate intelligence committee, said in an interview.
  Senator John McCain of Arizona called it a mistake to read Mr. Shahzad his Miranda rights so soon. ''When we detain terrorism suspects, our top priority should be finding out what intelligence they have that could prevent future attacks and save American lives,'' he said on Sean Hannity's radio show. ''Our priority should not be telling them they have a right to remain silent.''
  Representative Peter T. King of New York, the ranking Republican on the House Homeland Security Committee, said in a separate interview that he was troubled by the rush to charge Mr. Shahzad as a civilian. ''In these kinds of cases, the first preference should be a military commission because you can get more information,'' he said.
  But unlike the Nigerian suspect in the Christmas attack, Mr. Shahzad is an American citizen. The Supreme Court has ruled that an American citizen captured in Afghanistan could be detained as an enemy combatant, but it is not clear whether that would apply to citizens detained on American soil.
  Under the Military Commissions Act of 2006, only noncitizens can be tried in a military commission, meaning the law would need to be changed to bring Mr. Shahzad before such a tribunal.
  Democrats said the Shahzad case dispels the idea that constitutional protections need to be tossed aside in cases of terrorism. ''We have proven in this country for a long, long time that you can get very valuable information out of people after you Mirandize them,'' Representative Adam Smith, Democrat of Washington, said in an interview. Looking at the results of other interrogations, he said, ''you see that what we're doing is actually very effective.''
  In a case of odd allies, Glenn Beck, the conservative Fox News commentator, said Mr. Shahzad was entitled to his rights. ''He's a citizen of the United States, so I say we uphold the laws and the Constitution on citizens,'' Mr. Beck said. ''He has all the rights under the Constitution. We don't shred the Constitution when it's popular.''
  The administration is struggling to recalibrate the war against terrorists and to pull back on some of what Mr. Obama considers the excesses of the past. The administration has yet to figure out how to keep its promise to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. And it is reconsidering plans to hold civilian trials in New York City for figures accused of the Sept. 11 attacks.
  Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said Tuesday that he has not ruled out holding 9/11 terror trials in New York. ''Unfortunately, New York and Washington, D.C., remain targets of people who would do this nation harm,'' he said. ''And regardless of where a particular trial is, where a particular event is going to occur, I think that is going to remain true. And it is why we have to be especially vigilant in New York as well as in Washington.''
  The White House said that the Central Intelligence Agency and the director of national intelligence were consulted before the decision to read Mr. Shahzad his Miranda rights, and that the high-value interrogation group that specializes in terrorism cases was tapped for its expertise.
  Because of the limits on the handling of Mr. Shahzad, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, suggested legislation that would strip the citizenship of Americans tied to terrorism. Speaking on Fox News, he noted that existing law removes citizenship from Americans fighting for enemy militaries.
  ''It's time for us to look at whether we want to amend that law to apply it to American citizens who choose to become affiliated with foreign terrorist organizations, whether they should not also be deprived automatically of their citizenship and therefore be deprived of rights that come with that citizenship when they are apprehended and charged with a terrorist act,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 5, 2010


End of Document