ARREST IS VICTORY FOR MIDEAST PEACE EFFORTS
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
August 20, 1994, Saturday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Editorial-Commentary; Pg. A10
Length: 346 words
Byline: Another Viewpoint From The Seattle Times
Body


A tiny rip in the fabric of Mideast peace was stitched shut with the arrest of Carlos the Jackal, one of the world's most-wanted terrorists.
In the end, the Jackal was arrested quietly by French agents in Khartoum, Sudan. He has been tried in absentia and sentenced to life imprisonment for killing two Frenchmen investigating an attack on Israeli jetliners in Paris. But that was not the worst of his deeds.
Ilich Ramirez Sanchez carried the flamboyant nickname "Carlos the Jackal" but his acts were cruel and cowardly. Much like Che Guevara and other terriorist-revolutionaries, he failed to ignite popular uprisings or do very much to alter the larger events of history. Palestinians achieved more in a year of negotiations than Carlos allegedly did for their cause in 20 years of murder.
If everything attributed to him is true, the Jackal has a lot to answer for. He is linked to the death of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics. He fought the reign of King Hussein of Jordan, led the attack against OPEC oil ministers in 1975, and was involved in the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda, which sparked an Israeli commando rescue mission.
The importance of his capture has less to do with the impact of his reported crimes than the image of the terrorist thumbing his nose at cops from a dozen countries. The nature of terrorism is to pretend that it exists for a higher cause. Nothing helps that image more than the elusive bandit slipping through the fingers of authority.
In reality, the time of the jackal is fading with the collapse of sanctuaries such as East Germany and Bulgaria. Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang or Japan's Red Army would find fewer places to run if they existed today. State-run terrorism backed by Iran and Syria is a larger threat but lacks the fascination that surrounds a killer with a nickname.
Since his early guerrilla training in Cuba and the Soviet Union, Carlos led a life of attacks on the innocent. As the French slam shut the cell door on him, there's another reason to hope that a Mideast peace is possible.

Load-Date: April 17, 1995


End of Document