Arrested Egyptian faces bail hearing;
Local ACLU questions documents allegedly linking suspect to terrorism
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
March 14, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 808 words
Byline: Brett Lovelace
Body


The local chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union is questioning the detainment of an Egyptian national, who was arrested last week for allegedly showing a fake ID at a Lancaster city nightclub.
Ahmed Ebrahim Moussa, 25, of Jersey City, N.J., is being held without bail after he was found carrying instructions on how to deal with authorities if he was stopped for questioning.
In court papers filed after his arrest, authorities said he was carrying documents "known to be affiliated with active terrorism networks."
Charles Holtzinger, a local ACLU executive committee member, is concerned the instructions could be a "Know Your Rights" pamphlet published by the ACLU and distributed to immigrants over the past six months. The pamphlet is subtitled, "What To Do If You're Stopped By The Police, The FBI, The INS, Or The Customs Service."
#EGYPTIAN.M14#
Holtzinger said he has sent dozens of copies of the ACLU pamphlet to the Islamic Center of Lancaster and to foreign students at local colleges. Moussa has been in Lancaster for about seven months.
"If that is the only document that links that poor guy to terrorism, then this whole thing is absolute nonsense," Holtzinger said. "I hope the police would recognize the difference between an informational pamphlet and terrorist documents."
ACLU members said they plan to attend a formal bail hearing for Moussa scheduled for 11 a.m. today before Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas Judge David Ashworth.
Moussa, of Jersey City, N.J., was arrested March 7 at The Village nightclub, 205 N. Christian St.
The nightclub's manager checked Moussa's ID and became suspicious. He called police, who arrested Moussa on a charge of carrying an altered, forged or counterfeit document.
Police said the card purported to be a "Legal First Amendment Non-Governmental" photo ID card for New Jersey residents. They said the Social Security number on the card was not Moussa's.
After his arrest, police said Moussa admitted the card was fake and had been made at a shop on 42nd Street in New York City.
Assistant District Attorney Susan Moyer, in a court petition filed Tuesday to have Moussa's bail increased from $5,000 to $1 million, wrote, "Based on information received by the commonwealth from federal law enforcement sources, the commonwealth believes (Moussa) is a flight risk, is dangerous and will fail to appear as required."
After reviewing the petition, Judge Michael Perezous revoked Moussa's bail, pending the formal bail hearing this morning.
Mark E. Reimann, a special agent with the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, is scheduled to testify this morning with details about the alleged terrorist documents found on Moussa.
District Attorney Donald Totaro said information contained in the petition was provided by the INS.
"I have not seen the documents," Totaro said. "The local ACLU can speculate all they want, but the judge will be the only one to evaluate the evidence."
Capt. John Flemming Jr. said during a news conference Wednesday morning that police have been warned in the past by FBI anti-terrorism bulletins to be on the lookout for foreigners carrying instructions on how to deal with police.
Moussa's court-appointed attorney, Samuel Encarnacion, said he has not been allowed to see the papers his client was carrying, but was told by police they contained basic biographical information and instructions on how to get in touch with his brother in New Jersey.
Encarnacion said Moussa has no connections to terrorist organizations and was carrying the instructions only because he doesn't speak English well and was worried police might find him suspicious.
"At this point, it is pretty outrageous, to say the least," said Encarnacion, who blamed the suspicions of terrorism on overzealous police and prosecutors. "They have gone to all this training in Philadelphia. Maybe they feel like they are missing the action, and this guy is the only game in town."
Moussa applied for a green card in 1996, but is still awaiting approval and is in the United States on a temporary visa, which expired in January. Moussa was told Friday, a day after his arrest, that his request for a new visa was denied.
If Moussa is released on bail this morning, INS spokeswoman Niki Edwards said he would be detained on a visa violation charge.
The local ACLU, which has about 300 members, plans to monitor the bail hearing this morning and could request state ACLU leaders to intervene in the case.
Local ACLU member Paula Knudsen, an attorney, said Moussa might have been a victim of racial profiling.
"If a white person goes into a nightclub and has a fake ID, then they are denied admission and allowed to leave," Knudsen said.  "Because this man is Egyptian and may not speak English, he is perceived as suspicious and held by the police. It's outrageous."
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Ahmed Moussa

Load-Date: March 15, 2002


End of Document