Arrest escalates fear of Y2K terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 19, 1999, Sunday


Copyright 1999, Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. d 7
Length: 397 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


New Year: Ex-CIA agent says bin Laden is involved
SEATTLE (AP) - The arrest of an Algerian who allegedly drove a trunkful of bomb-making materials aboard a ferryboat into Washington state has raised fears that terrorists might be planning to strike in the United States during New Year celebrations.
Ahmed Ressam was arrested Tuesday after taking a ferry to Port Angeles from Victoria, British Columbia. Two security experts believe reputed terrorist leader Osama bin Laden is behind the Port Angeles incident, and federal authorities increased security along U.S. borders.
Ressam's arrest was the latest event that some people say points to planned terrorism during year 2000 celebrations.
In Arizona, authorities are investigating the theft of some 1,000 pounds of explosive materials from a mining camp.
Vincent Cannistraro, a former CIA counter-terrorism chief, noted that federal authorities were warning tourists who planned to travel abroad about possible attacks. Now, it appears those attacks could take place on American soil.
"There is a foreign terrorist threat in the United States that I don't think we were aware of," said Cannistraro, who now is a private security consultant in McLean, Va.
"The capture of this guy at Port Angeles I think has taken everybody by surprise," Cannistraro said. "They weren't looking for something to happen (in the United States), but clearly something was going to happen here."
U.S. Customs Service spokesman Dennis Murphy said Saturday that because of Ressam's arrest, security had been tightened across the borders.
Both Cannistraro and Larry Johnson, a former CIA agent and State Department deputy director for counter-terrorism, said they are certain the Port Angeles attempt was orchestrated by bin Laden.
The U.S. government believes bin Laden heads a terrorist network and is accused of involvement in the 1998 bombings of U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Bin Laden was believed the reason for the State Department's warning to tourists earlier this month, citing "credible evidence" of terrorist threats aimed at Americans traveling abroad for New Year's celebrations.
Cannistraro said the timers - Casio watches on circuit boards with 9-volt batteries - are identical to those used in attacks linked to bin Laden in the Philippines and Moscow.
Meanwhile, .  in Kabul, Afghanistan, Taliban rulers vowed Saturday to protect bin Laden.

Load-Date: December 20, 1999


End of Document