Arrest Made By Pakistan Of Man Tied To Terrorism
The New York Times
July 18, 2019 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 679 words
Byline: By SALMAN MASOOD and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Salman Masood reported from Islamabad, and Jeffrey Gettleman from New Delhi.
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Pakistan has arrested the founder of the terrorist group that carried out the deadly 2008 attacks in Mumbai, India, seizing him on Wednesday just days before the Pakistani prime minister, Imran Khan, heads to Washington to meet President Trump.
Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, the terrorism suspect, has been arrested before and then released. Critics of Pakistan's government said his arrest on Wednesday was yet another superficial tactic to placate the United States and others who have grown frustrated with Pakistan's halfhearted efforts to crack down on militant groups. 
  ''Arrest. Free. Repeat,'' Taha Siddiqui, a Pakistani journalist living in exile, wrote on Twitter.
  On Tuesday, Pakistan decided to reopen its airspace, which had been closed since hostilities flared with India in February. The closure of the airspace had caused difficulties for many international airlines, including American ones, which canceled many long-haul flights because of the complications of flying around Pakistan.
  This, too, was seen as a good-will gesture by Pakistan before Mr. Khan sits down with Mr. Trump next week.
  Their discussions are likely to center on the Afghan peace talks between the United States and the Taliban that have been moving forward, in fits and starts, in Doha, Qatar. Pakistan plays a pivotal role in Afghanistan. Its military and spy agencies helped bring the Taliban to power there in the late 1990s. American officials complain that Pakistan still shelters Taliban leaders and wanted terrorists from American airstrikes.
  Mr. Khan has tried to walk a fine line, seeking to avoid alienating his own military while trying to present an image of a new and reformed Pakistan. On this trip, he has said he will save his country a lot of money by staying at the Pakistan ambassador's residence in Washington, not in an expensive hotel like his predecessors. But Mr. Trump hasn't been exactly warm toward Pakistan.''We no longer pay Pakistan the $Billions because they would take our money and do nothing for us,'' Mr. Trump said last year in a Twitter message. ''They were just one of many countries that take from the United States without giving anything in return. That's ENDING!''
  With its economy nearing meltdown, Pakistan is desperate to find new sources of money and burnish its image. The Financial Action Task Force, an international terrorism-financing watchdog, has threatened to blacklist Pakistan if it does not take action against militant groups and their leaders, such as Mr. Saeed.
  Mr. Saeed was charged this month with financing terrorism following investigations into two charities that prosecutors say act as fronts for Lashkar-e-Taiba, the banned Islamist group that he founded. Counterterrorism officials said the two charities were involved in raising money for terrorism and that Mr. Saeed had been accused of accepting a 544-square-yard piece of land from one of his supporters in Punjab Province.
  Donating or accepting land for a banned group is illegal, officials said. Mr. Saeed was presented before a judge in court in the city of Gujranwala on Wednesday, under strict security. He will remain in judicial custody for at least a week before his next appearance.
  Mr. Saeed is facing several terrorism-financing cases; special counterterrorism police officers arrested him while he was on his way to court to ask for bail in one of these cases.
  The United States and India accuse Mr. Saeed of being the mastermind of the Mumbai attacks, but Pakistani courts have dismissed several previous cases against him, citing a lack of evidence. More than 160 people, including scores of civilians, were killed in multiple locations around Mumbai.
  While Pakistan has been accused by Western countries of continuing to nurture extremist groups, Mr. Khan said in an interview with The New York Times in April, ''We have decided, for the future of our country -- forget the outside pressure -- we will not allow armed militias to operate anymore.'' He also admitted in that interview: ''We can't afford to be blacklisted.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/17/world/asia/pakistan-hafiz-saeed-arrest.html

Load-Date: July 18, 2019


End of Document