ARSON IN YOUTH GANGS NEW FORM OF URBAN TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 30, 1994, Sunday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 476 words
Byline: Fox Butterfield
Body


BOSTON _ In Atlanta, a young gang member was
charged with murdering two infants after he threw a Molotov cocktail
into the apartment of their 18-year-old mother, who was quarreling
with another woman who was a friend of the gang.
In St. Paul, five children were killed by a firebomb intended to
intimidate their older brother who had witnessed a gang murder.  And
in Los Angeles, 10 people were killed when gang members tossed a
firebomb into a crowded apartment building.
The three incidents are part of a small but worrisome pattern of
youthful gangs turning to firebombs as a new weapon of terror, local
police around the country say. In the last two years, police in at
least 15 cities have reported gang-related arson attacks against
people.
"We classify this as urban terrorism," said Sgt. Rick Wiley of
the Philadelphia police.  "The weapon of choice for some gangs is
becoming the Molotov cocktail."
In Los Angeles, gang members threw a Molotov cocktail, a
homemade incendiary device, into an apartment building when the
superintendent tried to stop them from selling drugs outside on the
street.  Two pregnant women and eight children were killed.
A Molotov cocktail was also used in Philadelphia two years ago
by a 33-year-old man, said to have been hired by a gang of drug
dealers, who hurled it into the offices of a neighborhood anti-drug
group.
A federal jury convicted him of arson last year.  And it was the
weapon used last month to destroy the Quaker Lace Factory in
Philadelphia and a dozen nearby homes.
Gang experts caution that firebombs account for only a tiny
proportion of gang assaults and that arson has long been part of
gangs' arsenal.
Malcolm Klein, a sociology professor at the University of
Southern California, estimates that there were 2,200 gang-related
homicides in 1991 and that 80 to 90 percent involved guns.
Firebombs, Klein said, are "a dramatic but small phenomenon."
Still, local police officials are concerned about an increase in
arson attacks that claim innocent victims and that are hard to fight
.  Detective Steve Spear of the Los Angeles Police Department, who is
investigating the Los Angeles fire, said, "It's like combating
terrorism, it's almost impossible to stop."
Arson is more difficult to measure than most crimes because
there are usually no witnesses and the physical evidence is often
destroyed.
Still, a recent, large-scale study of arson by the federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms found that cities around the
nation "are reporting a startling rise in the use of Molotov
cocktails by gang members in setting fires."
The study examined arson fires during 1992 and 1993 in five
cities: Chicago; Kansas City, Mo.; Los Angeles; New Haven, Conn.; and
Philadelphia.  The survey concluded that 15 percent of arson in those
cities was connected to drugs, and that one-quarter was designed to
injure people, not just cause property damage.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document