ART VIEW;
A Concern With Painting the Unpaintable
The New York Times
March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 2; Page 35, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk
Length: 1947 words
Byline: By Michael Brenson
Body


All of Gerhard Richter's work can be seen as a struggle with ideology. He has moved back and forth between abstract and figurative styles, and between small hazy photorealist still lifes and landscapes and large gestural abstractions so physical that they seem to take over their room. He has consistently tried to make art that is provocative and pleasing without advancing any one program or theory. He is one of the few artists who can raise the issue of ideology itself.
Nowhere has he done this more persuasively than in his ''18. Oktober 1977,'' a traveling exhibition now at the Grey Art Gallery and Study Center of New York University. This suite of 15 black-and-white paintings of the Baader-Meinhof gang - one of the most notorious and fanatical of the terrorist organizations that arose during the late 1960's and early 70's - raises profound questions.
Where does the need for ideology or a system of belief - whether rigorously developed and advanced or unconsciously pieced together and assumed - come from? How basic is it? Does ideology inevitably diminish or destroy its children even while offering them a means of understanding and power? To what degree can ideology be resisted?
Richter knows how difficult it is to be convincingly unideological. Although he has said, ''I always want to do something different from what I've just produced,'' he knows that at the point his shifting back and forth between approaches becomes systematic, it can be interpreted as an artistic program with clear ideological implications.
He is aware that if he condemns terrorism without questioning the State it reacts against, he can easily be identified with an ideology that is conservative. In the two paintings in this show called ''Arrest,'' both of them based on photographs of a tank used to capture Holger Meins - a member of the gang's inner circle - in a Frankfurt street in 1972, the force of the state is clear.
The paintings are unsparing yet open. Sparse images of the terrorists and their lives and deaths in prison recur in patterns of one, two and three, then end as abruptly as they began. Everything is toned down, but the blacks and greys have a muted resilience that makes the bleakness compelling. Although they express a point of view that is clear, the paintings seem bathed in unease. They have a sense of inevitability, but they oblige the public to answer the questions they raise.
The questions about ideology are particularly urgent now. Communism has crumbled in Eastern Europe and exposed the resistance to hard-line ideology that had been breeding within it.
On the other hand, Marxism continues to be alive and well among Western intellectuals, and art criticism and art history in the United States and Europe have never been more insistently about programs and theories. In many university programs in art history, passion, openness and feeling for art matter far less than the theoretical and ideological system to which a scholar belongs. Some of the most influential criticism and history involves rummaging through paintings and sculptures for evidence of social and political attitudes that will enable the art historian to validate or bury the work. Ideology is now every bit as much the enemy of the artistic imagination as money, conspicuous artistic consumption and kitsch.
Oct. 18, 1977, marked the end of the first generation of the Baader-Meinhof gang, or the Red Army Faction - which set West Germany on edge by hijacking planes, bombing cars, burning buildings and murdering judges and prosecutors, as well as American servicemen. On that day, after the rescue of 86 Lufthansa passengers who had been held hostage on a plane in order to gain the release of terrorists imprisoned in West Germany, three leaders of the gang, Baader, Gudrun Ensslin and Jan Carl Raspe, were found dead in their cells in the high-security wing of Stammheim prison near Stuttgart.
The official cause of death was suicide. This is the cause that is widely accepted. But to many members of the radical left, questions linger, and the leaders of the gang are regarded as martyred heroes.
Richter is not sympathetic to the gang. A few paintings in the show have a touch of softness and the gang members are never explicitly condemned, but neither are they touched by any sign of transcendence or redemption. He wants to make it possible to think about them and their willingness to die for an idea and the relationship between their pitiless actions, the pitiless response of the State and their pitiable deaths. It is clear from the catalogue that he painted the series not to preach but to understand. ''In any case it's a story we cannot forget,'' he says.
The series, like all Richter's work, is both a question and an answer. In an interview in the catalogue, he describes the gang as ''not victims of a specific ideology on the left or the right but of ideological behavior per se.'' He wonders ''why we have ideologies, whether they are an inescapable, necessary part of our being - or a superfluous, troublesome, life-threatening madness.'' Later in the interview, he replies: ''I consider every type of belief, from astrology to every higher religion and all greater ideologies, superfluous and life-threatening.''
The series is a tour de force of controlled but unsystematic ambiguity. The paintings of the gang members alive and dead - all of them based upon police and journalistic photographs - are vivid and loaded with associations, but every image seems muffled and drained. The dominant color - and feeling - is gray.  The series creates an overwhelming sense of airlessness and fragmentation. No figure or image is complete. In no painting is the setting clear, or is there any space. If the immediacy of the images pulls us in, the lack of space and focus keeps us out. So does the thinness of the paint, which prohibits any feeling that there is something behind the pictorial surface that will resolve images seemingly beyond resolution.
Richter both makes room for and disorients the viewer by creating a sort of esthetic in-between. The paintings seem to exist between painting and photography, between the present and past, between esthetics and reality. The images of Ulrike Meinhof dead from hanging and of Andreas Baader dead from gunshots seem to be neither photographs, nor paintings, nor actual people. It is very clear what we are looking at and yet not clear at all.
If ideology is one of the messy issues that have made the Baader-Meinhof gang so difficult to paint, terrorism is another. Indeed in art history and criticism, strict ideology and advocacy of terrorism as an intellectual tactic often go hand in hand. The more a critic or scholar adheres to a hard-line intellectual program or theory, the more of a tendency there is to point that system at art, or at other sytems, and expect the target to be demolished.
Within the avant-garde tradition, terrorism is not a simple issue. While actual terrorism is almost universally abhorred, many artists are determined to use images and ideas to subvert and ultimately bring down institutions. For a long time now, terrorism has been one of the underlying metaphors that have inspired artists to try and shake up the public, generate a sense of unease and sharpen art's adversarial edge.
Richter has seen the dangers of ideology first hand. He was born in 1931 in Dresden, where he had to paint political banners to gain admission to an art academy that taught students to work in the style of Socialist Realism. He remained in East Germany until 1961, when he moved to Dusseldorf and studied at the Academy, where the guiding light was Joseph Beuys, who worked with different materials and styles and for whom no subject was beyond the reach of art.
Richter's rejection of ideology can be felt in the aura of neutrality that makes it seem as if he is both wholly present in and wholly absent from his work. It can be felt in his insistence on the difficulty of knowing: in recent large-scale color abstractions, Richter seems to have pulled the paint apart like curtains only to reveal more layers or curtains of paint beneath. It is unmistakeable in a remark he made to the Marxist critic Benjamin H. D. Buchloh: ''I want to produce a picture and not an ideology.''
The 15 paintings handsomely installed with the artist's help in a single square space at the Grey Art Gallery - as small as two feet square and as large as 6 1/2-by-10 1/2 - are both traditional and new. Arranged around a room to consider a theme, they have the look of a narrative cycle, except that they have no beginning, middle or end. They suggest history painting, but they neither aggrandize nor commemorate as history painting has traditionally done.
Each painting is based on one photograph that was cropped or altered in some way (the Grey has provided photographic and written documentation for the show in a separate room). Richter used a projector to blow up the images on canvas and establish the lack of focus he wanted. The images were painted with brushstrokes that can be creamy and sensual or invisible.
The first work, ''Portrait of a Young Woman,'' has an Old Master title. It is a portrait of Meinhof as a girl, one hand folded over the other in a way that suggests a painting of a courtly Venetian by Giorgione or Titian. In three paintings called ''Dead,'' all roughly the same size as the portrait, we see little more than Meinhof's head, the rope mark branded into her neck. She seems to have fallen over all at once, like a Greek statue that just toppled and crashed.
The series includes one painting of Baader's cell, with its floor-to-ceiling library, and another paintingof his record player, which had a space inside it where a gun could be concealed. Two other works, on a third wall, called ''Shot Down,'' show Baader lying in his cell like the nameless assassination victims in the paintings of Leon Golub.
The three vertical paintings called ''Confrontation'' present three different expressions of Gudrun Ensslin, varying from defiance, almost derision, to vulnerable introspection. In ''Hanged,'' on the previous wall, her dead body, unrecognizable, is hanging in her cell.
Throughout the series, personality is identified with life, anonymity with death. In this show death is not heroic; it is just death. There is real beauty here, but there is also pitiless irony, but it is of a stark and barely consoling kind.
The largest of the 15 paintings is called ''Funeral,'' and it is not at the end of the show but near the beginning. With its winding crowd it could be a modern ''Adoration of the Magi,'' except that the crowd is bearing not gifts but coffins. The painting is a reminder of the sympathy for the gang among a good number of young people in West Germany and the way much of the country was preoccupied with the fate of its members.
Richter is probably the only artist who could have used paint to open the door on this gang and the issues it raises. Along with his continuing preoccupation with ideology and death, he has been concerned for a long time with painting the unpaintable. In the 1960's he tried to make paintings of concentration camp photographs, but, he says in the catalogue, he had to abandon the idea. The Baader-Meinhof paintings are confident and absolute and yet wide open and filled with doubt, which is what any convincing response to ideology may have to be.
After closing at the Grey Art Gallery and Study Center on April 21, the exhibition will travel to the Musee des Beaux-Arts in Montreal and then to the Lannan Foundation in Los Angeles. The American tour, financed in large part by the Lannan Foundation, was organized by the St. Louis Art Museum.

Graphic

 
Photo: ''Dead,'' by Gerhard Richter-In this image of Ulrike Meinhof, she seems to have fallen over all at once, like a Greek statue that just toppled and crashed (pg. 35); Ulrike Meinhof in Richter's ''Portrait of a Young Woman'' (pg. 39)


End of Document