ART OF THE DEAL: TURNER SEES NEGOTIATION AS HOSTAGES' HOPE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 8, 1991, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 3D
Length: 1617 words
Byline: John M. McGuire Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


WEEKS BEFORE the recent release of three Western hostages in the Middle East, Stansfield M. Turner was in St. Louis talking about just such a possibility.  Turner, the former head of the Central Intelligence Agency, examines how previous presidents made deals for hostages in his new book, ''Terrorism and Democracy.'' ''And today, all the makings of a deal are there to get Americans out of Beirut,'' he said just before Edward Austin Tracy, a globe-trotting free-lance writer from Vermont, was freed. Tracy had been a prisoner since Oct. 19, 1986.  Deals are probably the only solution for the five remaining Americans held in Lebanon, said Turner, adding that he wished President George Bush would stop saying ''we don't make deals with terrorists, and leave himself a little flexibility.'' The ailing economy of Iran will make Iranians ''want to get on our good side so they can get back in the community of nations and get some aid,'' he said. ''That means they'll put some pressure on the hostage holders in Lebanon.'' In addition, ''I would hope the Israelis would be amenable to helping us because there's a lot of tension between our countries, and here's something they can do to help us,'' Turner said. He referred to the 400 Arab prisoners held in Israeli jails, whom the Palestinians want released. There are also a few Israeli soldiers being held prisoner in Lebanon, ''so they have a stake in it also.'' Turner was in St. Louis to attend a meeting of the Monsanto Co. board, where he has been a director for 10 years.
That night, he gave a speech at the Jewish Community Centers Association, talking about ''Terrorism and Democracy'' (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95).  It is a book the New Yorker called ''an exceptionally intelligent analysis of an appallingly complicated subject.'' The magazine applauded Turner for always being informative and ''wonderfully free of self-justification.'' .  As a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy in the accelerated class of 1947, Turner had a classmate, like him a fervent Christian, who would have a profound influence on the direction of his life.  Jimmy Carter, from rural Georgia, and Turner, who grew up in the fancy Chicago North Shore suburb of Highland Park, graduated from the academy a year early in 1946.  Turner became a Rhodes Scholar, an innovative president of the Naval War College at Newport, R.I., and commander in chief of Allied Forces in Southern Europe, headquartered in Naples, Italy.  Carter became president in 1976. Turner was not his first choice to be CIA director, and when he finally picked him, Turner's reaction was less than enthusiastic.  He had hoped to be chief of naval operations, and after getting wind of the CIA appointment, he telephoned his wife, Karin, and said, ''Darling, we're going to the bush leagues.'' ''But there's no way I would have said no to any president, certainly not one I knew,'' Turner said. ''And that would certainly not have been any way to further your military career. I didn't have any choice in the matter.'' The CIA was in something of a mess when Turner took over in 1977. Disrepute and disarray brought on by congressional probes of its past excesses, including Watergate and the uproar over its tinkering in Chile and Angola, led to recommendations that it be restrained by oversight committees. That sent morale plummeting.  There are Turner critics, notably Frank W. Snepp, the CIA's onetime chief strategy analyst in Vietnam, who say that Turner's actions as director further damaged the agency. He particularly cites the so-called ''Halloween Massacre'' when Turner fired or forced early retirement on about 200 veteran CIA people.  And Charles Lichenstein, a former U.S ambassador to the United Nations, accused Turner of trivializing intelligence work. Lichenstein then quoted retired Adm. Thomas Moorer, Nixon's former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who said that Turner was ''educated beyond his competence.'' Turner's first book, ''Secrecy and Democracy: The CIA in Transition,'' was a public debriefing of his sometimes troubled four years as espionage director.  ''I left the CIA very frustrated,'' he said. ''I couldn't accomplish all that I thought we should accomplish. I happened there at a period of seminal change, and although I was the instrument of change, I wasn't the originator.'' The idea for his second book came in 1985, when ''Secrecy and Democracy'' was published and when Arab terrorists hijacked TWA Flight 847, a drama that ended in Beirut. His literary agent proposed a book on terrorism and how a country like the United States can deal with it without violating national principles.  ''My book studies eight presidents, and seven of them made deals'' for hostages, Turner said. ''One of them, George Washington, made two deals'' with the pirates of the Barbary States. Washington, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson all were forced to make deals with Mediterranean troublemakers.  Despite historical accounts about his firmness in dealing with a Barbary pirate, Teddy Roosevelt, he of ''big stick'' fame, also made a hostage deal the year he ran for president. Ironically, it was to free Ion Perdicaris, who it turned out was a Greek citizen, a fact Roosevelt kept from an aroused public who believed Perdicaris was American.  ''Not that deals are the right answer to terrorism,'' Turner said. ''But when we are desperate, and there are no other recourses available, we will consider a deal and see whether it's marginally acceptable or not.'' In 1985, President Ronald Reagan made a deal that saw Arab prisoners released from Israeli jails in return for the freeing of 40 Americans held prisoner aboard TWA Flight 847, Turner said.  ''And he and (Secretary of State George Schultz obfuscated that deal, and said it wasn't a deal at all. It was a coincidence. And George Bush will obfuscate whatever deal he makes. Fine, more power to him.  ''I agree with Reagan and Schultz in obfuscating deals. No sense admitting it. Terrorists will think it's easy to make a deal with us.'' Turner discusses 10 widely differing ways of combating terrorism. He is lukewarm about two of the measures - assassination and revengeful military strikes. Besides concessions, he talks about covert actions, rescue operations, curbing media coverage ''that plays into the hands of terrorists,'' economic and political pressures and legal means, such as capturing and trying terrorists.  ''We must constantly assess whether one of them will be effective and acceptable in terms of what it does to our values and standards,'' he said.  While Turner didn't carry his book into the Bush administration, feeling it ''would be unfair and maybe dangerous to deal with continuing events,'' he does think Republican Bush has done a good job with the hostage situation.  ''He has muted the problem of hostages in Beirut, not letting it catch fire like the Carter issue in 1979 and '80,'' a reference to the 52 hostages held in the American embassy in Tehran for 444 days. With its disasterous failed rescue attempt, the Iranian hostage crisis was a major factor in bringing down the Carter presidency.  Does Turner believe the charges that the Reagan-Bush campaign secretly conspired with Iran to delay the release of the hostages so the Republicans could steal the 1980 election?  ''It's such a terrible thing to accuse anyone of that I would not want to say that I thought it happened based on the circumstantial evidence that exists,'' Turner said. ''Certainly I didn't see anything at the time that led me to be suspicious.'' .  Asked for his appraisal of the following former presidents and CIA directors, Turner had this to say: William Casey: ''No question in my mind he broke the law in one or two cases. No, I don't think much of Mr. Casey; I'm biased and admit it. He went and undid most of the things I tried to do. And now I can take pleasure in seeing that they're trying to reconstitute them. Casey was only interested in running the foreign policy of this country with covert action.'' Ronald Reagan: ''I admire Reagan for his ability to run the government and not run himself into the ground. But I think he carried detachment to an extreme. Where he has left the country is a whole other issue. I do have to fault Reagan on his sense of integrity in government, which is either because he didn't recognize the kind of people he had around him, or he just really didn't pay attention. I had a military officer come to me maybe six, nine months before the Iran-Contra business and say, 'You know, I just met the most scary lieutenant colonel on the NSC staff you can imagine. It was Col.  (Oliver North.'' William Webster, former St. Louisan, Amherst College classmate of Turner's before his transfer to Annapolis, an ex-federal judge, FBI head and recently retired CIA director: ''What did Bill Webster do when he took over, he rebuilt relations with Congress. He and his successor are confronted with a lot of stirring on Capitol Hill. That comes out of distrust of Casey, even though Webster has done much to smooth that over.'' Jimmy Carter: ''We do stay in touch. He's doing so many good things.  Because I'm a Monsanto director, I got a letter from him saying 'I'm going to eradicate guinea worms in Central Africa and we need so many million yards of (Monsanto mesh for them to filter their water.' I had several subsequent requests from him. It's interesting. Because usually people are going to former presidents and asking favors. Jimmy Carter is clearly being revived today. I believe as more time goes by, he'll get even more credit for being a very unusual source of integrity in a sea where there's a lack thereof, excepting Gerald Ford.''

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO By Robert C. Holt Jr./Post-Dispatch of Stansfield M. Turner

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document