Article's words on origin of Islam draw complaints
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 24, 2000, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; If you ran the newspaper; Pg. 37A
Length: 658 words
Byline: Lou Gelfand; Staff Writer
Body


Joseph Coleman of the Associated Press bureau in Tokyo "is ignorant of Islam, its history and what Islam stands for," said Ghanim Aljumaily.
     Muslim readers scorned Coleman's Sept. 10 article headlined, "Islam in Asia: A portrait of stunning diversity."
     They had disdain for the article's statement: "The Middle East is where the creed was founded by Mohammed and enjoyed its first flowering."
     Islam came from God, not from Mohammed, said callers.
   Aljumaily responded, "The writer's statement is offensive to Muslims and exhibits a level of ignorance about Islam that is not worthy of the newspaper."
     Ibrahim Hooper of the Council of Islamic-American Relations, said the statement "is directly against Islamic beliefs."
     Amin Kader, who teaches Islam at Augsburg College, said it is important to Muslims that "Islam was established by God," but also important that "religion is the individual's choice and you should respect the religions of others."    
     Fawzi Awad complained that the "experts" on Islam quoted in the AP article are not Muslims.
     David List's e-mail from Joliet, Ill., criticized the photo selection of a Chechen guerrilla praying with his rifle propped against the wall. "You could have cropped the rifle from the picture on the grounds that it reinforces prevailing false stereotypes of Muslims."
     Other complainants echoed List. One said the news media frequently refers to "Islamic terrorists," but never to "Christian or Jewish" terrorists.
     One caller said Timothy McVeigh "was not labeled a Christian terrorist."
     Edward Said, Columbia University professor often quoted on Arab affairs, acknowledged in his 1997 book, "Covering Islam," that "there has been a resurgence of emotion throughout the Islamic world, and there have been a great many incidents of terrorism, organized or not, against Western and Israeli targets."
     Said argues that "to advocate that Islam is a single, coherent entity, that church and state are really one in Islam, is an unacceptable generalization of the most irresponsible sort, and could never be used for any other religious, cultural or demographic group on earth."
     He wrote that "many Muslims have written that had the Bosnian, Palestinian and Chechnyan victims not been Muslims, and had 'terrorism' not emanated from 'Islam,' the Western powers would have done more."
     The case against non-Muslims as experts on Islam is weakened by Said, who describes the book of Georgetown University Prof. John Esposito, "The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality?" as "sensible and cogently argued."
     Esposito, who is not a Muslim, was quoted in the AP article.
     Coleman responded to the criticisms:
     - "Islam came from God, not Mohammed, is a theological point.
     - "In companion pieces [which did not appear in the Star Tribune] Muslims were quoted extensively and some stories quoted only Muslims.
     "That said, in retrospect, it would have been good to quote Muslim experts in this story, as well."
     - "The word 'terrorism' was used once in reference to FBI efforts to arrest Ramzi Yusef, convicted in the World Trade Center bombing, and a second time referring to Islamic separatists who 'draw inspiration _ and, allegedly, training in weaponry and terrorism _ from Taliban teachers.' "
     Comment: Yes, Coleman is right, the origin of Islam is a theological point.
     For the sake of balance he could have noted the Muslim belief that Islam came from God.      
     That absence doesn't soil the quality of Coleman's craftsmanship. Overall, he treated "Islamic terrorism" sparingly but factually.
     The picture with the story of a Chechen rebel, his weapon nearby, praying before combat, was intellectually penetrating.
 .
_ The reader representative catches bouquets and brickbats from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. Call 612-673-4450. Outside the metro area call 800-827-8742. Via e-mail: Readerrep@gw.startribune.com  

Load-Date: September 26, 2000


End of Document