Arts scene (8/10/12)
Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska)
August 10, 2012 Friday


Copyright 2012 Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska) All Rights Reserved
Length: 289 words
Byline: Compiled by arts reporter

Mike Dunham
Body


music
Sax in the city
The Alaska Jazz Workshop presents two concerts in its Summer 2012 Jazz Concert Series this weekend. Students in the program will jam on jazz, Latin, blues and funk at 7:30 p.m. tonight at the UAA Arts Building Recital Hall. Admission is $5, free for children under age 12. And the workshop Faculty Sextet will play at 7:30 p.m. on Saturday, also in the Recital Hall. The sextet will feature internationally known baritone sax and flute master Denis Diblasio, an alumnus of the Maynard Ferguson big band and director of Maynard Ferguson Institute of Jazz Studies at Rowan University in New Jersey. Tickets are $15 for adults, $10 for students, seniors and military and, once again, kids under 12 are free.
science
Dino digger
UAF professor emeritus Roland Gangloff , who has been discovering dinosaurs in Alaska for the past 25 years, will be signing his new book, "Dinosaurs Under the Aurora" at the Alaska Museum of Natural History, 201 N. Bragaw St., on Thursday, from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. He will give a presentation at noon, and the museum invites visitors to bring their lunch. At 5:30 p.m., he will reprise his discussion of significant research and fossil finds in Alaska at the UAA/APU Consortium Library . The event is free and parking in the library lot will also be free.
literature
Thriller
Brad Thor, the No. 1 New York Times bestselling author of a dozen page-flipping novels dealing with international intrigue will sign copies of his books at 7 p.m. Wednesday at Barnes & Noble, 200 E. Northern Lights Blvd. Thor has worked with the Department of Homeland Security and appears regularly on television as a national security expert discussing terrorism -- a real threat closely paralleled in his popular books.

Load-Date: August 10, 2012


End of Document