As 9/11 anniversary approaches ... Europe finds itself in the cross hairs As plots are uncovered, nations are reminded of risks of U.S. allegiance, porous borders.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 6, 2007 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 449 words
Byline: By Paul Haven The Associated Press
Body


A pair of alleged Islamic terrorist plots uncovered this week in Germany and Denmark share some disturbing hallmarks: Officials link both to al-Qaida and have found tentacles stretching all the way to Pakistan, the likely hiding place of Osama bin Laden.
The schemes - which could have caused massive loss of life - have been a chilling reminder to Europeans of the threat they still face due to porous borders, restive minorities and perceived allegiance to the United States.
Analysts and security officials warn that terrorists could be gearing up ahead of the anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks, with German authorities saying the investigation there was aided by the suspects' increased activity ahead of the anniversary.
"It is possible that a certain motivation (of the plotters) can be attributed to this anniversary," said German Federal Prosecutor Rainer Griesbaum - though he added there was no concrete evidence yet of a link.
Al-Qaida leaders including bin Laden and his No. 2, Ayman al-Zawahri, have frequently threatened to strike Europe in audio and video warnings. Anti-terrorism experts have said recently that the pace and speed of those warnings has picked up in recent months, leading to speculation that al-Qaida's inner circle is in greater control than once believed.
While Europe and the United States have diverged - often sharply - on issues such as Iraq, the creation of the U.S. holding facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the CIA's use of secret prisons for terrorism suspects, it is Europe that has found itself the victim of more terrorist attacks since Sept. 11.
The most serious strikes, aimed at commuters in Madrid in 2004 and London in 2005, killed 243 people. There have been many more schemes that have failed to come off.
Analysts say tensions over the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad deemed offensive by many Muslims, as well as a lack of opportunities and sense of marginalization in Muslim communities, have put Europe squarely in the cross hairs of radicals. Porous borders and years of relatively open immigration policies have added to the problem, they say.
Robert Sturm, an Austrian terrorism expert, said Europeans are deceiving themselves if they think their countries are not potential targets, or that opposition to the war in Iraq means that they are immune.
Louis Caprioli, of the risk management firm Geos, and former assistant director of the DST, France's counterterrorism agency, said security officials were taking special note of the Sept. 11 anniversary, but added that anniversaries have so far not been marked by attacks.
"Sept. 11 is in the minds of all terrorists, and all targets," he said. "(But) the threat is permanent."

Load-Date: September 6, 2007


End of Document