As devastating as a cruise missile
Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho Falls, Idaho)
September 06, 1998


Copyright 1998 The Post Register
Section: Guest Opinion; Pg. F4
Length: 695 words
Byline: Lenore Barrett
Body


Terrorism is "to dominate, coerce or subdue by terror, or intimidation" and terrorism is not just the province of a whacko domiciling in Afghanistan.
There exists within America a form of federal terrorism that threatens to destroy our United States Constitution and our western independence.
For example, William Perry Pendley, chief legal counsel for Mountain States Legal Foundation, reports that Utah Gov. Mike Leavitt inked a deal with Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, under which Utah's complaints over President Clinton's unprecedented 1996 federal land grab were resolved. Leavitt sued, alleging violations of the Constitution and several federal statutes; however, the suit was withdrawn and the subsequent deal turns over all state lands in the vast Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument to the federal government in exchange for $50 million tax dollars and "federal" lands elsewhere in Utah.
The deal happened for one reason. "Clinton made an unprecedented, and many legal scholars say unconstitutional and illegal, use of the Antiquities Act of 1906, giving Utah a Hobson's choice: either endure years of costly litigation against the world's largest law firm, the federal government, or take whatever deal Babbitt offered." Utah took the deal.
Federal terrorism proliferates faster than flies on a wolf kill!
Remember? U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, opposed by the Idaho Legislature, dumped wolves into Idaho, a terrorist act that is as devastating to livestock, wildlife and rural domestic tranquility as a cruise missile.
In the Snake River Basin Adjudication Court, Idaho is disputing federal reserve water right claims to all unappropriated waters relative to wilderness and Wild and Scenic Rivers Acts.
Similarly, Clinton's American Heritage Rivers Initiative is an unconstitutional, illegal attack on private property rights and a water grab. In spite of congressional disapproval, nominations continue. The final decision rests with the president who will designate these rivers knowing he is defying the will of Congress and the people.
Compounding the aforementioned terrorism, Clinton's Executive Order 13083 recently surfaced, and strikes at the heart of the 10th Amendment, intending to reduce state sovereignty to federal servitude.
Equally egregious, the U.S. Department of Transportation is proposing national cards that would require each state to electronically imprint all drivers' licenses with biometric identification such as fingerprinting - going far beyond congressional intent while raising serious privacy and civil liberties concerns.
In Yellowstone National Park, the visitor center sign at Norris Geyser Basin reads: "Yellowstone has been designated a U.S. Biosphere Reserve, A World Heritage Site," placing American real estate under United Nations direction and control: a territorial acquisition without a shot being fired!
The Kyoto Protocol has not been signed, nor sent to the Senate for ratification, yet Congress is being asked to fund it. If ratified and funded, it would cost Idaho 11,600 jobs and $393 million in tax revenue.
Nevada rancher Wayne Hage fought a takings issue for 12 years and reminds us that "land management agencies go virtually untouched even though they violate laws daily."
While Idaho farm families, miners, loggers and mom and pop businesses struggle to produce under federal agency regulatory terrorism, federal workers will see the largest pay increase in two decades that, if it doesn't survive the appropriations process, will be implemented by presidential executive authority.
Adding international insult to regulatory injury, western producers must now contend with a "global" economy rocketing toward recession.
Final analysis? It is wrong when government is filled with officials who engage in endless, illegal, even unconstitutional action that forces citizens, corporations, and sovereign states to the bargaining table where "what's for dinner?" is a Hobson's choice.
Barrett, of Challis, is a member of the Idaho House of Representatives and is one of six local columnists who appear each week on this page. You can write to her care of this newspaper, P.O. Box 1800, Idaho Falls, ID 83403.

Load-Date: September 7, 1998


End of Document