As New Year nears, concerns about terrorism grow
USA TODAY
December 22, 1999, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 402 words
Body


In the past two weeks, fears about anti-American terrorist attacks
during the New Year's holiday have risen from cyberspace speculation
about apocalyptic cults to substantive concern.
Consider the following events:
* The State Department on Tuesday issued its second warning
in 10 days telling Americans abroad to keep a low profile and
stay away from large gatherings because of credible information
that terrorists are targeting Americans.
* Algerian Ahmed Ressam was arrested outside Seattle on
Dec. 14 while allegedly attempting to smuggle from Canada enough
explosive material to damage seriously a building or large gathering
of people. He is suspected of having accomplices.
* In Jordan last week, 13 people linked to U.S. Embassy
bomber Osama bin Laden were arrested on suspicion of planning
attacks.
* U.S. Coordinator for Counterterrorism Michael Sheehan
last week warned Afghanistan's Taliban regime that the U.S. would
hold the Taliban responsible for any attacks by bin Laden, whom
the Taliban have sheltered.
* Customs and the Federal Aviation Administration have
boosted their personnel, sniffer dogs and scanning-machine vigilance
at points of entry into the USA.
From the White House to law enforcement, officials are tight-lipped
about specifics. But behind the scenes, the recent chain of events
has ratcheted counterterrorism officials' concern to extraordinarily
high levels.
"There probably hasn't been a comparable level of concern" says
Vincent Cannistraro, former chief of counterterrorist operations
at the Central Intelligence Agency.
The World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings show how the
terrorist threat against Americans has changed. Threats can be
domestic, foreign or a mix of the two. What's more, they can come
from hard-to-detect individuals rather than foreign governments.
This has left the administration a dilemma about how much to say
in public.
Warning the public in more direct terms than "Americans should
be vigilant," as National Security Adviser Sandy Berger put it
Sunday, could spread fear. And such panic would constitute a victory
for terrorists. But saying too little could leave people at risk.
Reflecting the difficulty of the decision, the FBI planned, then
postponed, a counterterrorism news conference Tuesday. But the
right choice is clear: Err on the side of disclosure, so that
regular Americans can judge for themselves what constitutes self-preservation
on this already-jittery New Year's.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, b/w, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY, Source:U.S. Department of State(Line graph)

Load-Date: December 22, 1999


End of Document