As Obama heads to Africa, terrorism is a top priority While there, senator will have a reunion with relatives in Kenya.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 20, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 628 words
Byline: By Bill Lambrecht POST-DISPATCH WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF
Dateline: CAPETOWN, SOUTH AFRICA 
Body


Sen. Barack Obama arrived on the continent of his family late Saturday with foreign policy issues to discuss and plans for a feast at a family reunion in his father's native Kenya.
Over the next two weeks, Obama, D-Ill., will have the opportunity to improve his stature in the Senate by discussing with African leaders such important matters as AIDS, corruption and budding alliances with terrorists.
As the son of an African and the only African-American in the Senate, Obama's trip is heavy in symbolism.
"I think I'm identified as someone with a special connection to the continent," he said. "But my goal is less personal and more about public policy, and my hope is that my visit can shine a spotlight on the enormous challenges Africa faces." 
Obama, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on Africa, planned to visit South Africa, Kenya, Rwanda, Congo, Djibouti and Chad.
Despite his credentials, Obama could not arrange a visit to Sudan, where violence has claimed the lives of an estimated 300,000 people. Obama said he had trouble arranging for visas for his entourage.
Nonetheless, he said, Sudan will be discussed in his meetings with political leaders.
"We want to put pressure on other countries to isolate Sudan and make them understand there's a cost to engaging in genocide," he said.
Obama planned a brief visit to Congo, where thousands of U.N. peacekeepers are deployed in a vote count after the country's election July 30, the first in 46 years. Obama engineered a Senate amendment to provide $52 million more in aid, provided that Congo continues to progress toward democracy.
Obama noted that there had been no major violence in Congo associated with the election and that he hoped that his visit could provide encouragement to avoid bloodshed.
Throughout his trip, Obama said, he will focus on what he referred to as the connection between failed African states and terrorism. Osama bin Laden once operated in Sudan, and Obama noted the rise of al-Qaida sympathizers in Somalia.
"We need to make sure that we're mobilizing allies in Africa to prevent the occurrence of ungoverned spaces where terrorists thrive," he said.
For one of his first stops, Obama scheduled a pilgrimage to Robben Island near Cape Town, where South African icon Nelson Mandela was imprisoned for 27 years. Obama planned to make speeches in South Africa highlighting flagging global efforts to combat AIDS.
Leaders pledge bulls
In Kenya, Obama can expect to be greeted warmly both for who he is and what he has done. His father, also named Barack, was a goat herder in Kenya who became a Harvard-educated economist. He was killed in an auto accident in Kenya in the early 1980s. Obama's mother is a teacher from Kansas.
Obama planned to visit a group of women in Kenya who have adopted children afflicted by AIDS in a program that he helped to bankroll with proceeds from his successful career as an author.
In Kenya, a play called "The Obama Dream," based on Obama's best-selling book, "Dreams From My Father," was staged this year at the national theater.
Beneath a headline that read "Leaders pledge bulls for Obama homecoming," the Kenya Times reported last week that local officials had appealed for donation of bulls, goats and sheep to feed hundreds of people expected at an event next weekend for the American visitor described as Kenya's son.
Obama will be accompanied by his wife, Michelle, and daughters Malia, 8, and Sasha, 5. His journey will be heavily covered by news organizations, as is nearly every step he has taken during his fast-rising political career.
Next month, he is scheduled to be the keynote speaker at a political gathering in Iowa that draws presidential hopefuls auditioning for the season-opening event in the 2008 presidential primary season.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Obama     PHOTO - Sen. Barack Obama, D-Ill., speaks Tuesday on the campus of Eastern Illinois University.  Mattoon Journal Gazette (Missouri First Edition, A8) 

Load-Date: August 20, 2006


End of Document