As Prelude to Terrorism Case, Prosecution and Defense Team Wrangle
The New York Times
August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1;  Page 47;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1244 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN 

By RICHARD BERNSTEIN 
Body


With one month to go before the scheduled start of the trial of the Egyptian cleric Omar Abdel Rahman and 13 other defendants, the pretrial maneuverings have been dominated not by usual questions like the admissibility of evidence, but by a bitter conflict between the prosecution and one team of defense lawyers, the firm of William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby.
The prosecution team, which is headed by Assistant United States Attorney Andrew C. McCarthy, has been waging an aggressive campaign to have the firm of Kunstler & Kuby disqualified from representing any of the defendants in the case.
The prosecution claims that Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby have been so deeply involved with so many of the defendants in the case that to represent any of them will involve the lawyers in a conflict of interest, and that, in turn, might lead an appeals court to reverse any convictions obtained in the trial.
Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby argue, by contrast, that the incessant campaign to disqualify their firm stems from the Government's disinclination to have skillful, independent lawyers involved in the case on the side of the defense.
"The Government is going absolutely berserk here," Mr. Kunstler said in a telephone interview on Friday. "They've given 50,000 reasons why we should be disqualified. They don't like us because they are afraid we may be good, aggressive lawyers."
 
A Foiled Terror Plot
 The case, which is set to go to trial in Federal District Court in lower Manhattan on Sept. 19, involves 14 men accused of participating in a terror plot to blow up several New York City landmarks. The case is separate from that of the four men who have already been convicted and sentenced to 240-year prison terms in the bombing of the World Trade Center early last year. The terror plot in the second case was, the Government says, hatched after the trade center explosion but was foiled by the police before any of the targets were hit.
The jockeying over the role of Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby, who are well known both for their in-court flamboyance and their defense of radical clients, has consumed what Michael B. Mukasey, the judge in the case, last week called "several gallons of ink" and involves some vituperative exchanges of accusations of dishonesty and wrongdoing. It goes back to last fall when the Government first petitioned the court to disallow Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby from representing more than one defendant.
At that time, the two were slated to represent both Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, accused of being one of the leaders of the plot, and Ibrahim A. El-Gabrowny, who was arrested during the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing and charged with having assaulted an investigator.
But Mr. Abdel Rahman, who is accused of using his position as a Muslim spiritual leader to urge the other defendants to undertake terrorist actions, requested that Mr. Kunstler be his defense lawyer, too. The Government objected, arguing before the court that some of the defendants could come into conflict with each other during the trial, and therefore they needed to be represented by lawyers whose obligations were only to one person.
Judge Mukasey accepted the Government's argument on Mr. Abdel Rahman, but he allowed Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby to continue representing Mr. Siddig Ali and Mr. El-Gabrowny.
 
Government Witness
 That is where things stood until what could be called the mysterious case of Mr. Siddig Ali arose several weeks ago. In June, Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby said, Judge Mukasey attended a meeting at the Metropolitan Correctional Center at which Mr. Siddig Ali, the prosecutors and Howard Leader, a defense lawyer, were also present. At that meeting, Mr. Siddig Ali announced his intention of becoming a Government witness. He said he was changing lawyers and Judge Mukasey allowed him to be represented by Mr. Leader.
A few days later, Mr. Kunstler said, a terse letter arrived at his office in which Mr. Siddig Ali said he was discharging Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby as his lawyers.
The decision of Mr. Siddig Ali to "flip," as lawyers call the act of becoming a Government witness, led the prosecutors to ask anew for Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby to be discharged from the case altogether.  Their argument was that, because the two had been Mr. Siddig Ali's lawyers, they were still bound by the rules of lawyer-client confidentiality.  And since Mr. Siddig Ali would testify against Mr. El-Gabrowny, the Government said, Mr. Kunstler would be unable to cross-examine Mr. Siddig Ali as aggressively as another "unconflicted" lawyer could.
But the Government went beyond that argument. In its brief to Judge Mukasey, the prosecution said that Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Kuby had had such deep contacts with so many defendants that the two lawyers had become "entangled in the facts of the case" and were likely to be called as witnesses, a situation that would make it even more difficult for them to give unconflicted representation to any client.
 
Potential Conflicts
 In a statement issued through a spokesman, the United States Attorney Mary Jo White said that the law required the Government to "bring to the attention of the trial court every potential conflict of interest." Appeals courts have indeed ruled in recent months that the failure to indicate possible conflicts of interest could lead to automatic reversals of any convictions obtained.
Mr. Kunstler sees matters differently. "Once again, an increasingly desperate Government turns to attacking defense counsel as part of a strategy to obtain convictions, no matter what the cost to the Constitution," he said in a memorandum to Judge Mukasey.
"The prosecution views aggressive and zealous advocacy as a form of obstruction," Mr. Kunstler continued.
Then, a week ago, Mr. Siddig Ali's agreement with the Government broke down. Following that, Mr. Kunstler said in a letter to the judge that Mr. Kuby and Mr. Siddig Ali had spoken on the phone and Mr. Kuby had learned why the deal had fallen through: the Government, Mr. Kunstler said, had tried to persuade Mr. Siddig Ali to lie, and Mr. Siddig Ali had refused to do so.
 
Charges of Fraud
 On Friday, at a hearing before Judge Mukasey, while prosecutors sat in silence in front of him, Mr. Kunstler accused the Government, in effect, of suborning perjury. In its interviews with Mr. Siddig Ali, Mr. Kunstler charged, the Government had engaged in "a mammoth fraud to get him to perjure himself against certain defendants in this case."
Judge Mukasey asked Mr. Kunstler to stop speaking in that vein, saying such comments would only invite a response in kind from the Government. Judge Mukasey then denied Mr. Kunstler's request to be able to visit Mr. Siddig Ali in prison so he could investigate the question of what he called "Government misconduct."
"You may not meet with him unless and until his lawyer tells us that he may," Judge Mukasey said.
The judge also asked for Mr. El-Gabrowny, who was present at the hearing, to meet with the lawyer who would take over his defense if Mr. Kunstler is indeed disqualified and to go over with him the list of potential conflicts of interest that the Government said might exist if he is defended by Mr. Kunstler.
Mr. El-Gabrowny asked to have until Tuesday to decide if he wanted to continue with Mr. Kunstler. If, as expected, he announces that he will stick with the Kunstler & Kuby firm, Judge Mukasey will have to rule on allowing Mr. Kunstler to stay in the case or disqualifying him.

Load-Date: August 21, 1994


End of Document