As the federal mid-term elections approach, what should be voters' top considerations?; Voters must weigh whether they want an endless occupation of Iraq
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 1, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. a21
Length: 881 words
Byline: RALPH SCHARNAU
Body


And if you want to focus on your own bottom line, realize this fact: The typical household income actually has fallen since 2000
As we approach the 2006 federal elections, public opinion polls show a clear majority dissatisfied with government policies. On virtually every issue, the political landscape has changed, creating new doubts about Republicans and new openings for Democrats.
President Bush and a Republican-controlled Congress receive low approval ratings. The military occupation of Iraq is unpopular. Disappointing wages and benefits create economic anxiety. Each of these alienates independent voters, energizes Democrats, and puts Republican incumbents on the defensive.
The issue that hangs over all the races in this election cycle is Bush's war of choice in Iraq. The invasion and occupation of Iraq has been cataclysmic with the loss of thousands of Iraqi and American lives, with the spread of terror and chaos in the Middle East, with the prospect of perpetual war, with the rise of anti-American sentiment in the region and among our traditional allies, and with the undermining of democracy here at home.
A majority of Americans now believe that the Iraq invasion was a mistake. And a late August Newsweek poll shows nearly two thirds disapproving of Bush's handling of the Iraqi occupation.
Iraq today is a caldron of violence, a broken and war-torn country. And evidence of sectarian civil war continues to mount. Despite the Bush rhetoric about growing democracy, the reality of growing violence dominates Iraqi life. Democracy, moreover, cannot be imposed; it develops gradually as a homegrown movement.
Whether the issue is Iraq or terrorism, the American public harbors negative views. A recent Time magazine poll shows 54 percent of Americans said our involvement in Iraq actually hurts our efforts to combat terrorism.
Most damaging to the administration is the assessment of terrorism trends by 16 American intelligence agencies. Their April report, a formal consensus appraisal, says the American invasion and occupation of Iraq spawned a new generation of Islamic militants and a rising tide of terrorism.
In addition to Iraq and terrorism, poll respondents put the economy high on their list of concerns. Republicans trumpet economic growth, but the rewards largely go to corporate profits, to rich families who own a majority of corporate stock and to chief executives' salaries. Meanwhile, many workers face stagnant or falling wages, spiraling health care and education costs, job outsourcing and rising debt. Most Americans think the economy is in poor shape and disapprove of Bush's economic policies.
Since 2000, typical household income has fallen. Declining benefits also are part of the employment scene. During the Bush presidency, the rich have gotten richer, the poor have languished, and the middle class has shrunk.
The upcoming elections will test voter appetite for new policies. During the campaign, candidates will be questioned on their views about Iraq, terrorism and the economy.
The increasingly unpopular Iraq occupation requires a clear new direction. An August Pew poll revealed 52 percent favored a timetable for getting out. An orderly withdrawal of American forces can be accomplished in the next 12 to 18 months.
Withdrawing our troops does not embolden the terrorists since our very presence accomplishes that. And bringing our forces home actually frees our policy from being held hostage by the terrorists. Closing our military bases, funding economic reconstruction, deploying U.N. peacekeeping troops and opening a dialogue with all of Iraq's neighboring nations will help to stabilize the region.
At home, we have witnessed an erosion of income, job, and health security in the past five years. Effective government policies that would help working families include raising the minimum wage, encourage the development of new industries, universal access to health care coverage, creating new public sector jobs and removing the employer-imposed barriers to union organizing.
The government can and should play a positive role in the lives of people at home and abroad. The politics of the common good emphasizes public welfare, not private greed. Yet the Bush administration embraces unfettered markets and distances itself from the needs and problems of ordinary Americans. The Bush presidency reveals a drive to peel away most social programs and regulatory agencies, scorning most forms of collective enterprise except the military.
The focus of foreign policy should return to diplomacy. We should rely on negotiations, alliances and international cooperation rather than unilateralism, bullying and threats. Terrorism, after all, is a tactic, not a state, and it should be addressed primarily as a matter of law enforcement and intelligence gathering, not military invasions and occupations.
Next month, voters have a choice. They will decide whether to approve or reject the twin hallmarks of the Bush-led, Republican-controlled Congress, an endless occupation in Iraq and a wage-less economy at home.
Scharnau teaches U.S. history at Northeast Iowa Community College, Peosta. His publications include journal articles on labor history in Dubuque and Iowa. Readers may comment on this feature via e-mail at doubletake@wcinet.com.

Load-Date: October 2, 2006


End of Document