AS TURKEY TAKES A 'CAUTIOUS STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION'
The New York Times
November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 521 words
Body


To the Editor:
 Jeri Laber's shocking article depicting the forthcoming elections in Turkey as a farce, published under a morbid picture of skull and bones (Op-Ed Oct. 19), was a source of deep disappointment for those concerned with constitutional rights and liberties in that country. Having spent three months traveling in Turkey recently, and having closely followed the political life of that country for the last 20 years, I have to disagree with Mrs. Laber's judgment.
Mrs. Laber claims the terrorism that preceded the 1980 coup has been ''replaced by a new terrorism waged by the Government against its frightened people.'' After the tragedy of the more than 200 deaths in Beirut, Americans may be in a better position to sympathize with Turks who, before the military took over, were suffering 200 deaths every day owing to terror.
In my own travels, talking to people from every walk of life, from Silvan in the east to Datca in the west, I did not come across any of these ''frightened'' citizens. The vast majority of the populace is grateful that the madness has been ended and that there is again firm government at the center.
The worry is not at all that the populace is frightened, but that on the contrary it has become too complacent in handing over a great deal of power to the President.
The concerns of the intellectuals about constitutional liberties do not appear to be shared by the general public. For better or worse, there has been such disillusion with the performance of both the old democratic parties in public life - such unhappiness over their inability to stem the tide of terror - that there is real anxiety as to what an open political system may hold in store.  How can we forget that Lebanon, too, was a ''democracy'' before outside powers started meddling? Outside meddling in the form of billions of dollars' worth of smuggled armaments from the Soviets and their proxies was a major, indisputable feature of the Turkish political landscape before the Evren intervention.  The elections on Nov. 6 must be seen not in some idealized vacuum but in the long shadow of terrible events. Turkey within NATO remains a critical target for Soviet planners, and conditions in Greece and Cyprus, in Syria, in Iraq and in Iran are not conducive to complacency.  Given the gravity of the international and national scene, an election with three contending parties under the eye of the military is hardly what one would wish for Turkey, but this is surely no farce, only a cautious step in the right direction. Unlike Jeri Laber, who appears totally out of touch with Turkey, I believe that much will depend on the actual conduct of the elections.
Encouraging the electoral process is a vital matter for Turkey and the entire region. Suggested remedies like cutting off military aid are likely to be counterproductive. The loss of a large and vital country to anarchy and thence to the Soviets (which is the new scenario, like Afghanistan) would have devastating repercussions in Eastern Europe and in the Middle East.
 
NUR YALMAN Professor of Anthropology Harvard University Cambridge, Mass., Oct. 24, 1983


End of Document