As the war spins
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 26, 2006 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B8
Length: 550 words
Body


Two weeks ago, on the fifth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, President George W. Bush made a nationally televised speech, part of which he devoted to defending his decision to invade Iraq.
"I'm often asked," the president said, "why we're in Iraq when Saddam Hussein was not responsible for the 9/11 attacks. The answer is that the regime of Saddam Hussein was a clear threat. My administration, the Congress, and the United Nations saw the threat -- and after 9/11, Saddam's regime posed a risk that the world could not afford to take. The world is safer because Saddam Hussein is no longer in power."
This weekend, The New York Times reported that at the time Mr. Bush made that speech, he had known for four months that U.S. intelligence agencies were taking just the opposite view: That the war in Iraq has made the overall problem of terrorism worse, not better. The war has caused Islamic fundamentalism to metastasize into unaffiliated networks and cells, linked only by radical Web sites that view the war as part of a U.S.-led effort to destroy Islam.
Those are among the conclusions reportedly contained a 30-page National Intelligence Estimate, drawn up over the last two years by 16 U.S. spy agencies and presented to the White House in April. John D. Negroponte, Mr. Bush's Director of National Intelligence, cautioned that the view that terrorism is worse because of Iraq represents only a "fraction of judgments" contained in the NIE. To focus on that conclusion and ignore the rest of the findings, "distorts the broad framework they create," Mr. Negroponte said.
In other words, Mr. Negroponte, whose office coordinates the work of the U.S. intelligence agencies that drew up the NIE, is urging that the document be read in context. This is excellent advice, which is why Mr. Negroponte should urge President Bush to declassify the NIE. Otherwise, some people might assume that the president is cherry-picking his intelligence. Again.
In 2002, when there was neither consensus within the CIA about linkages between al-Qaida and Saddam Hussein nor the danger posed by Iraq's weapons program, the White House chose to ignore the doubters. The Defense Department created its own Office of Special Projects, charged with coming up with the sorts of results the president and his advisers wanted.
It would take a close reading of the entire NIE to tell if the president was dissembling, or merely spinning. The report in The Times, and a similar story in The Washington Post, drew on interviews with intelligence officials who have read it, but did not quote directly from it.
Those officials say the NIE concludes that the centralized command structure of al-Qaida has been degraded. But in its place has come a sprawling, decentralized terrorist infrastructure, its members drawn from throughout the Middle East by their common hatred of the U.S. presence in Iraq. By insisting that Iraq is a central front in the war against terrorism, Mr. Bush may have made it so.
Congress should demand that the report be declassified. If necessary, the House and Senate intelligence committees can redact sensitive portions to protect sources and operations. The American people have a right to know whether or not this war has left us more vulnerable, and whether our president is telling the truth about it.

Notes

 OUR VIEW | IRAQ OPINION 

Load-Date: September 26, 2006


End of Document