AS VIDEO AIRS, CLINTON KEEPS A GLOBAL FOCUS;
HE TELLS UNITED NATIONS THAT TERRORISM THREATENS HUMANITY, NOT JUST U.S.;
DELEGATES GIVE STANDING OVATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 1998, Tuesday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A4
Length: 623 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


Keeping his public focus on international events, President Bill Clinton renewed a global call to arms against terrorism Monday and attacked the idea that it is mainly an American problem of American making.
"This is a threat to all humankind," Clinton said in a 21-minute speech to the opening of the 53rd session of the United Nations General Assembly. The hundreds of delegates gave Clinton a rare standing ovation as he was introduced in the cavernous hall at U.N. headquarters.
White House aides were quick to tell reporters that Clinton was moved by the warm greeting, which offered a measure of support for a beleaguered president whose videotaped grand jury testimony in the Monica Lewinsky matter was playing on TV as he spoke.
Stressing that the United States is carrying its load in the anti-terrorism battle, Clinton said he would submit a request to Congress this week for emergency funding to repair damage to the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that were bombed last month and to beef up embassy security worldwide. Aides later said he would ask Congress for $ 1.8 billion.
Clinton also held a one-on-one meeting at the U.S. mission to the United Nations with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Pakistan and neighboring India are locked in a nuclear arms competition that Clinton has tried for months to end.
Clinton will decide soon whether to scrap his plan for stops in India and Pakistan this fall during an Asia trip that was scheduled before the two countries shocked the world by detonating nuclear test devices in May, in defiance of American warnings.
The president was participating in a symposium Monday at New York University School of Law on the emergence of a global economy and the challenges it presents to liberty and democracy. Hillary Rodham Clinton also was speaking at the forum, which drew numerous foreign leaders, including British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Italian Premier Romano Prodi.
Rather than focus on specific actions to combat terrorism, Clinton sought in his U.N. speech to define the global scope of the problem and dispel the idea that it is caused by an inevitable clash of cultures and a Western disregard for poorer nations.
"It is a grave misconception to see terrorism as only, or even mostly, an American problem," Clinton said. "Indeed, it is a clear and present danger to tolerant and open societies and innocent people everywhere."
He listed terrorist incidents around the world over the past decade, including killings in Northern Ireland, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Sri Lanka and Argentina, as well as the bombings last month at the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 12 Americans.
"Some people believe that terrorism's principal fault lines center on what they see as an inevitable clash of civilizations," he said. "It is an issue that deserves a lot of debate in this great hall. Specifically, many believe there is an inevitable clash between Western civilizations and Western values and Islamic civilizations and values. I believe this view is terribly wrong."
Clinton sought to picture the United States as a friend, rather than a foe, of Islam. He said Islam is one of the fastest growing faiths in the United States, where there already are 1,200 mosques.
 
"There is no inherent clash between Islam and America," he said.
Clinton also attended a U.N. luncheon at which he offered a toast to U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan. He praised the U.N. chief for his "infinite patience" and cooperative spirit.
 
"He has truly been the right leader for this time," Clinton said.
He made no reference to tensions over Washington's failure to keep up with its U.N. dues or to calls in Congress for far-reaching changes in the way the international organization works.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - President Bill Clinton addresses the 53rd session of the United Nations General Assembly on Monday in New York. Clinton called anew for a united international front to combat terrorists.

Load-Date: September 22, 1998


End of Document