Ashcroft defends his 'tough' offensive on terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 5, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A&E; Pg. F8
Length: 558 words
Byline: By Harry Levins Post-Dispatch Senior Writer 
Body


"Never Again" recounts, in John Ashcroft's own words, his four years as U.S. attorney general. Well, sort of.
Mostly, "Never Again" adds up to a defense of his get-tough approach to terrorism after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. That explains the title. What Ashcroft calls "a moral imperative for toughness" is needed to ensure that never again will terrorists strike at the American homeland.
In his words, as delivered to the 9/11 Commission in 2004, "We have been aggressive. We have been tough. And we have suffered no small amount of criticism for our tough tactics. We accept this criticism for what it is: the price we are privileged to pay for our liberty."
Whether a reader will nod in agreement probably depends on that reader's view of Ashcroft before heading into "Never Again." The Missourian makes a strong case for the tough approach in dealing with terror suspect Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri and with far-left lawyer Lynne Stewart, who smuggled messages from the prison cell of her terrorist client. Ashcroft's critics probably will find his case against U.S. citizen Jose Padilla weaker.
One point I hadn't heard before: The passenger manifests of flights grounded early on 9/11 turned up a series of planes on which Middle Eastern men had sat close to the cockpit, just as the 9/11 hijackers had done. Ashcroft suggests that far more than four jetliners may have been potential cruise missiles that day.
Running through "Never Again" are two subthemes:
-- Ashcroft's early frustration with the FBI, a part of the Justice Department. Although he says things got much better after passage of the Patriot Act and some internal reshuffling, he sighs over the FBI's shortcomings: its clumsy bureaucracy, its ranking of evidence above intelligence and its human failings, as typified by Soviet mole Robert Hanssen.
-- Ashcroft's determination to get in the last word with the liberal advocacy groups that opposed him (the ACLU, et al.) and the mainstream media (especially this newspaper).
For a Cabinet member's memoir, this book is oddly lacking in anything else -- say, constitutional issues before the Supreme Court or the fight against conventional crime.
On the book's back cover, in a tone that tiptoes toward the lip of self-pity, Ashcroft says, "I may have been the most controversial attorney general in modern American history. Just mention my name. People love me or hate me. Few are indifferent."
Skeptics quickly note that in terms of controversy, Ashcroft seemed to have forgotten John Mitchell, to say nothing of Bobby Kennedy. I'd throw in one of Woodrow Wilson's attorneys general, A. Mitchell Palmer, the Red Scaremonger. Still, controversy is in the eye of the beholder and, in this indifferent book, Ashcroft hardly qualifies as a neutral beholder.
Still, he manages to make unapologetic room for his strong religious beliefs. Early in the book, Ashcroft says that at the time he first ran for public office, he and his family "genuinely believed then, as I do today, that God was directing my steps."
But before critical readers can groan, Ashcroft adds, "I've never been too big on challenging God. I refused to shake my fist at God, demanding to know, 'If You led me here, why didn't I win?'
"He might just tell me, and I'm not sure I could handle that."
---
'Never Again'
By John Ashcroft
Published by Center Street, 294 pages, $24.99

Notes

 Books 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - "Never Again" 

Load-Date: November 5, 2006


End of Document