Ashcroft debuts anti-terrorism plan to work on all levels of government
University Wire
September 19, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Californian via U-Wire
Length: 571 words
Byline: By Steve Sexton, Daily Californian
Dateline: Berkeley, Calif.
Body


U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft unveiled an elaborate plan yesterday to include local law enforcement agencies in the campaign to wipe out domestic terrorism.
The coordinated effort between local and federal officials that will include Berkeley, Calif., police and the Alameda County District Attorney relies on the exchange of information and leads among all levels of government.
Alameda County District Attorney Tom Orloff said he has ordered county law enforcement to alert the U.S. Attorney's office and the FBI if they encounter someone they suspect may have information about last week's terrorist attack.
U. California-Berkeley
Ashcroft said Tuesday that information obtained by the FBI would be passed on to national, state and local law enforcement agencies across the country. He said local authorities have been sent a list with the names of 190 people believed to have information related to last week's attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Top administrative officials, including Ashcroft, have acknowledged that the war on terrorism will be fought not only abroad, but also within our borders.
"The details that we have learned in the enormous destruction and devastation that was caused by last Tuesday's attack have brought us to a turning point in our country's fight against terrorism and the preservation of the safety and security of our society," Ashcroft said Tuesday.
He said the FBI has received 96,000 tips and leads since the attack. He said the war on terrorism will be "an overriding priority of the Department of Justice."
The FBI said as many as 100 people could have been involved in the plot to hijack the planes. They said many of them could be at large in the United States.
"This administration has got a firm goal and a determination to achieve the goal," said President Bush Tuesday. "And that is to rally the world toward a campaign to find terrorists, to smoke them out of their holes and to get them, and to bring them to justice."
Matthew Jacobs, a spokesperson for U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of California David Shapiro, said Shapiro will spearhead efforts to make sure information is shared among local, state and federal agencies.
Shapiro appointed Chief of the Criminal Division Leslie Caldwell as coordinator of the anti-terrorism task force Friday. The task force will include members of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Drug Enforcement Agency, the Secret Service, the Marshall Service, local officials and law enforcement.
Shapiro was sworn into his post on Sept. 4, after his predecessor, Robert Mueller, was appointed director of the FBI.
The task force will operate as the coordinating body for an operational plan to prevent terrorism. Jacobs would not comment on the specifics of the plan.
The task force is also charged with preparing the district to respond to a similar terrorist attack, Jacobs said.
Orloff said he was also coordinating with the Department of Justice to prosecute perpetrators of hate crimes under federal statutes. There have not been many problems in the county, he said.
Berkeley police Lt. Cynthia Harris said the police department has received information from the FBI. She would not comment any further.
"We have a heightened sensitivity," Harris said. "We are very aware people are on edge now. We are responding to calls as they come in."
(C) 2001 Daily Californian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 19, 2001


End of Document