ASHCROFT AGENDA SWITCHED AFTER ATTACK;
 TERRORISM NOT AT THE TOP OF JUSTICE DEPT. LIST BEFORE SEPT. 11
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 28, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 784 words
Byline: ADAM CLYMER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft has been testifying before Congress this week, arguing for substantial spending increases for counterterrorism programs.
 His appearances, in which he is seeking nearly $2 billion in additional spending next year, are a vivid example of the changed priorities of many Cabinet agencies in a post-Sept. 11 world, as preventing future attacks has emerged as the Bush administration's top priority.
 For Ashcroft, the change in spending priorities before Sept. 11 and after has been especially noteworthy.
 Although the attorney general made speeches and delivered congressional testimony before the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks in which he said fighting terrorism was a top priority of his agency, he identified more than a dozen other objectives for greater emphasis within the Justice Department before the attacks, internal department documents show.
To underscore Ashcroft's dedication to fighting terrorism before Sept. 11, Justice Department spokeswoman Barbara Comstock cited several of his statements and speeches. Testifying May 9 before Congress, Ashcroft said of counterterrorism, "The Department of Justice has no higher priority." And in a July 11 speech at a domestic preparedness summit of the National Governors Association, he said, "Our No. 1 priority is the prevention of terrorist attacks."
 But the attorney general's tough talk was not always reflected in the department's priority lists and budget requests, and some former Justice and FBI officials said they were frustrated that he had not supported more financing for counterterror programs before Sept. 11.
 In various listings of priorities for his department issued between May 10 and Aug. 9, made available to The Times by congressional officials critical of Ashcroft, the attorney general did not single out counter-terrorism.
 In his final budget request for the fiscal year 2003 submitted on Sept. 10 to Budget Director Mitchell E. Daniels Jr., the attorney general called for spending increases in 68 programs, none of which directly involved counterterrorism. Upgrading the FBI's computer system, one of the areas in which he sought an increase, is relevant to combating terrorism, though Ashcroft did not defend it on that ground.
 But in his Sept. 10 submission to the budget office, Ashcroft did not endorse FBI requests for $58 million for 149 new counterterrorism field agents, 200 intelligence analysts and 54 additional translators.
 Ashcroft proposed cuts in 14 programs. One proposed $65 million cut was for a program that gives state and local counterterrorism grants for equipment, including radios and decontamination suits and training to localities for counterterrorism preparedness.
 Last August, before he proposed cutting the program to $44 million from $109 million, Ashcroft went to Dayton, Ohio, and watched a preparedness exercise and announced grants totaling $1.8 million to Ohio.
 "All of these domestic preparedness efforts have one overarching goal -- to ensure that those of you at the state and local levels build the critical capacity to adequately respond to domestic terroris," Ashcroft said then. "At the Department of Justice, we recognize that the threat of terrorism here at home is a serious and growing challenge for our nation."
 Ashcroft justified the cut to Daniels by saying states had been slow to develop the statewide plans needed to qualify for federal money.
 Congressional critics of the attorney general said the Justice Department was not really interested in the program and did not help states develop the required plans.
 Those critics also pointed to a May 10 letter to department heads, advising them of the agenda the new administration was setting, in which he did not mention terrorism. Instead, Ashcroft cited seven goals: reducing gun violence and drug trafficking; helping states with anticrime programs; reducing racial discrimination; securing the nation's borders and cutting the immigration backlog; reducing overcrowding and drug use in prisons; securing the rights of victims of crime and strengthening internal financial and computer systems.
 Department officials said none of Ashcroft's budget recommendations or priority memorandums before Sept. 11 detracted from the government's counterterrorism efforts.
 A department budget official said the listing was intended to focus new attention on "specific presidential initiatives, such as gun violence and immigration services," and not to suggest that other department functions were unimportant.
 Comstock, the Justice spokeswoman, insisted, "The attorney general supported budget requests, last year and this year, that are necessary to support his commitment to counterterrorism."

Load-Date: February 28, 2002


End of Document