ASHCROFT SAYS 90 NATIONS BACK WAR ON TERRORISM;
 FRICTION OVER IRAQ DOESN'T CARRY OVER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 11, 2003 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A4
Length: 383 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


International discord over possible war with Iraq has not hindered U.S. efforts to assemble a coalition of 90 nations in the war on terrorism, Attorney General John Ashcroft said Monday.
In an address to the Council on Foreign Relations, Ashcroft singled out Germany - an opponent of military action against Iraq - along with Canada, Pakistan, Switzerland and China as lending assistance in the battle against al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
"To paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of the demise of international cooperation in the war on terror have been exaggerated greatly," Ashcroft said. "The bonds of sympathy and support hold firm."
Ashcroft spoke as the United States remained under high alert for possible terrorist attacks, the second-highest level on a color-coded scale of five. Increases in intelligence pointing to an attack, along with the standoff on Iraq and the ongoing Muslim hajj holy days, led the administration of President George W. Bush to raise the level from yellow to orange last week.
"In discussing this matter with people that have been around the White House longer than I have, it is universally agreed that this is the most significant set of warnings that we've had since before Sept. 11," Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said Monday on CBS' "The Early Show."
Ashcroft said German officials had worked "side by side" with the FBI and other U.S. agencies to arrest two men in Frankfurt on charges of membership in Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network. Canada, he sai d, has provided "invaluable assistance" in border security, and China let the FBI set up its first-ever office in that country as part of a U.S.-Chinese anti-terrorism working group.
In contrast, when it comes to possible U.S.-led military action to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction, Great Britain is among the few nations in full support.
Ashcroft said most nations, including many with a majority Islamic population, were backing the United States in the war on terrorism because Muslim terrorist groups do not offer "freedom of speech, religious tolerance, political democracy and equality between men and women."
"We know that we're on the winning side of the values war," he said. "People won't choose slavery over freedom. People won't choose intolerance over tolerance."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - John Ashcroft; "To paraphrase Mark Twain, the report of the demise of international cooperative in the war on terror have been exaggerated greatly."

Load-Date: February 11, 2003


End of Document