Ashcroft Says Efforts to Weaken Terrorism Law Will Place Americans at Greater Risk 
 The New York Times
August 20, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 785 words
Byline:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 19  
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft, in his most forceful defense of the Bush administration's antiterrorism efforts, said today that any attempt to strip law enforcement agents of their expanded legal powers could open the way to further terrorist attacks.
     "To abandon these tools," Mr. Ashcroft said in a speech here at the start of a national tour, "would senselessly imperil American lives and American liberty, and it would ignore the lessons of Sept. 11." 
 His remarks were an acknowledgment of the momentum achieved by opponents of the USA Patriot Act, as the law that grew out of the 9/11 attacks is called, as well as a declaration of the administration's commitment to preserve and possibly expand that law.
Some members of Congress and civil liberties groups say the act has given federal agents too much power to pursue suspected terrorists, threatening the civil rights and privacy of Americans.
But Mr. Ashcroft said today that the law had been essential in preventing another terrorist attack in the United States. Expanding the powers of federal agents to use wiretaps, surveillance and other investigative methods and to share intelligence information "gives us the technological tools to anticipate, adapt and out-think our terrorist enemy," he said.
Mr. Ashcroft's speech before the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research group, is the first in a series of appearances that will take him to more than a dozen cities in the next month to speak in defense of the Patriot Act.
Mr. Ashcroft will speak before law enforcement groups but is not scheduled to address any public groups, officials said. That task will be left to federal prosecutors around the country, whom Mr. Ashcroft has asked to organize town-hall-style forums on the Patriot Act in their cities.
In another element of the campaign, the Justice Department today posted a new Web site on the Patriot Act. Officials said that the site, www.lifeandliberty.gov, was aimed at "dispelling some of the major myths perpetuated as part of the disinformation campaign" by critics of the act.
At the same time, Justice Department officials and Republican leaders in Congress are considering legislation that would expand the reach of the act in areas like money laundering and narcotics trafficking linked to terrorism.
Mr. Ashcroft will be speaking in several states considered political battlegrounds for President Bush in his 2004 re-election campaign, including Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Iowa. Justice Department officials said the itinerary was not politically motivated, but some critics of the department questioned that assertion.
Laura Murphy, head of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union, said she was troubled by what she characterized as a "road show" by Mr. Ashcroft aimed at swaying public opinion on a politically charged issue like the Patriot Act.
"How prudent is it to be spending public money on a Patriot Act charm offensive?" Ms. Murphy asked.
The tour comes when opponents of the act appear to have made significant headway in recent months in raising concerns about its impact.
The Republican-led House voted overwhelmingly last month to repeal a provision of the law that allows federal authorities to delay notification that search warrants have been executed. Lawmakers have proposed other measures that would scale back surveillance powers and other aspects of the legislation. 
More than 150 communities around the country have passed resolutions opposing the law. Librarians in numerous cities have complained, despite adamant denials by the Justice Department and the F.B.I., that government agents may be using their expanded powers to monitor people's reading habits. And the A.C.L.U. and other civil liberties groups are suing to have parts of the law declared unconstitutional.
Justice Department officials said today that such critics represented "a small but vocal minority." Mr. Ashcroft pointed to the results of a Fox News poll last month that found that registered voters supported the Patriot Act by a ratio of two to one and that 91 percent said the law had not affected their civil rights.
Mr. Ashcroft cited recent arrests in which he said the powers granted by the act played an important part, and he urged Americans to visit the Web site on the law "and find out how it is keeping our nation safe and secure."
The 9/11 attacks, he said, exposed "fatal flaws" in national security that prevented federal agents from gaining and sharing intelligence and allowed terrorists to exploit loopholes in the system.
"If we knew then what we know now," Mr. Ashcroft said, "we would have passed the Patriot Act six months before Sept. 11 rather than six weeks after the attacks."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft, left, spoke yesterday at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. (Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)      

Load-Date: August 20, 2003


End of Document