Ashcroft stands by Patriot Act, raises money for Utah pals; Law Day: The former U.S. attorney general headlines the fund-raiser to show support for Sen. Orrin Hatch
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
May 5, 2005, Thursday


Copyright 2005 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Utah; Pg. A14
Length: 379 words
Byline: Matt Canham , The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Former U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft continued his spirited defense of the often-criticized Patriot Act on Wednesday, while at the same time helping Utah Attorney General Mark Shurtleff raise some campaign cash and pumping up Sen. Orrin Hatch as he embarks on another re-election campaign.
The Patriot Act, more than anything else, defined Ashcroft's four years in President Bush's cabinet, sparking debates about personal freedom that continue today.
Ashcroft proclaimed the Patriot Act a vital tool to proactively stop terrorism and dismissed claims by its detractors, such as the American Civil Liberties Union, who argue the broad law erodes needed checks on law enforcement.
"Terrorism is not on vacation," Ashcroft told a group of about 500 donors who attended the Wednesday night dinner in downtown Salt Lake City. "We need to have the Patriot Act as a continuing means of defense."
Ashcroft headlined Shurtleff's annual Law Day fund-raiser as a favor to Hatch, whom he befriended when he served in the Senate. Lawyers, legislators and lobbyists paid $ 150 a plate to hear Ashcroft retell the events following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that led to the creation of the Patriot Act, which provides law enforcement with increased means to surveil potential terrorists.
Wednesday's event added an estimated $ 100,000 to Shurtleff's campaign coffers, and was supported by such organizations as Intermountain Health Care, Anheuser Busch, the Motion Picture Association of America and R.J. Reynolds.
Elizabeth Smart, whose kidnapping case was instrumental in creating a nationwide Amber Alert system, attended and played the harp. Ashcroft and Shurtleff recognized the Smart family for their support of the Amber Alert, which helps recover child kidnap victims by widely distributing information about the possible suspect.
"It is now something that is taken for granted by the public," said Ashcroft, who is now creating a Washington, D.C. consulting firm.
A group of about 30 protesters from Planned Parenthood and Utah's Libertarian Party stood outside of the Wells Fargo Building at the corner of 300 South and Main Street. The Libertarians criticized Ashcroft's response to terrorism, while Planned Parenthood protested his stand against abortion.
mcanham@sltrib.com  

Graphic

 
Former U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft speaks at Salt Lake City's Wells Fargo Building as part of an annual Law Day fund-raiser.

Load-Date: May 5, 2005


End of Document