ASHCROFT UNVEILS STATE TASK FORCE;
   TERRORISM TOPIC OF DAY WITH STUDENTS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
April 12, 2002 Friday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. B3
Length: 437 words
Byline: Carrie Antlfinger Associated Press
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft finally made it to a Milwaukee elementary school Thursday, completing a visit derailed by the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. He used his time to tell the children what the nation has done to fight terrorism, later unveiling a new state task force.
"Will you forgive me and excuse me for being a little late for school?" he asked an auditorium of students at Anna F. Doerfler Elementary School on Milwaukee's south side.
"Yes," the students replied, in unison.
Ashcroft was scheduled to visit Sept. 11 but had to return to Washington after learning of the attacks on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center.
He explained the events of Sept. 11, drawing a picture of the United States and asking students to mark the places where the attacks occurred.
"I'm going to ask you not to laugh too much when I draw something on the board. I'm not really an artist," Ashcroft said.
He also answered questions.
One student asked if New York was going to rebuild the twin World Trade Center towers that collapsed.
Ashcroft said whether that was appropriate hasn't been decided. But "there is a spirit now of renovation and renewal," he said.
Another student asked the attorney general how he felt when he heard the towers were destroyed.
"I felt sick in my stomach and I said to myself that I will do everything I possibly can to make sure this doesn't happen again," Ashcroft said.
After the school, he went to Milwaukee's federal courthouse to announce the creation of an FBI Joint Terrorism Force for Wisconsin.
The task force, to be housed at Federal Bureau of Investigation offices throughout the state, will include full-time investigators from a dozen federal, state and local agencies, led by the FBI.
The threat of punishment has not been an adequate strategy so far to deter terrorist activities, Ashcroft said.
The task force's main focus will be ensuring that investigation of terrorist activities will be coordinated effectively among local, federal and state law enforcement.
Every FBI field office in the country has a task force in place or in the planning stages, said Jeffrey Berkin, the FBI's acting special agent in charge of Wisconsin.
The participating agencies, including the Wisconsin Department of Justice, local police departments and some sheriff's departments, will pay their investigators' salaries, Berkin said. The FBI will pay for equipment, vehicles, overtime and training, he said.
After the announcement, Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke said, "The task force will break down some of the traditional barriers that before allowed information to not flow from jurisdiction to jurisdiction."

Graphic

 
Phot of John Ashcroft

Load-Date: April 13, 2002


End of Document