Ashcroft unviles Wisconsin terrorism task force plans
University Wire
April 12, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Badger Herald via U-Wire
Length: 291 words
Byline: By Amanda Novak, Badger Herald
Dateline: Madison, Wis.
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft unveiled plans for an FBI joint terrorism task force in Wisconsin while making an appearance in Milwaukee Thursday.
The task force will focus on investigation, Ashcroft said, because the threat of punishment and prosecution has not been a sound strategy in terrorism prevention.
U. Wisconsin
Ashcroft said it is vital for law-enforcement agencies to work together to fight terrorism. The task-force offices will be at FBI offices throughout the state and will include full-time investigators from a dozen federal, state and local agencies.
Ashcroft had originally planned to visit the Wisconsin seven months ago but cancelled the trip because of the Sept. 11 attacks.
The task force will join federal, state and local communities in protecting against future attacks. This is the first terrorism task force for the state?s FBI, but 36 of the 56 national FBI offices have similar task forces. Gov. Scott McCallum started the state's first task force earlier this fall. Attorney General Jim Doyle said the state's task force was important step in state security. The task force determined Wisconsin law-enforcement offices are prepared to meet any potential terrorist threats. Ashcroft was with Jeffrey Barkin, special agent in charge of the FBI's branch in Wisconsin.
Barkin said every FBI field office has a task force in the planning stages. Ashcroft was also accompanied by James Santelle of the U.S. attorney's office for the Eastern District and Grant Johnson of the U.S. attorney's office for the Western District of Wisconsin. "There is no more noble endeavor these days than protecting Americans from terrorism," Ashcroft said. "Each of you is involved in that effort."
(C) 2002 Badger Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 12, 2002


End of Document