ASIAN TERRORIST GROUP SHOWS RESURGENCE/ HURT BY CRACKDOWN, NETWORK IS SAID TO BE LESS PREDICTABLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 2004 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 458 words
Byline: Michael Casey/ The Associated Press
Dateline: BALI, INDONESIA
Body


Damaged but still dangerous, a Southeast Asian terrorist network is regrouping, aided by porous borders, rising fanaticism and new recruits, officials said ahead of an anti-terrorism conference.
Forced further underground by a police crackdown, dependent on couriers and broken into isolated cells, Jemaah Islamiyah is becoming less predictable, officials said.
"JI's capabilities have been degraded but they have certainly not been defeated," Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said upon arriving at the conference Tuesday. "There is still a long ways to go, and the one thing we shouldn't become is complacent."
Cabinet ministers and other officials from 33 nations - including U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft - meet today and Thursday to discuss expanding the anti-terrorism fight against Jemaah Islamiyah.
Critics doubt the officials will sign anything beyond vague declarations because of the region's history of mutual suspicions, national self-interest and varying assessments of the terrorist threat.
Andrew Tan, a security analyst at Singapore's Institute of Defense and Strategic Studies, said the region needs something like the European Union police organization Europol to handle regional crimes, or an agency to craft Asiawide anti-terrorism policy and coordinate anti-terrorism legislation.
Experts say Jemaah Islamiyah is now a different group than the one blamed for bombings at Bali nightclubs that killed 202 people in 2002 and a bombing at a Jakarta hotel that killed 12 last year.
Under pressure, the group is no longer using banks to transfer money or cell phones or computers to communicate, Indonesian police and anti-terrorism officials said. Most messages are passed through couriers and meetings are a rarity, they said, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
The training of recruits, Philippine police said, has also been hampered in recent weeks. Peace talks in the Philippines have prompted the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to distance itself from Jemaah Islamiyah and cancel a training program with the group, said Philippines National Security Adviser Victor Mayo.
Officials say Jemaah Islamiyah's goal has remained unchanged: to establish an Islamic state in much of Southeast Asia.
But with many of its leaders in jail and funds at a minimum, the fight is now increasingly waged by local cells, making their targets harder to predict, according to Indonesian police.
A report issued Tuesday by the Brussels-based think tank International Crisis Group said that within the organization's Indonesian chapter, most members no longer favor high-profile attacks on Western targets, preferring instead to focus on setting up an Islamic state through religious indoctrination and building a base throughout the country.

Notes

PAGE 2

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - (Alexander) Downer, Warns against complacency

Load-Date: February 4, 2004


End of Document