Asia's Agenda: This Time, Terrorism Takes a Back Seat to Trade Issues
The New York Times
November 22, 2006 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 940 words
Byline: By DAVID E. SANGER
Dateline: HONOLULU, Nov. 21  
Body


Three years ago President Bush toured Asia just months after the fall of Baghdad, and declared that ''every nation in Asia and across the world now faces a choice.'' 
  In a series of high-energy stops across the Pacific, he urged leaders to pour money and manpower into rebuilding Iraq. In private meetings, he expressed confidence that Iraq would have a ''demonstration effect'' on states like North Korea and Iran, and urged Asian leaders to reshape the world with the United States.
Today, that moment appears as one of the high points of American power in Mr. Bush's tenure. On the five-day tour of Singapore, Vietnam and Indonesia that Mr. Bush completed with a visit here to the Pacific Command at Pearl Harbor on Tuesday, the sweep of the president's agenda was diminished, his initiatives far more modest, his rallying calls for fighting terrorism more muted. 
  The question is why. Perhaps it was an example of what Graham E. Fuller, a former vice chairman of the National Intelligence Council, described recently as ''superpower fatigue'' -- a sense that Washington is overstretched, and that other nations sense the opening that creates for them. 
  As Iraq grew ever more violent and complicated, Mr. Fuller wrote in the latest issue of The National Interest, ''diverse countries have deployed a multiplicity of strategies and tactics designed to weaken, divert, alter, complicate, limit, delay or block the Bush agenda through death by a thousand cuts.'' 
  But there are other explanations, including a belated awakening within the Bush administration that the agenda of its Asian allies is very different from Washington's. Iraq is rarely in the headlines in the countries Mr. Bush visited. Yet the resentments that have built up over the years, as Mr. Bush pressed his security and counterterrorism agenda ahead of the Asian desire to find ways to spur economic growth, are the subject of regular commentary.
  ''The Asians got tired of all this homework, and began to organize their own summit, one that excluded the United States, to return to the trade issues they view as so central,'' said Michael Green, who left the administration late last year after running the Asia side of the National Security Council. ''I think some in the administration realized we were sounding a little shrill on terrorism -- because there has been a lot of quiet cooperation in Asia -- and it was time to get the president back to the trade agenda.''
  So instead of pressing the hunt for Al Qaeda affiliates in Indonesia and terror groups like Abu Sayyaf in the Philippines, this time Mr. Bush talked about the distant goal of creating a free trade area in the Pacific. 
  The talk was motivated partly by a desire to avoid American exclusion: Mr. Bush's proposal for a sprawling free-trade area would compete with calls in Asia for a regional one that would exclude non-Asian countries. But it was less of an initiative than a long-range vision, like President Clinton's call for a ''free trade area of the Americas'' in the early 1990s. 
  ''It's a recognition that in Asia, economics is where the game is -- with China, and of course with India and others -- and in that arena, the president has been in deep kimchi,'' said James Lilley, who served as American ambassador to China and South Korea, and is close to Mr. Bush's father. 
  Mr. Bush's aides, not surprisingly, deny that the administration's troubles in Iraq are limiting his influence in places like Southeast Asia. Such explanations, they argue, are creations of the news media, seeking a storyline of presidential decline after the Republican defeat in the midterm elections. 
  Yet it was striking that a president who came to office with hopes of dominating the agenda in Asia felt the need on this trip to make the case that the United States could be counted on to stay around. 
  ''America will remain engaged in Asia, because our interests depend on the expansion of freedom and opportunity in this region,'' he said in a speech in Singapore. In what seemed to be a message directed back home, to a Congress he will no longer control come January, he warned against growing isolationist tendencies that would cede American influence. Left unsaid was the obvious: that if America retreats, China, India and others will gain.
  The true test may come in the next few months, as Mr. Bush manages the diplomacy over North Korea. On previous trips to Asia, he has declared the world could not ''tolerate'' a nuclear North Korea. Last month, the North Koreans set off their first nuclear test, leaving no doubt that they have a working weapon, even if it is one that did not work very well.
  The backroom diplomacy of this trip was centered on joining forces with China and others to lure or compel the North Koreans to make a symbolic step toward disarmament. But the North Koreans know that America's military is stretched to the limit already, and that, unlike the situation three years ago, there is little reason to fear that Washington's demands may be backed up by force. 
  And the rest of Asia, while interested in seeing the North Korean issue resolved, is even more interested in stability. For them, containment of Pyongyang would be fine; disarmament, Bush-style, a little too provocative. 
  ''You go to a meeting in Asia these days, and these issues never come up,'' said David Rothkopf, a former Commerce Department official who wrote a definitive history of the National Security Council. ''The Asians think that the world is a really great place right now, and they are making progress at a speed never thought possible before. And Bush's agenda, it just doesn't scan.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Playing down security and the war in Iraq, which are not Asia's top concerns, on this trip President Bush spoke of a free trade zone, which is. (Photo by Kevin Lamarque/Reuters)

Load-Date: November 22, 2006


End of Document