Asleep at the switch
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
January 24, 2010 Sunday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 734 words
Byline: John Browne
Body


On Nov. 5, 2009, an Army major killed 12 people and wounded 30 others in a shooting spree. An act by an individual rather than a group, it epitomized the evolving, more dangerous form of decentralized terrorism. However, possibly to avoid scaring people, President Obama refrained from terming it a terrorist act. 
On Christmas Day, a Nigerian passenger failed in yet another act of individual terror to bring down Northwest Flight 253. Reluctant to warn Americans of this new type of individual terror, Obama branded the astounding security breaches as merely "a systemic failure" by government agencies. However, no blame was attached to any individual or government department. 
His reaction to the similar "systemic failure" of the banking system, an event both financed and inspired by government laxity, was in stark contrast. With the banks, the president acted politically by imposing a highly discriminatory fine on selected profitable banks that were all supervised and highly regulated by government agencies. It was akin to blaming the air crew and passengers for the Christmas Day attack. 
On Feb. 4, a Jordanian double-agent suicide bomber murdered the operatives of a CIA outpost in Afghanistan. Again, an alertness failure was to blame. The suicide bomber's advance on the outpost, with one hand in his pocket, should have been an immediate red flag. 
These examples illustrate a series of failures, not just by operatives but also by government. However, no government department or official has been blamed. Historically, as Harry Truman knew, organizational failure necessarily starts at the top. 
In addition, while former President Bush's announcement of a "War on Terror" sounded good, it has proved to be a major strategic error, based upon little more than wishy-washy thinking. It has affected fatally the entire multitrillion-dollar counterterror operation undertaken to safeguard American citizens. 
First, while it is possible to identify a person such as Hitler or a group like the Nazis as an enemy, it is almost impossible to galvanize a force or nation into fighting an "ism," like terrorism. It is like trying to deliver a knockout blow to a free-floating balloon. 
Second, research indicates that the primary cause of terrorism and particularly suicide attacks is enemy occupation. 
There were a moral excuse and wide international support for a massive but swift, surgical search-and-destroy mission against the Taliban, followed by a quick exit. Instead, President Bush was persuaded to initiate an air war, unsupported on the ground and of insufficient strength. The enemy, underestimated, undetected and unbeaten, merely melted into the population rather than face a conventional battle against superior force. 
In Iraq, the unjustified attack was viewed widely as based upon falsely inflated intelligence data. Furthermore, the forces deployed were too small to ensure rapid success and exit. The effect was that public appetite for war support was eroded severely. 
In Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S.-led allies were viewed as invaders. The image of occupiers fanned rather than subdued the flames of terrorism. Many terrorists left for Yemen and Somalia to carry the battle further afield. 
Third, it is increasingly apparent that little thought was given to any cost-benefit analysis of the operations. Instead, overreliance was placed on faulty intelligence, a gross underestimation of enemy capabilities and an incredible lack of awareness of terrorist motivation. It led to an arrogant assumption of easy victory and resulted in unnecessary casualties and costs. 
The costs of the War on Terror are huge. For example, the $1 trillion estimate of the abortive invasion of Iraq is widely believed to become more like $3 trillion when long-tail expenses such as medical resettlement of the wounded are included. 
Finally, there are the hidden costs of counterterror efforts. The high cost, both direct and indirect, of airport passenger and cargo searches must be added to the threatened loss of potential sales in shopping malls. In the face of a likely deep recession, this is bad news. 
Presidential actions have fanned anti-American feelings and the resulting terrorist threat to the American homeland. America had given the impression of being an occupier. There will likely be severe political costs for any president perceived as soft on defense or asleep at the controls. 

Load-Date: January 24, 2010


End of Document