ASSAULT ON TERRORISM;
Hartsfield security brought up a notch
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 22, 1998, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 04A
Length: 568 words
Byline: Gary Hendricks; Ron Martz
Series: Metro Final
Body


Travelers at Hartsfield International Airport might see bomb-sniffing dogs on the prowl and experience some delays as baggage searches become more frequent in the wake of the U.S. missile strikes against suspected terrorist facilities, airport General Manager Ben DeCosta said Friday.
But passengers probably won't notice many other increased security measures, he said, because the airport has been in a heightened state of alert for three years. Since the 1996 Olympics, the airport has barred motorists from leaving vehicles unattended at terminal curbsides and airline ticket agents have routinely asked passengers whether they are carrying anything given to them by someone else.
The primary thrust of the airport's security plan is to have staffers "on their toes" looking for suspicious people and activity, DeCosta said. Patrols using the airport police's bomb-sniffing dogs are likely to be increased for the visibility factor, although no additional dogs have been added to the canine squad.
"I want to assure you, it is safe to travel through Hartsfield," DeCosta said at a news conference.
DeCosta urged passengers to arrive at the airport an hour and a half before their scheduled flights to allow sufficient time to deal with any security measures.
During previous terrorist crises, the airport refused to allow anyone but ticketholders onto the gate concourses and eliminated curbside baggage check-ins. DeCosta said he doesn't plan to reintroduce those measures.
Federal officials in Atlanta said Friday there are no specific measures being implemented to upgrade security at federal buildings to prevent terrorist attacks, but heightened vigilance is being recommended for all guards and employees.
Fleming James, executive assistant to the regional administrator of the General Services Administration, which oversees security at federal buildings, said there has been no significant upgrade in protection since the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995.
"We're just asking people to be more aware of things that might be out of place," James said Friday.
Federal workers are being asked to wear their identification badges so they can be easily seen and guards at metal detectors at the entrances to buildings have been told to keep a closer watch on everyone who enters.
Security at the five federal buildings in Atlanta --- the GSA also leases space for federal workers in more than 100 other buildings --- is being made more visible to deter terrorists and give a sense of security to workers.
 
"Guards outside are doing their rounds more frequently," James said.
The largest federal building in Atlanta, and the largest outside Washington, is the Sam Nunn Atlanta Federal Center downtown, which has more than 6,000 workers.
Two local Army installations increased security Friday. At Fort Gillem in Forest Park, where civilians have been able to enter without challenge, military police stopped cars and asked for identification and the reason for being on the post. The gate on Jonesboro Road was closed, and visitors were required to use the main gate on Ga. 42.
At Fort McPherson, guards now require motorists to produce identification, even if they have a windshield permit to enter the base. The Lee Street gate at McPherson also was closed, except during rush hours. Garrison spokesman Bob Bolia said the stricter access regulations will be in effect until the Department of Defense decides to relax them.

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document