ASSAD A FAN Calls Trump 'natural ally' after Bam was foe
Daily News (New York)
November 17, 2016 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 23
Length: 312 words
Byline: BY DENIS SLATTERY NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire Services
Body


SYRIAN PRESIDENT Bashar Assad believes Donald Trump could be a "natural ally" in the fight against terrorism.
Assad, in an interview with Portuguese broadcaster RTP published Tuesday, said Trump's pledge to focus the fight on ISIS militants was "promising," but added: "Can he deliver?"
Trump has vowed an about-face from President Obama's support of Syrian opposition forces.
Assad said of Trump "if - if - he fights the terrorists, it is clear that we will be a natural ally, together with the Russians, Iranians and many other countries who want to defeat the terrorists."
The Syrian civil war raged on as Russia announced a major offensive in opposition-held areas on Tuesday, and Syrian President Bashar Assad's air force has been pounding Aleppo city.
At least 30 people, including four children, were killed Wednesday in the government-backed blitz. The bombings pounded hospitals, a blood bank and targets near schools, activists said.
France's UN ambassador says attacks against medical facilities in Syria by the government and its allies "are war crimes." Francois Delattre strongly condemned renewed air strikes targeting hospitals.
"Make no mistake about it," Delattre said. "Bombing Aleppo and its population is not fighting against terrorism, as the regime pretends. What the regime and its allies are doing in Aleppo is actually fueling terrorism, it's fueling radicalization."
Meanwhile, Turkey's president criticized protests in the U.S. against Trump, saying the President-elect should be given time to show how he will govern.
President Tayyip Erdogan, who has tightened his ironclad control in Turkey following an attempted coup in July, said the protesters were "attacking" Trump because "the person they wanted wasn't elected President."
"Hold on a second. The election process just ended, show some respect! How will he govern, let's see that first," he said.

Graphic

 
Syrian leader Bashar Assad (below) sees President-elect Donald Trump as an ally in war on rebels (above) that has wracked his country. GETTY; REUTERS

Load-Date: November 17, 2016


End of Document