ASSAULT ON TERRORISM;
Yeltsin calls U.S. air strikes 'indecent';
Pre-summit posturing? Russian president may be trying to boost popularity.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 22, 1998, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 05A
Length: 622 words
Byline: Charles W. Holmes
Series: Metro Final
Dateline: Moscow
Body


Eleven days before he is to meet with President Clinton in Moscow, Russian President Boris Yeltsin sharply condemned U.S. air strikes against suspected terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, calling the attacks "indecent."
Yeltsin likened the cruise missile strikes to terrorism, casting frosty rhetoric over an already strained U.S.-Russia relationship. He also faulted the United States for unilateral military action without first consulting other world powers.
Attending Russian naval maneuvers off the northern port of Murmansk Friday, Yeltsin said of the U.S. strikes: "My attitude is negative, just as to any act of terrorism. The reason for (armed) intervention is impotence, better to solve this question through talks."
Aides were quick to stress that Yeltsin's stern criticism of Clinton would not prompt cancellation of the scheduled summit between the two leaders Sept. 1-3 in Moscow.
The Russian government hopes Clinton's visit will help begin to restore a sense of global confidence in the country's ability to overcome its worsening financial crisis.
Yeltsin's comments came as the opposition-led parliament was calling for his resignation over the economy, leading some analysts to conclude that Yeltsin's comments were intended to win points at home. The government devalued the national currency this week, causing consumer prices to rise and hitting the pocketbooks of average Russians.
The Russian president's remarks could have been "perhaps a meager attempt to improve his extremely low popularity by standing up to the Americans," said Viktor Kremenyhuk of the Institute of U.S.A. and Canada, a Moscow-based think tank.
The Kremlin was chiefly upset that it was not informed in advance of Thursday's missile strikes, particularly with its lingering interest in Afghanistan following a long and bloody Soviet war against Islamic rebels from 1979-88.
"I don't think the summit will be jeopardized, but these actions do not create the best atmosphere for it, especially where the Russian public opinion is concerned," said Vladimir Baranovski, of the Center for Geopolitical and Military Forecasts.
Yeltsin had strongly condemned the bombings against the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this month.
Baranovski said average Russians probably understand the reasoning for the strikes in Afghanistan, considered a quagmire in Russia similar to America's experience in Vietnam. But they probably also view the lack of consultations before the strikes as another example of America's failure to regard Russia as an ally. "This could be included in quite a long list of Russian concerns about the Americans," he said.
While reliant on the West for economic aid, Russia has used diplomacy to assert its independence on the world stage, a tactic that plays well among ordinary Russians, many of whom blame Western profiteering for the poor economy.
In recent years, Russia has opposed U.S. military strikes against Iraq and has differed with the U.S. and NATO over intervention in the Balkans.
In an effort to soften Yeltsin's remarks, his press secretary Sergei Yastrzhembsky stressed that "our joint work with the United States in the struggle against terrorism, and the special services of the two countries will continue."
Two issues are expected to dominate the Clinton-Yeltsin summit: Russia's deep economic problems and the international response to Serbian aggression in Kosovo.
Kremenyhuk said Yeltsin could have been using his comments about the missile strikes in advance of the summit as a ploy to undermine Clinton's position on those two issues.
"Yeltsin is expected to be put on the defensive at the summit. Now he raises the issue of the U.S. bombings to place Clinton on the defensive," Kremenyhuk said.

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document