ASSAD READY FOR 'NORMAL' ISRAELI TIES CLINTON HAILED THE SYRIAN PRESIDENT'S DECLARATION. IT WAS ASSAD'S MOST POSITIVE ASSESSMENT IN YEARS. STILL, TALKS ABOUT TERRORISM PRODUCED TENSE MOMENTS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 17, 1994 Monday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1101 words
Byline: Robert A. Rankin and Steve Goldstein, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: GENEVA
Body


After huddling with President Clinton for 5 1/2 hours here yesterday, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad made clear that he is ready to establish normal relations with Israel as part of a comprehensive peace agreement.
Assad invited Israel to negotiate "a peace of the brave . . . aimed at putting an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict." If Israel's leaders "have sufficient courage" to do so, Assad said, "normal peaceful relations among all shall dawn anew."
Said Assad: "In honor we fought, in honor we negotiate, and in honor we shall make peace."
Clinton hailed Assad's declaration as "an important statement . . . the first time that there has been a clear expression that there will be a possibility of that sort of relationship" between Syria and Israel.
Assad - Israel's most implacable Arab foe for more than 20 years - had never before used such promising language to define his vision of peace, according to senior Clinton administration specialists.
Clinton was asked at a news conference after the meeting if he believed he had won a firm commitment from Assad to normalize relations with Israel - including open borders, free trade and diplomatic relations.
"The short answer is yes," Clinton said.
Assad was less firm when asked essentially the same question, however, saying he and Clinton agreed completely "on the requirements for peace. We will respond to these requirements."
Senior Clinton administration officials stressed that that answer sends an important diplomatic signal that Assad recognizes Israel's objectives and is prepared to meet them.
However, Assad declined to discuss any specifics of what he meant by "normal relations" or what terms he would seek in negotiations. He said that would "hinge on the discussions and the peace negotiations."
The one requirement Assad stressed is that Arab negotiations with Israel must be "comprehensive," and he left no doubt that he meant settlements must be negotiated with all of the Jewish state's Arab neighbors, rather than one at a time.
Assad fiercely opposed Egypt's separate peace with Israel, negotiated in 1978, and the accord struck with the Palestine Liberation Organization last September. But a senior administration official said yesterday that Assad had told Clinton that "even though they didn't favor the Israeli-PLO agreement . . . they made it very clear that they would not oppose it" any longer.
Clinton endorsed Assad's call for a comprehensive peace, saying "I believe Syria is the key" to its achievement.
Among the topics the pair discussed were Syria's ties to terrorist organizations such as Hezbollah and alleged Syrian involvement in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988, which killed 259 people on the plane, mostly Americans, and 11 more people on the ground near Lockerbie, Scotland.
The Lockerbie bombing "did come up, and the President made very clear that this was a serious issue for the United States and it was absolutely essential that Libya . . . give up" the two suspected bombers it is harboring, senior administration officials said.
There was "no meeting of the minds" between the two presidents on those topics, officials said, adding that the atmosphere was tense during the discussion of terrorism.
But Clinton said he and Assad agreed to create a formal diplomatic mechanism under Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Syria's foreign minister "to deal honestly with the differences between us" in an effort to build confidence needed to sustain the Middle East peace process.
Later, as he headed back to Washington, he called Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak from Air Force One to brief them on his meeting with Assad. Asked on the plane about Assad's comments on alleged Syrian complicity in the Pan Am 103 blast, the President said, "I can tell you that we have absolutely no evidence of it, and that he flatly denied it. And he reminded us that a Syrian was killed on Pan Am 103 who was the only son of a woman from his home area."
Clinton made clear that he believes it now is up to Israel to capitalize on Assad's invitation, and implicitly acknowledged that Israel must make concessions that will be politically unpopular with many Israelis.
"Crucial decisions will have to be made by Syria and Israel if this common objective is to be achieved. That is why President Assad has called for a peace of the brave," Clinton said.
In an apparent reference to Syria's demand that Israel surrender control over the Golan Heights - a strategic plateau it captured from Syria during the Six-Day War of 1967 - Clinton said: "Critical issues remain to be resolved, especially the questions relating . . . withdrawal to peace and security."
The U.S. role is to try to keep the peace negotiations moving forward, Clinton said, not to conduct them itself. "But as a result of our conversation today, I am confident that we laid the foundations for real progress in the negotiations."
Israel and Syria broke off negotiations in September after two years without visible progress, but their talks are to resume next week in Washington.
To spur them, Clinton dispatched two senior aides - Dennis Ross, the State Department's chief Middle East negotiator, and Martin Indyk, the senior Middle East expert on the National Security Council - to Israel to brief Rabin.
Clinton and Assad talked for 4 hours and 26 minutes at the Intercontinental Hotel here. During a break, the President commented to an aide about the "tough" atmosphere when the subject of Pan Am Flight 103 came up.
After a break, the two leaders returned to an adjoining first-floor room in the tightly guarded hotel for 50 minutes more of one-on-one talks with only their translators present.
During the news conference, Clinton looked flushed and vigorous, a stark contrast to the frail Syrian leader, who moved very slowly.
However, it was Clinton who left the long meeting first to go to the bathroom. "I had heard a lot about President Assad's legendary stamina," Clinton noted in the news conference, prompting laughter.
Clinton's stamina also was tested; he came here at the end of an eight-day sweep through six countries - Belgium, the Czech Republic, Ukraine, Russia, Belarus and Switzerland - in his first visit to Europe as president.
Clinton was visibly pleased by the outcome of his talks with Assad.
"For too long, the Middle East has been denied the benefits of peace. And yet, it is within our power to create the conditions that will enable Israeli and Arab, Muslim, Christian and Jew to live together in peace," Clinton said. "Today's meeting was an important step toward fulfilling that vision."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. President Clinton helps President Assad after a joint news conference.
(Associated Press, DENIS PAQUIN)

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document