Assault on terrorism Blue-chip panel wants crackdown at U.S. airports
USA TODAY
September 6, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: MONEY;; COVER STORY
Length: 1090 words
Byline: Robert Davis; Donna Rosato
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- On the morning of July 17, aviation experts gathered
to discuss the gaping holes in the nation's aviation security.
Their job, National Security Council officials told them, was
to find ways the system could be fixed -- fast.
Hours later, they watched in horror as the TV pictures appeared
from Long Island, N.Y., where TWA Flight 800 had been blown out
of the sky that evening. A bomb or missile is suspected, but investigators
have not declared the crash a criminal act.
Within days of the tragedy, which killed 230 people, President
Clinton ordered Vice President Al Gore to form a commission to
study airport security and aviation safety. And he promised the
nation that officials would "search every airplane flying to
or from America from another nation -- every flight, every cargo
hold, every cabin, every time." But Gore's commissioners soon
learned such promises are difficult to keep.
"Those are rousing words; great rhetoric," says Kathaleen Flynn,
an anti-terrorism advocate whose son was killed in 1988 in the
bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. "Have
we learned nothing in almost eight years? . . . The system needs
major reform."
Gore's commission announced its first recommendations Thursday.
Many were adopted from the work of the aviation experts who met
the day of the TWA crash.
Here are answers to questions about the Gore Commission plan.
Q: What is the plan?
A: The plan is to take a sweeping and in-depth look at the security
at the nation's airports to plug the holes where terrorists could
attack Americans. It ranges from training more bomb-sniffing dogs
to buying state-of-the-art equipment. The commission wants the
government and the airline industry to:
-- Buy advanced bomb detection systems for airports.
-- Screen, train, certify and test airport security personnel.
-- Match every bag loaded onto a plane with a passenger.
-- Increase the role of the FBI, CIA and other agencies in watching
for terrorists.
-- Train and deploy more bomb-sniffing dogs.
-- Perform criminal background and fingerprint checks on airline
employees. In January, the FAA began requiring criminal background
and fingerprint checks going back five years on airline and airport
personnel but only for new applicants.
-- Develop better ways to "profile" travelers to spot terrorists
by knowing their habits and moves.
Q: How much would this cost and who'll pay?
A: The Federal Aviation Administration estimates that using the
best equipment and techniques to battle terrorism will cost $ 6
billion over the next 10 years.
Improvements in security have been stalled for years by fights
over who would pay for changes. Currently, the airlines pay for
airport security.
Q: Would I have to wait in long lines when I travel?
A: Yes. If the recommendations are implemented -- domestic bag
match, explosives-detection screening and profiling -- fliers
might have to arrive at airports 21/2 hours before their flights,
says Rich Roth, executive director of aviation security consultants
Counter Technology Inc. Many airlines now recommend fliers get
to the airport at least an hour before their flights.
Q: What's wrong with airport security now?
A: The increased awareness of terrorist activity has underlined
weaknesses in passenger screening and access to sensitive airport
areas. New technology in explosives and plastic weapons also has
made it easier to defeat X-ray machines and metal detectors.
"We live in a changing world," said David Fuscus, spokesman
for the Air Transport Association.
Q: Do bomb-detection devices really work?
A: The FAA has certified only one explosives-detection device,
the CTX-5000 made by Invision Technology. Each machine costs nearly
$ 1 million. They are in use at in three U.S. airports -- San Francisco,
Atlanta and New York's JFK -- and some foreign airports. The CTX-5000
does detect explosive material, but in tests it has sounded false
alarms about 30% of the time. And the CTX-5000 only processes
100 to 125 bags per hour, well below the 450 bags per hour that
airlines say is needed so flights aren't delayed.
Q: How does profiling work?
A: Profiling -- asking specific questions to identify travelers
who pose the highest security risks -- begins with simple questions
such as, "Did you pack your own bags?" and, "Did anyone ask
you to carry anything for them?" Airlines also use information
they already have about travelers, such as frequent fliers miles,
to pre-screen passengers. For example, a business traveler who
flies 250 days a year isn't likely to be carrying a bomb or be
duped into carrying explosives.
Q: Isn't there a concern about privacy?
A: Yes. Profiling can be an effective way to screen for terrorism,
but it raises concerns about civil liberties and ethnic or national
biases. Some organizations have complained that profiling singles
out certain groups for discrimination. A recent FAA security directive
to airlines lists seven countries whose citizens are automatically
selected for further questions: Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, Syria,
Cuba and North Korea.
Gregory Nojeim of the American Civil Liberties Union told the
commission on Thursday that under the law, individuals can be
singled out for searches only if there is "reasonably articulable
suspicion" that they are involved in criminal activity. Using
profiles to pick out passengers for extra scrutiny is not enough,
says Nojeim, and often involves racial or ethnic stereotypes.
But the Supreme Court has approved the use of profiling for drug
searches at airports and could endorse its use to combat terrorism.
Q: Will the Gore plan go into effect?
A: Opinions are mixed. "I don't think it's likely at all. Fliers
won't stand for it," Roth says. He says fliers will fight against
delays at airports and pressure Congress to ease up.
Others say the threat of terrorism will spur action. "Concerns
about terrorism are very real today. I think we have the political
willpower today that we didn't have before to fund these new strategies,"
says Ralph Sheridan, president of American Science and Engineering,
which makes a bomb-detection device used in many foreign airports.
Q: How does Gore propose to avoid turf battles that have blocked
security improvements before?
A: Gore cites partnerships forged between government and industry
by the Occupational Safety & Health Administration and the
Food and Drug Administration as examples of how consortiums can
accomplish more than typical government regulation processes.
Contributing: Adam Weintraub, David Field and Tony Mauro
"When you cut through all of the turf battles, we're talking
about protecting American lives." - Vice President Gore

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Matt Mendelsohn, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Denis Paquin, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Fred Mertz; Luggage being conveyed on a carousel at an airport. Airport safety: Vice President Gore, left, and Transportation Secretary Federico Pena unveil anti-terrorism plan. CTX-5000: Sergio Magistri, CEO of Invision Technologies, with the only bomb-detection suitcase scanner certified by the FAA.

Load-Date: September 6, 1996


End of Document