At attention
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne)
September 29, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Briefs; Pg. A5
Length: 495 words
Byline: Staff
Body


Air National Guard Airman Joshua R. Pennock recently graduated from basic military training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.
During his six weeks of training, the airman studied the Air Force mission, organization and military customs and courtesies. He also performed drill and ceremony marches, received physical training, practiced rifle marksmanship, participated in field training exercises and received special training in human relations.
In addition, airmen who complete basic training earn credits toward an associate degree through the Community College of the Air Force.
He is the son of Steve Pennock of Cheyenne.
-
Army Reserve Pfc. Ryan D. Bliss recently graduated from basic combat training at Fort Jackson in Columbia, S.C.
During the nine weeks of training, the soldier studied the Army mission, history, tradition and core values. He also performed physical fitness, and received instruction and practice in basic combat skills, military weapons, chemical warfare and bayonet training.
Bliss practiced drill and ceremony, marching, rifle marksmanship, armed and unarmed combat, map reading, field tactics, military courtesy, military justice system, basic first aid, foot marches and field training exercises.
Bliss is the grandson of Rusty Reinsbach of Cheyenne.
-
Army Reserve Staff Sgt. Sonya D. Buissereth has returned to the 2nd Brigade, 74th Division, at Camp Kilmer in Edison, Mo., after being deployed overseas in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Enduring Freedom is the official name given to anti-terrorism military operations involving U.S. troops and allied coalition partners. Reserve component members from all branches of the U.S. armed forces have been mobilized, activated and deployed along with active duty members to support the war against global terrorism.
Mission objectives encompass combating the international terrorist network or regime forces outside the borders of the United States. U.S. troops serve in South and Southwest Asia, Central Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, the Horn of Africa, islands in the Pacific and Europe.
Buissereth is a medical supervisor with 15 years of military service. She is the niece of Ann Bell of Cheyenne.
-
Capt. Pedro Rampolla of Cheyenne, a member of the Wyoming Air National Guard's 243rd Air Traffic Control Squadron, was awarded the Theodore Roosevelt Leadership Award for Company Grade Officers.
The honor will be presented to Rampolla for his excellence in leadership on Sept. 20 in Baltimore, Md., at the National Guard Association of the United States Conference.
Rampolla is the chief air traffic control operations officer for the 243rd Air Traffic Control Squadron. He has been a member of the Wyoming National Guard for eight years.
At Attention is a compilation of news releases related to military personnel from southeast Wyoming and their recent accomplishments. To submit an item for publication, contact Brandon Quester at 633-3134 or e-mail him at bquester@wyomingnews.com

Load-Date: September 29, 2008


End of Document