At Fort Hood, Wrestling With Label of Terrorism
The New York Times
April 9, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 882 words
Byline: By MANNY FERNANDEZ and ALAN BLINDER
Body


KILLEEN, Tex. -- In the hours and days after a deadly shooting at Fort Hood last week, Army officials have not shied away from talking about terrorism -- to contrast it with the 2009 attack and to ease fears about the motive behind the second mass shooting on the base in nearly five years.
''We have not found any links to terrorism, or any international or domestic extremist groups at this time,'' Chris Grey, a spokesman for the United States Army Criminal Investigation Command, told reporters.
That simple word has a complex and politically charged past at Fort Hood. Army officials have never called the first Fort Hood mass shooting, in November 2009 -- when Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan shot dozens of soldiers in what he said was an attempt to protect Taliban leaders in Afghanistan from American troops -- an act of terrorism.
Major Hasan was prosecuted by the Army on murder charges, not terrorism-related charges. The Army's lead prosecutor called it ''the t-word.'' Throughout Major Hasan's trial in August at Fort Hood, terrorism was never uttered in the presence of the military jury, neither by prosecutors nor by the more than 100 witnesses they called. Major Hasan was found guilty and sentenced to death.
The disconnect between how the Army mentioned the word terrorism in relation to one shooting and avoided it in the other underscores the still-unresolved debate over how to define the 2009 shooting and whether it should be considered an act of terror, a debate the attack last week has rekindled. When President Obama returns to Fort Hood on Wednesday for a memorial service, victims of the 2009 shooting will be listening closely.
''This would be the perfect opportunity to acknowledge that 2009 was terrorism,'' said Neal M. Sher, a lawyer representing dozens of victims of the 2009 attack and their relatives in a lawsuit accusing federal and Pentagon officials of providing them with inferior treatment. ''When you juxtapose the 2009 attack by Hasan with what happened this past week, it crystallizes the fact that Hasan committed an act of terror.''
Both the Army and the White House have been reluctant to call the 2009 shooting terrorism, although it was called an act of terror in a 2011 Senate report and it has an official ID number in the Global Terrorism Database. One reason the debate has persisted has been the mixed messages that federal and Pentagon officials have put out about the nature of the attack and the significance of Major Hasan's radical Muslim beliefs. The confusion has allowed conspiracy theories, misinformation and accusations of a cover-up to fester. A White House spokeswoman had not issued a response to a request for comment by Tuesday evening.
Army and Pentagon officials have talked about the 2009 attack within the broader context of workplace violence, although they have never officially declared it as such. But it is this latest shooting, not the previous one, that appears rooted in workplace violence.
Last Wednesday, Specialist Ivan A. Lopez killed three soldiers and wounded 16 others before taking his own life, the authorities said. He was being treated and evaluated for mental health problems, but the trigger appeared to be a dispute he had shortly before the attack began -- an argument with soldiers from his unit over his request for a leave.
On Nov. 5, 2009, Major Hasan shot and killed 12 soldiers and one civilian while wounding or shooting at 30 other soldiers and two police officers. Prosecutors said one of his motivations was to kill as many soldiers as he could to wage jihad on American military personnel. He told a military mental-health panel the shooting was justified because the soldiers he killed were ''going against the Islamic Empire.'' Before the attack, he sent messages and emails to Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical American-born cleric described by officials as the leader of external operations for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
Immediately following the first Fort Hood attack, Mr. Obama avoided calling the shooting an act of terror. In a counterterrorism speech last year, he linked it with another attack that he had declared an act of terror, the Boston Marathon bombings. The president spoke of the ''real threat from radicalized individuals,'' including those inspired by larger notions of jihad, adding that the ''pull towards extremism appears to have led to the shooting at Fort Hood and the bombing of the Boston Marathon.''
But in a letter sent last year to a Florida congressman, a top Army official wrote that the available evidence did not indicate the 2009 attack was an act of international terrorism. The official, Lt. Gen. Dana K. Chipman, at the time the Army's senior uniformed lawyer, described the attack as ''the alleged criminal act of a single individual.''
The issue stretches far beyond semantics. The lack of a terrorism declaration prevents victims from receiving combat-related benefits and Purple Hearts. It has also become a politicized issue..
''I was embarrassed by the initial ruling it was a workplace violence issue,'' said Representative John Carter, a Texas congressman who is a sponsor of a bill that designates the 2009 shooting an act of terrorism and makes the victims and their families eligible for combat-related benefits. ''I still am embarrassed by that.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/09/us/at-fort-hood-wrestling-with-label-of-terrorism.html

Load-Date: April 9, 2014


End of Document