At least 12 U.N. peacekeepers killed in Congo; Islamic group suspected; WAR ON TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 9, 2017 Saturday


Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A5
Length: 311 words
Byline: Rick Gladstone and Alan Cowell
Body


UNITED NATIONS - The United Nations said Friday that at least 12 peacekeepers, all from Tanzania, were killed in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo by attackers believed to be Islamic insurgents, in one of the deadliest assaults on the organization's forces.
Five Congolese soldiers also died, and at least 40 other people were injured when the rebel forces attacked a U.N. base in the North Kivu region Thursday evening, the organization said in a statement from its mission in Kinshasa, the Congolese capital.
The United Nations attributed the attack to an Islamist militant group known as the Allied Democratic Forces, which has its origins in neighboring Uganda and is accused of killing hundreds of people over the past three years.
Maman Sidikou, the head of the U.N. peacekeeping mission in Kinshasa, said the fighters had attacked the mission's operating base in the Beni territory, near the Uganda border.
The U.N. secretary-general, António Guterres, condemned the attack, saying it constituted "a war crime" and was the "worst attack" on peacekeepers in recent history.
"I want to express my outrage and utter heartbreak at last night's attack on United Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of Congo," Guterres said.
The United Nations declined to say how many militants were killed in the attack, but a spokesman for the Congolese Army in North Kivu, Capt. Mak Hazukay, said 72 rebels died.
The mission's statement provided few details about how the attack unfolded, but it said the U.N. and Congolese forces had been coordinating a joint response, and the agency had been conducting evacuations and assessing the security situation in the area.
The U.N. Organization Stabilization Mission for the Democratic Republic of Congo, known by its acronym, MONUSCO, is the largest U.N. peacekeeping mission in the world, with more than 16,000 soldiers.

Load-Date: December 9, 2017


End of Document