AT THE MOVIES;
Echoes of real terrorism dog Norris' latest film
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
May 2, 1995, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FEATURES,
Length: 332 words
Byline: Doug Hamilton; STAFF WRITER
Body

 
Presenting Great Moments in Bad Timing.
In this new action comedy, B-movie brawler Chuck Norris plays a loose-cannon San Diego police detective who teams up with an esteemed member of his department's canine unit - the titular top dog - to find and flush out a group of . . . American neo-Nazi terrorists. The movie begins with a public building being blown up, with babies trapped inside. It ends with an attempt to thwart the "big action" the extremists have planned for a significant date - Hitler's birthday, April 20.
In light of recent events, then, it's understandable if audiences aren't quite comfortable with the movie's juxtaposition of scenes of hate rallies and terrorist training with comedic man-dog bonding sequences. On the other hand, we really want Norris and his canine partner, Reno, to nail these creeps.
Misleadingly marketed as a cutesy-poo family flick, "Top Dog," with scenes of intense violence, earns every bit of its PG-13 rating. One sequence features Norris shooting it out with Nazis dressed as clowns. Double your horror.
And Reno is no adorably slobbery Beethoven. Sure, he gets to do a few cute tricks, including the old paw-over-the-eyes bit, but this scruffy, stained mutt is much more effective when he's baring his teeth and pushing bad guys off bridges.
The same goes for Norris. He delivers his extraordinarily unadorned dialogue - basically a running description of the dog's actions ("You ate my chicken, now you're in my chair!") - in a lazy monotone. But when Norris stops talking and starts kickin' butt, the movie kicks in.
And if the good guys dispense with the bad guys a bit too neatly here, well, maybe swift, easy justice is just what we need to see right now.
 
REVIEW "Top Dog" 1/2
Starring Chuck Norris. Directed by Aaron Norris. Rated PG-13 for violence and adult themes.
 
Ratings range from one to four stars.
THE VERDICT
Roll over, Beethoven. The shaggy star of this canine-caper flick would rather fight than fetch. And the dog's pretty tough, too.

Graphic

 
Photo: Chuck Norris plays a San Diego police detective who teams with Reno of the canine corps in "Top Dog." / Live Entertainment

Load-Date: June 27, 1995


End of Document