At U.N., Premier Inserts India Into Terrorism Fight
The New York Times
September 28, 2014 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4; UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Length: 865 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India reminded the world on Saturday of his country's abiding battle against extremist groups, and took a swipe at countries that give them shelter before capping his speech with a call for an International Yoga Day.
In his maiden speech to the United Nations General Assembly, Mr. Modi, without naming names, hinted at India's longstanding contention that its rival, Pakistan, backs groups that have carried out terrorist attacks on Indian soil. Twenty years ago, world leaders used to call it a ''law and order problem,'' he said, suggesting that only now had they had come around to understanding India's concerns. ''Some countries are giving refuge to international terrorists,'' he said. ''They consider terrorism to be a tool of their policy.''
Mr. Modi signaled his support for the United States' renewed focus on fighting terrorism, and showed that he clearly understands the value of political symbolism. Even before he arrived at the United Nations, he paid a visit to the National September 11 Memorial and Museum in lower Manhattan. In his meetings at the White House scheduled for Monday and Tuesday, security and counterterrorism cooperation between the two countries is certain to be on the agenda, including a discussion of the American-led airstrikes in Iraq and Syria, administration officials said.
Mr. Modi arrived early Saturday for his meeting with the secretary general, Ban Ki-moon. He toured a section of the second floor corridor of the United Nations complex to see several works of art, including an 11th century stone sculpture that former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India presented to the world body in 1982.
As expected, he said not a word about a decade-long visa ban by the United States government that had prevented him from coming to the United States since the deadly religious violence in 2002 in the state of Gujarat, which he then led.
Defying Expectations in India, Modi Begins Key Trip to U.S.
On climate change, India is under scrutiny for how it will commit to cutting its future emissions. On this issue, Mr. Modi did not show his hand. He spoke about ''shouldering our responsibilities,'' and reminded rich countries that they have promised to help pay.
Earlier this week, his environment minister, Prakash Javdekar, flatly said India's emissions would necessarily grow through new coal-powered electricity and transportation in the coming years as the country seeks to alleviate poverty and create industry.
Mr. Modi offered yoga as one of India's contributions to global efforts. It is not just exercise, he said. ''By changing our lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can help us deal with climate change,'' he said. ''Let us work towards adopting an International Yoga Day.''
In his speech, Mr. Modi rebuked India's neighbor and rival Pakistan, a day after its prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, raised the issue of a referendum for disputed Kashmir province -- long a sore spot for India. Mr. Modi said talks with Pakistan were possible in a ''peaceful atmosphere without the shadow of terrorism.''
''However, Pakistan must also take its responsibility seriously to create an appropriate environment,'' he said. ''Raising issues in thisforum is not the way to make progress towards resolving issues between our two countries.''
Nawaz Sharif on Stability in Pakistan
He began his remarks in an unusually understated way, speaking from prepared notes, which is rare for him, before picking up rhetorical steam and force. He repeatedly invoked India's Vedic traditions. Mr. Modi spoke in Hindi, as expected, with a generous sprinkling of English words like ''prosperity,'' ''cyber,'' and ''blue helmets.'' India is among the largest contributors of soldiers to United Nations peacekeeping efforts, and Mr. Modi sharply nudged the Security Council to include nations like his when making decisions about what peacekeepers are expected to do. His comments hinted at the tensions that arise between countries that contribute troops and the world powers on the Security Council that fund them, and set their mandates.
Mr. Modi renewed India's call for a permanent seat on the Security Council, pointedly reminding the audience that the Council's permanent members -- Britain, China, France, Russia, and the United States -- represent a bygone era. ''Institutions that reflect the imperatives of 20th century won't be effective in the 21st,'' he said.
The day before his arrival in New York, a federal court issued a summons for Mr. Modi to respond to a lawsuit that accuses him of human rights abuses in connection with religious riots in 2002 that tore through Gujarat. Mr. Modi, who was the chief minister of the state at the time of the riots, has been accused of acting too slowly to stop the violence.
Mr. Modi did not refer to the summons, and it is likely to have no effect. As an administration official pointed out Friday, ''as a general legal principle, sitting heads of government enjoy immunity from suits in American courts.'' The protection applies to sitting heads of national delegations to the General Assembly, the official added.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com/news/un-general-assembly/2014/09/27/narendra-modi-in-u-n-speech-inserts-india-into-terrorism-fight/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India at the United Nations General Assembly on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: September 28, 2014


End of Document