At U.N., Afghan leader seeks more military and police aid
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 25, 2008 Thursday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 283 words
Byline: the Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body


Afghan President Hamid Karzai wants the international community to strengthen his country's army and police, telling world leaders Wednesday that a more powerful Afghanistan can better fight terrorists.
Karzai, though, criticized casualties from foreign bombing airstrikes, saying in an address to the U.N. General Assembly that the deaths can seriously undermine the legitimacy of efforts to fight terrorism.
U.S.-Afghan relations have suffered over the issue, and Karzai said Wednesday that continuing casualties hurt "the credibility of the Afghan people's partnership with the international community."
The issue was propelled to the forefront of U.S.-Afghan relations when an Afghan commission reported that an Aug. 22 U.S.-led operation in the western village of Azizabad killed 90 civilians, including 60 children. Those figures were backed by a preliminary U.N. report, though the U.S. says it is still investigating.
Karzai pushed for giving Afghanistan more power, saying the international community should redouble its efforts to strengthen the Afghan army and police so they can more strongly fight terrorism and protect Afghanistan's people.
Afghan control of the military operations "is vital if the problem of civilian casualties is to be addressed effectively," Karzai said in his speech.
His comments come as Taliban attacks grow larger and more deadly. This has been the most violent year in Afghanistan since the 2001 U.S.-led invasion that ousted the Taliban's hard-line Islamist government.
At least 120 U.S. soldiers and 104 troops from other NATO nations have died already in 2008, both record numbers. Overall, more than 4,500 people - mostly militants - have died in attacks this year.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Karzai 

Load-Date: September 25, 2008


End of Document