At war over war medals; Lawmakers push for specific recognition of war on terrorism service, but defense officials stand by their original plan
Air Force Times
October 6, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSLINES; Pg. 36
Length: 518 words
Byline: By Rick Maze and Vince Crawley; Times staff writers, Times staff
Body


Three House lawmakers who also are Vietnam veterans have proposed creating specific, separate campaign medals for troops who served in Iraq and Afghanistan, an issue that the Pentagon has to date opposed.
Defense Department officials say they're satisfied to let troops make do with a new Global War on Terrorism medal, also known as the GWOT medal. President Bush created the new medal by executive order March 12, but more than six months later, the Pentagon had not issued implementation guidance.
A bipartisan bill creating campaign medals for Iraq and Afghanistan was introduced Sept. 17 in the House, sponsored by Reps. Silvestre Reyes, D-Texas; Vic Snyder, D-Ark.; and Rob Simmons, R-Conn. The three veterans said they would leave it to Bush and the Pentagon to design the medals and decide who is eligible.
They also said they are not satisfied with the Pentagon's plan to issue one medal for the global war on terrorism instead of giving special campaign medals to those who took part in Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom.
The fate of the bill is unclear. Normally, legislation dealing with awards and medals is considered by the House and Senate armed services committees as part of the annual defense authorization bill.
However, the House and Senate versions of this year's defense bill have been through the committees and passed by both full chambers. House and Senate negotiators in late September were working on a final compromise version of the bill.
Snyder is one of the chief negotiators on military personnel issues, leaving a possible opening for him to attach the campaign medal legislation to the authorization bill before a final compromise is reached. To do that, he will have to get Senate support for the idea, aides said.
After the bill was introduced, a Defense Department official said she was unaware of any change in existing Pentagon policy of using the GWOT medal to honor all combat service in the aftermath of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The medal does come in two versions - one for those who defended the homeland after the attacks and one for those who deployed overseas to pursue terrorists or overthrow regimes that may have had terrorist dealings.
Service members can be awarded each GWOT medal only once.
-------------------------------
Your design wanted
Try your hand at designing your own Iraq and Afghanistan campaign medals.
Military medals generally are 1 1/4 to 1 3/8 inches in diameter. You can get an idea of what the elements of existing medals symbolize by going online to www.perscomonline.army.mil/tagd/tioh/tioh.htm, a link to the Army Institute of Heraldry, which designs all Defense Department medals.
In the right-hand column, "Related Links," click on the last link, "Service, Campaign Medals and Foreign Awards." You'll see images of current campaign and service medals.
Then take a stab at it yourself. Air Force Times will publish the best entries in an upcoming issue. Send your designs to medals@atpco.com or mail them to Campaign Medals, c/o Times News Service, Army Times Publishing Co., 6883 Commercial Drive, Springfield, VA 22159.  

Notes

FACT BOX AT BOTTOM OF ARTICLE; 1 COLOR GRAPH WITH 2 COLOR PHOTOS. GRAPH HED: Two Medals and What They Mean. Source: The Institute of Heraldry, Army; Defense Department

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document