Athens Says U.S. Seeks Arab in Attacks on 2 Jets
The New York Times
June 8, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 401 words
Byline: By PAUL ANASTASI, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, June 7
Body


A Greek police official said today that the United States was demanding the extradition of a Palestinian in connection with two mid-flight bomb attacks on American passenger planes.
The United States Embassy declined to comment on the report. [In Washington, the State Department had no official comment.] The police official said the Palestinian, Mohammed Rashid, was arrested in Athens last week on a tip from the American authorities.
Mr. Rashid is believed to have been involved in the August 1982 bomb attack on a Pan American World Airways jet on a flight between Honolulu and Tokyo, the official said. A 15-year old boy was killed and 15 people were wounded.
The official said Mr. Rashid was also wanted in an explosion aboard a Trans World Airlines jet as it flew between Rome and Athens in 1986. Four people were blown out of the plane, including a 15-month-old baby.
The official was unable to give Mr. Rashid's age or to identify him further.
Greek press reports say the Greek Government will not extradite Mr. Rashid because it considers the evidence provided by the American authorities to be inadequate. The reports said Greece had also explained that Mr. Rashid would have to be tried under Greek law, and that even an American extradition request would have to go before the courts here. That process could take several years.
The reports said L. Paul Bremer 3d, a senior State Department official involved with combating terrorism, flew to Athens last week to press the Greek Government to extradite Mr. Rashid. The case was also discussed last week at a meeting between the American Ambassador to Greece, Robert Keeley, and Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, the local press reports said.
A United States Embassy official confirmed that Mr. Bremer visited Athens last week, but added that the trip had been planned long in advance and that the extradition issue was not discussed. The official would not comment on the contents of the talks between Mr. Papandreou and Mr. Keeley.
A Government spokesman, Telemachus Chitiris, said: ''Greece cooperates with all in combating terrorism. We are dedicated to the struggle against terrorism and impose stiff penalties against terrorists, in accordance with Greek law.''
Mr. Papandreou's Socialist Government has supported the Palestinian cause and refuses to grant full diplomatic recognition to Israel, citing Israeli policies in the occupied territories.


End of Document