ATHENS TO CUT LIBYAN MISSION
The New York Times
July 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 373 words
Byline: By PAUL ANASTASI, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, July 9
Body


The Greek Socialist Government of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, after several months of pro-Libyan statements, says the number of Libyan diplomats here is being significantly reduced.
The Libyan Embassy denied today that the Libyans were being expelled by Greece as part of the measures taken by Western nations to combat Libyan-backed terrorism.
''The only bodies that can take such decisions on our diplomatic personnel are the people's congresses ruling the Arab Libyan Jamahiriya,'' an embassy announcement said, using the Libyan name of the country. It said Libya maintained ''friendly and strong relations with the Greek people.''
According to Western diplomatic sources, however, the Greek turnaround stems from additional evidence provided to Athens on Libyan support for terrorism, as well as from Greece's need for Western diplomatic support amid the renewed tension with Turkey and from the financial losses suffered because a drastic decline in the number of American tourists here.
The Greek Government said Tuesday that the Libyan diplomatic representation in Greece would be reduced by 15 to 20 people. But it asserted that the development came at Libya's initiative and that the diplomats were departing of their own accord.
There are a total of 52 Libyans with diplomatic status in Greece, which makes the Libyan mission the largest in any Western country. Only four of them are listed as embassy personnel.
Antonis Drossoyannis, the Minister of Public Order, on Monday denied charges made in Parliament by the conservative opposition that some of the Libyan diplomats here have been identified as being involved in terrorism or arms trafficking.
Police sources said that a ''small number'' of Libyans had already departed, and that the rest would leave over the next two months. They said the Foreign Ministry has issued a ''diplomatic note'' to the Libyans stating that the number remaining must be only four or five.
Libyan diplomatic sources confirmed this, saying the measures included the closing of the Libyan consular mission and of the school for Libyan children here. But the Government's report that personnel would be reduced by 15 to 20 people contradicts this, for it means that the cut would be less than half.


End of Document