ATLANTA MOURNS Search is on for mystery 911 caller Domestic terrorism suspected
USA TODAY
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
ATLANTA FIRST EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 408 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body


ATLANTA -- An army of federal and state agents are searching today
for clues to who set off the terror bomb directed at the heart
of the Olympic Games here.
Investigators are focusing their search on domestic individuals
or groups, with attention on a 911 warning call 18 minutes before
the 1:25 a.m. ETSaturday blast. Officials say the voice had characteristics
of a white American male.
The explosion left two people dead, injured 111 others, and permanently
scarred an Olympics that had been marked by unprecedented security
and global interest.
The Games resumed Saturday under rainy skies and somber trappings.
Each event was opened by a moment of silence recalling the victims
of Saturday's terror.
But "the games will go on. I repeat, the games will go on,"
declared International Olympic Committee Director General Francois
Carrard.
Among the leads being pursued by law enforcement officials are
finger and shoe prints left at a public telephone near the park
where the emergency call was traced.
Also, federal authorities had been tracking domestic terror groups
that might have wanted to threaten the Games.
Saturday, Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell described the the city's
"worst fear" as the specter of terrorism.
"It has occurred, but we must move on," he said.
Among the injured were seven law enforcement officers who were
trying to clear the Centennial Olympic Park when the bomb detonated.
Alice Hawthorne, 44, of Albany, Ga., was identified as the lone
fatality directly connected to the bomb. Turkish television cameraman
Melih Uzunyol died of an apparent heart attack rushing to film
the scene.
The thunderous concussion, felt for blocks around, sprayed hot
shrapnel more than 100 yards into a horrified crowd.
Almost immediately comparisons were being drawn to the 1972 games
in Munich where 11 Israeli athletes were killed, the last time
terrorism targeted the Olympics.
And just as in Munich, the Games did continue but under the watch
of more guards and more guns. The competitions, some interrupted
by reports of unfounded threats, ran well into the night and were
attended by near-capacity crowds.
Informed early Saturday morning of the attack, President Clinton,
a visitor to the Games only 24 hours before, pledged to bring
those responsible to justice.
Carrard said there was no serious thought given to closing the
Games.
"Unfortunately we are living in a society where violence and
violent acts are not absent," Carrard said. "This could happen
in any city, at any time."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, colorTannen Maury, AP; Michael Peterson, right, and Jonathan Holland prior to race.

Load-Date: July 28, 1996


End of Document