ATLANTA GAMES;
SPECIAL SECTION;
DAY 12;
CITY;
OLYMPIC FORUM;
More terrorism in the wings?
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 30, 1996, Tuesday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL OLYMPICS; Pg. 37S
Length: 480 words
Byline: CHARLES W. SCHRADER; McDonough
Series: This story appeared in the Metro edition of The Atlanta Constitution.
Body


The Editors: The debris was still falling and there was blood on Centennial Olympic Park streets when an Olympic gold medalist gushed before the media that the Atlanta Olympics are so much more secure than the Barcelona Games were. Excuse me. No one was killed or injured by a terrorist's bomb in Barcelona. There's more to come. The nuts aren't through with Atlanta yet.
Give security higher visibility
WILLIAM L. WAUGH JR.
The Editors: Until the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings, experts might have recommended a limited security arrangement, providing tighter security for higher-risk areas and activities. It was commonly held that one is far more likely to be struck by lightning, bitten by a shark or suffer a serious injury in the bathtub than to be injured by a terrorist. But the level of risk has increased.
There will be calls for more security at all major events. But more- visible security, rather than more security, may be the best answer now. Overreacting and spreading security forces thinner is not wise.
Waugh is a professor in the School of Policy Studies at Georgia State University, and author of "Terrorism and Emergency Management" and "International Terrorism."
 
For all bomb victims, 'I hurt'
DANIEL C. O'KEEFE, Lawrenceville
The Editors: I hurt for my city, which was bursting with enthusiasm and cautious pride.
I hurt for our many visitors, who came in search of dreams - but who may leave with nightmares.
I hurt for the athletes, whose moment in the sun was darkened by the cloud of cowardice.
I hurt for the Olympic movement, where biannual celebration of idealism brings out the best in most - but the worst in some.
 
I hurt most of all for the victims and their families.
I hurt for the human race, which insists upon preying on its own.
We need to be more hospitable
DAVID L. WOODY, Norcross
The Editors: I have long been a supporter of the Olympic Games in Atlanta. I've never doubted for a moment that Atlanta would pull it off, or that from the logistical and organizational point, we would live up to all that was expected of us.
 
In those areas, I still believe.
However, I have now come to the inescapable conclusion there is one area where we in Atlanta will undoubtedly fall flat on our collective faces. Surprisingly, it is an area we are supposedly well-known for: our hospitality.
I have had several opportunities in the last few months to see first hand the way members of the hospitality industry in Atlanta conduct themselves with, and toward, non-English speaking visitors. It leaves much to be desired.
We Atlantans need to go out of our way, as employees, as representatives and as private citizens, to make all visitors feel welcome (now and after the Olympics). Take the time, be patient. If you can, help. If you cannot help, find someone who can and will.
Let's make the world glad they came, and let them know we are glad they did.

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document