Atlanta Games Special Edition;
Special Report;
Day 10;
City;
Q&A
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL OLYMPICS; Pg. 17S
Length: 824 words
Byline: Julie Bookman and Lawrene Calder Trump; STAFF WRITERS
Series: This article was archived from the Metro Edition of The Atlanta Journal- Constitution.
Body

 
News for Kids
Kids ask: What happened at the Olympic park? News For Kids answers some of their questions
In the last day, your family has probably been glued to the television, watching news updates on the terrible, unexplainable bomb explosion that occurred early Saturday morning in Centennial Olympic Park.
The pipe bomb explosion killed one person and apparently contributed to the death of another and injured about 100. Most were minor injuries - scrapes and cuts - but some required surgery.
Most people who have been to the park are feeling scared because it could have happened to them. They are also sad because the Games had been going so well. Others are just plain mad that the park - the place to be, especially at night - had to be shut down this weekend.
Monday's News for Kids page will focus more on the park bombing. For now, here are some questions and answers that may help families deal with the tragedy.
 
Who planted the bomb?
Ever since the bomb went off about 1:25 a.m. Saturday, police and special investigators (such as the FBI) have been searching the park and the downtown area for clues. Investigators believe the bombing could be an act of terrorism.
 
What is terrorism?
It's a violent act against innocent people, and it's meant to get attention. Terrorism includes bombings, plane hijackings and taking hostages. Terrorism is especially scary because it is so unpredictable. The people who get hurt in these situations usually have never met the people - terrorists - who want to hurt them.
 
Who are terrorists?
Special law agencies have lists of groups and individuals who have done terrorism before. For example, at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, Germany, Palestinian terrorists kidnapped and killed 11 Israeli athletes and a policeman. The bombing of a federal office building in Oklahoma City in April 1995 was an act of terrorism by a few American citizens who were mad at the government.
 
Why do people turn to terrorism?
Because they are angry at something they think is unfair but they cannot chan ge. Terrorism is their way of getting attention.
 
Why did terrorists strike Atlanta in the middle of its Olympics?
Because our city is the focus of worldwide attention now and terrorists are taking advantage of that.
 
Were any children injured?
We don't have a complete list of victims, but not many children were still in the park at 1 a.m. Saturday. One 14-year-old girl was hurt badly enough to need surgery. Her mother was killed in the explosion.
 
What is a pipe bomb?
Pipe bombs are made of pipes and other materials. They can be wired to an alarm clock and set to go off a few minutes - or hours - after you set them down somewhere.
What will happen to the person or persons who did this - if they get caught?
Because people were killed in the bombing, the culprits, if caught, would be charged with murder, among other things.
 
When will the park reopen and will it be safe?
The park is expected to reopen at some point. Olympic organizers and law enforcement officials are making plans so that people coming into the park will be checked. From the time the park opened July 13 until the Saturday explosion, people could enter it without being checked out in any way.
Will kids be able to play in the park's wonderful Rings Fountain again?
 
That's the plan, that's the hope.
Will we be able to feel safe during the rest of the Games?
The Olympics security forces are working very hard to make sure this will not happen again in the park. Since the bombing, they have been working around the clock to inspect not only the park but every Olympic site and venue.
Kids need to feel that things are under control, especially in large, crowded events, and that they are safe, says Cathy Blusiewicz, a Buckhead child and family psychologist. "It's very frightening when the idea of safety is ripped apart. They begin to question the whole system. That's one of the things adults really need to deal with: When you are in a crowd, you are taking a risk."
 
What can we do to ease our fears?
Talk it out, as much as you want or need to, experts urge.
It's OK to be upset, angry, sad, says Dr. Astrid Wilson, a child health specialist and assistant professor at Georgia State University School of Nursing. Parents and kids should express their feelings about what happened, Wilson said. "How do you feel about the people who did it? How do you feel about the people who were there and were hurt?"
 
How can citizens be safe from terrorism?
You could stay in your house and never go out where other people are, but that is no way to live your life. Bombs hurt and kill people, but terrorism works by making people afraid.
 
Can the Atlanta Games still be a success?
Yes. It's important that the Games go on, otherwise, the terrorists win and Atlanta - and the the world-class athletes competing here - lose out. "The athletes have shown a lot of courage saying let's continue," Blusiewicz said. "We don't want to interrupt all we've accomplished."

Graphic

 
Photo: WORRIED ABOUT GRANDMA: Willy Peters, whose mother-in-law was hurt
 in the bomb explosion, and his children are interviewed outside the
 hospital Saturday. / JUSTIN WILLIAMS / Staff

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document