Attacks Were Up Last Year, U.S. Terrorism Report Says 
 The New York Times
May 1, 2001 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 706 words
Byline:  By MARC LACEY 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 30  
Body


The number of international terrorist attacks increased by 8 percent last year, largely because of a surge in bombings by two rebel groups in Colombia and attacks by paramilitary groups operating there, the State Department said today.
     South Asia remains the focal point for terrorism directed against the United States, the department's annual report on global terrorism said, with the Taliban in Afghanistan continuing to provide safe haven for international terrorists and Pakistan backing terrorist groups as well. 
 Despite the concerns about Pakistan and Afghanistan, contained in the report for the second year in a row, they were not added to the list of nations accused of state-sponsored terrorism. Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria have long held that designation, which brings with it strict sanctions.
The report is based on data collected in the final year of the Clinton administration, but officials said the Bush administration had ample time to review and change the report, and therefore it represents the first view of global terrorism under the new administration.
"Terrorism is a persistent disease," Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said as he released the report this afternoon. "Many of you have heard me speak of the positive side of globalization. But terrorism shows the dark side as it exploits the easing of travel restrictions, the improvements of communication or the internationalization of banking and finance, making it easier for terrorists to do some of their work."
Of the 19 Americans killed in acts of international terrorism last year, according to the report, 17 died in the attack against the destroyer Cole in October in the Yemeni port of Aden. Another American victim was one of three aid workers killed in West Timor. An American journalist was killed when rebels in Sierra Leone fired at the car in which he and other journalists were riding. The State Department added the main rebel group in Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary United Front, to its list of "other terrorist organizations."
Iran continues to top the list of countries accused of state-sponsored terrorism, backing groups that try to prevent Middle East peace. The report accused Lebanon of being "unresponsive" to American requests to bring to justice terrorists who conducted attacks against American citizens and property in Lebanon. 
As far as the escalating violence in the Middle East, the State Department noted that the Israelis had accused Palestinian Authority security officials of facilitating terrorist attacks against Israel. But the report stopped short of accusing the Palestinians of such actions.
Overall, there were 423 terrorist attacks in 2000, compared with 392 the previous year. Rebel bombing attacks on multinational oil pipelines in Colombia accounted for much of the increase. Two hundred of the attacks in 2000 were directed against the United States.
For the first time, the State Department added the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, an umbrella organization of paramilitary groups, to its compilation of terrorist groups. The two main rebel groups are already on the more stringent list of foreign terrorist organizations.
"I think any group that is tempted to use terrorist tactics in their activity has to weigh in the balance the likely effect that will have on alienating not only the United States, but alienating the international community," said Edmund J. Hull, the State Department's acting coordinator for counterterrorism. 
Human rights groups welcomed the inclusion of the paramilitary groups in the State Department report but they had sought to have them deemed foreign terrorist organizations, a designation that brings sanctions with it. Rights advocates argue that those groups have become the most serious destabilizing force in Colombia because their escalation of violence has damaged peace efforts between the rebels and the government.
"It's good that they are on the list, but now the United States should increase the political pressure," said Harvey Suarez of Codhes, a leading rights and refugee assistance agency in Colombia. "There should be an organized pressure, increased pressure, on the Colombian state and on the financiers of these groups." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 1, 2001


End of Document