ATTACK ON LONDON: In the cross hairs, again;
United States still terrorism groups' primary target
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 10, 2005 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;
Length: 1304 words
Byline: MONI BASU, DAN CHAPMAN
Body


Who's next?
What suddenly stricken nation will have to mend mangled bodies and soothe the scarred souls of its citizenry?
Experts and analysts say another member of the "coalition of the willing" that invaded Iraq will be among the next targets of terrorism, and the next attack may well be of the same low-cost, high-impact caliber that the killers used to such effect in London last week and in Madrid last year.
"Next, it could be Warsaw. Or Rome. Or Sydney," said Emad ElSirgany, a former security and intelligence officer in the Saudi and Egyptian military who now owns a trucking business in Arizona.
The threat is particularly troubling for Turin, Italy, host of the 2006 Winter Olympics. "Next time, it will be our turn --- this is the first thing we think of when we are confronted with these pictures of mutilated bodies," said Turin's La Stampa newspaper.
The group that claimed responsibility for the London attacks said in its Web posting, "We continue to warn the governments of Denmark and Italy and all crusader governments that they will receive the same punishment if they do not withdraw their troops from Iraq and Afghanistan."
Italy was already on heightened alert: The Interior Ministry said Friday that it has had 13,246 sites around Italy under special surveillance for months --- including U.S. and NATO bases, telecommunications centers, public utilities and the Winter Olympics site. In addition, Premier Silvio Berlusconi said the country would withdraw 10 percent of its 3,000 troops from Iraq in September.
But the primary target among the coalition of the willing likely remains the coalition's lead partner --- the United States. ElSirgany says he is so sure about future attacks here that he forbids his children from visiting big U.S. cities.
One reason for such caution is the changing nature of al-Qaida, which many experts say has become more of a movement than an organization. Groups calling themselves "al-Qaida" may not be part of a tightly organized network at all but are, instead, small cells that can operate invisibly and independently, terrorism experts believe.
So, even though the United States and its allies have apprehended several al-Qaida leaders in recent years, these smaller groups --- inspired by Osama bin Laden but not necessarily led by him --- may be impossible to stop. They use little money, therefore leaving few financial trails, and they usually live in the communities they attack, terrorism analysts say. Two such groups may have been behind the attacks in London and Madrid.
The bombings illustrate another sobering fact of terrorism in the 2000s: that the "war on terror" is no longer solely about weapons of mass destruction or hijacked airplanes crashing into skyscrapers. Instead, a small group of people with a small quantity of explosives can bring a major city to a standstill.
"We have shifted from a 9/11 paradigm to a 3/11 paradigm," said Mark Ensalaco, a terrorism expert at the University of Dayton; the date of the Madrid bombings, which killed 191 people, was March 11, 2004.
Ensalaco fears the world will see many more incidents of carnage by al-Qaida sympathizers, carrying out low-tech, low-cost operations with devastating results.
"How many Americans would be aware of a bag left behind at a train stop?" Ensalaco said. "How many Americans would know what a suicide bomber would look like? I don't think we are prepared for that at all."
Any society, no matter how alert, is now vulnerable to a terrorist attack, Ensalaco said. The question now is when, not whether.
So far, most of the bombings have been carried out in heavily populated metropolitan areas. But Ensalaco worries that one day terrorists might strike at America's heartland.
"Just imagine five small Midwest communities where bombs go off at Wal-Marts and malls right before Christmas," he said. "You know what that would do to holiday shopping? You could actually sow more chaos in these small towns.
"The terrorist imagination is vivid," he added. "I can think of all the vulnerabilities we have and how our lives would be changed forever."
"The war in Iraq," says ElSirgany, "is one of the biggest reasons cited for terrorists to recruit in the Middle East. These attacks will not stop."
Others say the terrorist groups' enmity toward the West runs deep, pointing to what has popularly become known as a "clash of civilizations."
Gerry Leone, who successfully prosecuted the case against "shoebomber" Richard Reid, said, "There is no reason to believe Islamic extremism is going to subside."
"This is an attack on our psyche," he said. "The terrorists want heightened anxiety throughout our society. I expect that these extremist groups will continue to attack democratic interests that are contrary to their own."
Ensalaco believes the "jihad" that extremists are waging against the West will end only when the movement loses its ideological appeal; only when Muslim clerics denounce what has been called a "culture of death."
"This will stop when young Muslim men and women no longer feel that strapping explosives on themselves is a wonderful thing to do," Ensalaco said. "Now that is kind of discouraging, because it's going to take a long time to do."
Defending America
Since Sept. 11, 2001, the Bush administration and Congress have focused on preventing the next big attack, on keeping the American public safe from wayward airplanes or chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
With the surge in low-level bombings, though, critics question whether enough attention is paid to this equally sinister variety of attack and whether Americans have returned to the normalcy they thought was lost forever.
"So, what do you do? The answer is there is no clear answer to that," said Larry Taulbee, who specializes in international security policy at Emory University. "We have to steel ourselves to the idea that there is no perfect security."
Chris Grniet, a vice president of the risk consulting firm Kroll Inc., said the very nature of our society makes it difficult to prevent such attacks.
"Should we search everybody?" he asked. "Every bag? Every briefcase every time we get on a train or bus? We do it on planes, but that's a very controlled environment."
Or as Taulbee pointed out, "We can be vigilant, but there are some things we just can't do."
Like set up a roadblock on 1-75 to check every car. "Someplace down in Key West would be where the tail of the line is," Taulbee said.
Or make every MARTA passenger pass through a metal detector. "That would wreck the public transportation system," he said.
Securing mass transit
U.S. Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.), a member of the Intelligence Committee, said law enforcement and intelligence agencies are "doing a much better job keeping the bad guys out of this country since Sept. 11." He acknowledged, however, that the mass transit systems need more attention.
"The fact of the matter is that it's very expensive to do that," Chambliss said. "And there's a time issue involved in order to check people getting on the subway system. The question is, are the American people ready for that?"
Taulbee lauded the efforts of U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies but wondered how America would react to another attack.
"After 9/11, what we have done is complain about airport security, complain about having to take our shoes off," Taulbee said. "There has been a relaxation of vigilance."
And that, he said, ought to be a scary notion when Atlantans consider how accessible their city is to the rest of the world.
"It's relatively easy for people to get here whether by bus, plane or whatever," Taulbee said. "Our public facilities are relatively open. How successful are we in undermining drugs in Atlanta? How successful are we in interdicting all the illegal aliens coming into Atlanta? That gives you an indication of how open we are."

Graphic

 
PAUL WHITE / Associated Press Rescue workers cover up bodies next to a mangled passenger train in Madrid, Spain, following a series of train bombings on March 11, 2004. It was Spain's worst terrorist attack ever; SANG TAN / Associated Press Two armed police officers patrol outside the Houses of Parliament in London on Friday, as security was tightened following Thursday's series of explosions aboard three Underground trains and a double-decker bus. LOW COST, HIGH IMPACT Terror on the cheap, popular in Iraq and Colombia, was perfected in the 1980s.  > In 1983, a suicide bomber drove a truck laden with explosives into a building housing U.S. servicemen in Beirut, killing 241.  > The Oklahoma City federal building bombing killed 168 in 1995.  > A suicide bomber traveling on a train in Southern Russia killed at least 42 people and wounded another 200 in December 2003.  > Chechen rebels were blamed for the derailment by bomb last month of a passenger train en route to Moscow that injured 15 people.  "What we really haven't had a lot of space, time, energy or resources to do is the older-style terrorism," said John Kirton, an international affairs expert at the University of Toronto, who attended the Group of Eight summit in Gleneagles, Scotland.

Load-Date: July 10, 2005


End of Document