ATTACK ON LONDON: NEWSPAPERS: Fear, resolve, apprehension;
Reaction from papers worldwide
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 10, 2005 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;
Length: 260 words
Byline: ALICE WERTHEIM, DAN CHAPMAN
Body


Vremya Novostei (Russia)
The terrorists are among us, they participate in summits and the preparation for the Olympic games, and they remind us constantly that the world is at war.
Bild (Germany)
Terrorism is drawing near and from now on, no one is safe.
El Periodico de Catalunya (Spain)
Headline: Again: 11-S, 11-M, 7-J --- references to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in the United States, the March 2004 train bombings in Madrid and the London attacks.
Mlada Fronta Dnes (Czech)
Headline: When will the next one be? The world --- and not only the western world --- will experience many September 11ths.
Die Welt (Germany)
Don't be fooled by the message of revenge.
Berliner Zeitung (Germany)
The attacks do nothing to change the fact that Germany has for a long time been one of the possible targets for terrorism.
De Telegraaf (The Netherlands)
We must remain vigilant. The fight against terrorism must be an absolute priority.
Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)
Canadian troops in Afghanistan are moving into new roles with a high risk of combat in the Kandahar region, which will no doubt result in angering some militants somewhere. . . . We will remain Canadian, confident of our core values and living our lives, despite threats or even attacks.
Ottawa Citizen
It is time for Canada to wake up. . . . The complacent tendency of many Canadians to mollycoddle people accused of terrorist activities and simply rely on our nonconfrontational nature to keep Canadians safe is based on faulty reasoning.
--- Compiled by news researcher Alice Wertheim and staff writer Dan Chapman

Graphic

 
Associated Press The front pages of London's newspapers on Friday illustrated both the personal and the collective toll of Thursday's bombings. A headline in the Daily Express, "We Britons will never be defeated," reflected the country's attitude. ; MICHAEL KAMBER / NYT INSIDE What they're saying: A sampling of newspaper commentary from around the world. E2 (teaser)

Load-Date: July 10, 2005


End of Document