ATTACK ON LONDON: Nations united to 'defeat this terrorism';
Rush-hour bombings fit al-Qaida blueprint
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 8, 2005 Friday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 1356 words
Byline: SHELLEY EMLING
Body


London --- Four terrorist bombs tore through London's transit system Thursday, killing at least 37 people and injuring more than 700 in a coordinated wave of violence that was the deadliest attack on the British capital since World War II.
The explosions during morning rush hour ripped through subway trains at or near three stations in the center of the city and destroyed a red double-decker bus. Hundreds of passengers spattered with blood and covered in soot emerged from the London Underground subway stations.
The bombings appeared timed to coincide with the G-8 summit of world leaders in Scotland, hosted by British Prime Minister Tony Blair and attended by President Bush. Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said the bombings bore the "hallmarks of an al-Qaida-related attack," but police said there had been no credible claims of responsibility.
Just a day earlier, Londoners had celebrated the city's winning bid to host the 2012 Olympic Games with jubilation in Trafalgar Square and London's many pubs. After the bombings, the city was stunned. The siren scream of ambulances and police cars pierced the air and flags flew at half-staff to honor the dead.
The subway explosions struck the edge of the financial district and near Hyde Park in the heart of the city, trapping hundreds of commuters. Police said 45 of the injured were in serious or critical condition, including amputations, fractures and burns. Two Americans were among the injured, the U.S. State Department said.
Craig Kelly, a student from Ireland, said there was widespread panic among passengers on his train.
"People were trying to break the windows with an umbrella to get out," he said. "You could hear people shouting out, but you couldn't see their faces. It was awful."
Thousands stranded
The first train bombing occurred at 8:51 a.m., followed by bombings on two other trains and the explosion aboard the bus near the British Museum at 9:47 a.m.
In response, the subway and bus lines were closed, stranding thousands of workers. Overburdened cellphone networks crashed, further adding to the chaos.
A group calling itself the Secret Organization of al-Qaida in Europe claimed responsibility, declaring on a Web site that the attacks were retaliation for Britain's involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan. The statement, republished on the Web site of the German magazine Der Spiegel and reported by The Associated Press, could not be immediately confirmed but terrorism experts said the bombings resembled past attacks by the al-Qaida network.
Lisa Denney had just gotten on the subway --- popularly known as "the tube" --- at King's Cross station when she heard a big bang that she said sounded like a clap of thunder.
"Suddenly there was all this smoke everywhere and glass was flying all about and we didn't move," said Denney, her face shaded by black soot. "Just then everything went black and the electricity was gone and we didn't know if we'd get out.
"We just had to sit there for what seemed like hours and listen to people screaming all around us," she said. "It was very scary. Finally we were told to exit from the back. Lots of people nearby me had blood on them."
Blair determined
More than 100 ambulances carried the wounded to hospitals and the less severely injured were ferried away on city buses. A nearby hotel was used as a triage center.
The blasts coincided with the first full day of meetings of world leaders at the Group of Eight summit in Gleneagles, Scotland.
Supported by Bush and the others, Blair denounced the attacks, calling them "barbaric." He then rushed to London to preside over a meeting of security officials before returning to Gleneagles on Thursday evening.
"Whatever they do, it is our determination that they will never succeed in destroying what we hold dear in this country and in other civilized nations throughout the world," a somber Blair said in televised comments.
Bush, who appeared with other summit leaders at Gleneagles behind Blair in a show of solidarity during his remarks, vowed that the fight against terrorism would go on.
"I was most impressed by the resolve of all the leaders in the room," Bush said. "Their resolve is as strong as my resolve. And that is, we will not yield to these people, will not yield to the terrorists."
Vigilance urged
In London, British Transport Police Deputy Chief Constable Andy Trotter warned that no one was certain whether the terrorist attacks are over.
"The public must remain vigilant," he said.
In many ways, the scene in central London resembled that in New York City on Sept. 11, 2001, albeit on a much smaller scale.
Restaurants such as Burger King opened their doors to emergency workers and the injured, serving free food and drinks throughout the day.
Hospitals canceled elective procedures to make room for new patients. All West End theaters canceled performances Thursday evening.
Bystanders joined health workers in administering help to the injured. Just after the explosion on the bus, which sent the roof of the vehicle several feet into the air before crashing to the pavement, many passers-by rallied to help.
Some of the injured sought refuge in the nearby Tavistock Hotel.
"One man was carried in here by a bunch of other passengers," said receptionist Sam Elliott. "Many people came in not knowing what was going on."
Police said they were not yet certain whether the explosions were detonated by remote control devices or suicide bombers.
After the explosions, major streets in central London were cordoned off with security tape as crowds looked on.
People already at their offices were told to stay put and not return home while those still at home were instructed not to go to work.
The transportation shutdown meant the only way home for many was to walk, a scene that recalled the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York.
Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who happened to be visiting London on Thursday, told Sky News, "It was remarkable how the people of London responded so bravely. I just want to tell everyone that we [New Yorkers] understand what you are going through."
Terrorism experts said Thursday's attacks were highly coordinated and designed to intimidate.
"I think this was a plan that had been in storage for a while and was pulled out because it's the day after the Olympics announcement," said Eric Moonman, a terrorism expert at the City University of London. "These attacks just show again that the terrorists operate on a much grander and more determined scale than we ever imagined they did."
He said he expects Londoners to grow angrier over the next days and weeks and to rally around the government's fight against terrorism.
"This will generate a strong motivation to go after the perpetrators," Moonman said.
Constant concerns
In London, Blair vowed a global hunt for those responsible. He made of point of saying that most Muslims worldwide deplored Thursday's acts of violence.
In a statement from the Muslim Council of London, Iqbal Sacranie, the group's secretary-general, said, "All of us must unite to help the police capture these murderers."
There have been constant concerns that London's public transportation network would suffer a huge blow from terrorists at some point. The Underground offers unrestricted access to more than 3 million riders a day.
In March 2004, 10 bombs went off on trains and in train stations packed with morning commuters in Madrid, killing 191 people.
Between the 1970s and the mid-1990s, the Irish Republican Army repeatedly bombed London's transport. But warnings were generally issued before the attacks.
On Thursday, messages of support for Britain poured in from around the world.
Pope Benedict XVI said he was praying for the families of the victims and called the attacks "barbaric acts against humanity."
Giselle Davies, a spokeswoman for the International Olympic Committee, said the committee still had "full confidence" in London.
At the United Nations, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution condemning the attacks and reaffirming the commitment to fight global terrorism.
Staff writers Don Melvin in Gleneagles, Scotland, and Bob Deans in Washington contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
MAX NASH / Associated Press The facade of a London building is stained with blood, and debris litters the street at the site of Thursday's bus bombing. ; DAVID PARRY / Reuters An injured Underground passenger is wheeled to a waiting ambulance outside the King's Cross subway station after the morning rush-hour attack.

Load-Date: July 9, 2005


End of Document