Attacks thwarted, official says Clinton unveils $10 billion proposal for fighting terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
January 23, 1999, Saturday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 356 words
Byline: THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON - U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies have
prevented Osama bin Laden's network from carrying out truck-bomb
attacks against at least two American embassies since the bombings of
U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania more than five months ago, the
Clinton administration's senior counterterrorism official said.
Richard A. Clarke, who occupies the recently created post of national
coordinator of counterterrorism and computer security programs, also
said U.S. officials do not believe that bin Laden, a Saudi millionaire
now living in the mountains of Afghanistan, has acquired chemical or
biological weapons despite his contacts with experts in the production
of nerve gas and biological toxins.
"I think we've made life extraordinarily difficult for (bin Laden),
but he's still there," Clarke said. "I think it is very difficult for
him and his lieutenants to travel. I think it's very difficult for
them to raise money or move money or move explosives."
Clarke's assessment came as President Clinton unveiled a $ 10 billion
budget proposal for fighting terrorism and protecting the nation's
computer infrastructure from attack. "The fight against terrorism is
far from over, and now terrorists seek new tools of destruction,"
Clinton said.
In a speech at the National Academy of Sciences, Clinton said his
fiscal 2000 budget proposal includes $ 1.4 billion to enhance domestic
readiness in the event of a chemical or biological terrorist attack,
an increase of more than 50 percent since fiscal 1998, and $ 1.46
billion to protect the nation's computer systems.
Clinton proposed an array of initiatives in both areas, from new
vaccine research to creation of a "Cybercorps" of computer experts.
He said those programs come on top of $ 7 billion in counterterrorism
spending on intelligence, diplomatic security, military readiness and
law enforcement.
"We are doing everything we can, in ways I can and ways that I cannot
discuss, to try to stop people who would misuse chemical and
biological capacity from getting that capacity," Clinton said. "This
is not a cause for a panic. It is a cause for serious, deliberate,
disciplined long-term
concern."

Load-Date: January 25, 1999


End of Document