Attack victims' families stand to collect billions; Relatives pursued Iranian funds after 1983 Beirut blast.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 21, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A3
Length: 407 words
Byline: By Mark Sherman
Body


The 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, which was linked to Iran, killed 241 U.S. service members. A ruling by the Supreme Court clears the way for families of the victims to collect billions in frozen Iranian funds.
WA S H I N GTO N - T h e Supreme Court on Wednesday cleared the way for families of victims of the 1983 Marine barracks bombing in Beirut and other attacks linked to Iran to collect nearly $2 billion in frozen Iranian funds.
The court's 6-2 ruling directly affects more than 1,300 relatives of victims, some who have been seeking compensation for more than 30 years. They include families of the 241 U.S. service members who died in the Beirut bombing.
Other families who are not covered by Wednesday's decision also could benefit because they now stand to reap a larger share of a government-administered fund intended for victims of state-sponsored terrorism.
The decision, issued amid a warming in relations with Iran, is important because it is the first time Iran is being made to feel the sting of its past support for terrorism, said Notre Dame law professor Jimmy Gurule, a former Treasury Department official.
"Hopefully, it's also going to have a deterrent effect, or least cause Iran to think twice about supporting terrorist activity going forward," Gurule said.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the opinion for the court rejecting efforts by Iran's central bank to try to stave off court orders that would allow the relatives to be paid for their losses.
Iran's Bank Markazi complained that Congress was intruding into the business of federal courts when it passed a 2012 law directing that the banks' assets in the United States be turned over to the families.
Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented. "The authority of the political branches is sufficient; they have no need to seize ours," Roberts wrote.
Congress has repeatedly changed the law in the past 20 years to make it easier for victims to sue over state-sponsored terrorism; federal courts have awarded the victims billions of dollars.
But Iran has refused to comply with the judgments, leading lawyers to hunt for Iranian assets in the United States.
The plaintiffs in the lawsuit included relatives of the victims of the Marine barracks bombing in Beirut, the 1996 bombing of the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia which killed 19 service members, and other attacks that were carried out by groups with links to Iran.

Load-Date: April 21, 2016


End of Document