ATTACK IN SAUDI ARABIA: RESPONDING TO TERRORISM;
U.S. commanders defend security at the base in wake of bombing;
Troops had joked about building being 'fine target'
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 28, 1996, Friday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 03A
Length: 555 words
Byline: FROM OUR NEWS SERVICES
Dateline: Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
Body


As FBI investigators continued to sift through evidence at the explosion site, American commanders defended the security at the base where 19 Americans were killed by a terrorist's bomb.
But numerous members of the Air Force's 4404th Air Wing, based at this Saudi military facility in what used to be civilian housing, said that residents of the northeast corner building that suffered most of the force of the blast had joked nervously for months about their exposure to car bombs and talked of sleeping in their offices for safety.
And while their commanders praised American cooperation with the Saudi authorities, some servicemen said it was common knowledge that the Americans had been pressing the civilian police to monitor the perimeter of the base, which is their responsibility, more aggressively.
Americans patrolled intensively within the perimeter and posted guards on the roofs of the most exposed buildings - especially since the public beheading May 31 of four Saudis convicted of planting the bomb that caused the fatal explosion in November in Riyadh.
The building here that was hit hardest, the one that housed all of those who were killed and most of those who were seriously injured, is separated by only 35 yards and a low concrete perimeter barrier from a public road and parking lot for an amusement park.
"This building we were in, we constantly joked that we were a fine target, out in this corner, right next to the park," said Staff Sgt. Anthony Overbay, 34, of Borger, Texas. "When they heightened security, everybody made jokes about moving in to our offices."
He said it was "common knowledge" that the perimeter was overly exposed, and that there was debate between the Americans and the Saudis about patrolling more aggressively outside the perimeter, and allowing the Americans to assist there.
Three other American soldiers, insisting that their names not be used, said the same, and added that the sensitivity of the American-Saudi relationship required that the Americans, as one said, "not push too hard."
Base commanders, however, defended the Saudi police, despite considerable evidence that this kind of truck bombing could have happened at almost any time, and that there were few restrictions on vehicular traffic beyond about 35 yards from the buildings.
Because of the extreme sensitivity of the relationship, American diplomats and officials are always careful to avoid any public criticism of the Saudis.
In a news conference, the two commanders here, Maj. Gen. Kurt Anderson, the overall commander of the Joint Task Force for Southwest Asia, based in Riyadh, and Brig. Gen. Terry Schwalier, commander of the 4404th Air Wing here, said that their heightened security precautions were constructed on "a base line" of an explosion the size of the one that hit an American military compound in Riyadh, killing five Americans and two Indians.
Meanwhile, four groups - none known previously - claimed responsibility Thursday for the bombing, but U.S. officials said they doubted the claims.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher ignored the claims. "Where terrorism is concerned, first guesses usually are wrong," he said.
Gen. John Shalikashvili, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said investigators are concentrating on associates of Islamic fundamentalists executed for the Riyadh bombing.

Graphic

 
Photo: A U.S. Air Force officer climbs on a pile of rubble Thursday to
 photograph the bombing site where 19 Americans were killed and hundreds
 injured. / GREG MARINOVICH / Associated Press

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document