Attacking Iraq's Saddam is part of global anti-terrorism war
USA TODAY
July 19, 2002, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 601 words
Body

So the White House is now toying with the idea of waiting for Iraq to offer "a significant provocation" before taking firm military action ("Planners raise bar for Iraqi invasion: Provocation is needed to justify it, officials say," News, July 11).
According to USA TODAY, one of the "provocations" would be Saddam Hussein's ability to field a nuclear weapon. But by the time the Iraqi dictator can field such a weapon it may be too late. Millions more persons will be at risk or even dead.
The key to the Iraqi threat is the West's blindness since the expulsion of the United Nations' weapons inspectors. We may not know about the threat before Saddam has a weapon he can use to really do damage.
In my view, there is only one reason he keeps the inspectors out: He is working on such weapons.
The lesson of Sept. 11 is that those who boastfully value death cannot be reasoned with or appeased. They must be rendered harmless.
Many Europeans want to turn the other cheek and give their enemies the benefit of the doubt. But such a policy could be a potential death sentence for future innocent victims of the Saddam Husseins and the Osama bin Ladens of this world.
The job of fighting terrorism needs to be finished now.
Tom Minchin
Melbourne, Australia
Patience is key with Iraq
I agree with comments from USA TODAY reader Stephen Erpenbeck, who argues that an unprovoked attack against Iraq is not in the United States' best interest ("Iraq attack would hurt U.S. image," Letters, Monday).
I would like nothing more than to see a power change in Iraq and United Nations inspectors back in the country searching for weapons of mass destruction. However, I feel that the reputation the USA has among all Arab countries is already poor, at best. Any unprovoked attack against Iraq would further damage our country's standing in the Arab world. It would also undermine the support of those Arab nations we may need as we carry on our war against international terrorism.
It's clear that many countries -- and even Iraq's own citizens -- believe that Saddam Hussein should be removed from power.
The United States will get its chance for such a mission. I only hope our government does not move too quickly.
Art Carpenter
Southaven, Miss.
Arabs wouldn't oppose attack
I disagree with USA TODAY reader Stephen Erpenbeck, who seems so concerned about the USA's desire for new leadership in Iraq. Erpenbeck needs to put things into perspective.
The reader says that Iraq may be developing weapons of mass destruction. However, let's not forget that Saddam Hussein has consistently refused to allow United Nations weapons inspectors into Iraq because he is developing such weapons.
And if Saddam is allowed to fully build such weapons, tens of thousands of lives -- including those of many Americans -- could be lost.
The reader is also concerned that if the U.S. carried out a pre-emptive strike against Iraq, this would invite "criticism from the rest of the world" and that "even a covert action would not be well received."
Arab nations -- mainly because of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict -- may not wholeheartedly agree that the U.S. should rid the Middle East of Saddam. But all of Iraq's Arab neighbors, who have felt the brunt of Saddam's brutality, will thank the United States when he is gone. There would not be an iota of damage to the USA's "image."
I'm certain the majority of Americans are not concerned about any possible criticism when Saddam is eliminated. Nor do I think U.S. citizens want to wait "to seek retribution for something (Iraq) has not yet done," as Erpenbeck insists we must do.
Earl Custer
Carmel, Calif.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Karim Sahib, AFP; Saddam's cubs": That's what Iraqi schoolboys ages 12 to 17 call themselves. Some take part in recent military training at a summer camp near Baghdad.

Load-Date: July 19, 2002


End of Document