Attacks hit close to home for doctor
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
December 2, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 402 words
Byline: Jimmy Myers, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Dec. 2--The Mumbai that Dr. Prakash Patel knows is peaceful and full of people with "no gripes."
Dr. Patel, a gastroentologist at Heartland Health, returns to India once a year. He studied medicine in Mumbai, where his wife's family still resides.
His vacation timing couldn't have been better recently. He left Mumbai a week ago today, just 24 hours before gunmen began a shooting spree that killed more than 170. Dr. Patel has stayed in the Taj Mahal Hotel, the scene of much of the violence. He was supposed to have lunch there on Nov. 23, the Sunday before he left India.
"It's sad in the sense that it's such a vibrant city," said Dr. Patel, a resident of St. Joseph since 1975. "People go about doing their work. There are no gripes. This (attack) was something very unusual for all of us."
When news of the terrorism reached Vishnu Chaitanya Kosaraju, a student at Northwest Missouri State University, he immediately called his friends in Mumbai. Learning they were safe, his attention turned to his family living in other parts of India.
"Security measures have not been taken to avoid these kind of attacks," he said, adding that there have been many terrorists acts over the past few years.
As Mr. Kosaraju questions the safety of his family and friends in India, he also contemplates his own safety when he returns.
"One thing that I doubted was, 'Is it going be safe for me to go back and live in India?'" he said. "All the countries should unite together and fight against terrorism."
Another byproduct of the violence comes in the way of mistrust with neighboring Pakistan amid growing evidence that the terrorists came from Pakistan. The two countries have endured three major conflicts since gaining independence from Britain in 1947.
"We'll know a little better a few days down the line who really is behind this," Dr. Patel said, adding that when terrorist acts occur, "it always creates some tension between the two countries."
Jimmy Myers can be reached at jimmym@npgco.com
To see more of the St. Joseph News-Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.stjoenews-press.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: December 2, 2008


End of Document