ATTACK IN SAUDI ARABIA: RESPONDING TO TERRORISM;
Global leaders vow concerted pursuit of justice;
'All legal means' will be used
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 28, 1996, Friday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 03A
Length: 691 words
Byline: FROM OUR NEWS SERVICES
Dateline: Lyon, France
Body


President Clinton and six other world leaders pledged solidarity Thursday " to fight terrorism by all legal means" in the aftermath of a "barbarous and unjustifiable" truck bomb that killed 19 Americans in Saudi Arabia.
"We consider the fight against terrorism to be our absolute priority," said the statement from the leaders of the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan. They are here attending the annual summit of seven leading democracies, called the Group of Seven.
"We understand that an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us, and that none of us is invulnerable," Clinton said.
"We are all united in condemning the dreadful bombing that has taken place," said French President Jacques Chirac, host of this year's economic summit. " We changed our agenda" to deal with "this appalling event," Chirac said.
Earlier, British Prime Minister John Major called combating terrorism "the security challenge of the 21st century."
"We must make utmost efforts to eliminate terrorism. It's our common enemy. . . . We will support the president with our utmost might," Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said.
Today, the seven leaders are expected to adopt 40 measures aimed at strengthening the partnership among their national law enforcement agencies to mount an allied campaign against international terrorists and criminals.
Presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said Clinton would present the plan for tougher extradition guidelines, more sharing of national intelligence on possible terrorist activity and efforts to make it harder for suspected terrorists to cross national borders.
The 40 anti-terrorism measures were drafted over the past year by experts from the seven nations, plus Russia, at the order of last summer's summit in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Four basic concepts guide the 40 specific proposals, according to Clinton's national security adviser, Anthony Lake. One set of actions aims to show that "crime does not pay" by making it easier to seize the assets of criminals or terrorists. A second set is known as "nowhere to hide," steps to strengthen international cooperation among law enforcers.
A third set, Lake said, aims to tighten national borders against penetration by criminals and terrorists. Fourth is a package of reforms aimed at preventing high-tech crimes involving computers and other new technologies.
Clinton thanked his international counterparts for "this very powerful statement."
In addition to being signed by the Group of Seven leaders, the statement will also be embraced by Russia when its representative arrives Friday, said McCurry.
The quick statement - issued as the leaders met for a kickoff dinner - enabled the allies to show common ground while sidestepping differences on economic subjects such as trade with Cuba and such nations as Iran and Iraq, which the United States considers terrorist.
"We condemn this barbarous and unjustifiable act and express our wholehearted solidarity with the United States and Saudi Arabia in their terrible ordeal," the statement said.
"Special attention should be paid to the threat of utilization of nuclear, biological and chemical materials, as well as toxic substances, for terrorist purposes," the statement added.
The statement was issued after Clinton and other heads of state dined at Lyon's City Hall, a soaring elegant structure dating from the 17th century. As they arrived, they were saluted with anthems by a brass band of the Republican Guard, resplendent in plumed helmets, red longcoats, white jodhpurs and gold spurs.
Earlier in the day, Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto set a deadline of July 31 for resolving two contentious trade issues - over computer chips and insurance sales by foreign companies.
The announcement of a deadline was particularly significant on the issue of computer chips, where until recently the Japanese government had been refusing even to negotiate with the United States.
 
"We are not here to fight," Hashimoto told reporters.
Clinton used a picturesque medieval village about 25 miles northeast of Lyon to issue a plea to Western nations to join forces in combating terrorism.

Graphic

 
Photo: Metal detectors are used to search even the tiniest spectators at
 the economic summit. / JEROME DELAY / Associated Press

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document