Attacks may hike terror cover rates; Big impact in India, but effects modest elsewhere
Business Insurance
December 8, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 880 words
Byline: ZACK PHILLIPS
Body


MUMBAI, India-The recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India, may provoke modest hardening in prices for terrorism coverage from international insurers, but a more dramatic rise is possible among India-based insurers, observers say.
Terrorists armed with automatic weapons and explosives attacked sites across India's financial capital, including the Oberoi Hotel and the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower hotel, killing more than 160 people and injuring several hundred more in late November.
Ben Tucker, a senior vp who heads the terrorism risk insurance practice at New York-based Marsh Inc., said, ``I think you could see a very strong hardening of rates, possibly up to a doubling of rates, in the Indian terrorism market.''
India has a terrorism reinsurance pool managed by the state-run General Insurance Corp. of India. Some reports suggested the Mumbai attacks may exhaust the pool, though General Insurance officials have denied that will happen.
But brokers say they expect a more modest effect, if any, in the international market for terrorism insurance. After rates fell during recent low-loss years, pricing had begun to level off even before the Mumbai attacks, and the attacks may speed that adjustment, said Tim Davies, divisional director of terrorism for Arthur J. Gallagher (UK) Ltd.
Upcoming reinsurance renewals could complicate matters. India's terrorism insurance pool is reinsured, and reinsurance syndicates at Lloyd's of London sustained losses from the Mumbai attacks, Mr. Davies said. If those losses affect Jan. 1, 2009, reinsurance treaty renewals, that could contribute to higher rates for terrorism cover, he said.
Wendy A. Peters, a senior vp in the terrorism practice of broker Willis North America-London in Radnor, Pa., agreed that reinsurance renewals could affect the primary market but cautioned that it is too early to determine the full impact of the attacks. She said it will take years to know the extent of liability losses from the attacks.
Still, she also said she expects some hardening in pricing for international stand-alone terrorism coverages.
``Any time there's a major event, there's always going to be some sort of residual hardening,'' she said.
But prices for property policies with terror cover in the U.S. would increase only if ``there were major increased fears of terrorist attacks in the U.S. as a result of events like this abroad,'' said Sean Mooney, chief economist at Guy Carpenter & Co. Inc. in New York.
Risks for hotels
Messrs. Davies and Tucker said the attacks may boost rates for hotels, which have long paid higher prices for terrorism cover than other types of business, particularly U.S.-based and Western brands.
Security experts and hospitality industry representatives acknowledge that luxury hotels make attractive targets for terrorists. Hotels operate at all hours, typically reside in the center of a city and are open to the public.
The tourism industry is very sensitive to security concerns, so attacking hotels can damage that country's economy, said Brian Jenkins, a senior adviser and terrorism expert at the Santa Monica, Calif.-based Rand Corp.
``It's a way in which a terrorist can get international attention,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ``It is an opportunity to attack foreigners.''
``Particularly in developing parts of the world, hotels are not simply meeting places for foreigners but are the watering holes for the local elite,'' he said.
But security experts say despite the November attacks in Mumbai and the September bombing of a Marriott hotel in Islamabad, Pakistan, there is no evidence that terrorists are targeting hotels more now than in the past.
Mr. Jenkins studied terrorist attacks against luxury hotels from 1968 through mid-2005 and has monitored such attacks since 2005. He said terrorists have not targeted hotels more in recent years than previously, beyond a spike in hotel bombings in Iraq during the war. He said attacks on hotels have grown more frequent and lethal during the past two decades, although terrorism generally has increased worldwide as well.
In all, there were 269 attacks against hotels that caused 413 deaths during the period of the study, which Mr. Jenkins said produced an average of about eight deaths a year from attacks against hotels.
Police in Mumbai late last week reportedly linked two of the attackers to a Pakistani guerrilla group with ties to that country's intelligence services. Rising tension between India and Pakistan since the terrorist attacks could fuel interest in political violence insurance, which covers a broader list of perils than terrorism insurance, Marsh's Mr. Tucker said.
``I think it'd be a fair assumption that rates for political violence coverage in India and Pakistan will be increasing and capacity shrinking,'' he said.
Outsourcing
Mr. Tucker also said insurers and policyholders are talking about how U.S.-based corporations with some operations outsourced to India will be affected.
Typically, he said these contingent exposures would not be covered by a company's global property program if a terrorist attack were to cause damage or interrupt business operations. The firm likely would need to buy stand-alone terrorism insurance for contingent exposures, which costs more and which U.S.-based corporations typically do not have, he said.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: The Taj Mahal Palace & Tower hotel, one of the main sites of the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India, was damaged by several explosions and fires.
Art Credit: Reuters

Load-Date: December 12, 2008


End of Document