Attacker kills two in French train station; Terrorism suspected, weeks after incident at the same station
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 2, 2017 Monday


Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z3
Length: 411 words
Byline: John Bacon
Body


A police car blocks access to Marseille's main train station on Sunday in France after a knife attack that left two people dead. CLAUDE PARIS, AP
Two women were fatally stabbed Sunday in a rampage at French train station before soldiers fatally shot the suspect, French National Police said.
Police in Marseille evacuated the St. Charles station, the city's largest, and French President Emmanuel Macron said he is "deeply outraged" by the "barbarous" knife attack.
French Interior Minister Gérard Collomb said authorities did not know yet whether the incident was a "terrorist" assault, but some witnesses reported they heard the assailant shouting "Allahu akbar," Arabic for "God is great."
Collomb said police have video that shows a man attacking one woman, running away, then coming back and attacking a second woman.
The incident came two weeks after four young American women were attacked with acid at the same station. A lone female assailant with a history of mental health problems was arrested at the scene in that case, and at the time authorities said terrorism was not suspected.
On Sunday, one victim was stabbed to death while the other had her throat slit, according to Agence France-Presse and other news media outlets, citing police officials.
Police said the killer was shot and "neutralized" by soldiers patrolling the station. The Paris prosecutor's anti-terrorism office was investigating, police said.
More than 10,000 French soldiers, police and other security personnel protect tourist sites and transportation hubs under Operation Sentinelle, an anti-terror program started almost three years ago on the heels of a November 2015 terror attack that killed more than 130 people.
The program, which costs an estimated $500,000 per day, itself has come under fire.
"It is essentially just posturing that has zero operational impact," Jean-Charles Brisard of the Center for the Analysis of Terrorism recently told FRANCE 24. "Sentinelle has never stopped, prevented or hindered any terrorist attack."
In August, a driver rammed into two Marseille bus stops, killing a woman, but officials said it wasn't related to terror.
In April, French police said they thwarted an imminent "terror attack" and arrested two suspected radicals in Marseille, just days before the first round of France's presidential election. Paris prosecutor Francois Molins told reporters the two suspects "were getting ready to carry out an imminent, violent action" on French territory.

Load-Date: October 2, 2017


End of Document