Attack on Iraq would spur worldwide terrorism, war
USA TODAY
March 13, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 433 words
Body

Young Americans are rising up to voice their opposition to a military strike against Iraq, and we really need to listen ("Debate over Iraq fires passions not seen since the Vietnam War," Cover Story, News, March 6).
Pre-emptively annihilating Iraq likely would be the beginning of worldwide terrorism and war, especially in light of the fact that for years America has been planting seeds of despair, pain and righteous outrage in the Arab and Muslim world by arming and empowering the Israelis in their conflict with the Palestinians.
How dare we speak of spreading democracy while generously underwriting Israel's ethnic cleansing of the Holy Land? How dare we speak of freedom when, as far as I'm concerned, most of our elected politicians and many of our media outlets suppress the truth about the real plight of the Palestinians? They've been terrorized by Israel's hate for more than half a century.
Anne Selden Annab
Mechanicsburg, Pa.
War can bring peace
USA TODAY's Cover Story addresses, as some conclude, a terrible choice between war and peace. If that were truly the choice, no one in his or her right mind would choose war over peace.
Peace is an end, and there are circumstances when war is the only means to that end.
Saddam Hussein's non-compliance for more than a decade with United Nations demands for disarmament -- despite numerous warnings and second chances -- shows that he is ultimately responsible for making the choice for war.
I also read in the article that "two-thirds of Americans say they're seriously worried that Saddam might use chemical or biological weapons." Aren't these the very weapons Saddam says Iraq doesn't have? I hope the same two-thirds of Americans stand behind President Bush.
William S. Pietrzak
Warsaw, Ind.
Balance protest coverage
The liberal media love to give front-page coverage to high school students who oppose a war with Iraq yet know absolutely nothing about the situation in the Middle East.
When three out of four Americans support removing Saddam Hussein from power, USA TODAY appears to be leaning in the opposite direction.
William W. Dubbs
Southern Pines, N.C.
No immediate threat
I fail to see why President Bush is in a hurry to go to war. As far as I can tell, Iraq poses no immediate threat.
United Nations weapons inspectors appear to be making some progress. Seems to me, if we can allow more inspectors into Iraq, with more time, we may be able to prevent an invasion. Thousands of lives then could be saved, sparing our sons and daughters and many other innocent people. Or is this war really about getting Iraq's oil?
Marc Perkel
San Francisco

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, John Tipton, AP; Having their say: Pro-war supporters take their views to the streets of Visalia, Calif., on Sunday.

Load-Date: March 13, 2003


End of Document