Attack suspect charged with terrorism offenses Islamic State propaganda found on suspect's cell phone
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 2, 2017 Thursday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 488 words
Byline: Colleen Long and Jennifer Peltz Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK  - Federal prosecutors brought terrorism charges Wednesday against the Uzbek immigrant accused in the truck rampage that left eight people dead, saying he was spurred to attack by the Islamic State group's online calls to action and picked Halloween because he figured streets would be extra crowded.
 Even as he lay wounded in the hospital from police gunfire, Sayfullo Saipov asked to display the Islamic State group's flag in his room and said "he felt good about what he had done," prosecutors said in court papers.
 Saipov, 29, was brought to court in a wheelchair to face charges that could bring the death penalty. Handcuffed and with his legs shackled, Saipov nodded his head repeatedly as he was read his rights in a brief court proceeding that he followed through a Russian interpreter. He was ordered held without bail.
 Outside court, his appointed lawyer, David Patton, said he hoped "everyone lets the judicial process play out."
 "I promise you that how we treat Mr. Saipov in this judicial process will say a lot more about us than it will say about him," Patton said.
 Meanwhile, the FBI was questioning a second person from Uzbekistan, 32-year-old Mukhammadzoir Kadirov. A law enforcement official said Kadirov was a friend of Saipov's and may not have any role in the case. The official wasn't authorized to speak publicly and spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
 Prosecutors said Saipov had 90 videos and 3,800 photos on one of his two cellphones, many of them IS-related pieces of propaganda, including images of prisoners being beheaded, shot or run over by a tank.
 Saipov left behind knives and a note, in Arabic and English, that included Islamic religious references and said, "Islamic Supplication. It will endure," FBI agent Amber Tyree said in court papers. "It will endure" commonly refers to IS, Tyree said.
 Questioned in his hospital bed, Saipov said he had been inspired by IS videos and began plotting an attack about a year ago, deciding to use a truck about two months ago, Tyree said.
 During the last few weeks, Saipov searched the internet for information on Halloween in New York City and for truck rentals, the agent said. Saipov even rented a truck on Oct. 22 to practice making turns, and he initially hoped to get from the bike path across lower Manhattan to hit more pedestrians on the Brooklyn Bridge, Tyree said.
 He even considered displaying IS flags on the truck during the attack but decided it would draw too much attention, authorities said.
 John Miller, deputy New York police commissioner for intelligence, said Saipov "appears to have followed, almost exactly to a T, the instructions that ISIS has put out."
 In the past few years, the Islamic State has exhorted followers online to use vehicles, knives or other close-at-hand means of killing people in their home countries. England, France and Germany have all seen deadly vehicle attacks since mid-2016.

Load-Date: November 2, 2017


End of Document