ATTACK WON'T DETER TERROR;
ANALYSTS SAY EFFECT WILL BE MINIMAL EVEN ON STATE-SPONSORED STRIKES BY;
TERRORISTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 29, 1993, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 644 words
Byline: SUSAN BENNETT AND FRANK GREVE, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE
Body


The Clinton administration asserted yesterday that the bombing of Iraq's intelligence headquarters would deter future acts of terrorism, but independent analysts expressed doubt that the United States' show of force would have much effect.
''It dealt a devastating blow to Iraq's ability to plan and carry out similar kinds of operations in the future,'' Vice President Al Gore said.
''I think other terrorists around the world need to know that the United States will do what we can to combat terrorism,'' President Clinton said.
That message was directed particularly at Iran and Sudan -- two countries whose nationals have been linked to the Islamic fundamentalists accused of bombing the World Trade Center and plotting further attacks in New York.
But security analysts say the Clinton administration's hope for long-term deterrence is wishful thinking.
''We in the United States may believe that it has a deterrent effect, but if you ask anyone from Morocco to Afghanistan whether terrorists will leave us alone after this, their response will be: 'Are you crazy?' '' said Professor Lisa Anderson, director of Columbia University's Middle East Institute.
''It's not clear that bombing capitals cures state-sponsored terrorism under any circumstances,'' Anderson said.
Instead, bombings as reprisals for terrorist attacks ''make more people more mad and give terrorists more publicity,'' she said.
Even in Iraq, the results of Saturday's bombing may be less than advertised by the Clinton administration.
Robert Kupperman, senior scholar at Georgetown University Center for Strategic and International Studies, believes permanent damage to Iraqi intelligence capabilities is minimal -- and certainly didn't ''cripple the Iraqi intelligence capability,'' as Clinton claimed.
''A lot of their operations are in hardened bunkers. They are not in one place and in all probability, there are back-up facilities we were nowhere near getting,'' Kupperman said.
''Conventional forces mean nothing to terrorists,'' he added.
''They're so secretive, sneaky and cellular that B-52s and battleships and Tomahawk missiles are irrelevant as deterrents,'' Kupperman said.
In the New York terrorist episodes, at least five of the men implicated used Sudanese travel documents to enter the United States. Several others have lived in Iran, which has encouraged Sudanese participation in terrorism.
But the FBI has not yet announced any direct links between the terrorists and those governments.
''We know the Sudanese have training camps and Iran is running camps in the Sudan,'' one Arab diplomat said. ''But the question is, did the orders come directly from the Sudanese political leadership or not?''
The United States has not confirmed that terrorist training camps exist in the Sudan and the FBI has not arrested the man with the strongest ties to Iran, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, a self-exiled Egyptian cleric now in the United States.
Attorney General Janet Reno, asked yesterday about the possibility of an indictment against Abdel-Rahman, refused to comment on a ''pending matter.''
Even if Iran or Sudan were linked convincingly to terrorist acts, military reprisals against those countries would be harder to justify to allies and enemies than an attack on Baghdad.
''So there's no deterrence to Saddam or Iran. They know as everyone does that Iraq is a special case: a country that we can bomb with impunity. Clearly we can't behave that way when it comes to bombing Tehran or Khartoum,'' Anderson said.
Kupperman, who predicted in 1979 that Islamic fundamentalists would someday attack tunnels and bridges in major U.S. cities, now predicts ''some really monstrous things'' in the next two years.
''I think there will be an onslaught of chemical, biological or radiological agents, maybe the taking down of bridges, blowing up transformers or attacks on key senators,'' Kupperman said.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document