ATTACK ON USS COLE SHOWS LIMITS OF INTELLIGENCE
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 18, 2000, Wednesday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 874 words
Byline: By Eric Rosenberg Hearst Newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON -- The bombing attack on the USS Cole demonstrates the limits of intelligence in preventing terrorist assaults and the difficulty in tracking the splintered terrorist organizations in the Middle East, military experts said Tuesday.
To thwart the attack on the USS Cole, the U.S. government would have needed a spy who was working with the terrorists, according to retired Navy Adm. Stan Arthur, who commanded U.S. naval forces during the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
"To be able to have understood whether something was going to occur during that refueling, you almost would have had to have somebody on the scene, embedded within the culture to say that this is more than just a threat," Arthur said.
The Cole, a guided missile destroyer, was torn open by a massive blast last Thursday when the ship was about to be refueled in the Aden harbor in Yemen. A small harbor vessel came up alongside and detonated a large explosive in what Pentagon officials believe was a suicide mission. The explosion created a 40-foot by 40-foot hole in the hull of the billion-dollar ship.
The terrorist attack is likely to renew the debate over whether U.S. intelligence relies too much on satellites and eavesdropping equipment and neglects intelligence based on human spies.
The trend in recent years has been to develop more hardware and downplay the role of the spy, mainly because the machines are helpful in dealing with such big strategic intelligence questions as whether a foreign power is about to attack the United States.
Another reason for the relative de-emphasis on human spies can be traced to internal CIA rules issued in 1995 by then-CIA director John Deutch and designed to prevent the agency from dealing with would-be agents who also abuse human rights in their own countries.
Under the rules, if a CIA officer wants to put a proposed spy on the payroll, special committees in CIA headquarters must approve the request, a process that can take six months or more.
L. Paul Bremer, former U.S. ambassador for counter-terrorism, said the rules on recruiting spies have put a severe crimp in the CIA's ability to track suspected terrorists.
"If you're going to reduce the number of Americans killed by terrorists, you have to know their plans ahead of time; and to know that, you have to have a spy inside the terrorist group. But by definition, somebody who knows a terrorist's plan is going to be a terrorist," Bremer said in an interview.
When he served as chairman of a bipartisan committee on terrorism last summer, Bremer interviewed numerous CIA officers at all levels and concluded that their message was clear: The guidelines discourage the recruitment of terrorist informants.
But Bremer added that a human intelligence warning of an imminent attack "is the hardest type of intelligence to get, and it's very rare that we get it. It was much easier to figure out where the Soviet SS-20s (nuclear missiles) were hiding."
James Phillips, a terrorism expert at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think-tank in Washington, D.C., agreed.
"Unfortunately, when you are trying to infiltrate a terrorist group, those people you want to use likely have violated human rights or taken a life."
The CIA defends its practices and says the rules on spies have not hurt the agency's ability to infiltrate terror groups.
"The notion that our human rights guidelines are an impediment to fighting terrorism or recruiting sources is simply wrong," said Anya Guilsher, a CIA spokeswoman. "There are no guidelines impeding efforts to fight terrorism. We have had notable successes," she added, declining to elaborate.
The need for reliable human intelligence is compounded by the simple fact that the United States receives a huge volume of general terrorist threats. For example, Defense Secretary William Cohen said Monday that the U.S. military gets threats "every day around the globe. We try to analyze those as they come in for their credibility, their specificity, or lack of it," Cohen added.
Brian Jenkins, a terrorism expert with the Rand Corp., a non-profit think-tank in Santa Monica, Calif., said that while the number of threats is overwhelming, "most of the threats are just threats," he said in an interview.
Another difficulty for intelligence officials is that terrorist groups have become more difficult to track because of diffuse organizational structures. "Terrorist operations are a lot murkier than 10 or 15 years ago," said Jenkins.
Norman Friedman, an independent Navy expert and military historian in New York, said intelligence officials often have great difficulty even discerning a structure to attempt to penetrate.
"What makes terrorism so hard to thwart is that there usually is no single directing brain that you can put your finger on," he said.
Terror networks also are difficult to identify and locate.
For example, suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden allegedly lives in Afghanistan and operates in Africa and throughout the Middle East, including Yemen. Initial suspicion has fallen on Bin Laden for hatching the USS Cole attack.
"We see a collection of operatives brought together for specific attacks who then disband," Jenkins said. "It's harder to track and penetrate unless we get into the very, very center of operations."

Load-Date: October 18, 2000


End of Document