Attend BI's TRIA webinar; Panelists to discuss the challenges the loss of a backstop would bring
Business Insurance
September 19, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 287 words
Body


Time is running out for Congress to act on renewing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act.
What this might mean for your business and the insurance industry is the subject of an upcoming online panel discussion sponsored by Business Insurance. 
This webinar-a free, hour-long audio program online-is scheduled for 1:30 p.m. EDT Oct. 12.
The panelists for this event, ``A World Without TRIA: Why A Terrorism Insurance Backstop is Vital,'' are: Ramani Ayer, chairman and chief executive officer of The Hartford Financial Services Group Inc.; Bradley Wood, senior vp-risk management of Marriott International Inc.; and Joel Wood, senior vp of government affairs for the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers. The discussion will be moderated by Business Insurance Senior Editor Mark A. Hofmann.
These experts will discuss the challenges of winning congressional approval for TRIA, what impact Hurricane Katrina will have on reauthorization efforts, why they believe TRIA is vital to U.S. businesses and the insurance industry, and how businesses and insurers should plan for the possibility that the act will not be extended, resulting in the loss of a federal backstop of insurance coverage for future terrorism risks.
Anyone concerned with the TRIA reauthorization efforts should attend, including risk managers, brokers, insurers, reinsurers, regulators and industry association executives.
Register today to attend this important online panel discussion by visiting: www.businessinsurance.com/ webinars.
Registered attendees of the live event will have the opportunity to ask questions of the panelists. In case you are unable to attend the live event, an archived version of the live webinar will be available afterward at the above URL.

Load-Date: September 21, 2005


End of Document