Attorney general proposes anti-terrorism measures
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 18, 2001 Thursday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a11
Length: 480 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MADISON
Body


Attorney General Jim Doyle proposed expanding the state's wiretapping laws and stiffening penalties for those who help terrorists as part of a package he said could help ease fears of potential attacks on Wisconsin.
The anti-terrorism proposals also include new laws to punish those who use fake threats to disrupt people's lives.
"This is a matter of making sure our laws are adequate to protect us from the challenge ahead of us," Doyle said.
Doyle said his proposal to change the state's wiretapping laws would streamline the process to allow law enforcement officers to respond to the threat of terrorist attacks quickly.
If there is evidence of imminent danger of death or serious injury, officers would be able to receive permission from a judge to institute a wiretap. The officers would then have 48 hours to complete the currently required paperwork to approve a wiretap, which includes approval from a judge, district attorney and attorney general.
Doyle, who said he approves less than five wiretaps a year, said the proposal also would expand wiretapping laws to include cellular phones. Authorities also would be able to obtain a wiretap for a person rather than a specific phone number under current law.
The attorney general said he hoped the Legislature would act on his proposals soon. Lawmakers are meeting through Nov. 8 before breaking until January.
Steve Baas, spokesman for Assembly Majority Leader Scott Jensen, R-Waukesha, said Republicans have not yet reviewed Doyle's proposals. He said the Assembly will take up Doyle's suggestions but would put them through the normal legislative process, including hearings to give the public time to comment on them.
"We certainly want to get to the right answer," Baas said. "There is a sense of urgency, but we don't want to rush to a bad decision. We're not going to bypass the public hearing process or the legislative process in order to act quickly."
Doyle's proposals were the latest in a series of responses from the Capitol offered to deal with the threat of terrorism.
Several Republican lawmakers proposed last month bringing back the death penalty for any act of terrorism that includes premeditated murder.
Gov. Scott McCallum's terrorism task force also met for the first time last week. The 20-person board includes representatives from health, law enforcement and other professionals McCallum said had the expertise necessary to deal with terrorist attacks.
McCallum was clearly irked at that meeting that Doyle was working on his own anti-terrorism measures. Both are running for governor next year.
Both men said Wednesday they planned to work with each other to combat the threat of terrorism. But Doyle said he did not need input from the governor's task force to move ahead with his proposals.
McCallum said he anticipated Doyle would coordinate efforts with him. But he had not seen any of Doyle's proposals.

Load-Date: October 18, 2001


End of Document