Attorney demands documents related to student accused of 'cyber terrorism'
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
February 4, 2014 Tuesday


Copyright 2014 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 379 words
Byline: Bob Kalinowski, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Feb. 04--The attorney for a Dallas High School student accused of "cyber terrorism" is demanding the Dallas School District to hand over troves of documents and other information related to the teenager's suspension on accusations he hacked into the school's computer system and uploaded a virus.
A county judge last week granted the attorney's emergency request for an injunction to allow the 10th-grade student to return to school as facts about the case are evaluated.
Gary Michak, an attorney for the student, argued the teenager is being falsely accused based on "unsubstantiated suspicions" that he launched a duplicating virus that almost caused the district's computer system to crash on Jan. 23.
In court documents filed Monday, Michak demanded a long list of documents and information from the school, including:
n All emails school officials sent about the boy and the situation.
n All notes about the boy and the situation from the principal, superintendent, director of technology and guidance counselor.
n Specs and logs for the school's server, network, storage devices and security software.
n Copies of the file the boy allegedly duplicated, access to the computer the boy was supposedly using, and the boy's signed agreement regarding school computer use.
Michak demanded the school turn over all of those items that are in the "possession, custody, or control of your agents, employees or attorneys."
Dallas administrators suspended the teenager for 10 days, vowed expulsion and threatened a federal investigation after the school's computer server was hacked and infected with a virus that continually duplicated files and nearly caused the system to crash, Michak said in court documents filed last week.
Michak moved quickly in court after the suspension, getting Lupas to grant an injunction to allow the boy to return to school until a hearing in county court on Thursday.
In his ruling, Lupas barred the school district or any or its employees from making public comments on the matter or releasing any confidential materials associated with the case.
bkalinowski@citizensvoice.com
570-821-2055, @cvbobkalr
___ (c)2014 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: February 4, 2014


End of Document