Attorney says FBI lied to terror suspect; Agents promised not to arrest Ga. Tech student
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 16, 2006 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1E
Length: 460 words
Byline: BILL TORPY
Body


Six statements by a Georgia Tech student arrested on terrorism-related charges should be thrown out because of false promises and implied threats from investigators, the man's attorney said in court filings Thursday.
Syed Haris Ahmed, 21, talked to FBI agents after being told he would not be arrested if he cooperated. Ahmed did talk --- six interviews over a week's time --- and then was arrested, his court-appointed attorney Jack Martin said.
The agents also "prey[ed] on the defendant's devotion to Islam" to gain his trust and cooperation, he said.
"Office [Khalid] Sediqui, who revealed that he was a devout Muslim himself, stated 'Allah does not want you to go to jail. I want you to help us,' " the motion states.
Sediqui told Ahmed if he answered the investigators' questions, "then we are going to leave you alone," the motion states.
Ahmed gave more than 12 hours of statements, totaling 400 pages of transcripts, and identified photographs and videos. On March 23, he was indicted on a charge of providing material support to terrorists.
Another Georgia man, Ehsanul Sadequee, 19, of Roswell, a friend of Ahmed's, was arrested in April while traveling in Bangladesh. The two men allegedly took a Greyhound bus to Toronto in March 2005 to meet with "like-minded extremists" and plot "strategic locations in the United States suitable for a terrorist strike."
The men allegedly made contact with two of the 17 suspects arrested this month in Toronto on terrorism charges, according to documents filed in Canadian court.
The two men also allegedly discussed traveling to Pakistan to receive military-style training. Prosecutors say Ahmed tried to do that last summer.
In April 2005, a month after the Canada visit, the two allegedly shot some "casing videos" of sites in Washington.
Those videos were found on the computer of a man arrested in London on terrorism charges.
In the motion filed Thursday, Martin argued that the U.S. Supreme Court and other courts have determined that a statement is involuntary if induced "by significant and powerful promises or threats, such as the promise of nonprosecution here and the threat of arrest if the defendant did not 'cooperate.' " 
The motion quotes an agent telling Ahmed, "You have the rest of your life in front of you. ... You know eventually you are going to have to get a job some day. Do you want any type of criminal record?"
Ahmed answered, "No."
In a separate filing, Martin asks the court to force prosecutors to divulge any wiretaps or electronic surveillance the government used to keep track of his client.
The FBI declined to comment on the case. Patrick Crosby, spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office, said, "The motions filed today were expected and we will respond to them at the appropriate time."

Graphic

 
Photo: Syed Ahmed was told he wouldn't be prosecuted if he talked and threatened with jail if he didn't, his attorney says.

Load-Date: June 16, 2006


End of Document