Attorneys: Permanently block Dallas student's suspension for cyber attack
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
February 8, 2014 Saturday


Copyright 2014 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 699 words
Byline: Jacob Seibel, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Feb. 08--Attorneys for a Dallas High School sophomore who allegedly launched a cyber attack on the school district's Web server told a Luzerne County judge on Friday they want a permanent injunction to block the suspension indefinitely.
During the second day of a hearing to determine whether the student should be suspended for allegedly almost crashing the district's server, the student's attorneys, Gary and George Michak, argued that administrators violated the student's right to due process by flip-flopping on their allegations, failing to follow the school's disciplinary process and deciding the boy's punishment before he could defend himself.
Dallas administrators suspended the teenager for 10 days, and threatened expulsion, after the school's computer server was infected Jan. 23 with files that continually duplicated and finally reached 1.5 million records by the time it was stopped.
Gary Michak filed a preliminary injunction on Jan. 30 to block the suspension, which Luzerne County Judge David W. Lupas granted, allowing the boy to return to school as facts about the case were evaluated at the hearing before Judge Michael T. Vough.
Michak's injunction filing indicates the student's parents were told he is being investigated as "a cyber-terrorist."
Principal Jeffrey Shaffer, who said he is a layman when it comes to technology, had used the terms "virus," "cyber hacking" and "cyber terrorism" during conversations with and in written notices to the teenager's parents explaining to them why their son was being suspended.
To him, Shaffer testified, cyber hacking means "purposeful tampering --to harm the computer network."
The school's director of technology, Bill Gartrell, testified Thursday he wouldn't consider "copying files over and over" to be the same as "cyber hacking" or "cyber terrorism," describing it instead as "a malicious attack."
The district's attorneys, Robert Gawlas and Donald Brobst, presented a set of alleged violations which had nothing to do with allegations of "cyber terrorism" or "cyber hacking," claiming instead that the teenager violated the school's "technology use policy."
"No matter how you label it," Brobst said, "it's the same conduct."
The boy did not attend the hearing, but it was revealed Thursday for the first time that he admitted to school officials, the school's director of technology and his own father that he uploaded the files to the server on a dare from a friend he knows through a "piracy chat" Internet forum.
Aside from the change of allegations, Gary Michak claimed the student's right to due process was violated.
Initially, Shaffer suspended the student on Jan. 24 for three days, and the informal hearing on Jan. 27 was held to determine if the suspension should be extended.
But before the hearing took place, the school's guidance counselor, Cherilyn Keating, sent teachers a letter notifying them that the student's three-day suspension "could likely progress to a 10-day suspension."
This, George Michak said, indicated that the decision to extend the suspension was already made before the student could refute the accusations against him.
School policy also dictates that informal hearings are held when a student is suspended in order to explain to the student and the student's parents the reasons for the suspension, but in a letter sent to the student's parents, Shaffer said the boy wasn't allowed on school property for "any reason."
Brobst said regardless of the wording in the notice, school code clearly states that a student has every right to attend an informal hearing.
"It makes sense to rescind the 10-day suspension and have another (informal) hearing," Vough said.
But that, George Michak argued, wouldn't remedy the situation. The only thing that would, he said, would be to have a permanent injunction put in place to block the suspension indefinitely.
"We're here on a due process issue," George Michak said, "not a discretionary matter."
The hearing is scheduled to reconvene at 1:45 p.m. Monday.
jseibel@citizensvoice.com
570-821-2110, @cvseibel
___ (c)2014 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: February 9, 2014


End of Document