AUDIT FINDS INACCURATE DATA ON TERROR WATCHLIST
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 18, 2008 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-4
Length: 369 words
Byline: MARISA TAYLOR, MCCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The government's terror watchlist includes inaccurate and outdated information, increasing the risk that innocent people will be misidentified as terrorists while terrorists are overlooked, a government audit reported yesterday.
The report by Justice Department Inspector General Glenn Fine recommended that the FBI and other federal law enforcement agencies improve their coordination of how terror suspects' names are added to and removed from the list to avoid future problems.
Mr. Fine's report helps explain why innocent travelers continue to be misidentified as terrorism suspects, despite efforts by the federal government to improve its databases of more than 900,000 watchlist names. Agents rely on the watchlist when screening airline passengers and processing border crossers and visa applicants.
Although agents describe the watchlist as invaluable, high-profile blunders have underscored its flaws, such as when agents repeatedly blocked Sen. Ted Kennedy, D-Mass., from boarding a plane because his name was similar to a terror suspect's.
The Terrorist Screening Center oversees the watchlist, while the National Counterterrorism Center and the FBI recommend or "nominate" names for it.
In yesterday's report, Mr. Fine said federal agencies had set up procedures to catch errors, but didn't always remove outdated records. Compounding the problem, agents in the FBI's 56 field offices often provided incomplete or inaccurate data when selecting or "nominating" names, he said.
Mr. Fine also chided other agencies within the Justice Department -- such as the Drug Enforcement Administration and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and Explosives -- for their "informal" sharing of watchlist information. "As a result, the potential exists for terrorism information to not be shared with the FBI and for terrorists to not be watchlisted," he said.
To avoid further problems, he suggested that the FBI require that supervisors review nominations. Mr. Fine also recommended that the Justice Department take the lead in improving coordination of the process.
Officials with the FBI and the Terrorist Screening Center said Mr. Fine's proposals either were already being adopted or would be within six months.

Load-Date: March 18, 2008


End of Document