Aussie bank accused of 23 mln money laundering, counter-terrorism breaches
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 22, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MARKETS; Pg. 1
Length: 554 words
Byline: Jean Garcia
Body


Australia's largest lender, the Commonwealth Bank , previous year faced a theoretical maximum fine of A$1 trillion after AUSTRAC found it had failed to report on 53,500 transactions, a small portion of the alleged breaches by Westpac.
The financial institution additionally allegedly did not retain information and carry out sure due diligence purposes with doubtlessly high-risk in another country banks.
"Westpac disclosed issues with its IFTI reporting, has cooperated with AUSTRAC's investigation and has commenced the process of uplifting its AML/CTF controls".
The anti-money-laundering and terrorism financing watchdog articulated five key areas where Westpac (ASX: WBC) exhibited non-compliance.
"Since at least 2013, Westpac was aware of the heightenedchild exploitation risks associated with frequent low value payments to the Philippines and Southeast Asia, both from AUSTRAC guidance and its own risk assessments", it said.
These were originally meant to identify and manage the money laundering and terrorism financing risks of its designated services, which were deemed lacking in its case to the Federal Court of Australia.
The ones banks all disclosed relationships with high-risk or sanctioned nations, together with Iraq, Ukraine and Zimbabwe.
"Westpac still has not implemented appropriate automated detection scenarios to monitor for the knownchild exploitation risks through other channels", it said.
The agency also said there were a small number of transactions on accounts that were potentially linked to "child exploitation risks".
I'm a Celeb's Caitlyn: 'My kids all call me dad'
Kim, 39, explained the sale of 51 percent of Kylie Cosmetics and Kylie Skin had been in the works for a long time. The 93-year-old woman, during a conversation with The Daily Mail , said she didn't like that program too much.
AUSTRAC chief executiveNicole Rose said Westpac had engaged in "serious and systemic non-compliance".
Westpac said it was reviewing AUSTRAC's claim, adding it had informed the regulator of its failure to report the payments.
Hartzer said he accepted most of the regulator's assertions but "at a senior executive level, for the board, for me personally, in no way have we been indifferent on this".
The Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC), an Australian government financial intelligence agency set up to monitor financial transactions to identify money laundering, organised crime, tax evasion, welfare fraud and terrorism, alleges Westpac Banking Corp failed to report more than 19.5 million global funds transfer instructions it received over a period of five years.
The dirty money watchdog alleges almost 3,000 transactions indicative of child exploitation payments - totalling about $480,000 - were made by 12 Westpac customers.
Fourth-ranked lender Australia and New Zealand Banking Group declined to comment on whether it was under investigation by AUSTRAC, while National Australia Bank, the third-largest, was not immediately available for comment.
ASB Bank's Australian parent, the Commonwealth Bank, was fined $AU700,000 a few years ago for similar anti-money laundering breaches.
The country's banking sector has also been the subject of a royal commission - Australia's highest form of public inquiry - that earlier this year exposed widespread wrongdoing in the industry.

Load-Date: November 23, 2019


End of Document