Aussies may see terror cover mandate
Business Insurance
April 28, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 17
Length: 1127 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


SYDNEY, Australia-A proposal that would require all Australian insurance buyers to help fund terrorism insurance coverage is causing some concern among risk managers Down Under.
If the Terrorism Insurance Bill passes in its current form, it would go into effect July 1 and require all commercial property policyholders in Australia to pay a levy to fund coverage that protects against acts of terrorism. Policyholders could avoid the levy-and the coverage-by self-insuring their property exposures.
The bill, which has cleared Australia's House of Representatives, last week was before a Senate committee.
The coverage differs from that mandated by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 in the United States. Under TRIA, policyholders can reject coverage for terrorist acts, and no payment is required unless coverage is purchased.
Australia's terrorism insurance would cover property losses as well as business interruption and third-party liability exposures related to the covered property. It also would cover chemical and biological attacks but would exclude losses from nuclear incidents; the U.S. law excludes nuclear, biological and chemical attacks.
Australian risk managers differ on whether the coverage should be required. While some organizations claim their chances of suffering a terrorist attack are remote and that they don't need the coverage, others, such as financial institutions, support the measure.
For the Assn. of Risk & Insurance Managers of Australasia Ltd., the compulsory nature of the coverage is an unwelcome feature in an otherwise welcome piece of legislation. While ARIMA's members don't oppose the use of a levy, they do object to imposing it on all property insurance policyholders.
Risk managers are being forced to purchase the insurance ''whether terrorism is a real risk or not,'' said Brad Greer, president of ARIMA.
He said there are many risk managers with good programs in place designed to protect their organizations from terrorist incidents. Such risk managers don't see a need for the coverage and have little chance of ever filing a terrorism-related claim, according to Mr. Greer.
Under the proposal, insurers would write terrorism coverage to the same limits as provided in the underlying property policies. Insurers would bear the first $10 million Australian ($6.2 million) in claims, with each company subject to an annual retention of $1 million Australian ($615,271). That retention could be reinsured in the commercial market.
The legislation also would create the Australian Reinsurance Pool Corp., into which insurers could cede their exposures above the retention. Premiums paid by insurers would fund a pool of around $300 million Australian ($184.6 million). Above that level, coverage would be provided by a bank line of credit of $1 billion Australian ($615.3 million) and a government-funded indemnity of $9 billion Australian ($5.54 billion), providing aggregate cover of up to $10.3 billion Australian ($6.34 billion).
The bill proposes that the levy initially would cost policyholders an amount equal to 2% of their property premiums plus a 10% surcharge for properties in the capital cities of states and territories or 2% if the risk were to be located in other urban areas. Although the levy could be increased, it would be capped at 6% of premiums, 30% for the capital cities surcharge and 6% for other urban areas.
Insurance policies in Australia already carry additional charges for fire services, stamp duties and goods and services taxes.
Although many insurance buyers balk at the proposed requirement, risk managers at some of Australia's banks have a different perspective; as lenders, they want to make sure borrowers are adequately protected from terrorism risks.
David Bell, chief executive of the Australian Bankers' Assn. in Sydney, said in a statement last October that the plan ''will provide certainty for loan security and servicing, project finance of large infrastructure and property projects and the funds management sectors which manage property portfolios.''
Mr. Bell said he is ''pleased that the federal government has acted, because there was a clear market failure after the Sept. 11 terrorist attack, when reinsurers progressively withdrew cover.'' The new program is important, he added, because terrorism coverage is practically nonexistent or is available only at ''a price that far exceeds the perceived cost of the risk.''
Insurers are supporting the bill for the same reasons.
The Insurance Council of Australia said in a statement that not only did the Sept. 11 attacks impact the marketplace but that ''the issue of terrorism insurance was brought even closer to home with the tragic events that occurred in Bali,'' referring to the October 2002 nightclub bombing on the Indonesian island, in which many Australian tourists were killed.
By spreading the insurance cost across all property policyholders, the proposal ''will make cover more affordable and widely available,'' according to the council.
Lambros Lambrou, who heads market relationship strategy for Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd. in Sydney, said brokers are waiting for clarification on several aspects of the legislation, including the treatment of captives. ''At the moment, there's still a fair amount of detail we're still waiting to hear on.''
While the differences in the surcharges for capital cities and urban areas help differentiate the perceived terrorist risk for those areas, basing the surcharges on the underlying property rate could mean that less-risky terrorism exposures could, in some cases, pay more for coverage than would a high-profile target, he explained. For example, a high-hazard manufacturing risk outside a capital city would face a lower surcharge rate than would an office building in a capital city, but the risk outside the city might pay a much higher underlying property rate on which the surcharge is calculated.
As for the compulsory nature of the bill, Mr. Lambrou said that without such a feature, it is unlikely that enough premium would be raised to fund the government reinsurance pool. Even so, he noted, some of the broker's clients undoubtedly will be unhappy about being asked to participate regardless of whether they feel they need the coverage.Earlier this month, Mr. Greer of ARIMA submitted testimony to the Senate committee studying the measure. In it, he pointed out that while the government has argued that making the levy compulsory would achieve diversification of risk, it may do the opposite.
That's because those who don't want the terrorism coverage may choose to self-insure or fund the risk in captives, he pointed out. ''Consequently,'' he said, ''they will not participate in insurance arrangements in Australia which will attract the levy.''

Graphic

 
Property insurance buyers in some Australian cities, such as Sydney, would face an additional surcharge under a plan to provide terror coverage.

Load-Date: April 30, 2003


End of Document