Aussie ex-Gitmo detainee a free man
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 21, 2008, Sunday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P5A
Length: 344 words
Body


SYDNEY, Australia - Authorities on Sunday lifted the last remaining restrictions on an Australian man who spent more than five years as a detainee at Guantanamo Bay and admitted helping the al-Qaida terrorist network.
David Hicks, a 33-year-old ex-kangaroo skinner and Outback cowboy, was held in U.S. custody at the military detention center in Cuba before striking a plea deal that returned him home to Australia to serve a nine-month sentence.
Hicks was released a year ago after completing the sentence for providing support for terrorism, but was placed under a strict court order that required him to report to police three days a week, observe a curfew and banned him from using any telephone or Internet account not approved by police.
The order expired at midnight Saturday. Australian Federal Police, which had sought the original order citing national security reasons, said last month it had decided not to ask a court to renew the restrictions.
Hicks has kept a low profile since being released from an Australian prison. He is living in his home city of Adelaide, and has said through lawyers and recorded statements that he is struggling to return to a normal life after Guantanamo Bay.
Hicks was captured by the U.S.-backed Northern Alliance in Afghanistan in late 2001 and handed over to U.S. troops, who had invaded the country after 9/11 to topple the Taliban militia's regime, which had supported and protected Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaida terrorists.
Hicks spent 5 1/2 years in captivity at Guantanamo Bay before pleading guilty to supporting terrorism at a U.S. military tribunal in a plea bargain. Hicks admitted providing material support to al-Qaida in exchange for serving a sentence in Australia.
- The Associated Press
Throughout his ordeal, Hicks' family and lawyers insisted that he was an immature young man who was caught up in events beyond his control after the 9/11 attacks. They said Hicks converted to Islam and sought adventure as a fighter in Kosovo and Kashmir after the Australian army rejected him because of a lack of education.

Load-Date: December 22, 2008


End of Document