AUSTRALIAN OFFICIALS DOWNPLAY THREAT OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 27, 2000, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: SPORTS,
Length: 534 words
Byline: ROHAN SULLIVAN, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SYDNEY, Australia --
Body


Australian officials sought to reassure the world yesterday that the 2000 Summer Olympics were safe from terrorist attack after a possible plot against the country's only nuclear reactor was exposed.
In the first major security scare for the games, New Zealand police stumbled across evidence in March of a possible plan to attack the reactor. The information was found during an operation in Auckland against a suspected organized crime ring with links to Afghanistan.
With the games scheduled to start Sept. 15, officials were quick to say that there was no direct evidence of a terrorist threat. They expressed confidence in the massive security operation -- headed by the New South Wales state police and including Australian military forces and international intelligence services.
"We have been at pains to assure the Australian public, and visitors to Australia for the games, that we have put in place the most well-rehearsed and practiced cooperative arrangements between all relevant authorities -- law enforcement, intelligence security and otherwise," Attorney General Daryl Williams said.
International Olympic Committee chairman Juan Antonio Samaranch said he was not worried.
"Security is the responsibility of the governments of Australia and New South Wales, and we have no fears," Samaranch told Spanish television. "I feel calm, although I will feel even more so the day of the closing ceremony."
Milton Cockburn, a spokesman for Sydney Games organizers, said security during the games was the responsibility of the New South Wales police and declined to comment further.
The plant -- located in the western Sydney suburb of Lucas Heights -- will have upgraded security during the games. But because of the lack of a credible threat to the facility or to the Olympics, it will not be closed, Australia Science Minister Nick Minchin said.
During raids on a house in Auckland five months ago, police found street maps of Sydney, other maps marking entry and exit routes to the reactor and notes on police security tactics, said Bill Bishop, the New Zealand police detective superintendent.
Four people were arrested, although none was charged with terrorist activities and there was no direct evidence of a terrorist threat.
The New Zealand Herald, the first to report the raid and terrorism suspicions, described the house as a virtual command center. The newspaper said that those arrested might have been supporters of fugitive Afghanistan-based terrorist Osama bin Laden.
"It is certainly true that we think there may be some connections to overseas terrorist groups," Bishop said. "Other details gave us cause for concern.
"Nobody has been arrested for terrorist activities or for being part of a terrorist group or anything like that."
Bin Laden is accused of masterminding the deadly August 1998 bombings of United States embassies in Tanzania and Kenya.
Australian authorities have been aware of the Auckland suspicions since the March raid but said there is no serious risk to the reactor, which is used for scientific and medical research.
It is Australia's only nuclear reactor and produces less than 1 percent of the energy produced by a reactor that generates electricity.
COUNTDOWN TO SYDNEY

Load-Date: August 31, 2000


End of Document