Australia nabs 4 before suspected terrorist hit
The Salt Lake Tribune
August 3, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 260 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Melbourne, Australia » Police foiled a suicide plot in Australia today, arresting four men suspected of links to a Somali Islamic extremist group who were allegedly planning commando-style attacks on at least one army base, senior officers said.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said the plot was a "sober reminder" that terrorists are still a threat to Australia, which has drawn the ire of extremist groups for sending troops to join the U.S.-led campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Some 400 officers from state and national security services took part in 19 pre-dawn raids on properties in Melbourne, Australia's second largest city, and arrested four men.
The raids followed a seven-month surveillance operation against the group, which is allegedly linked to al-Shabaab, a Somali Islamic extremist group, Australian Federal Police Acting Commissioner Tony Negus told reporters.
Members of the cell planned to enter an army base armed with automatic weapons and open fire, Negus said.
"The men's intention was to actually go into the army barracks and to kill as many soldiers as they could before they themselves were killed," Negus said. "This operation has disrupted an alleged terrorist attack that could have claimed many lives."
The men arrested are Australian citizens ranging in age from 22 to 26, Victoria state police said. Several others were being questioned today. The group has been under investigation since January, Negus said.
"This is a sober reminder that the threat of terrorism to Australia continues," Rudd told reporters in the northern city of Cairns.
 

Graphic

 
In this image taken from a footage shot by Channel 7 and released via APTN, Chief Commissioner of Victoria State Police Simon Overland, right, speaks as Australian Federal Police, acting commissioner Tony Negus looks on during a press conference in Melbourne, Australia, Tuesday, Aug. 4, 2009. Australian police launched a major anti-terrorism operation on Tuesday, arresting four men they said were suspected of plotting an attack in the country. (AP Photo/Channel 7 via APTN) ** AUSTRALIA OUT **

Load-Date: August 5, 2009


End of Document