Australian Police Arrest 3 over Sydney Terror Plot
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
July 3, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 369 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


An Australian federal police spokesman the 23-year-old was due in court on Wednesday after he was charged with being a member of a terror organisation.
"We will allege the man has made early-stage preparations and has expressed an intention to carry out a terrorist attack in Australia", Mr McCartney told reporters. ISIL is an acronym for the Islamic State group.
Police targeted six addresses in Greenacre, Canada Bay, Toongabbie, Chester Hill and Ingleburn.
The three arrested men - aged 20, 23 and 30 - are expected to be charged later today.
The 23-year-old from Toongabbie was allegedly "prominent in the global online extremist community".
Authorities said they arrested a third man during the raids on unrelated charges.
Late a year ago, Australia passed controversial laws allowing spy agencies and police to access encrypted communications from suspected criminals and terrorists. "I want to say (however) they don't represent the Islamic faith".
Pep Guardiola Reacts To 'FC Barcelona Return' Rumours
But the Spaniard has failed to win the Champions League during his time in Manchester and many have been quick to criticise him for it.
"Today this highlights two issues: There are still those within the community who wish us harm and the community of Australia harm", Assistant Commissioner McCartney said.
The suspect is expected to be charged with preparing for a terrorist act and preparing to enter Afghanistan for the goal of engaging in hostile activities on behalf of Islamic State , Mr McCartney said, adding that he was to go to Afghanistan to take part in a separate plot.
NSW Police Counter Terrorism and Special Tactics Commander and Assistant Commissioner Mick Willing, said in a statement that the primary threat of terrorism comes from individuals with extremist ideologies influencing others, particularly on the internet.
It has since been confirmed that El Matari has this afternoon also formally been charged with knowingly being a member of a terror organisation, which carries a 10-year maximum jail term penalty.
He was monitored for the past 12 months since returning to Australia from Lebanon where he known to authorities.
The 30-year-old man may be charged with fraud with unemployment benefits.

Load-Date: July 4, 2019


End of Document