Australian Is Charged In Terror Case
The New York Times
March 2, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 320 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 1 
Body


The Bush administration filed charges Thursday against an Australian man captured in Afghanistan after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and held since without trial, the first terrorism suspect to face prosecution under a new system of military tribunals.
  The Australian, David Hicks, a 31-year-old former kangaroo skinner now held at the Guantanamo Bay military prison, was charged with providing material support for terrorism and could face life imprisonment if convicted. Court challenges are certain before any trial.
Mr. Hicks's case could well become the one that opponents of the new military tribunal system use to challenge the system at the Supreme Court level.
  President Bush and Congress established the new legal system last fall. Lawmakers set up the tribunals after the Supreme Court ruled that an older version established by Mr. Bush was unconstitutional because it lacked Congress's blessing and violated international agreements.
  An estimated 385 detainees remain at the Guantanamo prison. None of the men held there have gone to trial.
  Mr. Hicks was among 10 detainees who had been charged with crimes under the law that the court struck down. He was then charged with conspiracy, attempted murder and aiding the enemy.
  On Thursday, Susan Crawford, the head of the military commissions, formally charged Mr. Hicks only with providing material support for terrorism.
  The Pentagon announcement did not explain why the charge of attempted murder was dropped. But a package of talking points written for officials to answer questions on the announcement suggested that Ms. Crawford did not believe that the evidence warranted it.
  Mr. Hicks's Pentagon-appointed lawyer, Maj. Michael Mori of the Marines, said in Australia that the charge of providing support for terrorism was a fabrication that had not previously existed under the laws of war, and he said Australian officials should not accept it.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 2, 2007


End of Document