Australia called vulnerable to terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 17, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 469 words
Byline: By Raymond Bonner and Jane Perlez New York Times News Service
Body


CANBERRA, Australia -- As the car crept down the wide streets of this capital city on a June afternoon, a man with a video camera panned the buildings. "Slowly, slowly, slowly," he told the driver as the lens zoomed in on a sign, in English and Hebrew, that read, "Embassy of Israel."
The man with the camera was on a mission on that day two years ago. He had met with Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan, and he had been assigned to blow up the Israeli Embassy in Canberra and the Israeli Consulate in Sydney.
For unexplained reasons, the plot was never carried out. But in providing access to the previously unpublicized videotape and other evidence about the plot in recent days, Australian officials tried to drive home the point that even this quiet, out-of-the-way nation is vulnerable to terrorist attacks.
In interviews last week, senior Australian law enforcement, intelligence and defense officials outlined the terrorist threat they had belatedly come to realize their nation faces. An attitude of "it can't happen here" was shattered by the terrorist attack in Bali, resulting in the deaths of 88 Australians, the largest loss of Australian lives in a single incident since World War II.
"We face an unprecedented risk from terrorism," the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, a government-financed but politically independent research organization in Canberra, said in a report released earlier this month.
Australia's population of 19 million includes fewer than half a million Arabs, so for help in carrying out attacks, the authorities said, bin Laden's network, al-Qaida, turned to a British immigrant who converted to Islam, and, the police said, adopted the cause of extremism.
The British immigrant is Jack Roche, who had immigrated to Australia, married an Indonesian Muslim and converted to Islam.
Roche had been given another mission: to establish a clandestine cell in Australia for al-Qaida and Jemaah Islamiyah, the Indonesia-based radical Islamic organization, which officials describe as al-Qaida's regional affiliate.
Roche, who was arrested last month, withdrew from both missions, for reasons that are "a bit murky," as one official put it.
Australian intelligence officials know the identity of one other man that al-Qaida had approached to set up a cell.
With better intelligence, the Bali attack could have been prevented, a senior Australian official with close ties to the intelligence community said last week.
"The biggest intelligence failure between 1991 and 2001 was the failure to recognize the transformation of Jemaah Islamiyah from an extremist religious group to a terrorist organization," the official said.
He added that the activities of Roche right in the heart of the capital, undetected for more than two years, is "a living symbol of the failure by the intelligence community."

Load-Date: December 17, 2002


End of Document