Authorities say terror plot unlikely; Investigation shows no test run for attack
USA TODAY
September 1, 2010 Wednesday
FA_CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 538 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


Federal authorities have not filed charges against two men detained in Amsterdam on suspicion of possible links to a terrorist plot and doubt they represent a threat, two U.S. law enforcement officials said Tuesday.
Dutch authorities arrested the pair after suspicious items were discovered in the luggage of one and both of their airline itineraries to Yemen had been changed, according to the officials. They were briefed on the investigation but asked not to be identified because they are not authorized to comment publicly.
The two passengers traveling on a United Airlines flight from Chicago were identified as Ahmed Mohamed Nasser al Soofi, 48, a U.S. resident of Yemeni descent, and Hezam al Murisi, 37, of Yemen, who was in the U.S. on a visa, the two law enforcement officials said.
"I do not think they had any intentions" of committing terrorism, Yemen's consul general in Detroit, Abdul-Hakim Al-Sadah, said Tuesday. Al Soofi has lived in the Detroit area.
Al Murisi's Dutch lawyer, Klaas-Arjen Krikke, said his client "denies ... adamantly" any link to terrorism.
Department of Homeland Security spokesman Matthew Chandler said the matter remains "under investigation but as of right now, these two passengers have not been charged with any crime in the United States, and we caution you against jumping to any conclusions."
"In this instance, sound judgment led to suspicious items being identified, which triggered automatic security responses by U.S. security personnel," Chandler said.
Al Soofi was carrying $7,000 in cash and had suspicious items in his luggage, including cellphones and watches that had been bound together with tape and another taped bundle of medicine and a cellphone, one of the U.S. law enforcement officials said.
Al Murisi had missed a flight from Chicago to Yemen and the airline then put him on the same flight as Al Soofi, raising suspicion among investigators, the law enforcement official said.
The items, none of which are prohibited, were bound for delivery to individual recipients in Yemen, the law enforcement officials said. They added that the men do not know each other, neither of them is named on any terrorism watch list, and their travel together was coincidental.
It was initially thought the items might have been part of a practice run for a future attack, the officials said.
A statement issued early Tuesday by the office of the Dutch Public Prosecutor said the men were being held on "suspicion of a conspiracy to a terrorist criminal act." But a Dutch official said later that investigators were re-evaluating the inquiry based on information provided by U.S. authorities. The official has been briefed on the inquiry but asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to comment publicly.
Glen Winn, an aviation security consultant, said security officials were "right" to raise questions about the travelers. He said the men should not have been allowed to continue on the flight to Amsterdam until "all questions were ... resolved."
Yemen Embassy spokesman Mohammed Al-Basha said, "We are working closely with our international partners to hasten the ongoing investigation into yesterday's detainment of two Yemeni passengers."
Contributing: Detroit Free Press 

Load-Date: September 1, 2010


End of Document