AUTHOR: IN COLOMBIA, THINKING HAS BECOME SYNONYMOUS WITH TERRORISM
The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
October 22, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 The New Mexican
Section: EL NUEVO; Pg. B-2
Length: 1374 words
Byline: FLOR DE MARÍA OLIVA
Body


Fernando Garavito talked about his recent book, Praxis and Ambiguity of the Enemy in an interview Oct. 6.
Question: I understand that your book is divided into different sections. What do the divisions indicate?
Answer: They are about the different views there are about the relationships between the U.S. and Latin America. For example, the views Latin America has about the U.S.; the view the U.S. government has about Latin America; the view Latin American governments have about the U.S.; and the views the peoples of all those countries have of each other. What I propose in the epilogue is a conversation about the peoples of these countries, but at the same time, I consider that it is a utopia.
Question: Are the opinion columns you wrote for The Santa Fe New Mexican the basis of your book?
Answer: Yes, a selection (of them), and I wrote an epilogue about the relationships between Latin America and the U.S.
Question: How are the columns you wrote here in the U.S. different than those you wrote when you lived in Colombia?
Answer: In Colombia, they were much more precise about people and specific situations. Here they were, necessarily, more general, with a wider look, more political -- so to speak -- because of my circumstance of displacement.
Question: It is possible that many Santa Fe New Mexican readers are unaware of the reality people live in Latin America and the influence the U.S. foreign policy has in Latin America. Why is it important for people to learn about other points of view, which are not the official points of view?
Answer: The U.S. and Latin America are two parts of the same whole and they must establish a more positive relationship than the one they currently have, because from a geographic, political, economic and social point of view the two regions are closely linked. We should not be creating these enormous fractures based on power-originated ghosts. One of those ghosts is that (Colombia's President çlvaro) Uribe is a democrat, and no, he is not a democrat, he is a tyrant. He is one of the worst kind of fascists the U.S government is fascinated with because of Uribe's fight against yet another ghost, terrorism. In Colombia, thinking has turned into a synonym for terrorism.
Question: Would you say that this is very similar to what's currently occurring in the U.S.?
Answer: Yes, they are very similar situations. In the U.S. a space has been opened where any discrepancy and having a specific opinion with regard to the social and political and economic situations displaced people live in -- for instance, (Latin American) immigrants -- is a synonym with being an enemy of the establishment, and that is not so.
Question: Do you think that the media in the U.S. and in general is fulfilling its role to report the facts as they are, or is what's being reported seen through the lens of special interests which finance the media?
Answer: I think that this a problem experienced worldwide -- that of the relationship of the media to economic powers and to the political interests of big corporations. The press, at least in Latin America -- that's what I know best -- speaks for those interests as opposed to being a filter that would allow the public to be better informed about the situations in the countries.
Question: Your columns in The Santa Fe New Mexican provoked many positive reactions, many indignant ones. Why do you think that freedom of expression is important?
Answer: Well, the job of a person who writes about actuality for a group of readers who want to have different views about that actuality is that of inciting polemic, and to me the discrepancies that arose around my editorial column always seemed interesting. I would have preferred more ideological debates -- so to speak -- rather than temperamental ones, because the main argument was "You are a Colombian, go to Colombia and enjoy the paradise of your country if you don't like this one." That was too elementary to reply to.
Question: What's most satisfying for you about the publication of this book?
Answer: The fact that I am able to express myself about a situation that touches me daily -- that of Latin American immigrants in this country. I am one more of those immigrants, just like any other one, and I suffer their problems and enjoy their advantages. I am able to express that, thanks to the newspaper and now, thanks to this book.
Question: However, your columns were more Latin American politics than matters of immigrants in the U.S.
Answer: In order to be able to write those columns, the experience of the immigrant was in the background. (As an immigrant) one cannot separate from that condition of being an immigrant.
Question: Can you articulate what exile means for you?
Answer: I have written several pages about exile and they are more part of my literary work than my journalistic work. A writer's exile is a natural condition. To be a writer is to be an exile. Exile in his surroundings, exile within. Nowadays, I live a double exile -- my personal exile, which has always been an exile of silence and marginalization, and my geographic exile, which separates me from all which is mine. In a few words, exile is the solitude of the solitaire or the isolation of the solitaire. Exile is carried within, it is as a nostalgia, a sadness.
Question: Do you think it is possible to learn from history?
Answer: Yes, I do think it's possible to learn from history. The problem is that we never learn from history. We have no critical discipline to look at historical facts as teachings. We simply see them as the passing of a time gone by and that's not so.
Question: What changes would you like to see in Latin America?
Answer: I would like to see and end to caudillismo; I don't like either caudillos of the left or the right. (Venezuela's President Hugo) Chá vez is a leftist caudillo, Uribe is one of the right and that example has a repercussion all over Latin America. We are still 19th-century countries, with generals and military men in high government positions. In many cases, they are generals without the uniform, such as Uribe, for example. The worst that can happen to a human being is to wear a uniform.
Question: What can Colombia learn from the U.S. and the U.S. from Colombia?
Answer: I believe that at this point in time Colombia and the United States -- and it pains me to say it because of what's happening in political and social circles in the U.S. -- are the same thing, both countries are living a situation that's very similar. It has been said that the way the U.S. is living now is as if it were a new Latin American country, and that is true. I would say that the U.S., with that fundamentalism of the right in his government circles, is like any other country, it is totally Colombia. It seems to me that Colombia's tragedy should be analyzed not only by the U.S. but by the rest of the world, in order to avoid the process of "Colombianization" of other countries, where drugs, narco-traffic, political violence, military repression and the resurgence of extreme right forces -- which have no control and violate human rights -- turn political processes into a total chaos. This is all part of a process of deterioration and a values crisis that may only be recovered through a new educational process, education based on democracy.
Question: Talking about education, you are now a kindergarten teacher, right?
Answer: Yes. I am very happy to have discovered at the autumn of my life my true vocation. I was always a teacher, but what I should have been from the very beginning was a kindergarten teacher, because in kindergarten, when children are 5, 6 years old, is when ways of thinking and acting which last a lifetime get established. I teach my students democracy above all. In my classroom, the authority is the people's -- the children -- and they learn to exercise it coherently and intelligently. Recently, one of my students proposed that the teacher -- I -- would leave his job at the school. I thought the proposal was interesting and we voted. Eighteen students voted for me to stay, two for me to leave. However, had the results of the vote been different -- 11 for, nine against -- I would have seriously presented my resignation to the public schools. That's democracy.

Load-Date: October 23, 2007


End of Document