Author wants to move beyond 'War on Terror'
The Janesville Gazette (Wisconsin)
November 9, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 The Janesville Gazette
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 378 words
Byline: Anna Marie Lux, The Janesville Gazette, Wis.
Body


Nov. 9--JANESVILLE -- Long-time peace activist Tom Cordaro believes there is an alternative to the War on Terror and will share his ideas when he speaks in Janesville on Sunday, Nov. 15.
The justice and outreach minister at St. Margaret Mary Catholic Church in Naperville, Ill., is a national leader in the faith-based peace and justice movement. He is also the author of "Be Not Afraid: An Alternative to the War on Terror."
"I think I am not alone at being uneasy about what has happened in our country since the attacks of Sept. 11," Cordaro says, explaining why he wrote the 2008 book. "I remember how we were brought together and how the world was united behind us ... Then the Bush administration declared its 'War on Terror' and started to divide the world between those who were for us and those who were against us."
Cordaro believes the War on Terror is fear-based and ignores some of the country's founding principles, including respect for human rights, the rule of law and international treaties.
He will share thoughts about what an alternative response to terrorism might look like and his belief that policies rooted in justice rather than in fear build a more genuine peace.
"We need to create a new vision of peace, which is true to our American character," Cordaro says.
The Lutheran Peace Fellowship of Rock County, the Peace and Justice Commission of the Wisconsin Council of Churches, the Rock Valley Fellowship of Reconciliation and the Unitarian Congregation of Rock County are sponsoring Cordaro's visit.
As the Obama administration begins to talk about its own response to terrorism--whether in policies toward Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Middle East or elsewhere--Cordaro said he wants to ask a fundamental question:
Will we be a nation motivated primarily by fear, or will we embrace an alterative rooted in freedom and hope?
To see more of The Janesville Gazette, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.gazetteextra.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Janesville Gazette, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: November 10, 2009


End of Document