Authorities Faulted in Fort Hood Attack
The New York Times
February 4, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 556 words
Byline: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER
Body


WASHINGTON -- Various federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies missed an opportunity to prevent the 2009 shootings at Fort Hood that left 13 people dead and dozens injured, even though they had information that the man charged in the attack, Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, had communicated with a terrorism suspect and harbored extreme political proclivities, according to a new report.
The report was prepared by the offices of Senators Joseph I. Lieberman and Susan Collins, who said they were rebuffed numerous times by law enforcement and other government agencies in their attempt to investigate the attack. Mr. Lieberman, a Connecticut independent, is chairman of the Homeland Security Committee, and Ms. Collins, of Maine, is the ranking Republican.
The conclusions of the report echoed a Pentagon review released last year that detailed a systemic breakdown within the military that permitted Major Hasan, an Army psychiatrist, to advance through the ranks despite concerns that he embraced violent Islamic extremism.
''Instead of disciplining him or removing him from the military altogether,'' Mr. Lieberman said at a news conference at Capitol Hill, ''they inexplicably promoted him and, in my opinion, outrageously suggested that the evidence of his radicalization showed a knowledge of Islam that could benefit our military and our country instead of showing that he was a clear and present danger to our military and our country.''
Among the findings, the senators said, was that government officials knew Major Hasan had communicated with Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical cleric and terrorism suspect now residing in Yemen, but failed to alert the Army of this fact; that from 2003 to 2009, when he was a psychiatric resident at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, he openly suggested that revenge might be a defense for the Sept. 11 attacks; and that he spoke defensively about Osama bin Laden.
''But what followed,'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''was a lackadaisical investigation of Hasan by the F.B.I., coupled with internal disagreements and a failure to use effective intelligence analysis that led the bureau to end its inquiry into Hasan prematurely, thereby, I'm afraid, contributing to the government's failure to prevent the attack at Fort Hood.''
Ms. Collins sharply faulted the ''the inexcusably inadequate investigation conducted by the Washington Joint Terrorism Task Force.''
''As the chairman has pointed out,'' she said, ''it was about a half-day -- four hours.''
The accusations of poor communication and coordination are similar to those made about the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Col. Tom Collins, an Army spokesman, said, ''We appreciate the committee's efforts to examine circumstances surrounding the Fort Hood shooting incident, and we will closely examine the report's findings and recommendations.''
In a statement, the F.B.I. said, ''During the internal F.B.I. review undertaken immediately after the attack at Fort Hood, we identified several of the areas of concern outlined in the report, and, as noted in the report, have implemented changes to our systems and processes to address them.''
The report said the F.B.I. and its Joint Terrorism Task Forces ought to share information more effectively and coordinate operations with other federal, state and local agencies.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senators Susan Collins and Joseph I. Lieberman released a report on the Fort Hood shootings. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                                                    

Load-Date: February 4, 2011


End of Document