Authorities: Explosive Device Found Near George Soros' Home
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 23, 2018 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 291 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The FBI and local police responded to an address near the home of U.S. philanthropist George Soros after an object that appeared to be an explosive was found in a mailbox, according to authorities.
The package was discovered in a post box by an employee of Mr Soros who alerted the authorities before taking it to a nearby wooded area, police say.
Authorities responded to the home in Katonah, New York after receiving a call about a suspicious package at about 3:45 p.m., the Town of Bedford Police Department said in a statement.
A law enforcement official told the Times the bomb was "proactively detonated" and no one was injured.
Online records showed that Mr Soros resides at the address but he was not home at the time, The New York Times reported.
CNN reports that the device was a viable pipe bomb and the case has been turned over to the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force for investigation.
Pres. Trump Campaign: More Than 100K Tickets Requested For Texas Rally
Hannity ridiculed O'Rourke for his 1998 drunk-driving arrest, Perry blasted away at O'Rourke for his "Hispanic nickname" and Gov. Once it ended and we got together - and, by the way, very late into the campaign we lasted.
Soros' Open Society Foundation replied to both Trump's and Gaetz's tweets to deny their assertions.
Soros, 88, is well known as a lightening rod for criticism from those who oppose his strong financial support for liberal causes.
United States billionaire and liberal philanthropist George Soros.
Republican Representative from Florida Matt Gaetz also accused the billionaire of funding the migrant caravan that is moving towards the US-Mexico border.
Others have falsely accused him of being a Nazi collaborator during World War II, when he was a child in Hungary.

Load-Date: October 23, 2018


End of Document