Auto crashes near London's museum, terrorism ruled out
The Acorn: Drew University
October 9, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 336 words
Body


A Reuters witness said there were large numbers of police, including armed officers, and paramedics at the scene although the atmosphere appeared calm.
Metropolitan Police confirmed a man has been detained after the incident around 2.30pm.
Later that month, a van plowed into pedestrians near a mosque in north London, killing one man and injuring 11 people.
Police said the arrested man was among nine people who were taken to hospital to be treated for a range of head or leg injuries.
No one is believed to have life-threatening or life-changing injuries, and the majority were discharged by late Saturday.
A 47-year-old man was arrested at the scene on suspicion of risky driving and was taken to hospital for treatment, along with eight other people.
A spokesman for theLondon police force later said that counter-terrorism officers were assessing the incident but had not yet reached a conclusion, but police are keeping an open mind as to whether it is terrorism-related.
London Mayor Sadiq Khan also tweeted his thanks and hopes for a "swift recovery" for those injured. Enquiries to establish the circumstances and motive are underway.
"A man has been arrested at the scene".
The Natural History Museum is in the bustling section of South Kensington, popular with both Londoners and tourists.
Witness accounts and footage posted on social media showed a man being pinned down on the ground by passers-by, next to a black vehicle with a smashed bonnet.
Police are still appealing for witnesses to come forward and help them with their investigations.
Witnesses said the vehicle mounted the sidewalk near theLondon museum, which is a major tourist attraction along with the neighboring Science Museum and Victoria & Albert Museum.
'If you have any information about this incident, please call 101'.
British Prime Minister Theresa May was beingupdated on the incident, according to her office.
The South Kensington tube station has been temporarily shut down in the aftermath.
The UK is on its second highest security alert level.

Load-Date: October 9, 2017


End of Document