Awareness week preaches intolerance
University Wire
October 23, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 473 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Pitt News; SOURCE: U. Pittsburgh
Dateline: PITTSBURGH 
Body


Yesterday marked the first day of "Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week," an event sponsored by conservative pundit David Horowitz's Freedom Center. The event is aimed at protesting the "academic left," which, according to the organizers' website, "has mobilized to create sympathy for the enemy and to fight anyone who rallies Americans to defend themselves."
Horowitz and his team of speakers, which includes former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum and conservative writer Ann Coulter will promote their cause with talks, panel discussions and sit-ins on more than 100 college campuses across the country, including several campuses in Pennsylvania, according to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review.
Currently, no demonstrations have been planned at Pitt.
While the event intends to raise awareness within the college community, it will likely do no more than spread intolerance toward a group that has already had to endure a significant amount of discrimination in the United States.
Rather than assembling a group of scholars to discuss the causes and effects of Islamic terrorism in the United States and around the world, Horowitz has called on a team of conservative pundits who are known for their often severe and hate-filled rhetoric.
And it's a shame, too. We should be discussing the threats of Islamic terrorism -- it's the reason that we are currently embroiled in a deadly and costly war. And there are groups of people -- including radical terrorist group al-Qaeda - who murder and oppress innocent civilians and spread fear and hatred around the world.
But rather than organizing panels that could create a clearer image of how and why terrorist groups form, the event only aims at perpetuating the ideal that the vast majority of the world's Muslims are terrorists -- and that the "academic left" is poisoning students' minds with ideas to the contrary.
If Horowitz was really concerned about combating terrorism, his events should have focused on raising awareness -- not just perpetuating stereotypes.
Rather than calling out left wing academics, why not host bi-partisan panels that could debate how to most effectively counter terrorist groups?
Horowitz claims that his event is partially intended to protest laws that oppress, persecute and kill women in parts of the Islamic world.
Yet, Horowitz chose not to include any Muslim women -- or any Muslims, at all -- in his group of high profile speakers. Instead, the college campuses hosting these events will be left with generalizations about both the Muslim American community and liberal academics.
Horowitz believes that the American left has created a witch-hunt against those who "want to discuss the oppression of women in Islam and the threat of radical Islam and the totalitarian movement in Islam," and by doing so, has now created a witch-hunt of his own.
(C) 2007 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 23, 2007


End of Document