Award-winning journalist Chris Hedges to speak at Moravian
The Comenian: Moravian College
October 15, 2013 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 526 words
Body


Hedges is Moravian's 7th Peace and Justice Scholar in Residence
Bethlehem, Pa., October 15, 2013-Christopher Lynn "Chris" Hedges, a Pulitzer Prize-winning American journalist specializing in politics and society, will speak at Moravian on Tuesday, October 22, at 7:30 p.m., in Prosser Auditorium. His talk, "Days of Destruction, Days of Revolt," is open to the public and admission is free of charge.
Hedges is the seventh Peace and Justice Scholar in Residence at Moravian College. His talk will be drawn from his most recent book,Days of Destruction, Days of Revolt, described by theBoston Globe "as moving a portrait of poverty and as compelling a call to action as Michael Harrington's 'The Other America,' published in 1962."
In "Days of Destruction, Days of Revolt" Hedges and journalist/artist Joe Sacco set out to take a look at the sacrifice zones in the United States, those areas that have been offered up for exploitation in the name of profit, progress, and technological advancement. They wanted to portray in words and drawings what life looks like in places where the marketplaces rules without constraints, where human beings and the natural world are used and then discarded to maximize earnings.
For over two decades Hedges reported on war and terrorism from over 50 countries as a foreign correspondent. This work was published by many different news affiliates, including theChristian Science Monitor,National Public Radio, andThe New York Times. In 2002, with other reporters, he was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of global terrorism. He also has received the Amnesty International Global Award for Human Rights Journalism in 2002. Hedges write a weekly column that is published Mondays on Truthdig.
The lecture is sponsored by the Peace and Justice Studies minors and initiatives, the Religion Department, the Arts and Lectures Committee, Moravian Theological Seminary, and the Academic Dean's Office. Moravian College encourages persons with disabilities to participate in its programs and activities. If you anticipate needing any type of accommodation regarding physical accessibility, please contact the Academic Affairs Office at 610 861-1348, prior to the event.
The Peace and Justice scholar-in-residence is an early step in establishing a Peace and Justice Studies program at Moravian, which brings a distinguished speaker to campus to raise awareness of peace and justice issues among students, faculty members, and the public. Peace and Justice Studies programs at colleges and universities are multidisciplinary initiatives that provide an intellectual focus on the connections between social analysis, ethical deliberation, peacemaking and conflict resolution. Their goal is to prepare students to be responsible critical analysts of society and effective agents for positive social transformation.
Moravian College is a private, coeducational, selective liberal arts college located in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. Tracing its founding to 1742, it is recognized as America's sixth-oldest college. Moravian partners with students to build a strong foundation for their future. Visit the College's website at www.moravian.edu.

Load-Date: October 17, 2013


End of Document