Baby steps fail to battle terrorism effectively
University Wire
December 5, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Iowa State Daily via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 711 words
Byline: By Zach Calef, Iowa State Daily
Dateline: Ames, Iowa
Body


Saudi Arabia, a country suspected of supporting terrorism, may actually end up helping the United States in fighting our war on terror.
Saudi Arabia has been accused of being a financial supporter to al Qaeda and other terrorist networks. As a result, the kingdom announced Tuesday that it will step up efforts to stop the funding. But, if the Saudis want to join the side of the United States, other changes will need to be made.
Iowa State U.
The changes made thus far are primarily concerned with financial support through charities.
According to a Dec. 3 Associated Press article, a commission has been set up to oversee charitable groups and transfers of assets from one bank to another in cash have been banned.
In a Dec. 4 article on NewsMax.com titled "Red-faced Saudis crack down on pro-terrorist 'charities,'" it is stated that all charities can be extensively audited.
Saudi groups that get involved with charitable donations outside Saudi Arabia must now report and coordinate any activities with the foreign ministry. But why the need for the changes?
Because the Saudis' attitude of "let's sit back and watch" looked more like helping terror.
Last week it was announced that Saudi Princess Haifa al-Faisal possibly helped two of the Sept. 11 hijackers when she donated money to a Saudi woman on her charity list. The woman then endorsed a check to the wife of a man who gave the two hijackers cash to rent an apartment.
This is not the first time the Saudis were accused of funding terror through charities. They have been greatly criticized for donations by charities to the families of Palestinian homicide bombers.
So, the Saudis have finally made a positive move in the war on terror. But we can not overlook what has gone on, and continues to go on, in the kingdom.
Since the accusation of the Saudi princess, the Bush administration has come out in full support of the kingdom, which they should.
But statements have been made in support of the kingdom when in fact Saudi Arabia deserved the criticism it was getting.
Members of the Bush administration have called Saudi Arabia a good partner in the war on terror. But this is not necessarily the case.
First of all, it took them over a year to start buckling down on these charities, and we are still hoping they do. There has been evidence presented that links Saudi charities to al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations, yet Saudi Arabia claims to be a victim of misunderstanding.
Sure, the Saudis are addressing the problem with these charities now, but there are other policies within the monarchy that are very anti-American.
In August, the Washington Post reported on a Pentagon advisory board meeting where Saudi Arabia was described as an enemy rather than an ally because of their participation in terrorism.
The kingdom has been accused of giving $ 200 million to Osama bin Laden and the Taliban, as well as blocking the extradition of al Qaeda suspects in order to spare Saudi targets.
The Saudis also have very strong ties to Islamic fundamentalism. The Saudis have long supported the promotion of Islamic fundamentalist schools. This is a big problem for a number of reasons.
It is this type of education that breeds intolerance, sexism and death in the name of religion. These kids learn why the West is evil and that it is OK to kill in the name of Allah. These schools are a major reason why the West is so hated throughout the Middle East.
And let's not forget that this country is one of the biggest violators of human rights in the world.
We have to make clear to the Saudis that many of their actions hurt our cause to end global terrorism. If the Saudis want to help, we will welcome them aboard, but some serious changes need to be made.
Colin Powell was quoted in The Associated Press article as saying "[The Saudis] have done a number of things that were responsible. Could they do more? Yes. Now they have responded in what seems like a forthright way."
He said it perfectly. The Saudis have made a big step in helping rid the world of terror, but they can do more.
The Saudis' improvements are a good start, but they are only a beginning. Hopefully they will cooperate and come to the side of peace and freedom.
(C) 2002 Iowa State Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 5, 2002


End of Document