BACK CHANNEL;
GREAT BRITAIN WAS RIGHT TO TALK -- AND LISTEN -- TO THE IRA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 1, 1993, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; EDITORIAL
Length: 487 words
Body


The revelation that the British government has been communicating with the Irish Republican Army has not provoked the political crisis that many expected. But neither does the acknowledgment of such secret contacts (which have been rumored for some time) legitimize the IRA or advance the cause of peace in Northern Ireland. For those objectives to be achieved, the IRA will have to lay down its arms.
The government of Prime Minister John Major was caught off guard by reports over the weekend that it has been communicating secretly with IRA, in defiance of its stated policy. But on Monday, the British secretary of state for Northern Ireland defused the controversy by telling Parliament that the contacts began with an offer by the IRA of an ''unannounced ceasefire.''
''Peace properly attained, is a prize worth risks,'' Sir Patrick Mayhew told the House of Commons. The reaction was sympathetic, except from Protestants from Northern Ireland who, while they call themselves ''loyalists,'' have been anything but supportive of British efforts to resolve the conflict in Northern Ireland. The Rev. Ian Paisley, the symbol of Protestant intransigence, was ejected from Parliament after he accused the British government of lying.
Mr. Paisley may have violated parliamentary etiquette, but he had a point. Like Israel's secret (but more productive) contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization, the communications between Britain and the IRA proceeded under a veil -- now pierced -- of deniability
What is distressing is not that such explorations took place but that they have come to nothing. The IRA has not abandoned violence, even after intimations from Britain that a renunciation of terrorism would win the IRA and its political wing, Sinn Fein, a role in negotiations. It is here that the analogy with Israel and the Palestinians breaks down.
Even before the disclosure of secret contacts with Britain, the IRA was engaged in a peace offensive of sorts. Gerry Adams, the head of Sinn Fein, developed a still-secret peace plan with John Hume, a leader of a party that seeks the unity of Ireland by peaceful means. But continued violence -- including the bombing in October of a Belfast fish shop, in which nine people were killed -- has given the lie to the notion that the IRA has set out on a non-violent course.
It is debatable whether the IRA's consent is critical to progress toward a political settlement in Northern Ireland, one that would be acceptable to both ''traditions there -- Catholic Nationalist and Protestant Loyalist. Both Britain and the Irish Republic seem to be newly intrigued by the possibility of creative approaches to what has been an insoluble political conundum.
If the IRA is willing to cease its campaign of terrorism, it should have a place at the table. That is the message Britain sent to the IRA via the back channel that now has been publicized, and it was a message worth sending.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document