BACKGROUNDER: CDC: Q&A ON TERRORISM
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 23, 2001 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; Interview
Length: 539 words
Byline: M.A.J. MCKENNA
Body


Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy Thompson, who supervises the Atlanta-based Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and has become the administration's point man on bioterrorism, addressed the American Public Health Association's annual meeting in Atlanta Monday. Here are excerpts from an interview:
 
Q:What's your reaction to criticism that the public health system hasn't responded quickly enough to terrorism and has failed to keep the public informed? A:I think we've done a very good job. In New York, we got our people up there in a few hours; we delivered 50 tons of medical supplies in seven hours when our mission statement gives us 12 hours; and we were able to deliver 50,000 doses of tetanus shots beyond those 50 tons. . . . . We are responding, we can respond and we will respond --- and whether it is New York, Florida, Washington or Pennsylvania, we continue to do so. We've got 7,000 medical personnel divided up in 90 teams who can move within hours; we've got 400 tons of medical supplies strategically located in eight sites so we can move them within hours. We've got CDC on alert so they can move quickly. . . . Some people think we didn't speak with one voice. It is hard to speak with one voice, when you have the Department of Justice conducting their FBI investigation for a crime, and we are discussing public health, and there is the White House. That's the way the system is.
AJCQ:Are there things you would have done differently? A:No question. I should have never said this [Florida death] appears to be one case, or that he was an outdoorsman and it could have been a naturally occurring case. . . . . But at the time that was what the experts said. Now we're going to wait till we are absolutely certain that we have very good information.
 
Q:Are bioterrorism fears going to produce extra funding for the CDC and public health? A:I think you'll see at least $1.6 billion, maybe up to $2 billion. A lot of it will go for the purchase of smallpox vaccine and for an additional 200 tons of pharmaceutical supplies for the national stockpile: antibiotics but also necessities for radiological and chemical response. We have eight sites now with 50 tons each, but we want to go up to 12 sites, a total of 600 tons. Some will go into education at the local level, for emergency-room doctors to be able to diagnose bioterrorism cases better. There will be a lot of money to . . . improve the communication system that hooks up CDC and the state health labs.
 
Q:With so many anthrax hoaxes out there, are you worried about stress on the public health system, especially as flu season approaches? A:I've already met with the flu vaccine companies and said we have to really turn it up a notch. . . . I'm encouraging people to get their flu shots. . . . Flu has similar symptoms to anthrax, and medical professionals will be overloaded with concerned people who have flu and think something else is happening.
 
Q:Fears of bioterrorism have people very unnerved. Do you have a response? A:This is serious --- but . . . there are a lot more cases of flu every day, or people getting killed in automobile accidents. . . . Don't let the terrorists overcome your routine lifestyle. Just be a bit more vigilant.

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document