BACKGROUNDER: MISSIONS: Q&A ON TERRORISM
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 27, 2001 Saturday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; Series
Length: 518 words
Byline: COLIN BESSONETTE
Series: BACKGROUNDER
Body


Q: Is the United Nations still conducting inspections in Iraq for chemical and biological weapons or manufacturing capability? I haven't seen anything about this for a year or so. --- Joyce Meadows, Douglasville A:The most recent report by the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, dated Aug. 30, says it "still has not been able to carry out the mission in Iraq entrusted to it by the Security Council to address unresolved disarmament issues . . . in the course of carrying out a reinforced system of ongoing monitoring and verification."
It adds that Iraq's position, expressed to the U.N. secretary-general, is that it has fulfilled the United Nations' requirements "and that there is no ground for inspection."
AJC
In the absence of on-site inspection, the commission is trying to increase the use of other sources of information, such as overhead imagery.
The Security Council imposed sanctions on Iraq after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. The sanctions cannot be lifted until U.N. weapons inspectors certify that Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs have been dismantled, along with its long-range missile program.
But inspectors with the U.N. Special Commission, known as UNSCOM, left Iraq in December 1998 ahead of U.S. and British missile strikes launched to punish the country for not cooperating with inspectors. Since then, the Iraqi government has barred U.N. inspectors from returning, demanding instead that sanctions be lifted immediately.
Unpublished U.N. weapons inspection reports, meanwhile, indicate that Iraq evaded U.N. sanctions in the 1990s by importing military equipment to build missiles and nuclear weapons from companies in Eastern Europe and Russia.
The reports were disclosed by Gary Milhollin, director of the Washington-based Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a nonprofit watchdog group, and researcher Kelly Motz in the July-August Commentary magazine. --- Contributing: Sharon Gaus
Do you have a question about the news? Colin Bessonette will try to get an answer. Call 404-222-2002 or e-mail q&a@ajc.com. Include your name and city.  
 
GLOSSARY
A term that is being used during coverage of the war on terrorism: Al Jazeera: An influential Arabic-language 24-hour TV news network that broadcasts from Qatar. Modeled after Britain's BBC, Al Jazeera has more than 50 correspondents in 31 countries and bureaus in such cities as Washington, New York, Paris and Kabul. Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida organization has sent video statements to Al Jazeera, which has aired them in its news programs, leading to complaints from U.S. officials.
 
BEHIND THE NEWS
The terrorist attacks have brought many unfamiliar people, places and things to the fore. The AJC will explore these topics Monday through Saturday on Backgrounder pages.
Recent Backgrounders have explored: The Federal Aviation Administration. Anthrax and irradiation of the mail. Cyberterrorrism. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The military draft. Iraq since the Persian Gulf War. America's aircraft carriers.
Backgrounders from previous editions are available on ajc.com.

Load-Date: October 27, 2001


End of Document