BACTERIAL INFECTION LEFT TONS OF DEAD GERANIUMS IN STATE;
   THE BACTERIA, WHICH IS ON THE BIO-TERRORISM LIST, ORIGINATED IN PLANT CUTTINGS FROM KENYA.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
May 8, 2003 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2003 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. E1
Length: 377 words
Byline: Susan Lampert Smith Wisconsin State Journal
Body


Wisconsin has survived a threat from a bacteria on the "bio-terrorism select list" -- and the main casualties were "tons and tons" of dead geraniums.
A UW-Madison plant pathologist said university, state and federal officials learned from the experience.
"I think there are ways we can do this better the next time," said Caitilyn Allen, who identified the Ralstonia solanacearum bacteria in February from a wilted geranium sent in by a Racine County greenhouse owner.
Congress passed the law that put the bacteria on the bio-terrorism list in December 2002. Wisconsin is one of 27 states that received infected geraniums that originated from plant cuttings shipped from Kenya.
Infected plants were found in 127 greenhouses, seven of them in Wisconsin. Those infected faced having their entire stock of plants destroyed; Allen said one greenhouse in Indiana lost $750,000 worth of plants.
"Nationally, more than a thousand greenhouses were placed under hold orders," said Allen. "It cost the floral industry more than $7 million."
Bob Dahl, who headed the state enforcement for the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, said he spent the months of February, March and part of April tracking down and destroying infected geraniums.
"We either had to landfill them or incinerate them," Dahl said. "There were tons and tons of geraniums."
Allen, an expert in Ralstonia bacteria, said placing it on the bio-terrorism list was probably an overreaction; it makes a poor bio-terrorism weapon because it can't spread through the air. The bacteria causes wilt in crops such as potatoes grown in tropical countries, she said. Wisconsin's cold climate would likely prevent it from spreading here.
However, word that Wisconsin was infected with the bacteria could cause Canada to ban the import of Wisconsin seed potatoes, harming an important Wisconsin industry, she said.
This isn't the first time Ralstonia has infected geraniums in Wisconsin. In 1999, Allen identified the bacteria in geraniums that originated in Guatemala. In June, she is going to Guatemala to advise that country's flower industry on preventing the spread of the bacteria and a fellow expert is going to Kenya. Such "off-shore remediation," she said, may be able to prevent future outbreaks.

Load-Date: May 9, 2003


End of Document