Bad Santa: Smart Home Hacker Taunts Child
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 13, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 479 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"I would also encourage everybody to do their own form of risk assessment and determine what they need in these devices and whether it's worth the risk to have that functionality", Shue continues.
Reports have been popping up across the country telling tales of hackers accessing people's devices and either scaring or threatening them. "I didn't even get to the end where she is screaming "mommy, mommy" before I like ran inside", said LeMay.
Tania Amador, a 28-year-worn who lives in Worthy Prarie staunch exterior Dallas, gave a video to local news which reportedly showed that her Ring safety system had been hacked by cryptocurrency hungry scammers who demanded 50 Bitcoin (round $400,000 rounded up). This was not a result ofRing'ssecurity being breached or compromised, it said.
Stories of home security cameras being hacked are going viral-and they have many people anxious.
When a couple in Georgia installed theirRing device to keep a sentry on Beau, their puppy, they claim that a hacker's voice chimed in out of nowhere. "We're laying down. We're about to go to sleep, '" the woman, who asked not to be identified, told WSB-TV. She shouts for her mum and the man adds: "I'm Santa Claus".
Her boyfriend was taken aback, she said.
Three patients die as lawyers clash with doctors in Pakistan hospital
Such cases are then handled by anti-terrorism courts, which were primarily set up by to try suspects linked to acts of terrorism. Three heart patients died after a mob of lawyers rampaged through a Lahore hospital in a dispute with doctors.
It then dawned on her that her boyfriend wasn't the one watching her.
"I would say, unfortunately, folks may not think through the ramifications of having an internet-connected device, especially that has a camera to your home", Don Baham, president of Kraft Technology told WTVF. "Come on! Wake the f-- up!" "I did the exact opposite of adding anothersecurity measure", she told The Washington Post.
"I was even scared of my room for a few days".
Amador and her boyfriend didn't know what modified into once going down on the time, so staunch took the batteries out of the hijacked cameras. The irony lies in the invasion of privacy that comes from something the family bought to protect them.
In a statement specifically regarding the incident involving the LeMays in MS, the Amazon-ownedRing told Oxygen.com its "security team has investigated this incident and we have no evidence of an unauthorized intrusion or compromise of Ring's systems or network". Yes, In the United States of America the well-knownsecurity camera maker companies cameras are getting hacked very easily by password only.
"Due to the fact that customers often use the same username and password for their various accounts and subscriptions, bad actors often re-use credentials stolen or leaked from one service on other services", a statement fromRing noted.

Load-Date: December 14, 2019


End of Document