Baghdad mosque bombingkills U.S. soldier, two Iraqis Citizens rally against terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 5, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 351 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


BAGHDAD, Iraq - A bomb exploded near a Baghdad mosque as a U.S. military convoy passed by today, killing an American soldier and two Iraqis, the military and hospital workers said.
The soldier was traveling in a three-vehicle convoy when a roadside bomb exploded nearby, the military said in a statement. A spokesman had initially denied reports of U.S. casualties.
Most of the civilian casualties were passengers on a bus that was badly damaged in the blast near the al-Samarrai mosque in the New Baghdad section of the capital.
Karim Abdullah Muslim, the head of emergency services at the nearby al-Kindi hospital, said a man and a woman died and 13 people were injured.
Haitham Rashid, a passenger on the bus, said about two dozen people were aboard the vehicle at the time of the blast.
Haidar Aziz Kazim, an 11-year-old schoolboy, said he had been shopping with his mother and aunt at the time.
Meanwhile, U.S. troops cordoned off part of the main highway after a fire destroyed an armored personnel carrier in Mishada, 20 miles north of the capital.
Capt. Brian Ridley said the fire was caused by a faulty heater, which caused ammunition inside the vehicle to explode. No casualties were reported, he said.
Separately, about 500 people rallied today in central Baghdad to call for an end to terrorist attacks against civilians. Participants carried banners reading "No to terrorism" and expressed support for the U.S.-led coalition that has governed Iraq since ousting Saddam Hussein in early April.
In a sermon in the town of Kufa south of Baghdad, radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr threatened to call a general strike in the holy city of Najaf if U.S. occupation forces do not set free members of his militia group by the start of the next Arabic month, which falls in about 20 days.
Al-Sadr did not say how many militiamen of the group - known as Imam al-Mahdi's Army - were in detention.
His call came two days after Amar Yassiri, whom the U.S. military has described as a senior al-Sadr aide in Baghdad, was detained by U.S. troops in Baghdad in connection with an Oct. 12 ambush in which two soldiers died.

Load-Date: December 5, 2003


End of Document