BAI Conference On Bank Security
The American Banker
January 4, 1983, Tuesday


Copyright 1983 American Banker, Inc.
Section: Pg. 11
Length: 396 words
Dateline: ROLLING MEADOWS, Ill.
Body


Robert M. Sayre, former U.S. Ambassador to Uruguay, Panama, and Brazil, and now director of the U.S. Department of State's Office for Combating Terrorism, will deliver the keynote address at Bank Administration Institute's 1983 Conference on Bank Security.
The conference will be held Feb. 27-March 2, 1983, at the Fairmont Hotel in New Orleans. Ambassador Sayre's speech is entitled, ''U.S. Government Organization and Policies on Terrorism.''
''Bank security is no longer purely a local, or even a national concern,'' said Lewis H. Bunker, vice president-security, Riggs National Bank, Washington, D.C., and chairman, BAI Security Commission. ''It has become an international issue. Ambassador Sayre's expertise will be valuable to security officers from all financial institutions. His worldwide experience in critical 'hot spots,' and his current involvement with U.S. antiterrorist efforts, have made Ambassador Sayre one of the nation's foremost experts on international security issues.''
Also featured at the conference will be a presentation entitled, ''Surviving Ambush Journalism,'' by media consultant David A. Valentine, Ross, Calif., and a special session, ''Physical Security Compromise: It Can Happen to You!,'' conducted by Robert Barry, product manager, Physical Security, Mosler Safe unit of American Standard Co., Hamilton, Ohio. Mr. Barry's presentation will include a demonstration of a ''burning bar'' attack, a favorite method of bank burglars.
The security conference agenda also includes concurrent miniworkshops on check kiting, computer fraud investigation, and financial investigative techniques. In addition, concurrent sessions will feature presentations on data security, employee theft prevention, ATM security, crisis planning, microprocessor security applications, community bank security, and the selected criminal offenses report developed by the Canadian Bankers' Association.
For delegates from Central and South American countries, selected workshops and sessions will be translated into Spanish.
Registration fees for BAI members are $425 per person, $550 for non-members, and $250 for law enforcement officials. Spouse/nondelegate fees are $75 per person.
For registration and program information, contact Keith D. Marshall, manager, Security Programs, Bank Administration Institute, 60 Gould Center, Rolling Meadows, Ill. 60008, 312/228-6200.


End of Document