Bail Denied To U.S. Terror Suspects
RTT News (United States)
August 5, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 348 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A judge at the U.S. District Court in North Carolina on Wednesday denied bail to six men indicted for plotting terror attacks in Israel and Jordan, stating that the defendants were dangerous and posed a risk of flight.
The detention hearing of Anes Subasic, another member of the alleged terror group, was postponed to a later date after his lawyer withdrew and his interpreter was removed due to a conflict of interest.
Judge William Webb ruled Wednesday that a potential life sentence, along with the defendants&apos; contacts in foreign countries and their proven ability to raise large amounts of money, could prompt them to flee the country if granted bail.
All the seven suspects were indicted last month on charges of providing material support to terrorists and conspiring to support terrorism by training and traveling overseas to participate in "violent jihad."
The seven indicted by the North Carolina federal court on terrorism charges last month were: Daniel Patrick Boyd, Hysen Sherifi, Anes Subasic, Zakariya Boyd, Dylan Boyd, Mohammad Omar Aly Hassan and Ziyad Yaghi.
The detention hearing, which stretched for two days after opening on Tuesday, was held to determine whether the suspects could be held in custody while they await trial.
During the hearing, federal prosecutors played recordings of alleged ring leader Daniel Boyd talking to his family about plans to carry out attacks overseas, and his desire to take part in violent jihads. Prosecutors urged the court to deny the seven suspects bail, stating that all of them pose a risk of flight and a danger to the community as a whole.
All the defendants are charged with conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists, as well as conspiracy to murder, kidnap, maim and injure persons abroad. The charges are related to allegations that they helped raise money and provide training for terrorist operations in Tel Aviv, Israel. The men were arrested at various locations in Raleigh, North Carolina.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document