BAKER'S TART REMARKS HAVE UNFORESEEN EFFECT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 22, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3D
Length: 543 words
Byline: William Safire COLUMN
Body


WASHINGTON - When the PLO betrayed the basis for U.S. talks by launching a terrorist attack on the beaches of Tel Aviv, President Bush sent Secretary of State James Baker to Congress to lash the new government of Israel with sarcasm. Baker's blame-the-victim attitude invites more terrorism and a new cycle of stiffneckedness. As the supreme pragmatist, he should realize that snide, self-indulgent wisecracks make great sound bites but impede progress.  Let's be constructive: In the Middle East, that means taking Baker's calculatedly intemperate here's-my-number, call-me-when-you're ready blast and interpreting it in a different way.  The new conservative government should take the Baker tantrum as good news: For a while at least, it means that Israel will be given a respite from intervention in its democratic political workings by a one-sided, anti-settlement government in Washington eager to set up a Palestinian state under Arafat rule. This will give the new government, denied even the shortest media honeymoon, a chance to come up with a few surprises.  Surprise No. 1 is easy: to demonstrate that it is not the gang of thugs that Arab apologists would have the world believe. The new Shamir government has already welcomed a U.N. visitor and opened one Palestinian university facility. Other demonstrations of good will should follow.  The second surprise will come when the government lasts longer than a few weeks. The focus, Likudniks hope, will be on ''the absorption process.'' Today's enthusiastic welcoming is sure to face natural strains.
Young Israelis, facing unemployment approaching 9 percent, will be competing for jobs with arriving Soviet immigrants. Housing Minister Arik Sharon can expect heavy coverage of disappointed immigrants, but could confound his critics by rising to his greatest challenge - housing, and employing Exodus III, which will strengthen Israel immeasurably.  Mention of that controversial character turns us to the surprises we can expect from a Labor Party no longer in thrall to the State Department.  Sharon tells political friends: ''(Shimon) Peres is finished; our problem is (Yitzhak) Rabin.'' Rabin, the most widely respected leader in Israel, knows he must move quickly to regain the party and national leadership he held in the '70s. He would like to bring a primary system to his party, infusing it with young blood and capturing the nation's avid attention, but that might take four months to set in train. A quicker leadership decision would be through the 1,300 members of the party's central committee.  Because political parties exist to win, I'm betting on Rabin. What would follow in time would be elections with an eye to the sort of reform Israel needs: stable government by one side or the other.  What is the best U.S. policy? To restore our anti-terrorism credibility by getting out of the PLO's snare of talks (which the administration formally did Wednesday; to stop building the Iraqi threat with our trade and credits; and to get off Shamir's back as new Israeli leadership backed by an improved political system develops. As that happens, and as Baker learns that Israeli leaders do not quake at his sarcasm, let the phones begin to ring.  Copyright 1990 New York Times News Service

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document