Balancing Civil Liberties and Security
The New York Times
September 29, 2012 Saturday
The International Herald Tribune


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. ; LETTER FROM EUROPE
Length: 848 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- When the European Court of Human Rights finally determined this past week that Abu Hamza al-Masri, a radical Muslim cleric, could be extradited to the United States, the palpable sense of official relief reflected the long years of legal struggle between state and preacher that came to symbolize the ambiguities of Britain's efforts to balance civil liberties and security.
It was Mr. Masri, for instance, who helped provoke an accusation from other Western intelligence agencies that British counterterrorism agents had been complacent, permitting Islamic extremism to take such deep root that the British capital earned the contemptuous nickname Londonistan.
And it was Mr. Masri whose stubborn resistance to arrest and extradition symbolized a peculiar and tangled challenge: If Western liberal nations are to defend their freedoms, they must extend the rule of law to those who wish them ill.
As the United States discovered in the debate over extraordinary rendition, more draconian tactics erode the cherished values that Western societies are supposed to uphold. But legal processes can be protracted.
Even after the European ruling, Mr. Masri, 54, launched yet one more appeal against extradition that is to be heard Tuesday, confirming that, whatever his derision toward Britain -- which he once reportedly described as a ''toilet'' -- his freedom to seek redress from the courts remained undiminished.
Official relief turned to official annoyance. Without referring directly to the preacher, Lord Chief Justice Igor Judge, the head of the judiciary for England and Wales, said that any case that dragged on for eight years was ''a source of real fury to me.''
Mr. Masri was born in Egypt as Mostafa Kamel Mostafa and arrived in Britain as a student in 1979. The United States has been seeking his extradition since 2004 on charges relating to an array of anti-American plots dating back 14 years, including kidnapping in Yemen, urging holy war in Afghanistan and participating in a plot to set up a training camp in Bly, Oregon.
In 2006, he was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on British terrorism charges, including incitement to murder.
Even now, it is hard to pass by the Finsbury Park mosque in north London -- his erstwhile fief -- without recalling Mr. Masri, one-eyed and hook-handed from injuries caused by explosives many years ago, inveighing against the West, his ability to do so guaranteed by this country's reverence for free expression.
For many years, the British internal security service, MI5, believed that the greatest threat of terrorism emanated from North Africa, and its operatives saw Mr. Masri as ''a harmless buffoon who was also a useful source of information on other extremists,'' the journalist Vikram Dodd wrote in The Guardian. If he offered no threat to British security, he would be left alone. But his mosque became a center of radical inspiration and plotting.
To many Britons his physical appearance confirmed his status as an emblem of The Other, of a threat posed by strangers. Yet, as the nation learned abruptly with the terrorist attacks of July 7, 2005, the four suicide bombers who killed 52 people on the London transit system came from within.
In their netherworld of intelligence-gathering and maneuvering, the British ''had not counted on the radicalization of the children of Muslim immigrants,'' the American scholar Robert S. Leiken wrote in a recent study. ''They had failed to imagine that British young men would learn the lessons of Londonistan and deliver those lessons to London itself.''
The Masri case threw up other questions.
The cleric is one of five suspects affected by the European ruling, and British human rights advocates have argued that the charges against one of them, Babar Ahmad, raise far more complex concerns.
Mr. Ahmad, a 37-year-old computer specialist, has been in custody for eight years but has never been tried or charged. He has pleaded in vain with the British authorities to prosecute him on the accusation that he ran a jihadist Web site, but, he says, he has never been shown the evidence against him.
Among rights advocates, the fear is that the European ruling will galvanize American demands for jurisdiction over other cases that could be heard in British courts, outsourcing justice to a system often depicted here as vindictive.
There was a curious footnote to the imbroglio this past week, showing that the passions stirred by the Masri case had crept into the most elevated places, setting the land's great institutions against each other. In a radio interview, a BBC security correspondent, Frank Gardner, let slip the startling news that Queen Elizabeth II had once vouchsafed that she was ''pretty upset that there was no way to arrest'' Mr. Masri years ago.
The scoop flouted one of the most abiding royal conventions: The queen's confidences must remain just that -- confidential. The queen was not amused. The broadcaster was chagrined -- abject, some critics said. ''Frank is extremely sorry for the embarrassment caused,'' the BBC said, ''and has apologized to the palace.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/29/world/europe/29iht-letter29.html

Load-Date: September 29, 2012


End of Document