BAM, CHENEY IN SMACKDOWN. DUELING SPEECHES ON BATTLING TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
May 22, 2009 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 478 words
Byline: BY DAVID SALTONSTALL in New York and RICHARD SISK in Washington DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS With Kenneth R. Bazinet
Body


PRESIDENT OBAMA and ex-Vice President Dick Cheney traded jabs in the political equivalent of a schoolyard smackdown yesterday over who is better at protecting America. Obama took the Bush administration behind the woodshed in a speech that was a bristling, sometimes defensive, refutation of the Bush administration's use of extreme interrogation tactics and the Guantanamo Bay terror prison.
"We're cleaning up something that is, quite simply, a mess - a misguided experiment," Obama said from the National Archives.
Cheney, who delivered his own nationally televised speech moments after Obama's, shot back by noting "71/2 years without a repeat [of the 9/11 attacks] is not a record to be rebuked and scorned."
But Obama insisted the prison had "set back the moral authority that is America's strongest currency in the world."
"The wrong answer is to pretend like this problem will go away if we maintain an unsustainable status quo," he added.
Obama defended his moves to shut down the Guantanamo Bay prison camp and end the ex-veep's favored "enhanced interrogation techniques."
He conceded that some Gitmo inmates would end up in U.S. prisons, but vowed those facilities were secure enough to house even the most dangerous terrorists - as some do already.
"As we make these decisions, bear in mind the following fact: Nobody has ever escaped from one of our federal Supermax prisons," said Obama, noting that convicted terrorists like Zacarias Moussaoui, the so-called 20th hijacker on 9/11, have been safely held in the U.S. for years.
In Cheney's address to the conservative American Enterprise Institute, he said Gitmo and harsh interrogation tactics kept America safe after 9/11, when "we were staring at 16 acres of ashes" at Ground Zero.
"I think the President will find, upon reflection, that to bring the worst of the worst terrorists inside the U.S. would be cause for great danger and regret in the years to come," Cheney said.
"You don't want to call them enemy combatants? Fine," Cheney said. "Just don't bring them into the U.S."
Obama never mentioned Cheney by name - but he was clearly a target of several of the President's darts.
"I know some have argued that brutal methods like waterboarding were necessary to keep us safe," Obama said at one point. "I could not disagree more."
Obama's speech was in many ways a general restatement of his national security principles. There were no real specifics on when, where or how terrorists would be jailed in the U.S. - all central questions for members of Congress, Democrats and Republicans alike.
Obama's lack of details did little to sway lawmakers from either party after his speech. But White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said later that Gitmo would be closed, as Obama promised in January.
"We didn't get here overnight. All the decisions aren't going to be made overnight," Gibbs said.
rsisk@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
ELISA MILLER/DAILY NEWS President Obama (left) and ex-Veep Dick Cheney battle yesterday in speeches over tactics used to defend America.

Load-Date: May 22, 2009


End of Document