Bangladesh Gets $1 Bn Credit, Vows Not To Allow Anti-India Terror
RTT News (United States)
January 12, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 338 words
Body


(RTTNews) - India has extended $1 billion as Line of Credit to its eastern neighbor Bangladesh as part of its efforts to aid developmental activities in that country. On its part, the latter promised not to allow its territory to be used for anti-India terror activities.
The significant Line of Credit marked the highest one-time grant by India to any country, underlining the importance New Delhi attached to enhancing bilateral ties with Dhaka.
The two Asian neighbors signed five pacts following discussions between Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and his visiting Bangladesh counterpart Sheikh Hasina in New Delhi. These related to security co-operation, power and cultural exchange.
Hasina told Dr Singh that her government would not allow Bangladesh to be used for terrorism directed at India, an assurance aimed at addressing a major concern about India&apos;s North-East insurgents taking shelter there.
Though counter-terrorism and security issues were on top of the agenda at the wide-ranging talks, the two leaders discussed bilateral ties, including connectivity, trade and investment, border-related issues as also sharing water and power resources.
Three accords were: Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons and Agreement on Combating International Terrorism, Organized Crime and Illicit Drug-Trafficking.
The two countries also signed an MoU on co-operation in the power sector that included providing 250 MW of electricity to Bangladesh and one on cultural exchanges for 2010-2012. They also agreed to revive the traditional links of connectivity, including the Akhaura-Agartala railroad.
New Delhi also sought to address Dhaka&apos;s concerns on non-tariff barriers, by agreeing to remove them on more items, and assured that India would not begin constructing the Meghalaya-based Tapaimukh dam which would affect Bangladesh&apos;s interests.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 15, 2010


End of Document