Bank's $1.3B deal with gov't over its Cuba transactions
Daily News (New York)
November 20, 2018 Tuesday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 7
Length: 285 words
Byline: Shayna Jacobs

new york daily news
Body


Federal and state prosecutors reached a $1.3 billion settlement with French bank Societe Generale for facilitating transactions to Cuba and other countries in violation of U.S. sanctions.
The U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan will collect $717 million in forfeiture funds, while the Manhattan District Attorney will get $163 million through deferred-prosecution agreements the institution cut with authorities.
Another $325 million has been designated to the New York State Department of Financial Services.
The bank, the sixth-largest in Europe, will also pay an $81 million fine to the Federal Reserve and a $53 million penalty to the Office of Foreign Assets Control.
The bank "knowingly and willfully violated" federal and state laws "by illegally sending payments through the U.S. financial system in violation of U.S. economic sanctions, which caused both affiliated and unaffiliated U.S. financial institutions to process transactions that otherwise should have been rejected, blocked or stopped for investigation," court papers say.
From 2004 to 2010, Societe Generale ran 21 credit facilities and sent over 2,500 payments - totaling about $13 billion - to Cuban accounts, mostly for crude oil business dealings.
Steps were taken to conceal the transactions and fudge information, prosecutors said.
Half of the sum collected in the civil forfeiture by federal prosecutors will be designated to the Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund. The money collected by the DA's office will go to the city and state. 
"We acknowledge and regret the shortcomings that were identified in these settlements, and have cooperated with the U.S. Authorities to resolve these matters," CEO Frédéric Oudéa said in a statement.

Load-Date: November 20, 2018


End of Document