Bank big rips terror claim
Daily News (New York)
September 9, 2014 Tuesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 28
Length: 273 words
Byline: BY JOHN MARZULLI NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


TERRORISM is bad for business, the billionaire chairman of the Arab Bank testified Monday in Brooklyn Federal Court.
Sabih al-Masri took the stand to rebut civil claims that his bank turned a blind eye to transferring millions of dollars to charities controlled by the terror group Hamas and to families of suicide bombers responsible for attacks in Israel.
Masri, 77, said suicide bombings during the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation known as the intifadeh not only ruined lives but wreaked havoc on economic development fostered by the Arab Bank.
"The Palestinians were suffering, Israeli people were killed, all these things were negative for society, for finding peace, jobs and the future," said Masri, a Palestinian by birth who currently holds dual citizenship in Saudi Arabia and Jordan. "Business suffered . . . suicide bombers destroyed the opportunity for peace."
Lawyers for nearly 300 victims and survivors of terrorist attacks in Israel who are suing the Arab Bank rested their case Monday morning, and Masri was the first witness called by the defense team.
He said the Arab Bank processes approximately 1 million financial transactions daily around the world, and added that before the litigation, he had never even heard of the Saudi Committee, a charity that the plaintiffs allege encouraged terrorist attacks by transferring money to the families of suicide bombers.
Outside court, Masri struck a defiant note about the suit's contention that the Arab Bank helped provide material support to Hamas.
""The bank is clean; the bank never did anything intentional or knowingly," he said. "They can claim what they want."

Graphic

 
Arab Bank Chairman Sabih al-Masri denied on stand Monday that his bank aided terrorism against Israel.

Load-Date: September 9, 2014


End of Document