Bank of England Criticized on B.C.C.I.
The New York Times
October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk; Column 1;
Length: 500 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,

By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Oct. 22
Body


The Bank of England was neither alert nor inquisitive enough in responding to the huge fraud that led to the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a special British inquiry whose results were released today found.
The 15-month investigation, carried out by Lord Justice Bingham, a senior judge, recommended sharpening internal bank procedures and regulatory controls with an eye to tighter supervison of banks that cloak their operations in secrecy.
The investigation was the third inquiry to fault the Bank of England for failing to act quickly enough to impose controls on B.C.C.I., a Middle Eastern institution that was once one of the world's largest private banks.  A British paralimentary group made a similar finding last March, as did a report earlier this month by a United States Senate subcommittee.
But Lord Bingham's report was not as critical as the report by the Senate subcommittee on terrorism, narcotics and international operations, which said the Bank of England had been "wholly inadequate" in protecting shareholders.
Rather, Lord Bingham criticized the Bank of England for not pursuing "the truth about B.C.C.I. with the rigor which B.C.C.I.'s reputation justified."
His report also questioned the judgment of the bank's majority stockholders in Abu Dhabi, who are described in the report as telling investigators that the bank's huge losses had been caused by unsuccessful banking business. In the report, Lord Bingham argues that the authorities in Abu Dhabi are not "untutored innocents in the world of international finance, and I cannot think they were as greatly deceived as they suggest."
The bank was shut last year after regulators around the world accused it of stealing billions of dollars from depositors and funneling the money to bank insiders. Subsequent investigations have said the bank's activities ranged from international money laundering to terrorism.
Norman Lamont, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said in Parliament today that the Government accepted the findings of Lord Bingham's report. At the same time, he said he rejected the findings of the United States Senate report because it contained "wild allegations which are incorrect."
Mr. Lamont promised to introduce legislation to give the Bank of England power to refuse or revoke authorization of banks whose operations are clouded by complex structures or the undue secrecy afforded by countries that loosely regulate international banks.
He also said the Bank of England was setting up its own special investigations and legal unit, as recommended by Lord Bingham.
Mr. Lamont said the report, while critical of the Bank of England, showed that it "was party to no conspiracy or no cover-up."
But Gordon Brown, the opposition Labor Party's spokesman on financial matters, said the Conservative Government and Prime Minister John Major must accept some share of the blame for what went wrong. He said the report showed that the Bank of England "had been a soft touch for a crooked bank."

Load-Date: October 23, 1992


End of Document