Barack "HEARTS" Ray
Daily News (New York)
July 19, 2013 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 28
Length: 473 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


For years, New York City liberals have been hurling invective at Ray Kelly and the NYPD he leads.
It is spying without suspicion on Muslims, they say. It's engaging in racial profiling en masse via its program of stopping, questioning and sometimes frisking people, they say. It's using force indiscriminately, they say.
Hilariously, the nation's leading liberal - who enjoys overwhelming support among New Yorkers - never got the memo.
President Obama is suddenly in need of a law enforcement professional to head the Department of Homeland Security, frontline defense against terrorism.
Naturally, Kelly's name has bubbled to the top of lists. He's a former cop and Marine Corps reserve colonel, former Treasury Department undersecretary and customs commissioner, plus a two-time NYPD commissioner.
Asked about the speculation, Obama said what any commander-in-chief would say about a man who has overseen one of the steepest crime declines in the history of America while protecting the nation's top target from terrorist attack:
"Ray Kelly's obviously done an extraordinary job in New York. And the federal government partners a lot with New York, because obviously, our concerns about terrorism often times are focused on big-city targets, and I think Ray Kelly's one of the best there is."
Did America's former constitutional law professor President not read The Associated Press series alleging vast, suspicionless spying of Muslim-Americans, which the New York Civil Liberties Union says "violates our Constitution's guarantees of equality and religious freedom"?
Did he not hear about the supposedly rampant violations of the Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable searches and seizures happening daily on New York City's streets?
Did he not read the papers filed by his own Justice Department endorsing the idea of a monitor for the NYPD, should the Department lose the stop-and-frisk class action suit?
Obviously, the sound and fury signified nothing to Obama.
He surely knows that, under the leadership of former CIA deputy director David Cohen, the NYPD's intelligence division did not spy on anyone simply because of their religion. Rather, the division built profiles of neighborhoods where thousands of people hailed from particular countries that were importing terrorists.
One would like to believe, as well, that Obama knows that cops have not been unfairly targeting blacks and Latinos in the stop-and-frisk program.
In other words, Obama knows that the NYPD has been saving lives - and that endless, hyperbolic complaints by the professional critics are nothing but distractions.
Postscript: Controller and mayoral candidate John Liu, who has accused Kelly of presiding over "the biggest example of racial profiling in the country," said through a spokesman that "Kelly would make a fantastic Homeland Security secretary."

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: July 19, 2013


End of Document