BARBARA BUSH 'NOT AFRAID' TO RIDE COMMERCIAL AIRLINER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 1991, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14A
Length: 254 words
Body


INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Barbara Bush gave up her government-provided plane and joined travelers on a commercial flight Thursday to calm public fears about terrorism. ''I want people to know that the airports are secure,'' she said.
Airline executives, concerned that war-related terrorism worries were cutting into air travel, welcomed Mrs. Bush's gesture enthusiastically.  ''I'm not afraid to fly,'' she said in Washington before boarding a USAir flight.  Later at the Richard L. Roudebush Veterans Medical Center in Indianapolis, where she visited patients, she said, ''I'm trying to say to the public that our airlines and our airports have a lot of security and we're safe. People should feel free to fly if they have somewhere to go.'' She said she and President George Bush had decided she should fly on a commercial flight after discussing the air travel industry's sharp downturn since the start of the Persian Gulf War a month ago.  Mrs. Bush flew coach class on USAir's 7 a.m. Flight 257 to Indianapolis.  She was accompanied by eight aides and Secret Service agents on the half-full plane. The flight was her first on a commercial jetliner since her husband was elected president, and she said she might do it again.  Seated with her press secretary in the first row of the coach cabin, the first lady picked at a breakfast of cheese omelette, hash browns and coffee cake and chatted briefly with passengers behind her.  Her assessment of the flight: ''The plane was on time. The people were polite.'' The food? ''OK.''

Graphic

 
Photo Graphic; LOGO...Gulf War PHOTO By AP...Barbara Bush greeting a security person after passing through a metal detector Thursday at Washington National Airport. She took a commercial flight to Indianapolis.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document