Bard of Blood Season 2: When It Will Hit Theatres And Cast?
The Tiger: Clemson University
December 24, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 544 words
Body


This Web series concept is very familiar to Indian audiences with the past few years, which is India Pakistan and Terrorism. So this theme is very common to fans because it contains the same drama as always.
On the other hand Bard of Blood, no doubt satisfy you as a viewer but not as a CONTENT, which we called Netflix originals because, after series like Sacred Games, Ghoul, Leila, our expectations from Netflix live on the sky. Still, Netflix, this time, creates the same Bollywood drama.
Bard Of Blood: Story
The plot is simple Kabir Singh ( Emraan Hashmi) is on a mission to rescue his Indian agents with solving various mysteries in Balochistan and Pakistan. Fighting like a champ and always try to win terrorism.
Table of Contents
Bard Of Blood: Acting
Bard Of Blood: Screenplay and Dialogues
Bard of Blood Season 2: Cast
Bard of Blood Season 2: Release Date
Bard Of Blood: Acting
The Serial Kisser Boy (Emraan Hashmi) is best as always, perfect dialogue delivery, great action scenes, living the character entirely. Jaideep Ahlawat, as veer, will convince you that he is the best spy, but trust issues arise on Shobita Dhulipala as her acting doesn't stand that strong.
Related Posts
'The Boys in the Band' First Look: The Groundbreaking Gay...
Dec 30, 2020
'The Mandalorian' Reveals New Spinoff Series in Finale...
Dec 26, 2020
Bard Of Blood: Screenplay and Dialogues
The screenplay is brilliantly written and will make you understand what is happening in the series and help you grip with the set. Writers tried very much to make screenplay enjoyable, and yes, they are succeeding. Dialogues are not that creative, but yes, you will feel that Pakistani atmosphere, but I think more work has to be done on dialogues. Because many times the script will make you confuse about some scenes, I think this thing will have to be improving. You will understand in the first ten-twenty minutes that Imran Hashmi is not web series material. His confines as an actor that we overlooked in movies are clear. His character in the series is of someone who is on the path of self-destruction like Amitabh Bachchan in Sharabi, Sanjay Dutt in Sadak, or Mel Gibson in Lethal Weapon. He should be restless, angry, and fierce. Instead, here, he is calm like he has made peace with it. Staring to the floor while speaking your lines does not count for acting, and does not prove anything.
Bard of Blood Season 2: Cast
HD camera catches everything. More you will observe him and other actors, more you will love Manoj Bajpayee. The way Manoj has delivered his performance is simply fantastic. The further cast may include:
Emraan Hashmi will act as Kabir Anand
Vineet Kumar Singh will act as Veere Singh
Shishir Sharma will act as Arun Joshi
Amit Bimrot will act as Nihar Gupta
Ajay Mahendru will act as Rehmat Khatib
Sobhita Dhulipala will act as Isha Khanna
Ashish Nijhawan will act as Aftab Khalid.
Kirti Kulhari will act as Jannat Marri
Abhishekh Khan will act as Nusrat Bashir Marri
Shaman Ahmed will act as Qasim Baluchi
Jaideep Ahlawat will act as Tanveer Shehzad.
Rajit Kapur will act as Sadiq Sheikh
Sohum Shah will act as Vikramjeet and many others.
Bard of Blood Season 2: Release Date
The pandemic attack of the Corona Virus postpones the shooting and release date to the next year.

Load-Date: December 30, 2020


End of Document