Barge lines mull safety changes; Terrorism: Some hazardous materials are shipped by boat
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 24, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a12
Length: 380 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


In the past year, the threat of terrorism has redefined life for a Mississippi River barge company.
As in many other industries, the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, opened the eyes of barge line operators to how vulnerable their vessels were as they moved past cities and towns, said Larry Daily, president of Bettendorf-based Alter Barge Line.
"We've all had to take a step back and assess our level of security and risk factors, and have gone through a recommended security review," said Daily, whose company runs 400 barges between St. Paul, Minn., and New Orleans.
Smaller boats that cruise too close to a line of barges are watched more closely. Crew members must show government-issued identification to board. Emergency plans are carefully considered and reviewed.
Daily said Alter officials began considering safety issues when they realized that if terrorists could use planes as weapons, they could also use boats and barges.
Most barges that run along the Mississippi River aren't considered prime terrorist targets, but precautions are still important, said Kristi Hynes, assistant supervisor for the U.S. Coast Guard's marine safety detachment in the Quad Cities. Corn, soybeans and coal are common cargo, but hazardous materials also are shipped.
On average, 240 to 300 towboats push barges through Lock and Dam 15 in the Quad Cities each month, according to the visitor center there. A typical tow pushes 15 barges.
The Coast Guard, along with the industry group American Waterways Operators, has helped barge line operators conduct safety reviews in the past year.
The model vessel security plan adopted by American Waterways Operators in May and revised this month is designed to lessen the chance that the vessels are used as weapons of mass destruction, according to the association.
The plan encourages awareness of security threats, training for employees and emergency response planning. It outlines how towboat operators should respond to various levels of threats and lists common cargo that could be used as weapons, an association press release says.
"With our barges, they might just get a little corn in the river, and that probably wouldn't be the front-page effect they'd want. But involving something like a riverboat casino might be a little different," said Daily.

Graphic

 
AP photo

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document