BARKIN MAD 
Says NYPD focus on terror slowed probe of burglary
Daily News (New York)
November 3, 2017 Friday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2017 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 318 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


ACTRESS ELLEN Barkin had a terrifying encounter with a burglar at her Greenwich Village home - then criticized the NYPD, a day into the lower Manhattan terrorism investigation, for not sending detectives to her fast enough.
"The first responders were great, here in 70 secs!" the 63-year-old, Bronx-born Barkin tweeted. "It's only been 4 hours."
That tweet was sent at 9:06 a.m. Wednesday, which is actually 2 hours and 16 minutes after police got a 911 call to go to her W. 12th St. townhouse near Sixth Ave. Nine minutes later, Barkin (pictured) was back at it, acknowledging Tuesday's terrorist attack, but still saying cops had to pay attention to other crimes.
"Did I just hear this right?" she tweeted to Police Commissioner James O'Neill and Chief of Detectives Robert Boyce. "No detectives here, at all? My heart breaks for another day that will live in infamy but crime is still going on . . . in my house."
Detectives got to her home by the early afternoon. Generally, police said, while there are detectives who specialize in burglary cases, such work is based partly on what else might be happening.
On Wednesday morning, the NYPD was less than 24 hours into a terrorist act that killed eight, injured 13 and had police scrambling to investigate the case against Sayfullo Saipov. Detectives from various commands, particularly in lower Manhattan, were pulled into the probe to assist.
Some police sources suggested that Barkin should know better.
"There was an act of terrorism less than a mile from her house," one source said. Another, who is familiar with the incident, said, "She is not a very nice lady."
Barkin, currently starring in cable TV's "Animal Kingdom," awoke at 6:45 a.m. Wednesday to a noise in her son's bedroom. Her son was not home.
Barkin went upstairs and saw the thief at the balcony door, sources said. He bolted when he saw her, leaving behind a bag with jewelry he had hoped to steal.

Graphic

 
[Ellen Barkin]

Load-Date: November 4, 2017


End of Document