BASIS SET OUT FOR APPEALS/ ANTI-TERRORISM LAW GETTING FIRST TEST; 'TRIGGERMAN RULE' ALSO WILL BE ARGUED
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 18, 2003 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-6
Length: 580 words
Byline: Kiran Krishnamurthy and Paul Bradley/ Times-Dispatch Staff Writers , Contact Kiran Krishnamurthy at (540) 371-4792 or kkrishnamurthy@timesdispatch.com/ Contact Paul Bradley at (703) 548-8758 or , pbradley@timesdispatch.com,   
Dateline: VIRGINIA BEACH
Body


Higher courts eventually will consider John Allen Muhammad's capital-murder conviction, and though his lawyers appeared overwhelmed by evidence in the first phase of his trial, they methodically laid the groundwork for appeals.
Under Virginia law, capital-murder convictions are automatically reviewed by the Virginia Supreme Court if a jury recommends the death penalty.
But apart from the automatic review, several issues raised during the trial could prove ripe for appeal.
Chief among them is the conviction through Virginia's untested anti-terrorism law, enacted by the General Assembly in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks. Muhammad's trial marks the first time the law has been applied in Virginia.
Peter D. Greenspun and Jonathan Shapiro, Muhammad's attorneys, asked Judge LeRoy F. Millette Jr. to dismiss the terrorism charge, in part, because the law is imprecise.
The law makes a defendant who gave a "direction or order" to another person subject to a capital charge. The wording was included in instructions to the jury.
"The legislature has not provided the court or counsel with any assistance" in interpreting the phrasing, Greenspun told the judge last week.
"This jury is being asked to make a whole lot of distinctions," Greenspun added. "It's confusing to me, and we've all looked at that statute a hundred times."
Millette rejected the defense motion, but some legal experts predict the new law will eventually find its way to the U.S. Supreme Court.
"This is the test case for the terrorism provision," Anne Coughlin, a University of Virginia law professor, said yesterday. "The defense is in a strong position" in arguing the ambiguity of the terrorism law, she said.
The defense lawyers also argued unsuccessfully that as a matter of law, Muhammad cannot be put to death unless he is found to have actually fired the shot that killed Dean H. Meyers, 53.
"It remains our position . . . that the triggerman rule is the law," Greenspun told the judge.
Once again, Millette disagreed, saying he believed the term "triggerman" is misused and that a better term is "immediate perpetrator."
"A fair inference can be drawn that they perfected their ability to shoot people and perfected their ability to shoot them and escape," Millette said outside the jury's presence, referring to Muhammad and accomplice Lee Boyd Malvo.
The defense lawyers also objected to numerous pieces of evidence during the trial. And they complained when prosecutors repeatedly paraded Malvo into the courtroom as a human exhibit so that witnesses could identify the teenager. He was spotted near several shooting scenes, sometimes in the company of Muhammad.
The lawyers argued that seeing Malvo alone, clad in a bright orange jail jumpsuit, two deputies grasping his elbows, biased the witnesses.
"It is inherently suggestive to bring out Mr. Malvo in the way that they did," Shapiro said.
Gruesome crime scene photos and repeated testimony of doctors who described in graphic details the wounds of the victims drew objections as well.
As the trial entered its penalty phase yesterday, prosecutor Richard A. Conway reminded jurors that they can consider the graphic nature of the crimes as they decide whether Muhammad should live or die.
Coughlin said the impact on victims' relatives is likely to overwhelm the jury.
"The more that the jury sees and hears from relatives about their pain, their loss, their suffering, they're going to weigh that against any sympathetic case [Muhammad] can make," she said.

Load-Date: November 22, 2003


End of Document