Basque Politician Assassinated
The New York Times
February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column3; Foreign Desk
Length: 446 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, Feb.23
Body


Hooded gunmen shot and killed a prominent Socialist politician today, and officials in Madrid said the act appeared to be an effort to disrupt the elections Sunday in the Basque region.
The victim, Enrique Casas Vila, a senator and the leading candidate on the Socialist ticket for the Basque parliament from Guipuzcoa Province, had campaigned strongly against terrorism. He was outspoken in his attacks against E.T.A., the Basque separatist organization.
"A previously unknown group calling itself Mendeku, the Basque word for vengeance, took responsibility for the killing in telephone calls to Basque news organizations, United Press International reported. But the police and Socialist officials said they were certain the group was a cover for E.T.A
E.T.A., whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom, is struggling against antiterrorist actions by the Spanish police, deportation from southern France by the French authorities and deadly reprisals by an undergroung right-wing group.
 
End of E.T.A. a Major Theme
The issue of terrorism and violence has dominated the election campaign in the Basque provinces, where political killings, kidnappings and the paying of "revolutionary taxes" to terrorists by banks and businesses have become commonplace. The Socialists, hoping to consolidate electoral gains of recent years, have made the eradication of E.T.A. a major theme.
Recent public-opinion polls have shown the Socialists coming in second to the ruling Basque Nationalist Party, which is predicted to gain a majority in the expanded, 75-seat regional parliament. The party is a mainline, moderate nationalist group, especially when compared with the Herri Batasuna Party, which appears to coordinate its positions with E.T.A.'s. Recently E.T.A. called on its supporters to vote for Herri Batasuna candidates.
Immediately after the news of Mr. Casa's death became known, rallies were called off and virtually all the political parties, including Herri Batasuna, canceled the rest of their campaigns. They issued statements of anger and sadness.
"These people are out to kill democracy," said Jose Maria Bandres, a prominent left-wing Basque politician. Socialists and political leaders of the right called for a major turnout in support of parties that have condemned violence.
A spokesman for Herri Batasuna said that "we condemn this event" and called it a "clear provocation" and "an attempt to confuse public opinion."
The Madrid Senate suspended its session when news of the murder reached the floor. "Once more a Spaniard has fallen victim to terrorism," Senator Marta Espinilla said. "In honor of this man, I hereby terminate my speech."


End of Document