Basque Strife: Harder Lines On Both Sides
The New York Times
April 26, 1989, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 829 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, April 25
Body


After a three-month truce that raised hopes for peace in the long-convulsed Basque region, the Spanish Government and separatist extremists have both gone on the offensive following the collapse of the first negotiations between the two sides.
The failure of the peace initiative was a serious blow to the prestige of the Government of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, but it also marked a new stage in the growing political isolation of the Basque separatist organization known as E.T.A., which stands for Basque Homeland and Freedom in the Basque language.
The reason given by E.T.A. for breaking off the talks in Algiers was that the Government refused to change the wording of a communique issued in late March that, the organization charged, distorted the purpose of the negotiations.
But Government officials said the return to terrorism reflected the dominant position of a hard-line faction within E.T.A. that is apparently unwilling to accept anything short of full independence for the three northern provinces - Vizcaya, Guipuzcoa and Alava -that Basques call Euskadi.
Since the guerrilla group suspended the cease-fire it had declared, it has killed a policeman and an army officer in the Basque city of Bilbao and sent numerous letter bombs, two of which exploded, causing injuries. Bombs and bomb threats have also disrupted many of Spain's railroad services over the last two weeks.
 
Algeria Deports E.T.A. Leaders
In response, at the urging of Spain, the Algerian Government last week deported six E.T.A. leaders to the Dominican Republic, where they were put under house arrest. Spain also expects Algeria to expel about 40 more members of the organization to countries far from Europe in the coming weeks.
The prospect of more terrorism has nonetheless cast a pall over this country, forcing Spaniards to remember an unresolved problem from the past just as rapid economic growth and the consolidation of democracy have created a mood of optimism about the future.
While more than 600 people have died since E.T.A. began its separatist guerrilla warfare in 1968, its terrorism was at first quietly condoned by many Spaniards who saw it as a reaction to the suppression of all regional identity during the decades of the Franco dictatorship.
But after Franco's death in 1975 paved the way for both democracy and increased autonomy for Spain's regions, sympathy for E.T.A. evaporated throughout the country, including in the Basque region, where support for other nonviolent nationalist parties began to grow.
 
Cooperation With France
A dramatic expression of the region's sentiments came on March 18 this year, when about 200,000 people marched in Bilbao calling for ''peace now, peace forever'' and urging E.T.A. to extend its truce. The demonstration was backed by all regional parties except Herri Batasuna, E.T.A.'s political wing.
At the same time, at the urging of Prime Minister Gonzalez, France has begun clamping down on E.T.A. leaders who have traditionally used its territory as a safe haven for planning terrorist attacks and acquiring weapons. As a result, the Spanish police have at last been able to score important successes against the guerrillas, about 500 of whom are now in jail.
According to Government officials, E.T.A.'s decision to seek negotiations with the Government early this year was evidence of its growing difficulties. And while conservative groups opposed the idea of talks, the officials said the Government had no choice but to test the organization's good will.
The officials said that during the Algiers talks the Government was willing to discuss ways of enabling E.T.A. to abandon terrorism and take part in democratic politics. They said Madrid was also ready to discuss granting amnesty to E.T.A. members who had not participated in violent crimes.
 
'Intolerable Cynicism'
But, they added, the Government made it clear from the start that it would not negotiate the political status of the Basque region. And in this, it had the full support of other Basque parties, which last week blamed E.T.A.'s ''intolerable cynicism'' and its ''totalitarian nature'' for the collapse of the talks.
In justifying its withdrawal from the talks, E.T.A. said that the two sides had agreed privately that they were seeking ''a negotiated political solution'' but that a later Government statement referred only to ''an agreed and final solution,'' omitting any mention of a political settlement.
The Algerian Government, which has traditionally given refuge to E.T.A. terrorists, last week announced the end of its mediation effort, saying neither side had shown ''the least will to make the smallest concession with a view to a political solution.''
While annoyed that the Algerian statement seemed to equate the two sides to the conflict, Spanish officials said that Algeria's expulsion of the six E.T.A. leaders last week and its willingness to deport still more in the coming weeks indicated that the separatists could no longer count on its support.

Graphic

 
photo of an officer slain by guerrillas in Bilbao (AP); map of Spain highlighting Basque region


End of Document