BASQUE CONFLICT SPILLS OVER INTO FRANCE
The New York Times
December 24, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 862 words
Byline: By JOHN DARNTON
Dateline: MADRID, Dec. 23
Body


The terrorist violence that has long plagued the Basque region of northern Spain has spilled into southern France. The development has aroused fears of a ''dirty war'' fought across the mountainous border by Basque separatists and right-wing Spanish extremists.
 The fears were heightened Monday night when a 23-year-old Spaniard living in France and believed to be connected with E.T.A., the Basque separatist organization, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen in a bar where he worked in the town of Bayonne. Witnesses said the assailants fled in a car with Spanish registration.
Terrorist violence that has long plagued Basque region of Spain spills into southern France; Ramon Onaederra, Spaniard living in France and believed to be connected with Basque separatist organization, is fatally shot by unidentified gunmen in Bayonne; killing is thought to be retaliation for attack on two national policemen in San Sebastian; illustration (M)
The killing was thought to be in retaliation for an attack four days earlier on two national policemen in San Sebastian. One policeman died and another was wounded in that assault, which followed the pattern of many E.T.A. assassinations.
In telephone calls to the Spanish news agency E.F.E., a shadowy organization calling itself G.A.L. - representing Spanish words for Antiterrorist Liberation Groups - claimed responsibility for killing the Spaniard in France, Ramon Onaederra.
 
Opposes Sanctuary for E.T.A.
The existence of this organization first emerged two weeks ago, when a kidnapping victim, another Spaniard living in southern France, was released after being held for 10 days. In his pocket was a statement from G.A.L. that said the group was implacably opposed to the French Government because it offered sanctuary to E.T.A. terrorists.
The note vowed that assassinations by E.T.A., whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom, would meet with reprisals, one for one.  In the last year more than 40 deaths in Spain have been attributed to E.T.A.  At a news conference here today, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez rejected the idea that anyone could say the Spanish authorities were engaged in a ''dirty war'' against E.T.A. terrorists.  ''I don't want to lose a war of words,'' Mr. Gonzalez said.  ''Assassination is a 'dirty war' whoever practices it, and the highest marks there go to E.T.A. from any point of view. It's surprising that we can fall into a trap and say that when there is an illegal action against E.T.A. or an E.T.A. militant, something that is no doubt to be condemned, that this constitutes a 'dirty war'.  ''It's surprising that we forget to speak of the 'dirty war' that E.T.A.  practices.  More than 200 members of the state's security forces have been brutally assassinated by E.T.A. and many more people have been kidnapped by E.T.A.''
 
Sensitive Issue With France
Basque terrorism is one of the most sensitive issues between France and Spain. There are about two million people living in the four Basque provinces of northern Spain, and Basques also live on the other side of the border. Until recently, only the Basques on the Spanish side were agitating for their own state. To the anger of successive Spanish governments, Basque separatist leaders operated freely in France, even holding news conferences there.
Madrid has long maintained that bombings, kidnappings and assassinations by E.T.A. would stop or greatly diminish if the French would move against the organization. France's position has been that it cannot arrest or harass refugees unless they are proven to have broken French law.
The quarrel has continued, even though Socialist Governments have come to power both here and in Paris and have pledged to work for better relations out of a sense of solidarity. The issue of terrorism was high on the agenda when Prime Minister Gonzalez met with President Francois Mitterrand this week.
At a news conference after their talks Tuesday, Mr. Gonzalez said he believed he had detected ''good will'' on the part of the French to fight against terrorism. When a reporter asked if he was prepared to end police incursions into France, he replied that he was ''more upset'' by the 500 assassinations committed by E.T.A. since 1977 than by any ''suspected'' border crossings by the Spanish police.
Meanwhile, Herri Batasuna, a Basque political party believed linked to E.T.A., has accused the Spanish Government of complicity in the killing of Mr. Onaederra, the Spaniard in France.
The situation on both sides of the border is tense. On Tuesday in Bayonne, a mob protesting the killing clashed with the police. Four policemen were injured and 20 people arrested.  On the same night in Spain, 50 men carrying chains and clubs attacked the Socialist Mayor of Renteria, who received bruises.
The Spanish press has begun to express concern that a ''dirty war'' could be developing of the kind engaged in by rightists in the recent military dictatorship in Argentina.
In an editorial this week, El Pais, a Madrid daily called on the Government to release whatever information it had on the killing in France and to use its full powers to track down and prosecute G.A.L.


End of Document