BASQUE'S DEATH IN JAIL BRINGS CALL FOR MASS STRIKE
The New York Times
February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 616 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, Feb. 14
Body


Basque nationalists called today for a general strike in their region to protest the death of a suspected Basque terrorist while he was being held by the Madrid police.
The death of Jose Ignacio Arregui Izaguirre, a 30-year-old truck driver who was captured in a gun battle Feb. 4 and who had been held incommunicado for 10 days under a new antiterrorist law, seemed certain to galvanize partisans of the Basque terrorist organization E.T.A. just when it had openly split and been thrown on the defensive by popular sentiment against it in the troubled north.
Mr. Arregui, whom the police accused of several assassinations, died yesterday afternoon in a Madrid prison hospital. According to official reports, his eyes were badly bruised, one lung was full of liquid, his body was covered with hematomas, or swollen areas full of blood, and the soles of his feet had been burned. Such injuries would tend to confirm a recent report by Amnesty International that said torture was still practiced by the police in Spain.
Basque's death in jail brings call for mass strike
Even before an autopsy was performed, Interior Minister Juan Jose Roson dismissed the head of the police medical department and the Madrid plainclothes officer who supervised Mr. Arregui's detention.  Five police officers, who presumably were implicated in the death, were placed at the disposition of an investigating magistrate.
Mr. Arregui's death could generate renewed support for E.T.A., which has become increasingly isolated from the mainstream of Basque public opinion. Last week, there were demonstrations in the Basque region against terrorism after E.T.A.'s ''military'' wing murdered a kidnapped nuclear engineer.
Then, in a bitter open split rarely seen since E.T.A. was founded in 1959, the organization's so-called political-military wing denounced the military branch and accused it of committing ''constant errors'' and, more seriously, said it was resorting ''every day more and more to Fascist methods.''
The political isolation of E.T.A. - its initials stand for Basque Homeland and Liberty - has grown as Madrid has conferred home-rule powers on the region.
Calling Mr. Arregui's death a ''brutal murder,'' the heavily middle-class Basque Nationalist Party, the Socialists and the Communists called a general strike in the Basque region for Monday.  Last Monday, a similar general strike paralyzed the north after the E.T.A. killed Jose Maria Ryan, a 39-year-old nuclear engineer.
''We who condemned the death of Ryan,'' declared Xabier Arzallus, president of the Basque Nationalists, ''have the right to condemn, too, this death.''
''One cannot justify one death and condemn another,'' he added, speaking of the above-ground political arm of E.T.A.'s military branch, which called Mr. Arregui's death a ''state assassination'' and also called for a general strike Monday.
 
Criticism by Rights Group
The death focused attention on the Law of the Suspension of Fundamental Rights, which was adopted in December to help the police fight terrorism. The statute permits a terrorist suspect to be held by the police for 10 days before being allowed to see a lawyer.
Amnesty International, in a report in December, criticized such Spanish legislation and said it contributed to patterns of police mistreatment of prisoners. Torture is specifically banned under the country's two-year-old Constitution.
An autopsy report this evening mentioned bronchial pneumonia and fluid in the lungs among the causes of death. It also listed the many bruises without saying how they had been caused.
''The thing is very clear,'' said Enrique Galavis, director general of prisons, who left no doubt that Mr. Arregui had been tortured to death.


End of Document