BASQUE PEACE EFFORT IS ENDED BY KILLING
The New York Times
February 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 677 words
Byline: By JOHN DARNTON, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, Feb 11
Body


A sudden upsurge in terrorism has upset what many Spaniards viewed as the most promising effort in years to bring peace to the Basque region of northern Spain.
The effort was undertaken at considerable political risk by the head of the regional Basque government, Carlos Garaikoetxea. It centered on prospective three-way talks involving his own Basque Nationalist Party, local representatives of the Socialist Party, and the political wing of E.T.A, the Basque separatist organization.
The talks, which were still in a formative stage, collapsed after guerrillas belonging to E.T.A.'s hard-line ''military'' faction killed a civil guardsman and wounded two seriously in an attack on their vehicle in the town of Ordizia on Feb. 2. Three days later a bomb went off in the head office of the Banco de Vizcaya in Bilbao, killing two employees and wounding seven. One of the wounded later died.
MADRID, Feb 11 - A sudden upsurge in terrorism has upset what many Spaniards viewed as the most promising effort in years to bring peace to the Basque region of northern Spain.
The bombing, at the height of the working day, caused a public outcry. In a statement the next day, E.T.A.'s ''military'' wing apologized, asserting the device had gone off ahead of schedule and before sufficent warning for evacuation could be given.
 
Marchers Condemn Bombing
Political parties and labor unions called demonstrations in the region to condemn the bombing. For the first time, huge throngs paraded in major cities under slogans that directly challenged the separatist organization. ''E.T.A., no - the people united for peace,'' read a banner stretched across the front line of march in Bilbao.
Most political commentators believe that E.T.A. - the initials stand for the Basque words for Basque Homeland and Freedom - still commands some popular support in the region, partly because its fight for the rights of Basques began during the repressions of the Franco dictatorship. But with the advent of democracy, and especially with the rise to power of the Socialists, the situation has changed radically. Now some members of E.T.A. favor giving up the 24-yearlong armed struggle to work for change within the system.
In September a group of about 100 E.T.A. members announced they were laying down their weapons and wanted to seek a political solution. At a subsequent news conference in southern France, some of their leaders said they had been threatened with death by the militants if they returned to Spain.
At the same time, businessmen are bridling under E.T.A. demands that they pay ''revolutionary taxes,'' and the toll of violence has hurt the economy of the region, where unemployment is higher than in the rest of Spain. A large part of the population seems tired of the bombings, kidnappings and assassinations.
 
Peace Effort Launched
The climate apparently persuaded Mr. Garaikoetxea to launch his peace effort. Last month he came to Madrid for talks with Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez and shortly afterward he proposed the three-way negotiations involving regional, not national, representatives. One of the groups to be represented was Herri Batasuna, the People's Unity Party, which is the political wing of ''E.T.A.- military.''
The talks were to center on five points, which were based on E.T.A.'s longstanding five demands for a truce only carefully rephrased and toned down. E.T.A.'s demands were for total selfdetermination, withdrawal of ''occupying forces,'' annexation of neighboring Navarre, release of Basque ''political prisoners'' and ''improvement in the conditions of the Basque working class.''
Mr. Garaikoetxea proposed an end to violence, legalization of political parties advocating Basque independence, a commitment to resolve the Navarre issue, greater powers for locally recruited policemen, and a case-by-case review of the 500 or so Basques convicted of terrorism.
The proposed three-way talks did not get off the ground, however, because the separatists refused to negotiate in the building of the regional government and insisted journalists be present.


End of Document