Basque Separatist, Free From Spanish Prison, Backs Talks
The New York Times
August 31, 2008 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 272 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SAN SEBASTIAN, Spain 
Body


A prominent Basque separatist politician was released from prison on Saturday after serving a 15-month sentence for offenses related to terrorism.
  The separatist, Arnaldo Otegi, is a former leader of the outlawed Batasuna Party, which is considered the political wing of the armed separatist group ETA. Mr. Otegi said Saturday that he believed that talks could help end the separatist conflict in northern Spain.
  ''There is a deep and unresolved political problem in this country which I personally think can only be resolved through dialogue and negotiation,'' Mr. Otegi said. He also called for the release of all Basque separatist prisoners.
  A lower court convicted Mr. Otegi in June 2006 of defending terrorism -- a crime in Spain -- in remarks he had made at a rally in memory of an ETA leader on the 25th anniversary of the leader's  death.
  The Supreme Court rejected his appeal.
  At the time, Batasuna called Mr. Otegi's arrest an act of ''maximum gravity'' and accused the government of Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero of silencing the pro-independence movement's chief representative.
  Mr. Otegi is likely to return to court soon to face other terrorism-related charges, including  participating in illegal political meetings and marches and being a representative of a banned political wing of ETA.
  Spain, the European Union and the United States consider ETA a terrorist group.
  ETA has been responsible for the deaths of more than 820 people, including security forces, politicians and civilians, since the late 1960s, in its campaign for an independent Basque state in northern Spain and western France.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 31, 2008


End of Document