BATTLE CRY: 'WE HELPED DETER TERRORISM'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 28, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 291 words
Byline: BILL BASKERVILL, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NORFOLK, Va.
Body


The aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt, one of the first ships sent abroad in the U.S. war on terror, docked yesterday after a six-month mission, sending crew members streaming ashore into the tearful embraces of family members.
 Thousands at Norfolk Naval Station's Pier 14 hailed the return of the warship from a 189-day cruise.
"USA! USA! USA!" the throng chanted as the first carrier to deploy after Sept. 11 was nudged into the pier by tugboats. Many waved and wept openly before the crew left the ship.
 Sailors waving American flags waved back from the deck of the 1,092-foot carrier.
 "We still have 30 ships out there and thousands of shipmates who continue to do the job," said Adm. Robert J. Natter, commander in chief of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet. "The answer to this [war] is not have we captured Osama Bin Laden … but rather keeping them on the defensive, keeping them running. We are winning."
 Welcoming the sailors at the pier were Secretary of the Navy Gordon England, Sen. George Allen, R-Va., and other dignitaries.
 The ship flew the flag of New York City as it pulled alongside the pier. A banner, fashioned from a bedsheet, proclaimed: "Freedom Endures."
 The Roosevelt launched 60 to 80 combat flights a day into Afghanistan, and the ship's aviators routinely flew 14 hours a day.
 "We helped deter terrorism," said Capt. Stephen S. Voetsch, commander of the carrier air wing.
 Roosevelt departed Norfolk Sept. 19 on a regularly scheduled deployment, the first for a battle group after the Sept. 11 attacks in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
 At a tent for crewmen who are new fathers, Lt. Cmdr. Carther Jorgensen cradled his 4-month old son, Alexander Charles.
 "I'm so glad I'm home. It seems he knew who I was. He smiled."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Win McNamee/Reuters: Home is the sailor.../An officer aboard the USS Theodore Roosevelt shouts to a loved one as the aircraft carrier returned to the U.S. naval base in Norfolk, Va., yesterday after six months at sea. Crew members streamed ashore into the tearful embraces of family members. "USA! USA! USA!" the throng chanted as the carrier was nudged into the pier by tugboats. Many waved and wept openly before the crew left the ship. (Photo, Page A-1)

Load-Date: March 28, 2002


End of Document