Baylor U. speaker focuses on terrorism in Middle East, America
University Wire
September 28, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Lariat via U-Wire
Length: 670 words
Byline: By Tricia D. Greeney, The Lariat
Dateline: Waco, Texas
Body


In her speech "Listening to the Voice of the 'Other': A Palestinian Reflects on Terrorism, the Middle East, and America," Maha El-Taji discussed the plight of Palestinians and the process through which any group can understand the "other."
El-Taji, a Palestinian, also stressed that understanding the history and attitudes of the "other" does not equate to condoning their actions.
Her speech, to a standing room only crowd Thursday afternoon on the third floor of Baylor University's Carroll Library, was the closing event for a lecture series presented by the Center for American and Jewish Studies in conjunction with Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.
El-Taji examined the process by which the opposition can be heard and ultimately understood. El-Taji used her family background in the conflict in the Middle East as an example for the process.
Baylor U.
Dr. Marc Ellis, University professor of American and Jewish Studies, introduced El-Taji by commenting on the importance of confessing individual and national sins. El-Taji was originally scheduled to speak before the events of Sept. 11 but had to alter her speech in order to include a current discussion on terrorism.
"It was another day on the planet for me," El-Taji said as she explained her reaction to the terrorist attacks. "I was not as shocked and horrified as other people were because it came close to home for me."
El-Taji spoke at length about her family background that involved the displacement of her father's family by Jews and the persecution she felt as a Palestinian.
"The hatred that came with that was absolutely binding," Taji said. "How to get over it for me is really understanding the other side, and for me, it was the Jews."
"People aren't born evil, they are put into circumstances," El-Taji said. She explained that her experiences as Palestinian youth led her, at one time, to want to join the Palestinian Liberation Organization.
"There is a sense of injustice that can be multiplied over and over and then by their children," El-Taji said.
"The sense of injustice that Palestinians feel in their gut comes from the sense of having to move out to make room for others," El-Taji said as she recalled the sentiments of her father after his displacement in order to create room for Jews in his hometown.
Identifying with the victimization of others and the opportunity to interact with different cultures and religions were two ways in which El-Taji said she learned to listen to the opposition. She went on to emphasize that the process is continual. El-Taji said her educational opportunities and experiences outside the Arab world pushed her toward a desire to understand others.
Opening up her speech to a question-and-answer session drew several questions concerning resolution of conflict and America's response to the attacks.
"The acts of the U.S. in support of Israel are perceived by Arabs as attacks against them," El-Taji said. "They see American support of Israel in the daily attacks." El-Taji said, "revenge has less to do with religion and more to do with feelings."
"I am terrified, not by terrorist's attacks, but by the retaliation," El-Taji said. "You call it 'war' so it sounds clean. I am afraid because of the nature of the attacks will involve a lot of civilian damage."
Dr. Mark Long, assistant professor in the Baylor Interdisciplinary Core, said that El-Taji's speech "was an appeal to us to hear Palestinians, and in so hearing, to lessen the distance between us."
Spencer Holleman, a Livingston senior, said he was impressed by the honesty and open-mindedness of El-Taji's speech.
"Her speech served to raise awareness toward the reality of the Palestinian's plight because of the creation of a U.S.-supported Israel state," Holleman said.
El-Taji ended her speech with an extended question-and-answer session by highlighting the importance of remembering the humanity of the one's opposition. "We need to see the other as a person who has needs," she said.
(C) 2001 The Lariat via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 28, 2001


End of Document