Be a unifier among people
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)
March 22, 2019 Friday


Copyright 2019 The Pantagraph
Section: LIFE; Pg. D6
Length: 304 words
Byline: DAVID CRENSHAW For the Pantagraph
Body


The mass shooting in New Zealand, like all terrorist acts, was intended to separate us, to make us suspicious of one another, to spark more hatred, and to divide us as human beings. 
How do we know the motive? The terrorists themselves tell us. The New Zealand terrorist, for example, wrote a “manifesto” in which he said that he killed innocent people in order to incite religious bigotry and further violence, and to rally others to join his racist cause. 
Sadly, houses of worship have become targets for terrorists wishing to capture the world’s attention. Synagogues, churches, mosques and temples have been targeted. Terrorism isn't just a problem caused by one group, one religion, one people. It is a universal problem caused by prejudice and hatred, and these sentiments arise from false perceptions about the “other,” from illusory distinctions between people. It is like a disease of heart and mind, threatening the integrity of the entire body of humanity. 
What can an individual do about terrorism? First, be a unifier among people of all races. Second, lay aside prejudice. Third, promote interfaith harmony. As the Baha’i writings explain, “...the prophets of God have come to unite the children of men and not to disperse them, to establish the law of love and not enmity. Consequently, we must lay aside all prejudice — whether religious, racial, political or patriotic; we must become the cause of the unification of the human race.” 
Baha’i writings affirm, “Love ye all religions and all races with a love that is true and sincere and show that love through deeds…” 
The problem of terrorism stems from a desire to perpetuate the divisions and prejudices of the past. Its solution involves a renewed commitment to the law of love. 
Crenshaw of Eureka is a member of the Baha’i Faith. Reach him at davcren@aol.com 

Load-Date: March 22, 2019


End of Document