Be on the lookout for 'Most Wanted'; The latest from Le Carre is an instant classic
USA TODAY
October 7, 2008 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 8D
Length: 420 words
Byline: Carol Memmott
Body


A Most Wanted Man
By John le Carre
Scribner, 322 pp., $28
John le Carre, master of the spy novel, is a keen observer of world events. He made his mark writing suspenseful tales of the Cold War era in such memorable novels as The Spy Who Came in from the Cold and Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy. Decades have passed since the Cold War, but le Carre hasn't lost his touch.
With The Most Wanted Man, his 21st book, he cleverly builds an international story of intrigue -- packed with biting commentary -- around a contemporary hot-button issue: the post-9/11 paranoia that has the world's intelligence agencies scrambling to ferret out suspected and known terrorists at any cost.
When a bedraggled young Russian turns up in Germany, British and German intelligence agents, hungry to make their mark in the war against terrorism, circle this most unlikely of potential terrorists -- unless, of course, that's exactly what he is.
Issa Karpov, we learn, has escaped from a prison in Turkey and claims to be the illegitimate Chechen son of a Red Army colonel. He has come to Hamburg to claim a multimillion-dollar inheritance held for decades at a private bank. The bank is run by Tommy Brue, a disenchanted middle-aged man unknowingly drawn into a web of intrigue that fans of le Carre know can only end badly.
Brue and Annabel Richter, the young civil rights lawyer Issa hires to help him claim his fortune, become pawns in a scheme cooked up by intelligence agencies to prevent money from being funneled to terrorist groups. Issa says he wants his fortune to go Muslim charities. The agencies' spies think otherwise.
Short of any real evidence against Issa or the Muslim academic Dr. Abdullah,  who will handle the disbursement of Issa's money, intelligence agents make assumptions about their guilt based, le Carre writes, on "brilliant deductions they pulled out of the ether regarding the enemy's organizational structures." He derisively labels them "swiftly risen managers of the post-9/11 boom market in intelligence."
Of the trap being set for the seemingly unwitting Abdullah, le Carre has one agent excitedly declare: "If Abdullah is not part of a known network, I will personally make him part of one." If he isn't a terrorist, he will be when they're done with him.
And since no political thriller with ties to terrorism can be spared America's two cents, le Carre drops it Wild West-style into the back end of the sting, giving A Most Wanted Man a provocative and incendiary ending that only le Carre, the master, can pull off. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Christian Barnett
PHOTO, Color

Load-Date: October 7, 2008


End of Document