Be ready for any emergency
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 17, 2009, Friday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 653 words
Byline: Jeffery Harvey
Body


As we approach the 14th anniversary of the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building, we must be reminded of just how narrow our perception of "homeland security" really is.
On April 19, 1995, Timothy McVeigh shattered the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, taking 168 lives. At that time, it was the deadliest act of terrorism on U.S. soil. McVeigh cited, as justification for the bombing, anger at how the government handled the siege of the Branch Davidian ranch near Waco, Texas, and the ambush-arrest of Randy Weaver in northern Idaho at Ruby Ridge.
Our country is still fighting two foreign wars, is less than 90 days into a new administration following a historic election, and is in economic turmoil. Now is a time when citizens may be angry - when someone might be looking to get even. Now is a time when vigilance is a necessity.
How can we identify and eliminate threats and still maintain the freedom that we enjoy? It is easy to say we learned a lesson from Oklahoma City and will look for suspicious activity.
It is true that we have stepped up efforts and passed laws to guide our vigilance. Since Sept. 11, 2001, we now have the color-coded National Threat Advisory.
Several federal public safety agencies were combined under the new Department of Homeland Security to focus on terrorism. The U.S. government has made billions of dollars available to states and local communities to aid in planning efforts.
But with all this focus on terrorism, have we forgotten other hazards we face? The response to Hurricane Katrina was disastrous in and of itself. Basic security, an orderly evacuation and effective media relations were botched during the response. Here in West Virginia, the Sago Mine disaster demonstrated how critical managing public information could be to a successful response. History shows that we did not learn that lesson. On April 16, 2007, Seung-Hui Cho opened fire on the campus of Virginia Tech, killing 32 people. Just days ago, a gunman went on a shooting rampage in Binghamton, N.Y., killing 13 before taking his own life.
Why have all our increased planning and lessons not helped us react better to these emergencies?
Our view of homeland security is shortsighted. The term has created a neatly framed box in which to work. After Oklahoma City, we learned to watch for suspicious activity to prevent potential domestic terrorism, yet we have not learned to question the suspicious activities of someone with a history of mental illness, as was the case with Seung-Hui Cho.
Evacuations during Hurricanes Katrina and Rita were ineffective. Have we only learned to improve hurricane evacuations or have we learned to strengthen our capabilities to evacuate populations from any type of hazard?
The answer lies in whether we think only in the narrow confines of the funding program that is paying for our most recent plan or buying our newest piece of equipment.
For instance, we should not just do a continuity-of-operations plan because we were given money to do one in preparation for pandemic flu. We should have continuity plans that are flexible and applicable to numerous emergen-
cies. We should not just spend the money we receive on an evacuation plan to talk about westward migration from the nation's capital region. We must plan for an "urban to rural" evacuation from any major metropolitan area.
The West Virginia Legislature recently passed legislation regarding notifications for accidents that may delay traffic for more than two hours, and setting suitable amounts of time for industries to report emergencies at their facilities. The state continues to fund local planning efforts for westward migration (or urban to rural evacuations).
Such measures are an excellent beginning. The true test is whether we can challenge ourselves to think creatively to address our risks. The old ways of thinking narrow and planning small don't work. We do not need to repeat these lessons.

Load-Date: April 17, 2009


End of Document