Be the superhero the world needs
LNP (Lancaster, PA)
March 18, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 LNP Media Group, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Length: 869 words
Byline: NAZLI HARDY, Special to LNP
Body


In the terrible aftermath of &lt;a href="https://lancasteronline.com/news/killed-at-mosques-in-one-of-new-zealand-s-darkest/article_1b5ebc41-d4c9-5ac2-a302-325a3e62aa42.html" target="_blank"&gt;the Friday massacre at two mosques&lt;/a&gt; in Christchurch, New Zealand, I felt a need to write.
&lt;a href="https://lancasteronline.com/news/mosque-shooter-a-white-nationalist-seeking-revenge/article_9f121f79-a5e6-5173-8d12-6f9ef1422eb6.html" target="_blank"&gt;A man charged with the shootings was revealed to be&lt;/a&gt; an assault rifle-wielding, right-wing, anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, radical, white nationalist/supremacist. He was cheered on by others who were watching his violent killing spree on social media.
Despite the horror he wrought, Muslims still attended Friday prayers (for Jummah, the day of worship) at mosques around the world. And they will continue to go. For Islamophobia is not news to Muslims.
Imagine if Muslims, Jews, Sikhs, Christians, people of color, minorities, children and women had to stop going to places where they may possibly be attacked. We'd never go anywhere.
Instead, we go on, doing what we need to do, because we know that this world does not belong to terrorists and haters, and we do not obey the rules and contempt that terrorists would impose upon us.
We know we have the same right to be alive on the beautiful earth, on our own terms. So we learn to live, we learn to survive, we learn to be resilient, we learn to thrive, we mourn with one another. We value our friends and neighbors who stand in solidarity with us. And we love deeply those we love, despite the hatred that is directed at us - in our places of worship, in our places of work, everywhere. And no massacre, no terrorism, no hatred can kill the lessons we learn along the way - the lessons we share, and pass on.
There are not "fine people on both sides." Those who carry out violence are violent. Those who propagate bigotry and hatred are haters. There is nothing fine about violence, bigotry or hatred.
You cannot condemn terrorism only when it affects people who are like you, and remain quiet when others are persecuted.
Moderation, neutrality and silence are tantamount to solidarity with the hatred. Only outspoken outrage will suffice in the face of terrorism and bigotry. Lots of "little" and "harmless" bigotry accumulates to mountains of festering bigotry, and sometimes it leads to massacres.
We should ask ourselves if we are playing any part in the accumulation of bigotry. If we are, we have the power to stop and reverse the course of our actions and words.
Our place of worship, the color of our skin, our ability to speak English, the money we make - these are not markers of our humanity. Standing strong with those who are vulnerable in our community, especially when others will not, is a marker of our humanity. And there are many such bright flames of humanity, everywhere. Anyone can join forces with them and become the superheroes of humanity.
As an educator in computer science and a mother, I subject my students and children to my soapbox lectures on the internet and social media. The internet is an empowering and useful tool - until we surrender our power to the internet by becoming its tool. YouTube, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram are complicit in the marketing of hatred and bigotry and are open platforms for the propagation of terrorism.
While hatred and bigotry have existed since time immemorial, they have never had such a burgeoning and embracing ocean of technology to absorb and spread their message indiscriminately.
Without people propagating the hatred, social media is inert. So, ultimately, the culpability falls on politicians, and people with large platforms, who fan the flames of violence and hatred. We all know a few of those. Anyone can stand up to them, and become the superheroes of humanity.
Some of New Zealand's 49 dead - as of Friday afternoon - were refugees who had sought sanctuary from terrorism elsewhere in the world. Their loss is immeasurable, shattering. They were precious, irreplaceable and beloved in a million ways to their families, who will mourn them forever.
Millions of us around the world mourn with them.
Terror has just one religion: hatred. Those who do not adhere to it must unite in our common humanity and take every opportunity to stand against any form of terrorism.
Given the shootings and other hate crimes we've seen take place at churches, temples, mosques and synagogues, it appears that anti-immigration, anti-Muslim, anti-Jewish, anti-human sentiments are both a local and worldwide problem. Therefore, the solutions are worldwide and local.
Let's not wait for politicians and social media giants to solve the problem. Peace does not benefit them; it benefits us. So we - you and I - will have to solve the problem in our own little ways, trusting that it will lead to big change.
By what you do, by what you do not do, by what you say, by what you do not say, you can start a chain reaction against bigotry and hatred, against terrorism. You have the power of a superhero.
Nazli Hardy, MBA, Ph.D., is an associate professor of computer science at Millersville University, and a Millersville resident. Twitter: @Nazlinspired.

Load-Date: March 18, 2019


End of Document