Beaumont, Texas, Institute to Offer Terrorism Education
The Beaumont Enterprise
March 12, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
Copyright 2003 The Beaumont Enterprise
Length: 575 words
Byline: By Jamie Reid
Body


BEAUMONT, Texas--When the national threat level is upgraded from yellow to orange, many first responders won't be sure what to do, said Ken Holshouser, general manager of American Institute of Homeland Defense.
They'll open their eyes a little wider. Maybe they'll stop a few more people.
Holshouser doesn't believe that's enough to stop terrorists. He wants to train local first responders and anyone who is interested to think like a terrorist.
New courses at Lamar Institute of Technology, which kick off in April, will teach students about terrorism, counterintelligence and weapons of mass destruction, among other topics.
Students can take nine classes in one subject area to earn a certificate.
Each of five programs contains 12 courses, for a total of 60 courses. Students can take any of the $ 75 courses, but to earn a certificate they must complete nine courses in one program area. A final general program also is offered.
The five programs are Understanding and Combating Terrorism; Investigating, Preventing and Surviving Terrorists for Law Enforcement; Homeland Security Intelligence Operations for Law Enforcement; Weapons of Mass Destruction: Anticipation, Preparation and Prevention for First Responders; and Emergency Management.
One eight-hour course will be offered on Saturdays. Each course will be offered about once each year and the courses in each program will be offered about once every five weeks.
Holshouser hopes the courses attract about 100 people each Saturday.
"These 60 courses are really teasers," Holshouser said. "Eight hours on a topic will not make you an expert."
Holshouser hopes the program continues to grow. By fall, he hopes LIT will offer an associate degree in homeland security. Students will take eight weeks of each course by computer and then meet for eight hours on a Saturday, Holshouser said.
Farther down the road, he hopes LIT and Lamar University will hook up to offer bachelor's and graduate degrees in homeland security.
The National Institute of Technology in San Jose, Calif., already offers a homeland security program. Sandia National Laboratory and Monterey's Naval Postgraduate School offer master's degree programs in homeland security.
Holshouser also believes other community colleges throughout the state will adopt the LIT curriculum. He would not say what schools were examining the program.
When other colleges adopt it, people can drive to different locations to complete their hours quickly, Holshouser said.
Trained law enforcers will teach the courses, said Holshouser, a former U.S. Army intelligence officer. Some instructors, located all over the nation, will fly into Southeast Texas to teach the courses.
Holshouser expects firefighters, law enforcement officers and health-care workers to take courses through LIT. He hopes members of the community jump in as well.
Holshouser, who also will teach, said many of the courses will be hands-on rather than "death by Power Point."
Student in the document fraud class will handle identification tags when looking for clues of fraud. In the explosives class, they will examine explosives so they can recognize them.
Holshouser believes Beaumont is a great spot to start the program. In Southeast Texas, there are big-value oil refineries, correctional facilities and ports all potential targets of a terrorist attack, he said.
-----
To see more of The Beaumont Enterprise, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.southeasttexaslive.com 

Load-Date: March 13, 2003


End of Document