Beavercreek neighbors stunned by news of ISIS-related arrest
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 25, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Dayton Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 270 words
Byline: Chris Stewart John Bedell
Body


BEAVERCREEK —
Neighbors were shocked to learn that federal investigators had charged a Beavercreek teenager with trying to help an ISIS affiliated group.
 FULL DETAILS: Beavercreek man accused of trying to join ISIS, faces terrorism related charge
 Naser Almadaoji, 19, was arrested at a Columbus airport on Wednesday with tickets to Kazakhstan. He planned to go from there to Afghanistan to support ISIS, according to U.S. Attorney for the Southern District Benjamin Glassman.
 TRENDING: Springboro HS closed after overnight break-in
 In Beavercreek on Thursday, James Fisher, who lives near Almadaoji, said, "I'm extremely shocked that somebody that close to me is thinking about joining a terrorist group like that. In my opinion if they don't want to be here, then why are they here?"
 "But this is kind of scary thinking that someone that close to me is a possible terrorist," he added of Almadaoji.
 Fisher said the of people living at the house: "They kind of keep quiet. I see them, but because of the direction where it's at, I don't have any contact with them."
 Another neighbor, a man named Dan who declined to give his last name, said he saw Beavercreek police at the house on Wednesday.
 "Ten or 12 people over there talking," he said. "I didn't actually see the FBI or anything like that. But Beavercreek police were over there talking to them.
 "Obviously it's really surprising. You hear about this stuff on the news, TV, stuff like that. But when you walk out your front door and you see the police over there, you know it makes you think about it."
 "You don't think it's going to be right here in Beavercreek, Ohio."

Graphic

 
Caption Naser Almadaoji (Contributed Photo/Montgomery County Jail)

Load-Date: November 16, 2018


End of Document