BEEF UP INTELLIGENCE, SENATOR URGES; U.S. VULNERABLE TO TERRORISTS, WARNS LEAHY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 1, 1993, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1B
Length: 749 words
Byline: Bob Adams Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau Chief
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


THE UNITED STATES remains highly vulnerable to terrorist attacks and can prevent them only with better intelligence, says Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., a leading congressional expert on terrorism.
Leahy held hearings on terrorism in recent years as chairman of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on technology and the law. He commented in a telephone interview Saturday from his home in Vermont, following the bombing at the World Trade Center on Friday.
Leahy, the former vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, is now chairman of the Senate appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations and still chairs the judiciary panel.
Leahy said he believes that terrorism is one of the biggest threats the United States faces.
"We're not in a position where we have to worry about armies marching on us," Leahy said. "The biggest danger (on American soil) isn't from 600,000 troops, but from six dedicated terrorists."
The senator said that if the New York explosion were a terrorist attack, it represented only a hint of what could happen. "That could just as well have been an explosive in an air shaft, wrapped around a bottle of anthrax spores.  And you could have had hundreds of thousands of people killed.
"We guard our airports carefully. It would be hard to carry a bomb through security at LaGuardia (Airport). But we also have hundreds of unaccounted-for Stinger ground-to-air missiles. They're available for sale to just about anybody. You could sit out in a parking lot, and, before anybody could stop you, shoot down a jumbo jet taking off. These can be operated without a great deal of skill."
Leahy said the nation's power and telecommunications grids also are vulnerable to attack, without the back-up systems to replace them. As for the beefed-up security on Capitol Hill since a bombing there in 1983, Leahy said that, in most cases, "a B-minus high school student could penetrate it."
He added, "It has tied up a lot of police officers and inconvenienced a lot of people visiting the Hill and really wouldn't do much to protect against something like what we saw in New York.
"For the next week or so, it will tighten down considerably, which will give everybody a sense of satisfaction but won't really deter anything."
Leahy said stepped-up intelligence is the only real way to prevent terrorist attacks. He criticized U.S. intelligence agencies for being focused on Cold War concerns rather than new potential threats, such as those posed by Middle East groups or radical Serbs or Croats.
"I'm not satisfied at all," Leahy said. "It seems the more esoteric the language of the group, the less intelligence we have on them. I think we spend too much time worrying about the ideology of various groups and not enough worrying about their capabilities."
FBI Director William S. Sessions said on television Saturday that "we're very well prepared" to head off terrorist attacks. He said terrorist-type incidents in the United States had dropped from about 100 in 1981 to virtually none last year.
David Christian, a spokesman for the CIA, said he had no comment on Leahy's remarks.
In another reaction, Rep. James M. Talent, R-Mo., a member of the House Armed Services Committee, said federal officials should focus on determining whether the New York incident was the beginning of a wave of anti-American terrorism.
"The possibility that this might be the first of a new wave of terrorist activity against the U.S. is chilling," Talent said. He cautioned, however, that it was too early to blame the FBI or the CIA for failing to predict or prevent the explosion.
Rep. Ike Skelton, D-Mo., chairman of a House Armed Services subcommittee, said he was eager to find out whether the apparent bombing was related to the strife in the former Yugoslavia. "Right now, this calls for a first-class FBI investigation. I think Congress should wait until we know more about what happened in New York."
Leahy said the openness of a democratic society precluded the draconian steps that might prevent any terrorist attack. That's why advance knowledge of terrorists' plans is the only effective way to stop them, he said.
He said the United States must not let terrorist attacks, or the threat of them, change American foreign policy. "We've always defended ourselves against the possibility of a superpower taking us on. If we suddenly let a handful of people - who may be fanatics from whatever part of the world - change our policy, then they've proven more powerful than any superpower," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo by AP - Officer John Liegel inspecting damage Saturday in the Port Authority's Police Operations Control Center under the World Trade Center. The center's public address system was knocked out Friday by the damage the explosion caused to this office. (2) Photo Headshot of Sen.  (Patrick J.) Leahy

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document