Bees have a nose for bombs But researchers say it's doubtful whether they will ever be enlisted in the war on terrorism.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 9, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A23
Length: 245 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SANTA FE, N.M. 
Body


Here's the latest buzz on detecting explosives: bomb-sniffing bees.
A study at Los Alamos National Laboratory has found that honeybees can be trained to detect explosives, even in tiny quantities.
"These bees really perform," said bee biologist Timothy Haarmann, the study's leader.
Whether honeybees will ever be enlisted in the war on terrorism looks doubtful at this point.
In thousands of trials conducted over the past 18 months at the nuclear weapons lab, bees stuck out their tongues when they smelled explosives. The bees even underwent field trials, successfully sniffing out explosives in a simulated roadside bomb, in a vehicle, and on a person rigged like a suicide bomber.
The insects have a phenomenal sense of smell, rivaling that of dogs, Haarmann said.
The researchers found that ordinary honeybees can readily be trained by being exposed to the odor of an explosive, then given sugar water as a reward. After a few times, the bee, anticipating the sugar water, will stick out its tongue at the smell of the explosive.
The study was funded by the Department of Defense's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Despite the positive test results, the agency said it does not see a future for bomb-detecting bees in the military.
"Bees are not reliable enough for military tactical use at this point," the agency said in a statement this week. "We see no clear pathway to make them reliable enough to make it worth risking the lives of our service men and women."

Graphic

 
PHOTO
PHOTO - A honeybee receives a sugar water reward during tests at the lab.  The Associated Press / Los Alamos National Laboratory

Load-Date: December 9, 2006


End of Document