Behind facades Lorraine Adams' fast-paced 'Harbor' explores nature of terrorism, sanctuary
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 12, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Life; Pg. P3F
Length: 616 words
Byline: Amy Driscoll Knight Ridder Newspapers
Body


AN illegal immigrant plunges into the icy waters of Boston harbor. It's a disorienting immersion that shocks body and soul. Up is down, down is up. He swims to shore, arms freezing, hands barely able to grab the rungs of a ladder as he pulls himself out of the water.
The jarring first moments of Lorraine Adams' razor-sharp debut novel hurl the reader headfirst into an intimate exploration of the nature of terrorism and political sanctuary in modern-day America. It's a vivid, fast-paced entry into an immigrant's story that is part thriller, part social commentary and at times darkly funny.
The murky and confusing underworld of illegal America is revealed in film noir fashion: a light beneath the door, a flicker at the edge of peripheral vision, a subtle shift in tone. Nothing is stated; everything implied.
The immigrant is a young Algerian named Aziz who leaps into the frigid blackness after stowing away in the hold of a tanker for 52 days. He finds shelter ashore, first in an abandoned signal shed, then with Algerians he knew as a child.
But the world Aziz has entered is confusing, filled with contradictions, shady characters and the drudgery of the downtrodden. He puzzles out the city around him, learning the language with the help of other immigrants. He works as a busboy, a dishwasher, a waiter when times are good. He lives with others like himself who have no papers, no concrete existences.
He wonders if he is safe, if he can plan a future and feel secure in his new country. He carries the burden of those still at home, wondering if he'll measure up to their expectations or cause them shame.
He quickly realizes that life in Boston isn't so different from what he left behind, despite the acres of televisions, vast fields of fluffy towels, gallons of hot water gushing from shining showerheads. Even in the United States, there is treachery, ambiguity, fickle justice. And there is fear - of police, authority, the friends who could turn on him in a heartbeat.
Before he even begins to understand English, he has committed insurance fraud. Hospitalized after his trip in the tanker's hold, he is treated under someone else's insurance. His Algerian friends warn him to say nothing.
But that's not his only problem: One of his more menacing roommates is doing something illegal. Is it drugs? Stolen goods? Smuggling? And the blonde American woman, Heather, who sleeps with Rafik and drives a BMW - why is she living with them? He doesn't know, doesn't ask. He has learned the basic lesson of new immigrants: Mind your own business.
The scenes in discos are sly observations of American social mores. Aziz and his friends spend their minimum-wage paychecks on designer jackets or shoplift Versace clothing to impress women. They are bewitched by the sexuality so openly on display. They watch closely as young men from Harvard stride into bars with loud voices and crude manners, taking over the place. Harvard, they decide, must be "the school of playboys."
But discos at night and menial labor during the day can't make the past go away. As months pass, Aziz fights increasingly vivid flashbacks: burying a murdered girl in the Sahara, atrocities he doesn't want to remember, scenes of military life. Slowly, a question emerges: Are Aziz's friends terrorists? Is he?
Adams, a former Washington Post reporter who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1992 for investigative work, has written a terrific book, weaving suspense and dread in rhythms that grow even more rapid as the novel concludes. With its relevant references to terrorism and staggering hallucinatory intensity, "Harbor" leaves the reader reeling, wondering - as we do so often in life - how much is real and how much delusion.

Load-Date: September 13, 2004


End of Document