Benazir assassination case accused disappears from Pak jail
Metro Vartha
July 10, 2018 Tuesday


Copyright 2018 Vartha News Network Pvt Ltd All Rights Reserved
Length: 299 words
Dateline: Lahore 
Body


Lahore, July 10 -- A man acquitted in the assassination case of former Pakistan prime minister Benazir Bhutto was reported as missing from the high-security Kot Lakhpat jail here, a media report said today.
Benazir, the first woman prime minister of Pakistan, was killed in a gun and suicide attack at an election rally in Rawalpindi on December 27, 2007.
The accused, Rafaqat Hussain's father filed a plea to the Rawalpindi bench in the Lahore High Court (LHC) and claimed his son had gone missing from the the prison, Express News reported.
He maintained that Hussain was acquitted in the case but was still being detained in jail.
Justice Sadaqat Ali Khan accepted the application for hearing and issued a notice to the local senior police official and directed for a reply to be submitted on July 16, the report said.
An Anti-Terrorism Court (ATC) had acquitted Hussain in August 2017, however, he was kept in detention, it said.
Earlier, an anti-terrorism court acquitted five accused for lack of evidence and branded former military ruler Pervez Musharraf a fugitive.
ATC Judge Mohammad Asghar Khan found two police officers guilty of "mishandling the crime scene", making them the only people to have been convicted over the assassination of Benazir.
The judge not only declared Musharraf a "proclaimed offender", but also ordered confiscation of his property.
In 2013, Musharraf was charged with murder, criminal conspiracy for murder, and facilitation for murder. But he has been in self-imposed exile in Dubai ever since a travel ban was lifted three years later, the report said.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from MetroVaartha English. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

Load-Date: July 10, 2018


End of Document