Benefit plans often exclude war claims
Business Insurance
February 4, 1991


Copyright 1991 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: WAR IN THE GULF; Pg. 37
Length: 687 words
Byline: By COLLEEN JOHNSON
Body


Non-military employers of many of the nation's largest companies would not be covered by their group benefit plans for injuries or death caused by acts of war, according to a recent survey.
In addition, some of the employers' group benefit plans exclude coverage for injuries or death resulting from acts of terrorism, reports the survey by Buck Consultants Inc. of New York.
The survey also found that many of those firms have implemented special travel policies and security measures.
"It is interesting to see that the majority of the respondents have already reviewed their benefit plans to determine if they have exclusions for a loss suffered because of an act of war or terrorism," said Frederick W. Rumack, director of tax and legal services at Buck.
"While the terrorism risk in the U.S. might appear to be remote, it is still very important that all companies review their benefit plans to determine exactly what their insurance policies cover and what action they will take if a loss occurs," Mr. Rumack said.
The results of Buck's survey, "Operation Desert Storm -- War and Terrorism Exclusions in Benefit Plans," are based on a phone survey of 56 Fortune 1,000 companies conducted shortly after the Persian Gulf war began.
Not all companies answered all questions on the survey, which was released last week.
Twenty-three companies --or 41% -- of the 56 survey respondents said they have checked to determine whether benefits plans exclude both war- and terrorism-related losses.
Seventeen respondents, or 30.4%, said they checked their plans only for war exclusions, while two others said they checked only for terrorism exclusions.
The survey found that among survey respondents':
* Accidental death and dismemberment plans, 26 of 53 -- or 49% -- contained war exclusions, and eight of 49 -- or 16% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Group health plans, 19 of 52 -- or 37% -- contained war exclusions, and seven of 48 -- or 15% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Long-term disability plans, 18 of 52 -- or 35% -- contained war exclusions, and six of 48 -- or 13% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Business travel accident plans, 17 of 53 -- or 32% -- contained war exclusions, and seven of 49 -- or 14% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Short-term disability plans, 15 of 52 -- or 29% -- contained war exclusions, and five of 47 -- or 11% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Group term life plans, 12 of 53 -- or 23% -- contained war exclusions, and five of 49 -- or 10% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
* Group universal life plans, three of 52 -- or 6% -- contained war exclusions, and one of 48 -- or 2% -- contained terrorism exclusions.
However, the survey noted: "On the issue of terrorism, many organizations don't know if plans have an exclusion, either because the issue had not been sufficiently addressed or because in reviewing the plans this was found to be an 'extremely gray area.'"
Among 37 companies that responded when asked whether they would compensate an employee for a war or terrorism loss excluded from a plan, 18 -- or 49% -- said they would not be compensated; eight -- or 22% -- said they would be conmpensated; and 11 -- or 30% -- were undecided.
Fifteen of 52 responding companies, or 28.8%, have implemented special travel policies because of the threat of terrorism, the survey found.
Fourteen employers have restricted international travel -- with six employers prohibiting all international travel -- and five employers have restricted domestic travel -- with two firms restricting all such travel, the survey found.
"My own sense is . . . the insurance claim would be the least" of employers' concerns if an employee were injured or killed while on a business trip, said Henry von Wodtke, a benefit consultant with Buck.  "They're restricting (travel) where they can, because they don't want to have employee losses."
The survey also found that eight -- or 14.5% -- of 55 companies said they are providing "additional assistance programs to employees who are troubled by the crisis in the Middle East."
However, none of those respondents developed an EAP specifically because of the war.


End of Document