Benghazi Attacker Gets 22 Years, Disappointing Prosecutors Who Sought Life
The New York Times 
June 27, 2018 Wednesday 11:04 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1020 words
Byline: Adam Goldman
Highlight: A federal judge said the militant, Ahmed Abu Khattala, was essentially convicted of property crimes, which did not warrant a life sentence.
Body


WASHINGTON — A former militia leader was sentenced on Wednesday to 22 years in prison for his role in the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, that killed four, including the United States ambassador, and set off a political firestorm.
The sentence was a disappointment for federal prosecutors and family members who had urged a federal judge to send the militant, Ahmed Abu Khattala, 47, to prison for the rest of his life, believing he was remorseless and still a danger.
But the judge, Christopher R. Cooper, said Mr. Khattala was essentially convicted of property crimes and that his actions did not warrant a life sentence. Judge Cooper praised the government for its professionalism.
“I really hope you appreciate what a fair trial means,” the judge told Mr. Khattala, who sat nearly motionless in a green jumper suit during the hearing in the federal courthouse not far from the Justice Department.
Mr. Khattala was convicted last year of four charges but acquitted of 14 other serious counts after a seven-week trial. A jury found him guilty on a pair of terrorism charges and taking part in the attack on the diplomatic facility but not on a nearby secret C.I.A. base. The mixed verdict was a setback for prosecutors, who had sought to hold him responsible for the killings of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens; another State Department employee, Sean Smith; and two C.I.A. security contractors.
Prosecutors and F.B.I. agents had assembled an array of evidence against Mr. Khattala in the Sept. 11, 2012, attack. They relied on an informant who earned Mr. Khattala’s trust and testified against him during the trial. Investigators also had video footage of Mr. Khattala with a gun at the diplomatic facility stormed by members of his militia.
Mr. Stevens and Mr. Smith died at the diplomatic facility. Hours later, militants attacked the nearby C.I.A. base with mortars and small arms. The contractors, Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty, were killed there, and three others were seriously wounded.
Prosecutors had hoped the gun charge — carrying a semiautomatic weapon during a crime of violence — would send him to prison for the rest of his life. But the judge imposed only the mandatory decade in prison.
Judge Cooper said Mr. Khattala was a “participant and leader” in the initial attack on the diplomatic facility. Members of militia were there, and he talked to them before, during and after the attack.
Mr. Khattala had spent a decade in a Libyan prison, where he endured brutal conditions and recruited members of his militia, prosecutors said. He later fought during the revolution, helping to overthrow Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the dictator who ruled Libya for 42 years.
Judge Cooper said Mr. Khattala struck him as a creature of a violent and repressive environment and capable of ordering acts of violence. But he said he had doubts about whether Mr. Khattala was a “stone-cold terrorist, as the government made you out to be.”
Before sentencing Mr. Khattala, Judge Cooper reminded the courtroom that before the attacks were viewed mostly as a political firestorm, they were a crime scene with real victims.
Mr. Woods, a former member of the Navy SEALs, was one of them. His father, Charles Woods, called Mr. Khattala an “unrepentant terrorist.” Charles Woods said his son had become a father himself days before the attack and had pledged to make Benghazi his last assignment.
“I’m not here to seek vengeance or retribution,” Mr. Woods said. “How can this be done? By giving him the maximum. It would be wrong to give him anything less.”
After the sentencing, the United States attorney’s office in Washington issued a terse statement detailing the sentence. Mr. Khattala’s lawyer declined to comment but appeared relieved that the judge had not agreed with prosecutors on a life sentence.
During the hearing, Mr. Khattala’s lawyer, Jeffrey D. Robinson, said his client was not a monster and implored the judge not to “pass a sentence as if he had been convicted on all counts and of murder.”
One of the prosecutors, Michael C. DiLorenzo, compared Mr. Khattala’s case to that of the bombings of the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998. A suspect, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, was acquitted on all but one of the more than 280 charges of conspiracy and murder he faced. Nonetheless, the judge in the case sentenced Mr. Ghailani to life in prison.
Judge Cooper seemed skeptical of the comparison to Mr. Khattala’s case.
It is not clear whether Mr. Khattala’s sentence will affect the government’s continuing operations to catch and prosecute those responsible for the Benghazi attacks. More than a dozen people have been charged.
Republicans, including Attorney General Jeff Sessions, and conservative news media commentators have attacked the use of the civilian courts system for terrorism cases. Mr. Sessions has said for years that terrorism suspects should be held and prosecuted at the wartime prison at the naval base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
He has said that terrorists do not deserve the same legal rights as common criminals and that such trials were too dangerous to hold in the United States.
Critics have also argued that civilian trials present a greater risk of disclosures of classified information and could turn courthouses into targets for terrorist attacks.
Judge Cooper took a swipe at that argument, saying that federal courts could handle terrorism trials with voluminous classified information. And anybody who disagreed “obviously did not come and watch this one.”
He described American justice as “swift” and “thorough,” in stark contrast to the military tribunals being held at Guantánamo Bay detention camp, where five of the men accused of carrying out the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks await a trial not expected to begin until 2020.
Catie Edmondson contributed reporting. 
PHOTO: Ahmed Abu Khattala, a Libyan militant, was sentenced on Wednesday to 22 years in prison in the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya. (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
Libyan Convicted of Terrorism in Benghazi Attacks but Acquitted of Murder
Benghazi Attacks Suspect Is Captured in Libya by U.S. Commandos

Load-Date: June 29, 2018


End of Document