Best 9/11 lesson: Keep calm, carry on
USA TODAY
August 24, 2011 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 641 words
Byline: Richard Ben-Veniste
Body


Ten years after 9/11, we have made ourselves safer and more vigilant. It is time to replace the Chicken Little "sky is falling" reaction to terrorist activity in the United States with a more mature national resiliency that deprives the terrorists of the disproportionate climate of fear they seek to create.
Simply put, terrorism is aimed at creating terror; the best antidote is a nation that refuses to be terrorized. While we must not let down our guard, neither should we allow ourselves to be manipulated into excessive or counterproductive reactions to such events.
Based on an intensive investigation into why we were vulnerable to the attacks of that day, the bipartisan 9/11 Commission made a number of recommendations to make us safer. Most of our suggestions have been incorporated into the fabric of our national defense. We are more alert, more interconnected, more willing to share information and better able to gather and exploit intelligence than we were  10 years ago. At long last, Osama bin Laden has been subtracted from the equation.
While in many respects we are safer, our success in killing off much of al-Qaeda's senior leadership and in detecting and interrupting larger scale plots has led to an uptick in one-off attempts and home-grown terrorists. It is unrealistic to believe that we can achieve perfection in the prevention of such attacks, particularly inasmuch as lone-wolf events are all the more difficult to detect.
However, we have a penchant for overreaction to even failed attempts. The paroxysms of finger-pointing and political declamation following attempts by the so-called "Underwear Bomber" in 2009 and the "Times Square Bomber" in 2010 are but two examples. Unfortunately, some of our leaders -- fanned by our 24/7 hyperventilated news delivery system -- have found it politically advantageous to exploit fears around such events, becoming de facto enablers of the very terror groups we seek to eliminate.
I do not mean to suggest that we can be complacent about terrorist attacks on our home soil or that we should not require accountability. It is time, however, to have an adult conversation about how we as a nation can deny our enemies a reaction far disproportionate to the actual damage they cause.
History teaches us that the unity of purpose that characterized America's immediate response to 9/11 can be translated into resiliency that would deny terrorists their chief goal. When Britain faced a German war machine intent on demoralizing and breaking the will of the British people, the Ministry of Information came up with the slogan "Keep Calm and Carry On," characterizing the determination of a nation to remain steadfast despite a relentless aerial bombardment. This spirit of national resiliency countered a far more existential threat than modern-day terrorists pose to the United States.
Among the areas where we have made significant progress since 9/11 is in treating ordinary citizens as informed partners in combating terrorism. Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano has replaced the essentially useless color-coded alert system with a new information-based paradigm, providing specific information that the public can better evaluate and act upon. Similarly, the "see-something, say-something" program has empowered citizens to play a role as "force multipliers" for law enforcement.
Building a robust spirit of resiliency is another way ordinary citizens can contribute meaningfully to our nation's defense. A strong society does not overreact or abandon its core values in the process of defeating an act of terrorism. As we consider the possibility of attacks on our home soil in the future, let's present the terrorists with a united front, not a glass jaw.
Richard Ben-Veniste was a member of the 9/11 Commission. He is a partner at Mayer Brown LLP in Washington, D.C. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Joshua Roberts, AFP

Load-Date: August 24, 2011


End of Document