Better-Armed Muslims Warn Croats - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 857 words
Byline: By CHUCK SUDETIC,

By CHUCK SUDETIC,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: MOSTAR, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Nov. 5
Body


In this war-ravaged city, where Muslims and Croats joined forces in June to break a Serbian siege, the leaders of the main Muslim party say the prospect of long-term violence and terrorism will head off any possibility that the Croats will join the Serbs in carving up Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Embittered by recent fighting between Croats and the Muslim-dominated forces of the Bosnian Government, and by indications that the Croats are tightening their grip in parts of the 20 percent of Bosnian territory now under their control, many Muslims have started equating the republic's Croatian forces with the Serbs, who have seized 70 percent of the country.
Some Muslim political and military figures have even asserted that the Croats and Serbs, who made up 17 and 31 percent respectively of the prewar population of 4.4 million, have struck a deal to divide the country and leave the Muslims, who made up 43 percent of the population, with 10 percent of the territory.
"The Croats have carried out a classic military takeover," said Arif Pasalic, the Government's commander in Mostar. "Their aim is clear: to create a state within a state and eventually merge it with Croatia."
 
Forces Allied Against Serbs
 In spite of such assertions, President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and his Bosnian counterpart, Alija Izetbegovic, on Sunday renewed pledges to ally their forces against the Serbs, and the main Muslim party leaders here say that they will implement this week a Croatian proposal for a 50-50 allocation of positions in a joint local police force and other institutions.
"It is simply not in the Croats' interests to make enemies of the Muslims," said Ismet Hadziosmanovic, local chairman of Bosnia's main Muslim party, the Democratic Action Party. "The consequences for the Croats would be catastrophic."
"If the Croats seek more than 50 percent of the political power, there will be terrorism against them," he said. "That would bring a bloody three-way war. The world community would also give Croatia the same treatment it gave Serbia: economic sanctions."
"A balance of terror now exists," he said, asserting that thanks to Arab money, the once poorly armed Muslims now possess firepower almost equal to that of the Croats. "Franjo Tudjman and Mate Boban understand this."
Mr. Boban is the leader of the Bosnian Croats. With Mr. Tudjman's backing, Mr. Boban and his supporters formed a war government here and overthrew a faction called the Croatian Democratic Union that had been participating in the Sarajevo Government.
 
'Nothing Left to Lose'
 Sadi Cemalovic, a Democratic Action Party official, said:
"The Croats cannot create a state here without the Muslims. They cannot exist here economically and culturally without a Bosnian state. There would be no end to the fighting and terrorism. We have more fighters. We have time on our side. We have a just cause. And we are ready to accept losses because we have nothing left to lose."
Mr. Hadziosmanovic smiled as he pressed his finger onto a copy of a draft constitution for Bosnia and Herzegovina drawn up by United Nations and European Community negotiators in Geneva. The document calls for subdividing the country into as many as 10 autonomous regions instead of breaking it into Muslim, Serbian and Croatian cantons, as the Croats and Serbs demand.
"This is our guarantee," he said. "I would sign this document with my eyes closed."
Croatia has played an enigmatic role in Bosnia and Herzegovina since war began here seven months ago.
 
Supplying Troops and Weapons
 Arguing that it is defending Croats from Serbs, the Zagreb Government has supplied the Croatian Defense Council with troops and weapons despite a United Nations arms embargo against the former Yugoslav republics.
Croats have also sold war materiel to the Bosnian Army; all arms deliveries must cross Croatia.
"Most of the Muslims' weapons came from Croatian hands," said Bozo Rajic, the Croatian Defense Council's vice president, adding that Croatia has accepted 600,000 Bosnian refugees. Lately, though, Croatia has refused to accept any more.
"Equating the Croats with the Serbs, who have carried out ethnic cleansing, is unjust," Mr. Rajic said. "The Serbs would have taken over all of Bosnia and Herzegovina if it had not been for the Croatian forces."
 
'No Sense' for Deals With Serbs
 "It makes no sense for us to make any deals with the Serbs," said Jadranko Prlic, head of the Croatian Defense Council, as nearby explosions of Serbian shells rattled the taped-up office windows. "Only the Serbs want a Muslim-Croat conflict.
"We want a Bosnia and Herzegovina that will have all the attributes of a state. But we want a certain level of autonomy."
Mr. Prlic and Mr. Hadziosmanovic said the recent clashes between their groups were caused by extremists on both sides. "There will always be extremists," Mr. Prlic said. "We must create a legal order that will deal with them."
Despite their stated commitment to Bosnia, Croatian leaders have fueled Muslim fears by negotiating separately with the Serbs over cantonization, fighting to defend only Croatian-populated territories and hampering some arms deliveries to Bosnian forces.
Correction

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about relations between Croats and Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly to their ethnic background in some copies. Both groups are Slavic.

Correction-Date: November 7, 1992, Saturday

Graphic

 
Photo: Josip Jurisic saying goodbye yesterday to his wife, Jasminka, and his son Bojan as they left Sarajevo. (Reuters)
 
Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina showing location of Mostar.

Load-Date: November 6, 1992


End of Document