Better terrorism through technology, engineering
University Wire
October 31, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 The Collegiate Times via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 821 words
Byline: By Devin Stone, The Collegiate Times; SOURCE: Virginia Tech
Dateline: BLACKSBURG, Va. 
Body


This summer, a 34-day war between Israel and Lebanon produced magnificent suffering for many. Over 7,000 air strikes were launched by Israel killing over a 1,000 people (a third of whom were children), injuring a little over 4,000 and displacing around 970,000 people.
One such attack by Israel on Qana killed 28 civilians, which the Israeli Defense Forces tried to justify by blaming the victim. According to Israeli Justice Minister Haim Ramon,dequate time had been given for evacuation and that all "those now in south Lebanon are terrorists who are related in some way to Hezbollah." This outrageous lie has already been discredited by human rights organizations.
According to Human Rights Watch, among the civilians who stayed in Qana, the vast majority was "unable to flee due to destroyed roads, a lack of gasoline, high taxi fares, sick relatives or ongoing Israeli attacks. The sick and poor are those who mostly remain behind."
The day after Qana had been attacked, Human Rights Watch sent in researchers to investigate the sites. No destroyed military weapons were found, and to this day there is no evidence Hezbollah forces were using Qana as a base.
Nonetheless, the word "terrorism" is used by numerous governments (not just Israel) to devalue the lives of civilians and to justify war crimes, as in the example of Qana. This is also what shocked me when I was walking in McBryde and saw a yellow flyer advertising a presentation with Colonel Yoav Zacks from the Israeli Defense Forces. The flyer that shows a picture of a fighter plane firing a missile has a disturbing caption that reads, "Battling Terrorism through Technology and Engineering."
Looking at Israel's war against Lebanon this summer, it's easy to see how such technology has been used. According to a report by Human Rights Watch, Israeli Forces had "consistently launched artillery and air attacks with limited or dubious military gain but excessive civilian cost." It further states that the "timing and intensity of the attack, the absence of a military target, as well as return strikes on rescuers, suggest that Israeli forces deliberately targeted civilians."
Human Rights Watch even went further in the report to state that "the extent of the pattern and the seriousness of the consequences indicate the commission of war crimes," a claim that has also been echoed by other human rights groups such as Amnesty International.
Not only have human rights organizations documented cases of hospitals, supermarkets, civilian households and UN observation posts being targeted by the military, but the type of weapons that were used are terrifying as well. The use of phosphorous weapons that burn the skin when they come into contact has already been acknowledged by the Israeli military, and the use of white phosphorous against civilians has been documented in reports by Amnesty International. The use of cluster munitions that spread bomblets or submunitions across wide areas have also been documented by human rights groups and numerous newspapers as well. Cluster munitions, which have a high dud rate, mean that not only do cluster munitions kill civilians during an attack, the unexploded bombs have the potential of killing civilians who return home after a cease-fire. Amnesty International has widely documented Israel's use of cluster munitions in Southern Lebanon, including the village of Tebnine where cluster munitions were fired upon a government hospital where hundreds of civilians had stayed for shelter.
The actions of Israel's adversaries do not in any way relieve Israel of the need to follow international law and basic moral and ethical standards. Instead the Israeli military has used excuses and public relations campaigns to justify these war crimes, as seen with the quote mentioned earlier by Haim Ramon, which categorized all civilians in Qana as being "terrorists."
Freedom of speech is a liberty that needs to be cherished at Virginia Tech, but with freedom comes responsibility. Academic discussions concerning military technologies require a respect for human rights and dignity.
It needs to be emphasized that Colonel Yoav Zacks, who will be speaking tomorrow, is neither an academic nor a scholar; he is an official of a military that has used technology and engineering for purposes that contradict the basic values of our university.
The event being sponsored by the "University Honors" program, the Department of Aerospace and Ocean Engineering, and two student organizations is deeply objectionable because the event will be a public relations campaign by a colonel under the false guise of being a legitimate academic talk.
Although a discussion of military technologies, their use and their technical aspects is a legitimate topic of discussion at a university, the speaker chosen for tomorrow was in very bad taste. As students we should expect better from Virginia Tech.
(C) 2006 The Collegiate Times via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document