BEWARE OF . . . OCT. 24-30
The New York Times
October 31, 2010 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 470 words
Body


THE NEWS Two packages containing explosive devices shipped from Yemen and bound for synagogues in Chicago were intercepted in Britain and Dubai, setting off a global terror alert Friday that included searching other planes.
BEHIND THE NEWS The explosives were packed in toner cartridges for computer printers. Speaking at the White House late Friday afternoon, President Obama called the packages a ''credible terrorist threat against our country.'' Both contained PETN, according to Representative Jane Harman, a California Democrat; the same explosive was sewn into the underwear of a Nigerian man who tried to blow up a commercial airliner over Detroit on Christmas Day. American officials said they were tipped off to the explosives by the intelligence service in Saudi Arabia and emphasized that they were looking for additional explosives. The attempted terror attack emerged just four days before the 2010 midterm elections. For months, issues of national security and terrorism have taken a back seat to concerns about the sluggish economy. ''The events of the past 24 hours underscores the necessity of remaining vigilant against terrorism,'' Mr. Obama said.
THE NEWS GlaxoSmithKline agreed to pay $750 million to settle criminal and civil accusations that for years it knowingly sold contaminated baby ointment and antidepressants that didn't work.
BEHIND THE NEWS The case stemmed from a complaint by a former quality manager. When she warned of endemic problems at a huge Glaxo plant in Puerto Rico, the company fired her instead of correcting them. The investigation led to the seizure of $2 billion worth of products, and later, the closure of the plant. Under federal law, the whistle-blower stands to get $96 million.
THE NEWS An official of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said the agency might have blundered in 1997 when it started letting thyroid cancer patients go home from the hospital right after treatment with radioactive iodine.
BEHIND THE NEWS The problem is that for several days afterward, patients remain ''hot'' enough to expose anyone who comes close to them or their bodily fluids to potentially harmful radiation. One patient who boarded a bus to Atlantic City set off an alarm at the Lincoln Tunnel. Still, some experts argued that the public-health risk was small.
THE NEWS The Food and Drug Administration declined to approve a new diet drug, Qnexa, and asked its maker for a thorough analysis of its potential to cause birth defects and heart problems.
BEHIND THE NEWS Qnexa was the third diet drug in a month to suffer a major setback. Worried about side effects from long-term use, the agency has not cleared a new diet drug since 1999. ''It looks pretty bleak out there for anyone trying to get a drug approval for weight loss,'' said Dr. Ken Fujioka of the Scripps Clinic in San Diego.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JONATHAN DIENST/NBC
ASIM HAFEEZ/BLOOMBERG NEWS
 JOHN MACDOUGALL/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)                                               

Load-Date: October 31, 2010


End of Document