Beyond diversity
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 1, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 14A; EDITORIAL
Length: 436 words
Body


Some strange things have been done in the name of diversity on college  campuses, but not until now has a university twisted the word to include  terrorists. Outrageous, you say? Then consider how a top official at the  University of South Florida reacted Monday to news reports identifying one of  its former professors as the new secretary general of the Middle East's most  notorious terrorist group.
Ramadan Abdullah Shallah, according to fliers distributed at Islamic  University in the Gaza Strip, will take the place of Fathi Shikaki, who was  assassinated last week, as head of the Islamic Jihad. This terrorist group has  killed dozens of Israelis and an American college student in its efforts to  sabotage the peace accord signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation  Organization.
JIHAD
Shallah, experts on Mideast terrorism say, is a former USF adjunct  professor who headed the Tampa-based World and Islamic Studies Enterprise. The  university ended its ties to the think tank last June after the Tampa Tribune  reported that some WISE officials also were active in the local Islamic  Committee for Palestine, which supports the Islamic Jihad.
So what does USF have to say about the latest development? The university's  vice president for public relations, Harry Battson, stepped forward to defend  USF's relationship with both Shallah and WISE in the name of promoting  political and cultural diversity.
"We entered into a relationship because we thought there were mutual  gains," the Associated Press quoted Battson as saying. "We espouse  diversity, we espouse understanding different cultures, and we will always do  that."
Battson, the AP reported, said there is no proof that Shallah, WISE or even  the Islamic Jihad promoted terrorism. Perhaps the Israelis could provide him  with a body count and photographs of the body parts they scrape up when the  Jihad suicide bombers do their work.
"The Islamic Jihad does a lot of things," Battson said. "There may be a  terrorist element to it, but it is also an important cultural group in the  Middle East."
So are we now to believe the Islamic Jihad has some redeeming cultural  values that the civilized world has overlooked in its revulsion to the group's  murder of innocents?
Battson goes on: "You're making an assumption that because he was elevated  to head an organization that has a terrorist element that he has terrorism on  his mind. But that's not necessarily true."
These are astounding comments from a university official. Someone, perhaps  USF President Betty Castor, needs to explain to Battson the difference between  diversity and terrorism.

Load-Date: November 1, 1995


End of Document