BHS dance team plans fundraiser
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)
November 13, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Pantagraph
Section: SPORTS; Pg. A4
Length: 370 words
Body


NEWS IN BRIEF 
BHS dance teamplans fundraiser 
BLOOMINGTON - The Bloomington High School Poms dance team will have a fundraiser during halftime at the Dec. 7 basketball game against Urbana. 
The poms team will duct tape the principal, Tim Moore, to the gym wall. Purchase duct tape for $1 per foot from any poms member or call (309) 530-5411 or (309) 827-2462. 
Profits go toward the national dance competition Feb. 1-5 in Florida. Checks can be made to BHS Poms. 
Giving Tree eventunder way at ISU 
NORMAL - The Illinois State University chapter of Pi Sigma Epsilon will have its annual Giving Tree event until Dec. 7 to help buy gifts for elementary school children in Bloomington-Normal. 
There will be a tree in the atrium of the College of Business, where those who wish to participate can pick an ornament that contains a child’s information to help in buying them a gift. 
Drop boxes will be located in departmental offices in the College of Business. Monetary donations can be brought to the Dean’s Office, room 401. 
Terrorism topicof joint forum 
NORMAL - "Fighting terrorism: Effective alternatives to military solutions" will be at 7 p.m. Nov. 27 in the Bone Student Center’s Old Main Room of Illinois State University. 
The free program is sponsored by the McLean County League of Women Voters. 
Speakers are Melvin Goodman and Suraya Sadeed. 
Goodman is a former CIA and State Department analyst on Russian affairs. He is a senior fellow at the Center for International Policy and director of the Center’s National Security Project. 
Sadeed is the founder and executive director of Help the Afghan Children, a U.S.-based, grassroots, nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to helping Afghan children. 
The program is co-sponsored by Our Voices Together and ISU’s Global Review. 
SETTING IT RIGHT 
Local 
Road closures - Riverwoods Lane from Fullerton Road and Lay Lane in the Eagle View 1st Addition subdivision, is closed until 6 p.m. Nov. 20 for pavement replacement. The completion of the road work was incorrect in Monday’s Pantagraph. 

Load-Date: November 13, 2007


End of Document