BI webcast discusses comp terrorism risks
Business Insurance
November 19, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 300 words
Body


Terrorism presents a unique challenge to the workers compensation system, according to a workers comp expert.
``Workers compensation was never intended to cover terrorism,'' said Mark J. Noonan, managing director and workers compensation practice leader at Marsh Inc. But no state allows a workers comp terrorism exclusion, and underwriters must also contend with a lack of reinsurance and heavy state rate regulation, he said.
Mr. Noonan was one of three panelists discussing ``Workers Compensation: Protecting People in the Age of Terrorism Risk'' in a Nov. 14 Business Insurance Online Executive Forum(tm), moderated by BI Senior Editor and Western Bureau Chief Roberto Ceniceros. The interactive forum occurred only days before the Senate passed a bill that would extend the federal terrorism insurance backstop for seven years beyond its current scheduled Dec. 31 expiration date (see story, page 1). The House had already approved its own bill to extend the program 15 years and expand it to cover group life insurance and acts of domestic and foreign terrorism.
Dawn Watkins, chief risk officer for the Los Angeles Unified School District, noted that a single act of terrorism could results in millions of dollars of workers comp claims. She noted that enterprises are often grouped together in a downtown area, raising the possibility of high casualties.
Richard L. Thomas, senior vp and chief underwriting officer for American International Group Inc.'s Domestic Brokerage Group, explained how the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks impacted underwriting as insurers faced the question ``how do you go about deciding what you're going to insure and how do you price for it?''
To view an archived version of this webcast as well as other Online Executive Forums, please visit www.BusinessInsurance.com/webinars.

Graphic

 
Art Caption: Workers Compensation: Protecting People in the Age of Terrorism Risk: A Business Insurance Online Executive Forum [tm]

Load-Date: November 21, 2007


End of Document