Biden Says Al Qaeda In Pakistan Is Weaker
The New York Times
December 20, 2010 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 669 words
Byline: By MARK MAZZETTI and HELENE COOPER
Body


WASHINGTON -- In the view of American spy agencies, Osama bin Laden and a dwindling cadre of Al Qaeda operatives hiding in Pakistan no longer ''have the capacity'' to carry out a terror plot similar to the Sept. 11 attacks, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said Sunday
Mr. Biden's comments provided the latest snapshot of assessments by American intelligence agencies about the shifting landscape of international terrorism. Qaeda operatives in Pakistan have, over the past three years, endured a barrage of missile strikes from drones operated by the Central Intelligence Agency, and American officials in recent years have warned that Al Qaeda's Yemen affiliate has emerged as the most immediate threat to attack American soil.
Citing the unsuccessful attempt to blow up a trans-Atlantic jetliner last Dec. 25, which American officials believe was planned by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula -- based in Yemen -- Mr. Biden said that attacks against the United States were now ''more likely'' to be hatched outside Pakistan's tribal areas.
These ''smaller bore'' attacks, while potentially deadly, are a sign that Qaeda leaders have had to lower their ambitions, Mr. Biden said
''Does that mean we've succeeded? No,'' the vice president said on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC. ''Does that mean that we're in much better shape than we were a year ago and two and three? Yes.''
The Obama administration in recent weeks took pains to cite progress in the war in Afghanistan in advance of its much-anticipated war strategy review, which was released Thursday. Most terrorism analysts agree that the drone attacks have killed off a number of top Qaeda planners, but they also cite recent terrorism scares in major European cities as evidence of the lingering threat from Pakistan's tribal areas.
Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at Georgetown University, said the United States was only ''partially succeeding'' in containing the power of Al Qaeda's affiliate groups in Yemen, North Africa, Somalia and elsewhere.
According to Mr. Hoffman, Washington's ''overwhelming preoccupation'' with Afghanistan and Pakistan in recent years ''has allowed the threat to expand or mutate elsewhere.''
Administration officials dispute this assertion -- at least when it comes to Yemen. John O. Brennan, the senior White House counterterrorism official, said in a speech on Friday that the United States has increased American foreign aid to Yemen more than tenfold in the past two years.
The United States is also trying to bolster the counterterrorism abilities of Yemen's fragile government and has orchestrated unilateral strikes against operatives of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, a group that Mr. Brennan called ''the most operationally active node of the Al Qaeda network.''
The most recent sign of the group's determination to attack the United States by any means possible was the failed plot to hide bombs inside packages sent by air cargo from Yemen to addresses in Chicago.
The C.I.A. has begun patrolling the skies above Yemen with armed drones, although they are not believed to have yet carried out any strikes.
Still, with a war raging in Afghanistan and American officials frustrated that militant groups are still able to plot attacks against American troops from across the border in Pakistan, American resources can only be stretched so far.
''We remain relentlessly focused on Pakistan-based Al Qaeda because of the strategic nature of the threat posed by its leadership,'' concluded the White House review of the situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan released Thursday.
''Although the global affiliates and allies of Al Qaeda also threaten the U.S. homeland and interests, Pakistan and Afghanistan continue to be the operational base for the group that attacked us on 9/11,'' the report concluded.
As one senior White House official put it on Sunday, Al Qaeda's core group in Pakistan -- while sapped of some of its strength -- still provides ''inspirational leadership'' to the organization's surrogates around the world.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 20, 2010


End of Document