Biden bickers with Cheney across airwaves
USA TODAY
February 15, 2010 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 307 words
Byline: Peter Eisler
Body


WASHINGTON -- Vice President Biden said his predecessor, Dick Cheney, is either "misinformed or ... misinforming" as the two sparred on separate Sunday news shows about Cheney's continued criticism of the Obama administration's handling of terrorist threats.
Biden said that Cheney is off-base criticizing President Obama on fighting terrorists and noted that the administration has killed 12 of the 20 most wanted al-Qaeda operatives -- and has "taken out 100 of their associates."
Cheney said he is a "complete supporter" of Obama's policy in the Afghanistan war, including last year's decision to deploy 30,000 more U.S. troops. But he said the administration has failed to take a wartime posture toward terrorism suspects.
Cheney criticized Obama's treatment of the Christmas Day airline bombing suspect as "an isolated extremist," when it now is clear that he was trained by al-Qaeda. He said the suspect, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, should be tried by a military tribunal as an enemy combatant, instead of in federal court. He also criticized Obama's order to outlaw "enhanced interrogation techniques," including waterboarding, and said they should be "on the table" for Abdulmutallab.
Biden noted that the Bush administration also tried terrorism suspects in federal court, including "shoe bomber" Richard Reid. Cheney said he opposed trying Reid in federal court and said there was a "major shootout" within the Bush administration over whether to try terrorists in courts or military tribunals.
Cheney sidestepped a question on whether former Alaska governor and Republican vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin is qualified to be president. His response: "I haven't made a decision yet on who I'm going to support for president" in 2012.
Cheney appeared on ABC's This Week. Biden appeared on CBS' Face the Nation and NBC's Meet the Press. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: February 15, 2010


End of Document