BIGGEST SURPRISES OF ALL WERE THINGS THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 28, 1991, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 22A
Length: 1012 words
Body


WASHINGTON - In a war of surprises, some of the biggest were the things that didn't happen.  A long bloody ground war, poison gas attacks, worldwide terrorism, Islamic uprisings, bickering among the allies, economic disruption and mass dissent at home - all widely predicted at one point or another - simply did not occur.  Why not? U.S. military officers, government officials and foreign affairs experts are still analyzing the reasons. Their explanations include mistakes by the enemy, shrewd planning by U.S. leaders and plain luck.  In some cases the most dire predictions were ''worst-case scenarios'' that strategists must plan for regardless of whether they actually expect them to materialize.  An example was the forecast of a protracted ground war again st ''battle-hardened'' Iraqi troops that would produce a grim procession of body bags heading home.  That was a worst-case scenario. The reality was a long procession of enemy prisoners trudging through the desert in defeat.  The surprises have ''all been good surprises,'' presidential press secretary Marlin Fitzwater noted on the second day of the ground war.  The brilliant success of the air war made the ground assault, when it came, look easy. The massive damage to Iraq's command and control facilities and the relentless pounding of front-line Iraqi positions paid off.  In the final showdown, Saddam Hussein still commanded the world's fourth-largest military force.  But the Iraqi army, while large, was never very good, says defense analyst Barry Blechman.  ''They could stop human wave assaults by 14-year-old Iranian Revolutionary Guards,'' Blechman said.
''That's where their reputation came from. It only performed well when it could use artillery and poison gas against untrained infantry.'' Why didn't Saddam use his poison gas, which can be fired by artillery?  No one is completely sure.  ''Saddam is completely unscrupulous, but he's not crazy,'' said former Defense Secretary Harold Brown.  It is one thing to use gas against defenseless Kurds or Iranian infantry, and another thing to use it against an adversary equipped with weapons capable of even greater mass destruction.  The threat of ''escalation dominance'' may have deterred Saddam, who always hoped to survive the war and retain power even if defeated, says Marvin Feuerwerger, a strategic analyst at Johns Hopkins University. ''He didn't know what we might do'' if he used gas.  And what happened to the wave of terrorism forecast at home and abroad?  Low-level terrorist activity around the world increased, but no dramatic operations signaled the presence of major Iraqi or Palestinian networks in the field.  It is clear that terrorist factions ''disappointed Saddam,'' says Edward Luttwak, a military analyst with the Center For Strategic and International Studies.  One intriguing possibility is that Saddam was double-crossed by Palestinian terrorist leaders who ''were bought off'' by Kuwaitis and Saudis, who bankrolled their activities in the past, says Brian Jenkins, a security consultant for the Rand Corporation.  Terrorists also may have been hindered by the expulsion from the United States and Europe of Iraqi diplomats suspected of being intelligence agents.  Abroad, surveillance of known terrorists was stepped up and security precautions heightened.  However, the threat is still out there, experts warn.  ''Once there is a truce, people will let down their guard,'' warns Pentagon consultant Kenneth Brower.  ''They won't want to be inconvenienced at airports. That's when terrorism will rear its ugly head. To radical Arabs, thousands of Iraqis killed is a big bill, and it'll come due.'' Before hostilities with Iraq began, the United States was warned that the entire region ''from the Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean . . . would be aflame,'' said Secretary of State James A. Baker III. ''That hasn't really happened.'' Demonstrators took to the streets in Jordan, where a large Palestinian population supported Saddam, and in Tunisia and Morocco. But for the most part, Arab dissent was muted.  Luttwak believes it was suppressed by the ''dictatorships of our friends.'' ''Syria, for example, is as efficient at repression as Iraq,'' he said, and Saudi Arabia deported more than 700,000 Yemeni residents, the population most likely to voice objections to the war.  Nevertheless, Luttwak said, ''a thick residue of resentment'' probably will linger when the war is over because, for the first time, ''Americans have been in the business of killing Arabs on a large scale.'' That resentment might have burst its restraints and wrecked the allied coalition if Israel had entered the war.  Saddam did his best to provoke Israel, lofting dozens of Scud missiles over Israeli cities, but Israel remained on the sidelines with American crews manning its missile defenses. Thanks to the success of U.S. Patriot missiles, the Scud attacks scored little military damage in Israel.  ''The Israelis demonstrated more political maturity than people gave them credit for,'' said Feuerwerger, a former Pentagon policy analyst.  The expectation that Israel would be drawn into the conflict was ''based on two distortions,'' Luttwak said. ''One was that the Israelis are reckless and malevolent and wanted to break up the allied coalition. The second was that the Arab members of the coalition would be irrational and self-destructive.'' Another pleasant surprise for many experts was the dazzling performance of many unproven weapons systems.  ''The reality is that American technology is good,'' said Brower. ''The problems with the equipment were always exaggerated. We have the best in the world, and it's performing as advertised.'' At home, an improving economic picture helped keep Americans united in support of the c ountry's war effort, along with the remarkably low level of combat deaths.  ''Casualties were so low,'' said former Sen. George McGovern, a leader against the Vietnam War. ''That's the key. If we had seen several thousand Americans killed over there, we would have had substantial dissent.''

Graphic

 
Graphic; LOGO (COLOR)...Gulf War

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document