Biggest weapon against terrorism
University Wire
August 30, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 636 words
Byline: By Phillip Godwin, The Crimson White; SOURCE: U. Alabama
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala. 
Body


Thirteen years ago, Philippine officials discovered a single Toshiba laptop. The laptop belonged to the same man who executed the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center, Ramzi Yousef.
The laptop contains documents that detail plans for future terrorist attacks. Among the many different terrorist plans, one involves exploding U.S.-bound planes over the Pacific Ocean with specially designed detonators.
Now in August 2006, U.K. officials foiled a terrorist plot to destroy 10 U.S.-bound planes. This is a clear example of how persistent and patient terrorist organizations have become. It is important that we as Americans and the world remember this and remain watchful and vigilant.
Since the foiled terror plot, many planes have been diverted due to suspicious activity on the flight. Although, to my knowledge, none of these incidents has been a true terrorist threat, it is important that we keep reporting suspicious activity to the proper authorities.
The man sitting next to you behaving nervously and fumbling with electronic devices is in all probability just a man on his first flight. But what if you're wrong?
My point is this: Every day, terrorists' minds are consumed with thoughts of how they would be able to inflict the most pain on our country. Our biggest problem is that we lack the imagination to protect ourselves from every possible point of attack.
I am not saying that terrorists are smarter than we are. I am only saying that they have a desire so strong that they will figure out any weak point possible.
America does a great job protecting itself from attacks that would be similar to previous ones. However, protecting ourselves from similar attacks is only half the battle. The other half rests within the hearts and minds of every American citizen and every individual throughout the world.
In fact, people are terrorists' most difficult obstacle to overcome. A terrorist may be able to slip into this country unnoticed by government officials, but you can't deny that at some point, at least one citizen of this country will witness peculiar behavior exhibited.
Now, it is up to this individual to act responsibly and follow through with his suspicions. We tend to rationalize too much when it comes to odd behavior. We seem to always find some alternative reason for strange behavior and usually dismiss it shortly. I am proposing that we think through the situation logically and weigh the possible gains against the losses.
If someone reports suspicious behavior and it turns out to be a future terrorist, obviously the benefits are great. The United States is able to gain intelligence from this person and prevent future attacks. However, if the activity reported turns out to be justified, what harm has actually been caused?
Maybe a few authorities investigate the situation and ask some questions. That's it. That is the worst possible outcome for being vigilant and responsible.
I am not saying that we should report every individual who walks down the street the wrong way, but we are all intelligent beings; it's not hard to discern normal everyday behavior from something a little more alarming.
Obviously, I don't believe that terrorists have Tuscaloosa as a possible future target. But, at the end of the semester, when you're preparing to fly to your home state or driving across the country to find your way home, don't forget the threat that is never resting.
My message is not just addressed to the students of this university, nor is it addressed only to the people in this state. My message is addressed to every citizen of the United States and every individual residing on this planet.
Remember the events of the past, and look forward to the future. Never forget that the biggest weapon against terror lies within the confines of your being.
(C) 2006 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 30, 2006


End of Document