Bill expands counterterrorism powers
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 10, 2004 Friday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A04
Length: 459 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


People indicted on terrorism charges will have a much harder time getting free on bail under a provision in the new intelligence bill. The provision also broadens the government's authority to spy on terrorism suspects.
Critics say the enforcement powers, attached to the bill with little debate in Congress, further weaken civil liberties and privacy rights that already were undermined by the Patriot Act, which was approved shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks.
President George W. Bush's administration pushed to include the law enforcement package in the intelligence measure to augment the Patriot Act, which expanded the government's surveillance and prosecutorial powers against suspected terrorists, their associates and financiers. "We are pleased that Congress agreed that we still needed to improve our defenses," Justice Department spokesman Mark Corallo said.
Critics say the provisions escaped close scrutiny because they were tucked into the bill creating a new national intelligence director. "Overall, it's another threat to civil liberties in this country," said Charlie Mitchell, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. "It's just a continuation of what the administration's been doing."
Under the bill, a legal presumption would be established denying bail for anyone indicted by a grand jury on terrorism charges. Although the suspect could appeal to a judge, the burden of proof would be on the defendant to show that release would be prudent.
That stipulation has long been in place for suspects in many violent and drug crimes but not for terrorism. Skeptics say the provision has the potential to be abused, possibly resulting in long detentions for people ultimately found innocent.
The legislation also plugs a gap in the FBI's ability to obtain eavesdropping warrants under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA. Under current law, these secret warrants are reserved for non-U.S. citizens the government can show are affiliated with a foreign power or international terrorist group, such as al-Qaida.
Shortly before the Sept. 11 attacks, the FBI tried to get a FISA warrant for surveillance on Zacarias Moussaoui, who had aroused suspicion by taking flight training in Minnesota. FBI agents sought help from the CIA to tie Moussaoui to such a group but ultimately failed -- missing a potential tip-off before the attacks, according to the 9/11 commission.
Moussaoui is awaiting trial in Alexandria, Va., as the only person charged in the United States in connection with the attacks.
Under the intelligence bill, FISA warrants could be obtained for surveillance against people the government believes are involved in terrorism but are "lone wolves," with no known affiliation to a foreign nation or group.

Load-Date: December 10, 2004


End of Document