BILL ON TERRORISM GAINS MOMENTUM ON CAPITOL HILL
The New York Times
April 16, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 1148 words
Byline: By STEPHEN LABATON 

By STEPHEN LABATON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 15
Body


Broad counterterrorism legislation moved closer today to becoming law as Republican leaders in Congress predicted final passage of the measure by Friday while senior Administration officials said President Clinton was unlikely to veto it.
Friday is the first anniversary of the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
A central element of the bill would sharply restrict the ability of death-row inmates and other prisoners to appeal their sentences, generally limiting them to one appeal that must be filed soon after they have exhausted their state appeals.
Supporters and opponents of the legislation said that if the measure was adopted and withstood court challenges, it would drastically accelerate executions by shaving years off appeals of most capital cases.
The measure would make it easier to deport aliens suspected of terrorism and would make it more difficult for terrorist organizations abroad to raise money in the United States. It would also authorize the Government to spend $1 billion over the next five years to fight terrorism.
Flanked by relatives of some victims of both the explosion of the Federal Building, in which 168 people died last year, and the downing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in which 270 were killed more than seven years ago, the Republicans introduced the legislation today.
The measure, a product of a House-Senate conference committee assigned to resolve broad differences between the two chambers, is supported by both Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, and Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia.
As expected, the conference committee late this evening approved the measure by a voice vote. Lawmakers said it would proceed to consideration by the full Senate and after it voted, to the House.
Senior Administration officials criticized the legislation for failing to incorporate provisions proposed by the President like the expansion of the wiretap authority of Federal agents. But the officials also said Mr. Clinton would not block the measure's becoming law.
"The legislation is still deficient in several areas," said George Stephanopolous, a senior aide at the White House, "but it is a step in the right direction."
Senator Orrin J. Hatch, the Utah Republican who as head of the Senate Judiciary Committee had co-sponsored the legislation, said that in a discussion on Sunday night, Mr. Clinton indicated he would not veto the measure. Administration officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, confirmed Mr. Hatch's account of the conversation.
The legislation has faced a rocky road. After the bombing of the Federal Building, Mr. Clinton proposed legislation that did not include the limitations on habeas corpus appeals -- the main method that state inmates use to get Federal courts to review their sentences -- but included many other provisions dropped from the measure proposed by Republicans.
The White House measure would have expanded the wiretap authority of Federal agents and would have permitted them to consult with military officials in certain cases. A legal doctrine known as posse comitatus, which is Latin for "the power or force of the country," prohibits the military from becoming involved in such investigations.
A variation of the Clinton proposal, but also including the habeas corpus provisions, sailed through the Senate 91 to 8 less than two months after the Oklahoma City bombing, and a similar bill then passed the House Judiciary Committee.
But for months afterward, the measure stalled in the House as it faced strong opposition from an unusual coalition of arms rights advocates and civil-liberties organizations, which had found many provisions objectionable. Last month, the House approved a measure, but only after it was gutted as a result of heavy lobbying by the National Rifle Association.
Many of the provisions opposed by the N.R.A. -- like increased wiretap authority and lower standards to bring lawsuits against sellers of guns used in crimes -- remained out of the legislation proposed today. As a result, the gun lobby's strongest supporter in Congress, Representative Bob Barr, Republican of Georgia, said he and other conservatives would support the measure.
Still, Chip Walker, an N.R.A. spokesman, said the group had just received the legislation and had not reviewed it.
Civil-liberties groups, led by the American Civil Liberties Union, said that the legislation was perhaps the harshest in years and would eviscerate many of the essential elements of habeas appeals.
Those groups have also objected to provisions that would enable the Federal Government to deport aliens suspected of terrorist ties, without revealing the evidence used against them. Those provisions would also permit the Government to exclude members of organizations considered to be terrorist from entering the United States even if those members had done nothing illegal.
"It strips away many protections of Americans under the Bill of Rights," said Mark Kappelhoff, a legislative counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union.
Other civil-liberties proponents compared the legislation to laws that had been adopted in the McCarthy era and have since been discarded.
James X. Dempsey, the deputy director of the Center for National Security Studies, a civil-liberties organization, said the provision that would prevent foreigners with ties to unpopular groups from visiting the United States "is a return to the notorious McCarran-Walter Act, a standard repealed in 1990 and is now being reinserted into the law."
But by far, the legislation would have its greatest impact on habeas appeals.
While the Supreme Court has sharply eroded habeas corpus in death-row appeals, the legislation would go considerably further. It would generally give death-row inmates six months from their final state court proceeding to file a habeas corpus petition, and other prisoners one year, provided the state supplied the prisoners' counsel. Current Federal law imposes no time limits.
It would require Federal courts to render decisions in capital cases on habeas petitions within six months. It would require Federal judges to overturn state proceedings only in three instances: if the state courts decision was "contrary to clearly established" Federal law as determined by the Supreme Court; if it involves an "unreasonable application" of clearly established law, or if the state court's factual determination is "unreasonable." Current standards are more lenient.
It would permit an inmate to file a second habeas appeal in only two narrow circumstances that experts today said almost never occur. A second petition would be permitted if it raised a constitutional claim based on a new court decision that was deemed to apply retroactively, or if there was clear and convincing evidence that the defendant was innocent, which could not have been reasonably discovered when the first petition was filed.

Graphic

 
Photos: Nichole Williams, above, with her daughter Kylie at a news conference in Washington yesterday to urge passage of the anti-terrorism legislation in Congress. Her husband, Scott, was killed in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building. (David Scull/The New York Times); Below, Christa Gay with her son Erin at the site of the destroyed Federal Building in Oklahoma City. (Librado Romero/The New York Times); She lost many friends in the explosion a year ago Friday. (pg. A19)      

Load-Date: April 16, 1996


End of Document