Bill fighting terrorism stalls;
Dole rips Democrats' tactic of pushing for tighter handgun laws
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 7, 1995, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 371 words
Byline: Jerry Gray, The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senate debate on a broad bill that would help federal law-enforcement officials deal with terrorist incidents like bombing plots and nuclear threats bogged down yesterday over the far-less-exotic but no-less-contentious issue of handguns.
Despite conciliatory gestures and political pleas from President Clinton intended to clear the last roadblocks to passing the legislation, the Comprehensive Terrorism Prevention Act of 1995, Democrats held their ground. They insisted that they be allowed to debate four proposed amendments to strengthen existing handgun laws.
An equally adamant Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., railed against the amendments, arguing that they were not germane to the counter-terrorism legislation and threatening again to withdraw the bill if Democrats persisted.
''It's an effort by Democrats to bring up all the gun amendments they've been keeping in their closet,'' he said. ''They don't want to pass the anti-terrorism legislation. They have already forgotten what happened in Oklahoma City.''
Dole's comments brought an angry response from Minority Leader Thomas A. Daschle, D-S.D. ''We care just as deeply as anybody else about what happened in Oklahoma City,'' he said.
The Senate, which had planned to vote on the full bill last night, set a vote this morning to end the debate.
The Senate began its business yesterday by accepting by a voice vote a gun-related amendment. The measure by Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., would increase the statute of limitations under the National Firearms Act, from three to five years, for certain crimes like manufacture of fully automatic machine guns, possession of sawed-off shotguns and manufacture of homemade silencers or bombs.
Later in the morning, a cheerful Dole arose on the floor to praise Clinton for his reversal on including wording in the bill to limit death-row appeals. Clinton had supported such limits but did not want them included in the anti-terrorism bill for fear of bogging it down.
Before the bickering over gun amendments arose, changes in habeas corpus procedures suggested by Republicans had been a major sticking point. But Clinton made an about-face Monday night in an interview on ''Larry King Live'' on CNN, resolving that problem.

Load-Date: June 8, 1995


End of Document