BILL ON TERRORISM, ONCE A CERTAINTY, DERAILS IN HOUSE
The New York Times
October 3, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 1052 words
Byline: By STEPHEN LABATON 

By STEPHEN LABATON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2
Body


Broad new counterterrorism legislation that was considered certain to become law earlier this year has been derailed by an unusual coalition of conservative Republicans and civil-libertarian Democrats in the House of Representatives.
In June, less than two months after the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, the legislation sailed through the full Senate and the House Judiciary Committee with little opposition. It had been pushed by President Clinton and endorsed by Republican and Democratic leaders in both chambers.
But since then the legislation has stalled, a casualty of a political mood swing in Congress. Hearings in August and September about the deadly standoffs by Federal agents with the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex., and a white separatist, Randall C. Weaver, at Ruby Ridge in Idaho, have nurtured a new skepticism, particularly among conservative Republicans and newer lawmakers who are reluctant to hand over broad new powers to law-enforcement officials, as the legislation would.
"Since the Oklahoma City bombing, we've had hearings on Waco and Ruby Ridge which demonstrate the ability of the Federal Government to overreach," said Laura Murphy, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "The thinking, which has crossed party lines, is that if law enforcement can do these things without a counterterrorist bill, imagine what would happen with one."
Republican aides in the House said the legislation had not been introduced on the floor in recent weeks because their private counts showed it would be defeated. The only hope now for passage would be for a dramatically scaled back version.
A senior Administration official who has worked on the legislation said: "The politics of crime and terrorism are a little weird right now. You now have the far left and the far right meeting around the back of the middle."
The legislation, which passed the Senate by the lopsided vote of 91 to 8, would give Government law-enforcement officials vast new authority to plant wiretaps; make it easier for the Government to deport illegal aliens suspected of terrorism without informing them of all the evidence against them; expand the role of the military in certain kinds of cases, and limit most death-row prisoners to one appeal in Federal court.
Two weeks after the Senate action, a similar measure was approved by the House Judiciary Committee by a vote of 23 to 12. The House measure also voted to classify as a terrorist act almost any crime in which a gun was used, providing jurisdiction for the Federal Government to investigate a wide array of crimes that had fallen exclusively under the control of state and local authorities.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, the Illinois Republican who heads the Judiciary Committee and was a sponsor of the legislation, blamed the bill's broad definition of terrorism for creating problems and said he had tried to narrow it at the request of some Republican conservatives who opposed giving the Federal Government new power over state crimes. Mr. Hyde said that the Waco and Ruby Ridge hearings had "given substance to a lot of the negative feelings about law enforcement."
"The result of those hearings was that I did not feel I can press forward right now," he said in an interview on Friday.
Mr. Hyde said the legislation also had been tied up by the gun industry, which is trying to use it to repeal major portions of the legislation that passed last year restricting assault weapons.
In large part the legislation has risen and fallen with the reputation of one of its strongest supporters, Louis J. Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Freeh's high stature in Congress helped to move the legislation with few questions earlier in the summer. But in recent weeks, his standing in the Capitol has diminished with new disclosures about the F.B.I.'s handling of the Ruby Ridge case, in which Mr. Weaver's wife, Vicki, was shot and killed by an F.B.I. sniper.
Earlier this year Mr. Freeh dismissed the bureau's critics of Ruby Ridge and promoted the senior Washington official who had handled the case, Larry Potts, as the No. 2 official in the agency. But after new allegations of a possible cover-up among the highest ranks of the F.B.I., Mr. Freeh did an about-face, demoting and later suspending Mr. Potts.
The legislation has been hobbled by a lobbying alliance of civil liberties organizations, libertarians, the explosives industry, and gun enthusiast groups. They have persuaded many lawmakers that virtually none of the provisions in the legislation would have had an effect on the Oklahoma City case that prompted it. The alliance consists of such unusual bedfellows as a former Republican Senator from Wyoming, Malcolm Wallop, now head of a conservative group, Frontiers of Freedom; the American Civil Liberties Union; the Cato Institute, a conservative research organization; Americans for Tax Reform, and the Gunowners of America.
"There's a growing feeling that the legislation goes way too far in a wide number of areas," said Representative Bob Barr, a Georgia Republican and former United States Attorney in Atlanta during the Reagan and Bush Administrations who has been leading the Republican opposition to the measure. He said the hearings on Waco and Ruby Ridge had led to a "strong hesitancy to embrace expanded authority to the Federal Government."
Mr. Barr, an opponent of gun control, has found himself allied in this battle with longtime opponents on law-and-order legislation, such as Representative John Conyers Jr., a liberal Democrat from Michigan who has long supported gun controls and was the only member of Congress to raise questions about the Government's handling of the Branch Davidians in the days following the siege.
Other supporters of the legislation said that its failure would be used by the White House as evidence that the Republicans were unable to control Congress.
"There is no question that the President will use this as an issue against the Republicans," said Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, who has worked to put the legislation back on track. "This is an example of the Republicans' inability to deliver. It's another sign that some of them are pushing the agenda of the extremist groups and the militias."      

Load-Date: October 3, 1995


End of Document