Bill earmarks $750 million to fight terrorism in Africa
Air Force Times
December 5, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSLINES; Pg. 42
Length: 588 words
Byline: By Gordon Lubold; Times staff writer
Body


Troops may get an additional $750 million to tear down terrorist networks and help build, train and equip foreign militaries in areas such as Africa and other struggling regions, under a provision passed by the Senate.
Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., inserted the additional funding request into the Senate version of the $492 billion defense authorization bill for fiscal 2006, approved Nov. 15.
The provision would allow President Bush to authorize building the capabilities of other nations' military or security forces to "disrupt or destroy terrorist networks, close safe havens or participate in or support United States, coalition or international stability operations," according to the amendment's wording.
The money would be used to buy equipment, supplies, services, training and funding, in "partner" countries that need it most, according to the amendment.
In introducing the provision Nov. 4, Inhofe referred to his visits to several African nations, including Djibouti and Burundi, and said that although some African governments have made inroads in stopping violence or addressing terrorism within their borders, they lack the resources to do the job more vigorously.
"What they need … is to be able to be trained," he said, adding that Marine Gen. James Jones, commander of the U.S. European Command, and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, among others, "feel very strongly that we need to have a streamlined process where we can go in and train these guys to do the job that otherwise American troops are going to have to do."
Teaming up to tame a continent
The State and Defense departments have been working together on several programs in Africa, increasingly seen as vital to America's national security. Last summer, under what is now known as the Trans-Sahel Counterterrorism Initiative, teams of U.S. Special Forces trained local military forces in Mali, Niger, Mauritania and Algeria, among other nations.
The training teams taught basic marksmanship, land navigation and medical training in nine countries for the monthlong exercise, called Flintlock. More such exercises are planned in the coming year.
The Pentagon has been leaning forward on these types of initiatives that aim to prevent terrorist networks from proliferating in countries with few resources or little political will to eliminate them. The lack of political or economic stability among African nations to police their own borders could allow terrorist networks to operate across wide swaths of the region.
Such areas are now being called "ungoverned spaces" by some analysts. International security guru and occasional Pentagon consultant Thomas Barnett, author of the book "The Pentagon's New Map," calls these areas part of the world's "nonfunctioning core" in which terrorism often finds fertile ground to flourish.
But there is evidence that U.S. training teams can make a difference. A U.S. special operations unit working in Africa in 2004 helped local forces capture a leader of a terrorist group known as the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, which has alleged ties to al-Qaida.
Theresa Whelan, deputy assistant secretary of defense for African affairs, said she sees engagement in Africa as critical to U.S. national security.
"Dangers may arise in, and emanate from, states that don't exercise effective sovereignty over their territory," Whelan said at a Nov. 16 conference on African security hosted by the National Defense University in Washington. "Sub-Saharan Africa continues to face security, economic, and political crises."

Notes

1 BW PHOTO.

Load-Date: December 13, 2005


End of Document