BILL WOULD FORBID AID TO TERRORISTS
The New York Times
September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 833 words
Byline: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Specia l to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19
Body


Senator Lloyd Bentsen, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said today that he would introduce legislation next week that would bar United States citizens from aiding international terrorism.
Mr. Bentsen, a Texas Democrat, said that the bill, titled the International Terrorism Crime Act of 1981, had been drafted in response to d isclosures about the activities of Edwin P. Wilson, a former Americ an intelligence agent charged last year with illegally exporting exp losives to Libya as part of a plan to train terrorists in the North African nation.
''It is incredible,'' said Mr. Bentsen, ''that the U.S. Government, through a loophole in the law, would condone activities that aid and abet international terrorism. Yet, that is exactly what is happening.''
Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas announces that he plans to introduce legislation to bar US citizens from aiding international terrorism
Mr. Bentsen's bill reflects growing interest in Congress in the Wilson case and questions it has raised about the effectiveness of current laws governing the export of American military equipment and advanced technology and the activities of former intelligence agents.
 
Inquiry in House
Yesterday the House Intelligence Committee announced that it would conduct a full-scale investigation into Mr. Wilson's activities and the way the Federal Government has handled his case. Committee members said the inquiry would focus on developing legislative remedies for apparent deficiencies exposed in Federal laws.
Although the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, has said he has little interest in the case, other members, including Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, said last week that they hope the committee would take a more active interest in the Wilson affair.
Staff members on the Senate Intelligence Committee said today that Mr. Bentsen's bill was likely to attract bipartisan support.  Mr. Bentsen's bill would make it a crime, punishable by a maximum fine of $25,000 or a maximum prison term of 10 years, or both, to sell weapons, explosives devices, restricted military and communications equipment and expertise in any of these areas to a foreign power or its agent for the purpose of aiding international terrorism.
Legal to Sell Arms
''As things now stand, it is legal for a U.S. citizen or group of citizens to manufacture or purchase explosives devices in this country and sell those devices to, say, the regime of Col. Qaddafi in Libya,'' Mr. Bentsen said.
He added, ''They could do this even if they knew that the Libyan Government planned to use the devices to promote terrorism.'' According to Federal investigators, in 1976 Mr. Wilson, a former covert agent for the Central Intelligence Agency, negotiated a deal with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the leader of Libya, to sell his expertise in intelligence, arms and explosives for the training of terrorists in Libya.
Mr. Wilson, and Frank E. Terpil, another former agent of the Central Intelligence Agency, were indicted in April 1980 by a Federal grand jury here on multiple charges of illegally exporting explosives to Libya and conspiring to assassinate a Libyan critic of Colonel Qaddafi. Both Mr. Wilsn and Mr. Terpil are fugitives living in the Middle East.
Charges in Indictment
The indictment charges the two men with violating a number of United States laws that govern the transport and export of arms, including the Arms Export Control Act of 1976. Specific charges include the unlawful transport of hazardous materials in foreign commerce.
However, investigators and prosecutors who worked on the case, which first came to the attention of the Justice Department in 1976, have said they were handicapped by a lack of Federal statutes covering aid to terrorist organizations.
At present, according to Justice Department officials, the United States Criminal Code contains no law prohibiting American citizens from aiding international terrorism outside the United States.
Officials in the Justice Department, Commerce Department and Treasury Department and State Department, all of which play a role in enforcing export laws, have been reviewing the criminal code in the aftermath of the Wilson case to determine whether new laws are necessary.
One issue not covered in Mr. Bentsen's bill is the question of whether and how the Government should control the activities of former intelligence officials. The C.I.A. has no legal mechanism to control the activities of its former employees, except for laws and regulations that prohibit the transfer of classified information and the publication of writing about the agency without prior review by the agency.
Mr. Wilson's activities in Libya, these officials said, would not be covered by these prohibitions. The House Intelligence Committee plans to study this issue, according to committee members, to see if legislation can be drafted that would prevent abuses by former agentswithout trampling on their civil rights.


End of Document