BILL BACKS BIBI ON TERRORISM / OFFERS TO HELP END IMPASSE
 Philadelphia Daily News
APRIL 8, 1997 Tuesday PM EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 09
Length: 483 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


With Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at his side, President Clinton agreed yesterday that Israel should never "have to bargain to be free of terrorism." But their White House meeting failed to produce an immediate formula to resume stalled Mideast peace talks.
Clinton said he would explore "any reasonable opportunity" to end the impasse. A Palestinian delegation will come to Washington later this week to broaden the discussions.
"We keep our commitments; they violate theirs," Netanyahu said at the end of the day, signaling that divisions remain.
However, he affirmed that new homes for Palestinians should be built in Jerusalem, a gesture designed to offset the harsh criticism surrounding Israel's project for 6,500 new Jewish housing units.
The statement was welcomed by the Clinton administration. "That's obviously positive," State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said.
The Israeli leader also pledged to carry out commitments for a three-stage pullback on the West Bank whether or not the Palestinians accept his proposal to move quickly into negotiations over Jerusalem, refugees and other tough issues.
Still, Hasan Abdel-Rahman, the chief Palestine Liberation Organization representative in Washington, reiterated the Palestinian position that the talks would not be resumed until Israel stopped construction of the Har Homa project.
The Palestinian official also dismissed Netanyahu's attempt to focus attention on terrorism.
"Mr. Netanyahu knows very well that we oppose terrorism because we feel that terrorism is against our national interests for Palestinians," he said. "Mr. Netanyahu bringing up the issue of terrorism is an attempt, in our view, to cover up for his own policies that are very disruptive to the peace process."
At the outset of their meeting, the president renewed his call for a statement from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat of "zero tolerance" for terrorism.
But Clinton indicated he was not prepared to set up a summit meeting between Netanyahu and Arafat under U.S. auspices or make any other dramatic move right away.
"It's important not to jump into this," Clinton said. His chief mediator, Dennis Ross, also suggested there would be no quick fix, saying the United States could not impose a solution.
"We can't wave a magic wand and put things back on track," Ross said.
Netanyahu said 75 percent of the land on which Har Homa was being built was owned by Jews and that Israel was building 10 neighborhoods for Arabs, as well.
"What is wrong with this?" he asked. "Nothing. People get married, have kids, build homes."
Palestinian leaders, he said, were making "almost zero efforts, and at times zero, and at times worse than zero efforts" to stop terrorism.
Referring to Arafat's demand that construction be halted before peace talks are resumed, Netanyahu said: "We are being told to pay for the privilege of not being killed. We are not going to do this."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu meets with President Clinton at the White House yesterday (ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document