Bill targets 'eco-terrorism';
 It would toughen penalties, create registry
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
January 16, 2004 Friday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Pg.B1
Length: 917 words
Byline: Richard Roesler, Staff writer
Dateline: OLYMPIA
Body


One-third of the state Senate has signed onto a bill to curtail
 ''eco-terrorism" with tougher penalties and racketeering-style legal language
 and by listing convicted ecological- and animal-rights saboteurs in an online
 registry, like sex offenders.
 ''We are in a new day," said Sen. Val Stevens, R-Arlington, the bill's
 prime sponsor.
 She and other proponents, citing this summer's attack on a Sultan, Wash.,
 mink farm, say existing laws are too weak to address the sabotage and
 harassment.
 ''The perpetrators would have people believe they committed a righteous act
 against mean people," said Kate Roesler, co-owner of the mink farm. ''What
 happened at our farm was nothing more than destruction."
Critics of the bill, including the state chapter of the American Civil
 Liberties Union, say the proposal is too broad and could brand people as
 terrorists or ''criminal profiteers" for holding a vegetarian rally or
 writing a letter to the editor decrying the cutting of old-growth trees.
 ''It can target organizations like ours, that work within the legal system
 and above ground," said Lindsay Saibara, of the Northwest Animal Rights
 Network.
 ''To call acts of conscience, however misguided, 'criminal profiteering' is
 false," said Alan Mountjoy-Venning, representing a Quaker group.
 According to a Senate research report using FBI data, ''special-interest
 terrorist groups" have committed more than 600 criminal acts nationwide since
 1996, with damages exceeding $43million.
 Two bills dealing with eco-terrorism are now before Congress. One would
 create a national clearinghouse about such acts. The other would boost
 criminal penalties for environmentally motivated vandalism.
 Several states, including Idaho, are considering similar bills.
 Idaho in 1999 passed a bill making it a felony to release fur-bearing
 animals raised commercially. Last year, Idaho lawmakers made it a felony to
 damage - or intend to damage - agricultural research facilities, with
 penalties of up to 20years in prison. This year, the Idaho Farm Bureau is
 backing a bill to extend those protections to fish farms, after three trout
 pens in south-central Idaho were poisoned with chlorine.
 Ecological saboteurs such as the Animal Liberation Front and Earth
 Liberation Front work in small cells, mostly unknown to each other. ALF's Web
 site details how to glue locks, use acid to etch slogans onto windows and
 where to strike glass when trying to shatter it (the corner). ELF maintains an
 online booklet detailing how to make firebombs. Both groups stress that no
 animals or humans should be harmed, and despite numerous arsons attributed to
 such activists, no one has been killed.
 ''In this age of insanity, you may be branded a terrorist, but you will one
 day be remembered as a selfless warrior who dared to fight for what is
 right," an anonymous author wrote on the ALF Web site. ''Once you've begun
 and know what you are doing, go big. The more actions you take part in, the
 more likely it gets that you will get caught. So be sure that when you hit,
 you hit hard."
 Washington's bill would allow for sentences of up to a year in prison for
 ecological attacks resulting in $500 or more in damage, and triple damages in
 civil lawsuits.
 Any eco-terrorism offense, planned offense or confession would be
 considered ''criminal profiteering," which allows state or local officials to
 bring a lawsuit, seize property, and seek penalties of up to $250,000, plus
 damages and attorneys' fees.
 The bill also would require people convicted of eco-terrorism to register
 with the attorney general's office, giving their current address, a photograph
 and signature. The information would be posted in an online registry.
 Roesler said that existing laws against trespassing and malicious mischief
 are nowhere near severe enough to deal with attacks such as the one on her
 family's mink farm. The damage - 10,000 mink released to the wild, breeding
 records lost, overturned pens - totaled about $500,000, she told police.
 The first evidence of the problem came early the morning of Aug. 25, when
 Snohomish County motorists started calling local police about hundreds of mink
 running loose - and getting run over - on U.S. Highway 2.
 Thus began a three-day mink hunt that stretched east and west for miles.
 The farm workers and scores of volunteers hunted the small carnivores with
 fishing nets. The hungry mink killed local birds and fish. Two mink were
 caught hiding in a man's bedroom.
 ''It was way more than a simple trespass or a little vandalism," Roesler
 told lawmakers.
 She said her family and the volunteers who helped have received death
 threats, and that the attacks destroyed her peace of mind.
 ''Now, if you're at the farm and somebody drives past, you're taking down
 license numbers," she said. Roesler said groups such as the Animal Liberation
 Front, to which the attack was attributed, ''are bullies that hope to
 intimidate ranchers and farmers, researchers, loggers, miners - anybody who
 believes anything differently than they do."
 Sen. Adam Kline, D-Seattle, said he'd feel the same way if someone trashed
 his workplace. But he said the state has other laws on the books to deal with
 things such as death threats, criminal sabotage, arson and burglary.
 ''We already have legal tools for this behavior, if we can find it," Kline
 said.
 No one has been charged with the mink farm release, but Sultan police Chief
 Fred Walser said Thursday that the FBI, which is working the case, ''has some
 information on the perpetrators."

Graphic

 
Color Photo; Kate Roesler's mink farm was attacked by "eco-terrorists" in August. Thousands of her animals were released. She wants tougher laws against such crimes. Photo by Richard Roesler, The Spokesman-Review

Load-Date: January 18, 2004


End of Document