BILL WOULD LET TERRORISM RESPONSE BE KEPT SECRET
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 20, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO ; Pg. B2
Length: 461 words
Byline: Bill Bell Jr. Post-Dispatch Jefferson City Bureau
Dateline: JEFFERSON CITY
Body


The public would not be able to find out how police, fire or health officials would cope with a terrorist attack under a bill presented to a Senate committee.
The measure would create an exemption to Missouri's Sunshine Law, which makes most meetings, records, actions and votes of government bodies open to the public. The bill would let public safety officials close their operational plans, guidelines or procedures for responding to or preventing a terrorist attack - or what appears to be an attack.
While supporters say the bill is needed because of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, opponents argue it is too broadly worded and could result in many public documents being closed. Disclosure of the documents would have to endanger the safety of first responders.
Possible terrorist attacks could be more sophisticated than in the past, the bill's sponsor, Sen. Charlie Shields, R-St. Joseph, told the Senate Pensions and General Laws Committee on Tuesday. His district includes Kansas City International Airport in Platte County. He said plans for response to a terrorist attack on the airport include where a command post would be established.
"Information of that type should not be available to the people planning the attack," he said.
Capt. Paul Carrill of the Platte County Sheriff's Department also spoke in favor of the bill. He said operational plans often include very detailed information about what public safety and health officials are supposed to do when they come to the scene of an attack.
Carrill referred to the March 1998 shootings at a middle school in Jonesboro, Ark. He said the shooters knew where students and teachers would go during a fire drill. They pulled the alarm and positioned themselves along a tree line to shoot at students as they filed outside.
The shooters, then ages 13 and 11, killed five and injured 10 with scoped hunting rifles.
Carrill said the same principle could be used by terrorists or another school shooter, who could do research to pick off police officers or other emergency workers who respond to an attack.
Sen. Harry Kennedy, D-St. Louis, asked if there was anything anyone could do to stop someone intent on causing such harm.
"No," Carrill said. "All we can do is plan and prepare the best we can."
Doug Crews of the Missouri Press Association testified against the bill. He said it is so loosely worded that it could close police department budgets. A public official who wanted to keep a document closed could simply stamp "public safety" on it, he said.
In addition, Crews said, the bill lacks safeguards to ensure the public knows who would get public money for anti-terrorism efforts and how the money would be used.
Shields said he was willing to compromise on the wording of the bill.
The bill is SB 411.

Notes

Reporter Bill Bell Jr.:; E-mail: bbell@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 573-635-6178  

Load-Date: February 20, 2003


End of Document