Bill expanding wiretapping powers advances to Okla. Senate
Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)
March 6, 2003 Thursday


Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 305 words
Byline: Ray Carter
Body


The state Senate voted Wednesday to expand the wiretapping powers of law enforcement agents to include investigations of terrorism, but critics warned the bill could infringe on individual liberties.
Senate Bill 509, by Sen. Dick Wilkerson, D-Atwood, would allow the state attorney general to authorize wiretaps "when such interception may provide evidence of acts of biochemical terrorism, terrorism, terrorism hoax, and biochemical assault."
The bill requires judicial approval before the attorney general authorizes wiretaps.
Wilkerson said law enforcement agents may not be able to act on information relating to potential acts of terrorism without wiretap authorization.
But several lawmakers suggested the bill was too expansive and could drastically infringe on the rights of Oklahomans.
Sen. Jonathon Nichols, R-Norman, noted that a wiretap is one of the most "intrusive" tools given law enforcement and warned against expanding that power in an "apparent rush to deal with terrorism."
"We must do so carefully, cautiously and with detailed scrutiny," said Nichols, a former assistant district attorney.
Wilkerson said it has been almost two years since the 9-11 attacks and there has been no rush to pass legislation in response.
"Maybe the body count hasn't gotten high enough for you yet," Wilkerson said. "It has got high enough for me and I think we've drug our feet. I think that we're just too slow."
"If we are going to do this we should consider it carefully and that shouldn't be interpreted as being paranoid," Nichols said. "You would agree, wouldn't you?"
"No," Wilkerson replied. "I won't agree that we are rushing. I won't do that. I think a healthy paranoia is always good, but we can be so timid that we never get anything done."
Senate Bill 509 passed the Senate 35-5. It will next go to the House of Representatives.

Load-Date: March 6, 2003


End of Document