Bin Laden, 5 nations sued over 9;
11 attack;
A Phila. law firm is handling the suit for insurers seeking
$300 billion from Iraq, Iran, Saudi Arabia and others.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 11, 2003 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C01
Length: 426 words
Byline: Porus P. Cooper INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


More than two dozen insurers, represented by the Philadelphia-based law firm of Cozen O'Connor, are seeking $300 billion in damages from hundreds of foreign individuals and entities - including Osama bin Laden and the nations of Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Syria, and Saudi Arabia - for losses caused by the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on New York's World Trade Center.
The claims, filed yesterday in federal courts in New York and Washington, are the first brought by property and casualty insurance companies against alleged sponsors of the attacks, Elliott R. Feldman, cocounsel for the plaintiffs, said.
"This is very much consistent with the government's war against terrorism," Feldman said.
"We can go after the assets of countries, and organizations, and individuals who are sponsoring terrorism and put them out of business," he added.
The defendants were identified from State Department lists of terrorist groups and state sponsors of terrorism, congressional testimony and other official sources, he said.
In the event of a favorable judgment, he said, "trillions of dollars" of Saudi and other assets within reach of U.S. authorities could be targeted.
The action is being coordinated with other lawsuits brought by families of trade center victims, Feldman said. The insurance companies are acting as members of five large groups - Chubb, American Re, Zurich American, One Beacon and Crum & Forster.
The concept of sovereign immunity generally bars civil claims by Americans against foreign governments, according to Stephen B. Burbank, who teaches international civil litigation at the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
However, he said, the law permits litigants to target nations named by the United States as sponsors of terrorism. Saudi Arabia, a U.S. ally, is not officially labeled a terror sponsor, but some Saudi officials have been accused in Congress of aiding a couple of the Sept. 11 airplane hijackers.
Suing individual terror suspects "may be purely symbolic," Burbank said, though bin Laden has substantial assets.
A State Department spokeswoman declined to comment on the suit. The department, she said, is sympathetic to victims of terrorism and is backing legislation that, as currently written, would provide $262,000 to the family of each person killed.
Just how does a Philadelphia law firm serve notice of the lawsuit on terror suspects hiding abroad? The courts may allow the plaintiffs to publish such notices in newspapers in those locations, Feldman said.
Contact staff writer Porus P. Cooper at 215-854-4761 or pcooper@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: August 16, 2005


End of Document