Bin Laden's Driver
The New York Times
October 21, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10; TAKING NOTE
Length: 351 words
Byline: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL
Body


The story of Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a Yemeni man who worked as a driver for Osama bin Laden and won a significant court battle on Tuesday, is the story of how little President George W. Bush cared about the rule of law.
Captured in Afghanistan in 2001, detained there and then sent to Guantánamo Bay, Mr. Hamdan was initially charged with conspiracy by the military commissions that President Bush created by executive order shortly after 9/11. He should have been charged in a federal court, but Mr. Bush thought that system wasn't tough enough for Guantánamo detainees.
United States District Judge James Robertson halted the trial, finding in 2004 that the commissions violated the Geneva Conventions and military law. The Bush administration tried to fight that ruling, but lost its Supreme Court case in 2006.
Once again Mr. Bush and Congress ignored the obvious solution -- trials in federal court -- and passed a law creating new tribunals and new ''war crimes'' with which to charge people like Mr. Hamdan. One of the crimes was ''material support'' for a terrorist group (like driving Bin Laden around).
In 2008, Mr. Hamdan was cleared on the conspiracy charges but convicted of ''material support.'' He has since been released and gone home to Yemen.
But a federal judge, Brett Kavanaugh, on Tuesday overturned the conviction because ''material support'' was not a war crime when Mr. Hamdan was arrested, charged and recharged. Judge Kavanaugh wrote: ''Because we read the Military Commissions Act not to retroactively punish new crimes, and because material support for terrorism was not a pre-existing war crime under 10 U.S.C. § 821, Hamdan's conviction for material support for terrorism cannot stand.'' It's not clear how big an impact this ruling will have, because prosecutors have since charged other inmates with crimes beyond ''material support.'' But it stands as a rebuff to the military tribunal system, which exists to make politicians feel tough but is not actually a good way to try or convict terrorists.
ANDREW ROSENTHAL
These are excerpts from the blog Taking Note, at nytimes.com/opinion.

Load-Date: October 21, 2012


End of Document