Bin Laden Killing Draws Praise From Allies but Concern About Reprisals
The New York Times
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 1241 words
Byline: By KATRIN BENNHOLD and ALAN COWELL; Ellen Barry and Andrew E. Kramer contributed reporting from Moscow; John F. Burns from London; Souad Mekhennet from Morocco; Jim Yardley from New Delhi; and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.
Body


PARIS -- The death of Osama bin Laden prompted a range of speculation around the world Monday: Could it lead to a faster withdrawal by NATO countries from Afghanistan? Could Western triumphalism lead to revenge attacks?
But one consensus emerged: The end of the manhunt helped burnish the image of the United States.
''They did it, and they did it in the most classical, manly way,'' said Dominique Moisi, senior fellow at the French Institute of Foreign Relations. ''It wasn't a drone, it wasn't technology, it was man vs. man.''
One European ambassador to an Arab country put it this way: ''No other country could have done this.''
President Nicolas Sarkozy of France issued a statement hailing Bin Laden's death as ''a victory for all those fighting terrorism,'' while Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy called it ''a great outcome for the United States and for all democracies.''
In a joint statement, the presidents of the European Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso, and of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, said Bin Laden's killing ''makes the world a safer place'' and hailed it as ''a major achievement in our efforts to rid the world of terrorism.''
Amid the many congratulatory statements, there was also caution. Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain urged vigilance, suggesting that, in the short term, security concerns were greater rather than reduced. ''There's no doubt that Al Qaeda will continue to pursue attacks against us,'' Mr. Cameron said in a statement. He alluded to the 67 British deaths from the attacks in the United States and the 52 from the suicide bombings on the London transit system on July 7, 2005.
In the hours after President Barack Obama broke the news, the worries about revenge attacks had begun. U.S. embassies around the world were placed on a higher security alert, while the British foreign secretary, William Hague, said he had instructed British missions to maintain greater vigilance.
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said Bin Laden's death did not change the need for tough measures against terrorism. But her partners in a coalition government, the Free Democrats, who have a tradition of defending civil liberties, have not agreed to extend a controversial antiterrorism law, said Gisela Piltz, vice chairwoman of the Free Democrats in the Bundestag, in a statement.
Concerns were also voiced at NATO headquarters in Brussels about the future of the war in Afghanistan. In many countries, including Germany and France, the enduring deployment of troops is deeply unpopular, polls show.
Diplomats in both countries privately expressed hope that Bin Laden's death would provide the occasion for President Obama to wrap up the war.
''This is the opportunity for the Americans to say 'mission accomplished' and to leave Afghanistan,'' said one European diplomat with extensive Middle East experience. ''There is no military solution to the problems there. We couldn't leave before because it would have allowed the jihadis to proclaim victory. But now we don't have that problem anymore.''
Perhaps anticipating calls to speed German withdrawal after Bin Laden's demise, political leaders took pains Monday to again justify the German presence in Afghanistan. Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said: ''We are not in Afghanistan to fight one man. We are in Afghanistan to keep it from becoming a refuge for terrorists.''
Mr. Sarkozy said his resolve both in the fight against terrorism and in Afghanistan was undiminished and that France ''will continue to fight.''
Australia, which is among the coalition of forces fighting alongside U.S. troops in Afghanistan, also said it would continue its operations there.
The discovery that Bin Laden was hiding out near Islamabad deepened suspicions about senior Pakistani officials' commitment to fighting terrorism. ''Some of them have been complicit in concealing Osama bin Laden for a very long time,'' alleged Sir Christopher Meyer, who was British ambassador to the United States at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Pakistan disputed that view, saying it was committed to the fight. ''Pakistan has played a significant role in efforts to eliminate terrorism,'' the Foreign Ministry said in a statement. ''We have had extremely effective intelligence sharing arrangements with several intelligence agencies including that of the U.S. We will continue to support international efforts against terrorism.''
In Russia, where the authorities in Moscow have long contended that the insurgency that has simmered in Russia's predominately Muslim North Caucasus has been masterminded from outside the country, a statement from the office of President Dmitri A. Medvedev called the U.S. raid a ''serious success'' against international terrorism.
The Kremlin has angrily rejected Western claims that Moscow's heavy-handed counterterrorism tactics have fueled popular resistance in the North Caucasus.
''Russia was among the first to face the dangers posed by global terrorism, and unfortunately, knows firsthand what Al Qaeda is,'' the statement said, offering to cooperate in ''a united war with global terrorism.''
Ten years ago, the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks marked a high-water mark in cooperation between Moscow and Washington. Vladimir V. Putin, then Russia's president, offered sweeping support for U.S. operations in Afghanistan, including help in securing bases in Central Asia. But that support curdled over the years that followed, and Mr. Putin was sharply critical of the U.S.-led war in Iraq.
Many Europeans expressed hope that the shared joy over Bin Laden's death would also help salve difficult relations with the continent's 15 million Muslims.
''Few will mourn the reported death of Osama bin Laden, least of all Muslims,'' said Farooq Murad, secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain. ''Many Muslims will reflect on the 10 years that have passed in which our faith and our community have been seen through the prism of terrorism and security.''
But some people warned that excessive triumphalism and celebrations like those in Washington and New York after the news broke would be counterproductive.
Mohammed Shafiq, chief executive of Britain's Ramadan Foundation, likened some of the images beamed across the world to those of some Muslims celebrating after Sept. 11, 2001.
''From my heart I felt uncomfortable seeing those celebrations in Times Square; they were quite crude and insensitive,'' he said. ''This man was responsible for killing thousands of people. It wasn't an occasion for this kind of street party, but for reflection and sadness.''
That assessment, widespread among Western nations, found an echo in comments from militant figures such as Sheik Omar Bakri Mohammed, the former head of the Al Muhajiroun group, who said Bin Laden was ''now a martyr and he will be a role model to Muslim youth.''
A British diplomat with experience in the Middle East said the language used by Western leaders in the days and weeks to come would affect how people there reacted to Bin Laden's death.
''The key for the West is to get the tone right -- the focus must be more on sorrow than anger: this was an evil man who killed people of all nationalities and all faiths,'' the diplomat said. ''Our reaction can't be too gun-slinging or triumphalist. The most important thing is that we don't help Osama bin Laden to become in death what he failed to be in life.
''Al Qaida,'' he added, ''is a franchise, not a Fortune 500 company.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document