Bio-security chief is all about planning
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 8, 2008 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B5
Length: 1159 words
Byline: REPPS HUDSON
Body


When we talked, Greg Evans' office near St. Louis University's Medical School was a jumble of boxes of files and books. Still hanging on the walls were tapestries from countries where Evans had worked on projects.
Bio-terrorism was in the news again a few days after Bruce E. Ivins, an anthrax researcher at Fort Detrick in Frederick, Md., killed himself, apparently because he was the subject of an FBI investigation of the anthrax attack in 2001 that left five dead and 17 injured. Momentarily, this has been one of those times when the public has awakened to the potential threat from anthrax and diseases like avian flu. For a while after the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the anthrax deaths nearly seven years ago, Evans was the subject of several interviews a day with print and broadcast reporters. He also had been a local authority on the dioxin contamination of Times Beach.
The center has a budget of $490,000 and a staff of three full-time faculty, six adjuncts and five administrative personnel.
---
Why is there an Institute for Bio-Security?
In 2000, we were approached by Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.). He offered us an earmark to set up an institute for bio-terrorism. The first year, we got earmarked federal funds of $1 million. It was channeled through the Centers for Disease Control (in Atlanta). We called ourselves the Center for the Study of Bio-Terrorism and Emerging Infectious Diseases. We changed it to the Institute for Bio-Security because no one could remember the long name. We developed educational material around bio-terrorism. We produced fact sheets and a website and other educational material. Then we expanded our scope to include chemical terrorism. We had the earmark for three years, which really got us started. It declined: a million the first year, $900,000 the second year and so on. By that time, we had developed a number of research grants with the CDC.
What did people most want to know?
About bio-terrorism and the likelihood of an attack.
What is the likelihood?
I don't think we'll ever know. We did a survey before 9/11 because we needed to know what kind of educational material people wanted. We included other questions. One was: "How likely is a bio-terrorist attack sometime in the United States in the next five years?"
We sent this out to public health people and physicians. That's a group of people who should be aware of what's going on. Twenty-six percent believed there would be a bio-terrorist attack in the next five years. Then we asked them: "How likely is it that it will happen in your community?" Hardly any thought that.
We repeated that survey after 9/11, and 76 percent believed an attack was likely. Then, we asked: "How about your community?" Six percent. No one wants to believe it.
What would be a bio-terrorist attack?
Anthrax is the primary one. There is a list the federal government, with several agencies, put together, believing these were the most likely agents. Anthrax was at the top. Then there was smallpox, plague, botulinum, viral hemorrhagic fever.
Is this something we should think about?
Terrorists are interested in biological weapons. They are cheap and relatively easy to develop. They cause a tremendous amount of panic because people are particularly afraid of anything associated with disease. They have the potential of killing a large number of individuals.
An attack is going to create havoc. It's going to kill a lot of people. It's going to overwhelm our resources. If I were the terrorist, anthrax is the agent I'd be very interested in.
What did you find when you traveled around the country as the institute was getting started?
There was a real interest in developing academic degree programs to deal with this. In 2005, we put together an online degree program, a master's of science in bio-security. It's for people all over the country who work in related jobs. They need certification and training. But they cannot afford to go back to school full time. We figured we'd have 45 to 50 students a year at the peak. It's 2008, and we are approaching 100 students. Our students are from the FBI, Homeland Security, two in the military serving in Iraq, public health people.
How does disaster planning apply to businesses?
One of the biggest groups of people in our program are those responsible for business continuity. How do I keep my business going in a pandemic?
What should a company do?
-Have a plan. Figure out which people can work from home. Do I need to stockpile various things within my company? Do I have plans to carry on with my employees spread out? If schools and day cares are closed and employees have to stay home with their children - all of these things are part the planning.
What are some things people should know?
They have to accept that it's a real possibility. But the possibility of being a victim of a terrorist attack is very remote. We're going to experience more terrorist attacks. There's the likelihood some of those will be biological. Yet there's a low likelihood you will be the victim. We're never going to have an attack that's spread out over hundreds of thousands of square miles.
Some kind of pandemic flu is inevitable. We all know that. It has occurred in the past. It will occur again. Flu is a constantly mutating virus. Is it always going to show up in a form that will kill hundreds of thousands of people, or it is going to show up like other flus have and kill a few thousand people? 
What should a family do to prepare for a disaster?
The same thing it would do to prepare for any kind of disaster. They need a family plan. They need to have a supply of food, medicine, water.
A 30-day supply?
A minimum is 30 days. Could be dried beans, canned food, rice. Any of that stuff that will keep well. Store it somewhere cool and close by. I would have water, batteries, a crank radio. I'd be storing surgical masks. You can find them at hardware stores. I'd prefer to stay in the house as much as possible and not come into contact with people. If I don't come into contact with people, I won't get disease. If I do have to go out, wearing a mask could provide at least some protection.
---
Greg Evans
Director, Institute for Bio-Security, St. Louis University School of Public Health
Age: 61
Career: research assistant and associate, St. Vincent's Hospital, Worchester, Mass., 1970-1974; various positions at the Center for Health Services Education and Research, the Medical School, the School of Public Health and the Division of Environmental and Occupational Health, St. Louis University, 1981-2002; professor of environmental health and director of the Institute for Bio-Security, St. Louis University, 2002-present Education: bachelor of arts, psychology, Hofstra University, 1970; master of public health, St. Louis University, 1981; doctorate in health services research, St. Louis University, 1986
Personal: lives in Wildwood with his wife and research colleague, Rachel Schwartz; a stepdaughter and a stepson are adults.

Notes

 Five Minutes With - REPPS HUDSON WATER COOLER 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - EVANS 

Load-Date: August 8, 2008


End of Document