Bio-terrorism: Raising smallpox from the dead
University Wire
November 1, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Good Five Cent Cigar via U-Wire
Length: 595 words
Byline: By Jamie Turcotte, The Good Five Cent Cigar
Dateline: Kingston, R.I.
Body


Twenty years ago the danger of smallpox was nonexistent, but since the threat of bio-terrorism emerged in 2001, health officials have been preparing against another possible outbreak.
Ann Sarkes, a registered nurse for the FBI, spoke about the comeback of smallpox and its role in bio-terrorism as part of the Forensics Science Series Seminar Thursday evening in Pastore Chemical Laboratory at the University of Rhode Island.
Sarkes began her lecture by defining the different kinds of terrorist attacks.
U. Rhode Island
There is domestic terrorism, an attack on American soil without foreign direction; international terrorism, which consist of violent or dangerous actions committed by a foreign party; and bio-terrorism, or the release of bacteria, viruses or poisonous substances against mass population intended to kill or maim.
The World Health Organization certified that smallpox was eradicated in 1980, but since the anthrax attacks of 2001, there has been national concern for a new wave of the disease.
The symptoms for smallpox are flu-like, with a high fever, cough, headache and body aches. Because of its similarity to the flu, the disease is often misdiagnosed, Sarkes said.
The appearance of a rash begins on the face and mouth and spreads down the arms to the trunk of the body. The tiny red bumps become pus-filled and eventually form scabs, which remain contagious until they fall off.
If a victim survives the disease, they usually suffer severe scarring.
Smallpox, absorbed through mucous membranes, is extremely contagious and often deadly. However, with a vaccine the disease is preventable.
Still, health officials nationwide have expressed concerns about the spread of smallpox through bio-terrorist attacks.
"It is a very small possibility we might get attacked with smallpox," Sarkes said. "We have more of a probability of dying from influenza than from aerosol-released smallpox it is highly improbable that smallpox can be weaponized. Viruses are very containable if we're well-prepared."
In case of an attack, the Center for Disease Control has the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile, which supplements local and state supplies with emergency drugs, antidotes and other medical supplies. Positioned strategically throughout the country, its locations are secret and often change.
In addition to the stockpile, preventative measures have been taken under the Nunn-Lugar-Domenici Domestic Preparedness Program, which was created under the National Defense Authorization Act of 1996. Its purpose is to help prepare communities nationwide to respond quickly and efficiently to possible terrorist attacks, Sarkes said.
In addition to federal components such as Homeland Security and U.S. Customs, nurses, physicians, local fire departments and law enforcement officials have also been trained to respond to a biological attack. Officials at fish and game departments are also valuable resources, Sarkes said, because if fish in a pond are dying then something must have been dumped into the pond.
Sarkes offered a hypothetical situation where a person takes their next-door neighbor, who has been infected with smallpox, to the emergency room. If the driver is unaware of the neighbor's condition, they are infecting themselves, the car and the entire emergency room, Sarkes said.
If that situation were to occur, Sarkes said the best solution would be to call your local Center for Disease Control or emergency medical service and they would respond to the situation immediately.
(C) 2002 The Good Five Cent Cigar via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 1, 2002


End of Document