Bio-terrorism tops agenda at science briefing
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 12, 2003 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL NEWS PHILADELPHIA & ITS SUBURBS; Pg. B02
Length: 759 words
Byline: Marie McCullough and Stacey Burling INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS
Body


Developments and advances on many scientific fronts were highlighted yesterday at the American Medical Association's 22d annual science reporters' conference in Philadelphia.
Bio-terrorism was at the top of the agenda, in recognition of the second anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
But topics as varied as Alzheimer's disease, infectious diseases, and the link between insomnia and anxiety were part of the first day of the two-day event, presented in association with Thomas Jefferson University and the University of Pennsylvania.
Fears of bio-terrorism have prompted an expansion in technology to detect, monitor and diagnose biological, chemical and other hazards. The National Institutes of Health's budget for such research has jumped from nothing before Sept. 11 to $2 billion now, said Scott Lillibridge, a bio-security expert from the University of Texas Health Science Center. In addition, the AMA, in collaboration with government, academic and military officials, has developed a series of courses to standardize disaster relief training for all personnel who might respond to any sort of disaster.
Bio-defense efforts are strengthening public-health efforts to control emerging and endemic infectious diseases, said James W. Kazura, a professor of international health at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
He said pharmaceutical companies are now donating drugs for a five-year project to wipe out a debilitating mosquito-borne disease, lymphatic filariasis, in Papua New Guinea. As the drugs cure infected persons, mosquitoes will lose their reservoir of the disease, which affects 120 million people in Africa and Asia.
"The principles that are used to contain malaria or a SARS epidemic are equally relevant . . . against agents that may be introduced by terrorists," he said.
Scientists are on the verge of finding out, through human testing, whether using drugs that target amyloid plaques - gooey clumps of protein between nerve cells that are characteristic of Alzheimer's disease - can prevent or slow the disease, said Samuel Gandy III, director of Thomas Jefferson University's Farber Institute for Neurosciences.
At the same time, researchers are trying to figure out how to identify people with the disease before it has become debilitating, he said. That will become increasingly important if the amyloid deposits prove to be the key factor in Alzheimer's symptoms.
Currently, the only drugs approved to treat Alzheimer's disease block the breakdown of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter that becomes less prevalent in the early stages of the memory-robbing disease. But these drugs have only a modest effect and don't halt the progression of Alzheimer's, Gandy said.
There is some evidence, Gandy said, that statin drugs, currently used to lower cholesterol, may block the generation of amyloid proteins.
And, there is preliminary data that people taking the drugs have lower rates of Alzheimer's.
An experimental drug, PI3KI, appears to enhance the ability of a statin drug to destroy amyloid.
Researchers also are working on "passive immunotherapy," which involves treating patients with synthetic human antibodies to amyloid.
Vladimir Hachinski, a professor of neurology at the University of Western Ontario, called for a new way of thinking about cognitive decline among the aged that takes into account the connection between dementia and stroke.
There is increasing evidence, he said, that stroke and Alzheimer's have similar risk factors, including high blood pressure and cholesterol, obesity and smoking.
When people have both Alzheimer's disease and strokes, as they often do, the resulting decline in mental abilities is more severe. Doctors need to become more attuned, he said, to noticing subtle cognitive changes and working to prevent more serious decline.
"There is a looming epidemic of stroke and Alzheimer's," he said.
Karl Doghramji, director of Jefferson's Sleep Disorders Center, said the relationship between GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, and both insomnia and anxiety, is a hot research topic. GABA, he said, is "basically the brakes of the brain."
Insomnia and anxiety tend to overlap in patients and both disorders are associated with lower than normal amounts of GABA. Using both approved and investigational drugs, researchers are studying how GABA affects sleep patterns and mood.
Doghramji said there's no evidence that products labeled GABA in health food stores work.
Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-4944 or mmccullough@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: August 16, 2005


End of Document