BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM;
PROFESSOR URGES HOSPITALS TO TRAIN TEAMS, BE READY
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 1, 1999, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: HEALTH & SCIENCE,
Length: 1143 words
Byline: ARTICLES BY PETER BACQUE; Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


Terrorists using biological weapons now have the frightening ability to altTer the genetic makeup of producing organisms - pathogens - to make them resistant to antibiotics and vaccines, according to a leading expert on infectious diseases.
"Furthermore," Dr. Richard P. Wenzel said, "in the dark corner of some fringe groups, bioweaponeers are searching for . . . pathogens that target specific races or cultural populations."
Biological weapons have been used for centuries, but modern technology has made the risks greater, "and the outcomes more terrible," Wenzel said.
Bioweapons include live pathogens - disease-producing organisms - toxins and even, theoretically, "bioregulators" affecting with fatal consequences the signals that human cells send out, he said.
Wenzel is a Virginia Commonwealth University medical professor and chairman of its Medical College of Virginia's department of internal medicine.
Though the chance of a bioterrorist attack here is small, the consequences would be unthinkably horrible, Wenzel told the Richmond Academy of Medicine recently.
 
 A release of little more than 100< /MFROM>BIOLOGICALE1
pounds of anthrax bacterium upwind of a city of 500,000 would kill 95,000 people and incapacitate another 125,000, he said.
The death and disease from the use of biological weapons would produce unprecedented chaos, shaking governments, panicking people and overtaxing resources, Wenzel warned.
With terrorism on the rise around the world, "it's probably going to come," he said.
Virginia hospitals need to set up special medical teams trained and ready to treat the victims of terrorist attacks using biological weapons, the expert on the spread of infectious diseases at the medical school said.
And the state also needs a computer network linking doctors in emergency rooms and medical offices with disease specialists so resources can be marshaled quickly to prevent catastrophic loss of life, Wenzel said.
Though a bioterrorist attack would require "unprecedented coordination in the health system," said Dr. William L. Roper, dean of the University of North Carolina's medical school, America's health care system is not prepared to deal with such an event.
The public health side of the system is not integrated with health-care practitioners, Roper said. Wide variations in capacity and infrastructure exist between different states and communities.
And the public health system is a "slow, passive" one, Roper said, without the "instantaneous information transfer we need" for early warning of a bioterrorist attack.
"Bioweapon programs began to receive substantial attention during World War II," said Dr. Donald A. Henderson, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Civilian Biodefense Studies and former dean of the Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore.
"An infamous Japanese program ceased with the end of the war," Henderson said, "but programs in the United States, Canada, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom expanded steadily until 1972."
Among other nations known to have worked to develop biological weapons are Iraq, Iran, Israel and North Korea, Wenzel said.
Beginning in 1972, 140 nations, including Iraq and the Soviet Union, ratified the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention calling for the end of all research on offensive bioweapons and the destruction of existing stocks of agents.
The United States has disposed of its stockpile of bioweapons.
Though the 1995 sarin gas attack on metropolitan Tokyo by the little-known Aum Shinrikyo sect riveted the world's attention, Henderson said authorities learned only in 1998 that the cult had tried to aerosolize anthrax and botulinum toxin in the Japanese capital eight times between 1990 and 1995.
Russia's desperate economic conditions have impelled some of the more than 30,000 scientists in the former Soviet Union's biological weapons establishment to work with nations such as Iran, Iraq and Libya seeking to build up bioweapon stockpiles, he said.
Public attention to the threat from biological, chemical and nuclear weapons of mass destruction has soared recently.
For instance, President Clinton has asked for more than $ 1 billion in the fiscal year 2000 budget to prepare the country to deal with weapons of mass destruction attacks, including biological agents.
Of that amount, $ 52 million would be used for a national stockpile of specialized medicines to protect the civilian population, $ 611 million to train and equip emergency personnel and strengthen the public health system, and $ 381 million for research and development of medicines, therapies and related measures.
The budget also requested almost $ 7.2 billion for conventional counter-terrorism security programs.
Wenzel presented several cases to Richmond Academy of Medicine physicians, asking them to diagnose the illnesses. In one, a 60-year-old male suffering from headaches and a fever sought medical attention. Three days later, the man was dead. The cause: anthrax.
In another case, a 72-year-old man was running a 105-degree fever. His speech was slurred, and he was disoriented. He was struck down by tularemia, "rabbit fever."
"How many of you would recognize these?" Wenzel asked his colleagues. Both diseases are potential biological weapons.
Another prime candidate for use as a biological weapon is smallpox, and he said, "I'm probably one of the few people in the room who's seen smallpox."
Of the three weapon types - nuclear, chemical and biological - "the most effective, least costly and greatest threat are biologicals," Wenzel said. They are cheap and "extremely simple" to make.
As a first line of public health defense, he said, physicians need to be able to recognize and control the unusual diseases biological weapons can spawn.
"The problem is the proliferation of agents," Roper said. "It's a growing list. It sort of boggles your mind."
"As physicians," Wenzel said, "we have an obligation to be able to recognize unusual diseases and disease clusters early, to help lead a public health response, and in a responsible way to educate our colleagues and the public for prevention and control." DR. RICHARD P. WENZEL
Position: William Branch Porter Professor and chairman of the Department of Internal Medicine at Virginia Commonwealth University's School of Medicine.
Education: bachelor of science, Haverford College, 1961; doctor of medicine, Jefferson Medical College, 1965; master's degree in epidemiology, University of London.
Professional: residency and fellowship in infectious diseases, University of Maryland Medical School; editorial board, New England Journal of Medicine; member, American Society for Clinical Investigation and the Association of American Physicians; board certified in internal medicine and infectious diseases.
Teaching positions: University of Virginia; University of Iowa.
Publications: More than 400 scientific papers and five textbooks.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 2, 1999


End of Document