Bioterror has huge impact on insurance industry ; Symposium on terrorism
Business Insurance
February 11, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 16
Length: 567 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


CHICAGO-The handful of anthrax-tainted letters that contaminated a congressional office building, several post offices and two media offices late last year have had a far greater impact on the insurance industry than that small number of incidents would indicate.
''The advent of biological terrorism is spawning unique coverage and legal issues as well as complex adjusting considerations,'' according to two attorneys who presented a paper on the topic during a recent symposium on the impact of terrorism on insurance claims. The Jan. 31-Feb. 1 meeting in Chicago was sponsored by the Property Loss Research Bureau, an affiliate of the Alliance of American Insurers in Downers Grove, Ill.
There are not yet any cases alleging liability for contamination, said Rebecca G. Casagrande, of Casagrande & Associates P.A. in St. Petersburg, Fla.
We are really ''in uncharted waters,'' said Stephen E. Goldman, an attorney with Robinson & Cole L.L.P. in Hartford, Conn.
Existing legal theories in other types of cases, however, may help indicate whether a policyholder could turn to insurance to cover losses related to an anthrax contamination, he said.
For example, courts differ in their interpretation of when a policyholder's property sustains ''direct physical loss or damage.'' Some courts interpret that common phrase literally and have excluded losses ''that are purely economic in nature...including repair and remediation expenses.'' Other courts, though, have broadly interpreted such loss or damage ''to include the effect of any substance that renders insured property useless or otherwise impairs its function,'' which a court might decide includes anthrax in a facility, the attorneys said.
If anthrax bacteria are considered ''a pollutant,'' coverage issues arise about whether the bacteria were ''dispersed, discharged or released in the building'' and the ''proximate cause'' of the contamination, which are terms governing property insurance contracts, the attorneys said.
Finally, potential anthrax coverage cases may turn on whether the anthrax contamination is considered ''vandalism,'' and the extent to which the policyholder purchased coverage to protect against that, Mr. Goldman said.
Before legal issues are resolved, though, immediate challenges for risk managers include decontaminating a worksite and salvaging valuable papers, which may require scanning or cleaning them, Mr. Goldman said. ''This is very tricky. The costs can be radically different depending on what your obligations are,'' he added.
When it comes to remediation of a contaminated site, the difficult questions include ''how safe is safe and how clean is clean,'' he said.
In an effort to prevent coverage disputes arising from anthrax attacks in the future, the Insurance Services Office Inc. in Jersey City, N.J., has filed terrorism exclusions for commercial policies that eliminate coverage for ''any incident of terrorism that involves the use, release or escape of pathogenic or poisonous biological or chemical materials....''
Nearly every state-except notably California and New York-has adopted those exclusions for insurers to use in their states (BI, Jan. 14).
The issue, however, is complicated by the fact that some forms of anthrax are present in nature and may be able to survive forever, Ms. Casagrande said. But the recent incidents primarily featured an ''engineered'' form of anthrax, Mr. Goldman said.

Graphic

 
A cleanup crew enters the American Media Inc. headquarters in Boca Raton, Fla., where two employees contracted the anthrax virus.

Load-Date: February 14, 2002


End of Document