Bipartisan coalition opposes anti-terrorism legislation
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 9, 1995, Thursday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A
Length: 914 words
Byline: JENNIFER S. THOMAS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Though the Republican-controlled Congress and President Clinton have fought  bitterly this year, the tragic Oklahoma City bombing that claimed 168 lives  seemed to yield one area of agreement.
The Congress would pass and the president would sign a package of  legislation aimed at curbing terrorism on U.S. soil.
Clinton asked lawmakers to pass such a bill in the days immediately after  the bombing. And House Speaker Newt Gingrich promised as much in an appearance  on CNN a week after the devastating explosion.
TERR
"We think, in the next 30 days, the House and the Senate can get this  done, and can lock into place a tougher regimen that makes it better for us to  be able to go after terrorism," Gingrich said April 26.
That was more than six months ago. So where is it?
The answer: stalled, in the House of Representatives.
And while one House Democrat is trying to force action on the bill, it  could be months before Clinton sees it on his desk.
Here's why: A strange coalition of Republicans and liberal Democrats has  emerged as opponents to the proposal. Both groups fear that the enhanced  investigative authority in the bill poses a threat to civil liberties.
Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., has been the most vocal opponent.
"Congressman Barr wants a solid anti-terrorist bill," insisted spokesman  Carter Cornick. "But he wants to see a bill with respect for constitutional  protections."
All of the early signs pointed to speedy passage. On June 7, not too far  off the original Memorial Day deadline, the Senate overwhelmingly approved a  bill that would give federal law enforcement officials new authority to go  after suspected terrorists. The House Judiciary Committee approved its version  of the bill on June 20.
Both versions would give federal law enforcement more money and authority  to investigate and prosecute crimes linked to terrorism, bar fund raising in  the United States by terrorist groups and make it easier to deport aliens with  terrorist links.
But it was during the Judiciary Committee's consideration of the bill that  the unusual bipartisan bloc of opposition began to take shape.
The Judiciary Committee's ranking Democrat, Rep. John Conyers of Michigan  has said he won't support the bill because he thinks the section broadening  federal law enforcement's authority to use telephone wire taps oversteps  constitutional bounds.
It is a position shared by Barr, who also sits on the committee. Barr also  has criticized provisions in the bill that would allow federal law enforcement  agencies increased access to the credit information of suspected terrorists.
President Clinton recently assailed congressional leaders for failing to  move the bill.
New York Rep. Charles Schumer, the ranking Democrat on the crime  subcommittee, on Thursday accused Barr and other Republicans of engaging in  "secret, back-room dealing" to dilute the measure. That same day, Schumer  filed a petition to force the bill to the floor. Under a little-used House  procedure, members can obtain a vote on a stalled bill with the signatures of  a majority of members. With the current House membership, 217 signatures are  needed.
House Majority Leader Dick Armey of Texas has promised that the House will  take action on the bill by the end of this year.
But Schumer's petition could squeeze Republicans, since it explicitly  states the bill must be considered in an open debate. Republicans don't like  the so-called "open rule" because it allows Democrats the opportunity to  offer amendments.
So if the petition nears the 217-signature mark, as Schumer predicts,  Republicans may hustle to try to get the bill to the floor under a more  restrictive debate format.
Another complication: The bill includes a provision that would limit  death-row inmates to one federal petition filed within a year of exhausting  state appeals.
Clinton and most of the Republican leadership agree the area of law known  as habeas corpus needs reform, since many inmates postpone their sentences  indefinitely with endless appeals. But House opponents of the anti-terrorist  package such as Barr refuse to approve what they call bad legislation just to  curb death-row appeals. And Senate leaders are loath to take up a standalone  habeas reform measure passed by the House, because they fear it would trigger  a filibuster.
One man frustrated by the delay is the bill's author, Judiciary Chairman  Henry Hyde, R-Ill. Hyde endured broadsides from Democrats and members of his  own party alike when his panel marked up the bill. Lately he has been meeting  with balky Republicans in hopes of talking them into line to meet the  end-of-the-year deadline.
"The bill will move when we know it will win," said Sam Stratman, a  spokesman for Hyde. "Right now, we're still gathering votes."
But even if the House votes on the bill before they leave for the holidays,  Clinton won't necessarily get a terrorism bill by Christmas.
One Democratic Judiciary aide said that if Republican leaders continue to  alter the proposal to satisfy individual members' concerns, the bill that  emerges will be radically different from the version passed by the Senate.  House and Senate negotiators could be working on a compromise into the New  Year.
Hyde's aide, Stratman, warned that further pronouncements from Clinton  could doom the bill.
"The president's statements of late excoriating the Hill for not moving  faster are most unhelpful. He risks politicizing the issue with his rhetoric,  which only hurts its chances of passage."

Load-Date: November 9, 1995


End of Document