Bipartisan push on to toughen up anti-terrorism law
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 320 words
Byline: A Tribune wire report
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton and Republican leaders sought to calm a jittery nation Monday by shaping a package of anti-terrorism tools, including more wiretaps and authority to prosecute terrorists as racketeers.
Sitting elbow-to-elbow with House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, the president said, "When we are attacked ..., we come together."
But their sober White House meeting ended without specific agreement on an anti-terrorism bill. Scheduling a Capitol Hill meeting today, both sides expected a swift accord in response to the bombing at the Atlanta Olympics and the explosion of TWA Flight 800.
The tragedies emboldened Clinton's push to expand law enforcement's wiretap authority and study the safety of putting traceable markers - called "taggants" - in explosives.
The measures were dropped by Congress from an anti-terrorism bill Clinton signed April 24.
Leaders in both parties agreed to try to rush the measures through Capitol Hill by Friday, when Congress begins its summer recess. But the legislation could be slowed because of concerns over civil liberties and opposition from gun lobbyists.
"This unites all Americans," said Gingrich, whose home state of Georgia is hosting the Olympics.
The White House later released Clinton's proposed package, which included initiatives to:  - Expand authority for wiretaps, including "roving wiretaps" that allow police to tap all lines belonging to suspected terrorists.  - Allow the FBI to get information on suspected terrorists from hotels, telephone companies and storage facilities in foreign counterintelligence cases.  - Allow suspected terrorists to be prosecuted under federal racketeering laws, making them subject to asset forfeiture and longer sentences.  - Make it easier to trace telephone numbers called by suspected terrorists.  - Make it tougher for suspected terrorists to encrypt their communications to avoid detection by police.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document