Bitcoin may face stringent regulations in Europe
The Paladin: Furman University
December 18, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: BITCOIN-MAY-FACE-STRINGENT-REGULATIONS-EUROPE; Pg. 1
Length: 438 words
Body


There is no doubt that the rate at which virtual currencies are appreciating, they will soon be worth the global economy but with such commodities, there are always fears related to the burst of this currency bubble. While the proponents of Bitcoin argue that the virtual currency will define the future of the financial system of the world, there are risk-averse investors who oppose the idea of spending a wholesome of fortune of an intangible currency that is fickle as the weather.
European states have started to come up with plans devised to control and monitor the movement of virtual currencies. There are threats related to the illegal utilization of virtual currency systems for money laundering and financial terrorism. Bruno Le Maire, the French Finance Minister, has shown the resolve to bring 20 countries on a common page regarding the regulation of virtual currencies before any unforeseen event takes place. Countries like Argentina, France, United Kingdom, and Italy have been interested in making an accord regarding policies to curb the unpredictable movements in its prices.
Le Maire stated,
I don't like it; it can hide activities such as drug trafficking and terrorism. There is an obvious speculative risk, we need to look at it, study it.
These concerns have particularly strengthened after the recognition of virtual currency by the CME Group which gave it an identified platform. This action was preceded by the inculcation of Bitcoins on the Cboe Global Markets. On Monday, Bitcoin had a closing value of $20,000.
With the increasing number of European investors, it was evident that the countries had to jointly form a set of rules to ensure the safety of investors' interests without losing out money in the virtual currency trade. The EU has been working to bring the cryptocurrency and other such commodities under the umbrella of its monetary policies with the aim of establishing a safe and sound trading platform with an acceptable legal framework.
EU stated that the aim of regulatory steps is to curb the uncertainty in financial markets,
bring virtual currency exchange platforms and custodian wallet providers into anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing regulation.
On the other hand, Britain is worried about the misuse of virtual currency's medium of exchange for funding terrorism and other malpractices because of the anonymity of investors. The Treasury stated
Digital currencies can be used to enable and facilitate cyber crime. There is little current evidence of them being used to launder money, though this risk is expected to grow, that is why these regulations will help.

Load-Date: December 19, 2017


End of Document