Bizarre Death of the Man Who Talked Too Much
The New York Times
August 12, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 2; BOOKS OF THE TIMES
Length: 1064 words
Byline: By JOSEPH WEISBERG
Joseph Weisberg worked in the Directorate of Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency in the early 1990s and is the author, most recently, of ''An Ordinary Spy.''
Body


On Nov. 1, 2006, a former Russian intelligence officer named Alexander Litvinenko met with several business associates at the bar of the Millennium Hotel in London. He took a few sips of tea, which British authorities later determined had been laced with polonium-210, an obscure radioactive isotope. That night he began to vomit uncontrollably, and over the next three weeks he died a slow, agonizing death.
  In ''The Terminal Spy'' Alan S. Cowell, a veteran foreign correspondent for The New York Times, gives an absorbing account of Mr. Litvinenko's life and bizarre murder. Along the way he explains how Russia lost and got back its tremendous energy resources after the fall of the Soviet Union, describes how wealthy Russians have turned London into ''Moscow-on-the-Thames'' and tries to determine if the Litvinenko murder is the harbinger of a new and especially dangerous kind of terrorism.
  Mr. Litvinenko started his career as a K.G.B. counterintelligence officer. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, he became an officer of the F.S.B., the reorganized domestic branch of the former K.G.B. While working in a division investigating organized crime, he became a kind of part-time lackey to a billionaire businessman named Boris Berezovsky, a common type of arrangement in those days between government officials and members of Russia's new oligarchy. 
  After the murder of a prominent television personality who worked at a station that Mr. Berezovsky controlled, Mr. Litvinenko used his official position to stop local police officers from arresting and interrogating his patron in connection with the crime. In the helter-skelter world of 1990s Russia, events of this type were complex, but Mr. Cowell has a knack for the telling analogy: 
  ''The incident was the equivalent of a lone F.B.I. officer facing down men from the N.Y.P.D. because he believed they were in the pay of the Mafia in a conspiracy to spirit away Warren Buffett and frame him for the murder of Dan Rather.'' 
  Mr. Litvinenko ultimately went public with accusations of widespread corruption and criminal wrongdoing in the F.S.B. He became something of a Serpico figure,  reviled by his colleagues even though his accusations were true. He was suspended by the F.S.B. and later jailed on trumped-up charges. After getting out of jail, Mr. Litvinenko fled to England, where by now Mr. Berezovsky himself was also in exile. 
  Mr. Litvinenko spent his time in London writing anti-Putin diatribes, giving interviews to novelists and filmmakers interested in post-Soviet Russia and trying, for the most part unsuccessfully, to drum up work as a security consultant. In their interviews with Mr. Cowell, Mr. Litvinenko's acquaintances, friends and even family frequently said he talked too much, was obsessed with Vladimir V. Putin in an unhealthy way and came across at times as crazy. His own father, referring to Mr. Litvinenko's childlike view of the world, said, ''He was a bit like Forrest Gump.'' 
  One of the enduring mysteries of Mr. Litvinenko's murder is why anyone would go to the trouble of killing such a small-time player. Mr. Cowell lays out the great variety of theories: Mr. Litvinenko was gathering information on shady dealings in the Russian oil business and upset powerful people; Mr. Litvinenko's connection to Mr. Berezovsky made him a stand-in target for him; Mr. Litvinenko's former colleagues in the F.S.B. were furious over his public denunciations and, assuming he had been debriefed by British intelligence, considered him a traitor who deserved to die. 
  Probably the most spectacular of the theories is that Mr. Litvinenko was killed for revealing in an interview that he had been told that the Italian prime minister at the time, Romano Prodi, was a K.G.B. agent.
  We may never know precisely why Mr. Litvinenko was murdered, but the British police were able to determine, at least to their satisfaction, how he was murdered. One of polonium's attributes is that the smallest traces of it will ''spill, tumble, rise on air currents, attach to surfaces and solidify.'' 
  Mr. Cowell follows the British investigation as the police chase the traces of the isotope around London, reconstructing the chronology of events on the day of Mr. Litvinenko's murder. For everyone who's tired of the endless forensic investigations that take up so many hours on television and so many pages in crime novels, this nuclear street work is engrossing in a whole new way.
  Ultimately, the trail led to a Russian businessman and former K.G.B. bodyguard named Andrei Lugovoi. Russia refused to extradite him, and since there has never been a court case, much of the evidence against Mr. Lugovoi has remained sealed. Mr. Lugovoi asserts that he himself was a victim of the polonium attack, which is why he left traces of the element everywhere he went. 
  As the multiple subtitles in Mr. Cowell's book suggest, he believes that the Litvinenko murder has far-reaching significance. He argues that the West has become embroiled in a new cold war with Russia, and that Mr. Litvinenko's poisoning, whether authorized at the very top or not, was the act of an angry, newly ascendant Russia. He also believes that the murder was the world's first act of nuclear terrorism, and that the use of polonium or similar elements in a slightly modified manner could be much more effective for terrorists than a dirty bomb. 
  Mr. Cowell's warnings about this may or may not prove to be prophetic, but it's hard to see Mr. Litvinenko's assassination itself as an act of terrorism, rather than just as a brutal and particularly twisted murder. Perhaps Mr. Litvinenko's father captured it best when he described what happened to his son as a ''tiny'' nuclear attack.
  As for Mr. Litvinenko's suspected  killer, Andrei Lugovoi went on the offensive, publicly attacking the British and their case against him. His nationalist, anti-Western stance was so popular at home that he was elected to the Duma, the Russian Parliament's lower house. 
  In a world where a decent, naive and ultimately harmless man like  Alexander Litvinenko is poisoned by radioactive tea, it's hardly a surprising conclusion to this story.
  THE TERMINAL SPY 
  A True Story of Espionage, Betrayal and Murder -- The First Act of Nuclear Terrorism and the New Cold War 
  By Alan S. Cowell 
  Illustrated. 432 pages. Doubleday/Broadway. $26.95. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alan S. Cowell (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE SHEIL)                 

Load-Date: August 12, 2008


End of Document