BIZARRE CASES MAR RELATIONS WITH LIBYA
The New York Times
August 20, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 643 words
Byline: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 19
Body


Today's clash over the Mediterranean was only the latest in a series of bizarre events that have marked Libyan-American relations since Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, a leader with grand notions of forging a single Arab nation, overthrew King Idris I in 1969.
Relations were all but broken in May when the Reagan Administration ordered Libya to close its diplomatic mission in Washington and expelled its staff, citing ''a wide range of Libyan provocations and misconduct, including support for international terrorism.'' Less than 18 months earlier, all American diplomats were withdrawn from Libya after the United States Embassy in Tripoli was sacked and burned.
Robert Reinhold discusses clash between US and Libyan planes and other events of US-Libyan relations since Colonel el-Qaddafi became leader
Despite all this, however, the two nations have maintained an economic relationship borne of necessity. Libya is this country's third largest supplier of oil, after Saudi Arabia and Nigeria, providing the United States with more than 10 percent of its imports at a cost of about $9 billion. American exports to Libya, according to new statistics issued by Washington, rose to $348.5 million in the first five months of this year, a 63.2 percent increase over the same period of 1980.
These ties have persisted despite cultural and political differences that American and Arab experts say make it almost impossible for the two sides to understand each other. Today's dispute, involving how far Libyan sovereignty extends into the Gulf of Sidra, was a stark example of the seemingly irreconcilable differences between the two countries.
American administrations have accused Libya of using its oil revenues to finance global terrorism and of hiring assassins to kill exiled opponents. There have even been intimations that Colonel Qaddafi plotted the murder of American officials.  Libya has charged Washington with imperialism and with supporting repression abroad.
Prof. William I. Zartman, director of the African Studies Program at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies here, said, ''We are just ideologically on entirely different courses and have been from the beginning - it runs very deep.''
The differences were not apparent in 1969, when Colonel Qaddafi, without great American objections, overthrew the monarchy.  Though an anti-Communist, he denounced foreign companies and moved to nationalize some foreign oil interests. Compared to other radical nations, however, he was comparatively lenient, and the United States made no strong efforts on behalf of the companies.
But by 1973, the last time an American Ambassador lived in Tripoli, relations had chilled. Wild stories about the Libyan's adventures began to crop up, such as his reported attempt in 1973 to have the Queen Elizabeth 2, laden with American Jews bound for Israel, sunk by an Egyptian submarine.
A year later Libya began to buy arms from the Soviet Union.  One of the more bizarre episodes in Libyan-American relations was disclosed last year when former President Carter's brother, Billy, registered as an agent of the Libyan Government with the Justice Department, having received a $220,000 ''loan'' from Libya. It was widely assumed that Libya was trying to obtain release of American planes it had ordered.
Perhaps even more bizarre is the invovement of Edwin P. Wilson and Francis E. Terpil, both former operatives of the Central Intelligence Agency who are fugitives from American charges that they supplied arms to Libya and ran a school there to train terrorists.
Mr. Terpil is suspected by American law enforcement authorities of having sent a Green Beret veteran last October to kill a Libyan dissident studying in Fort Collins, Colo. The attempt, which failed, was one of the events that is believed to have led to the expulsion of Libyan envoys in Washington.


End of Document