Blair addresses terrorism at Texas A&M
University Wire
April 8, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 672 words
Byline: By Rolando Garcia, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


Despite growing opposition at home to his steadfast support of America's war on terrorism, British Prime Minister Tony Blair moved closer to endorsing President George W. Bush's plan to remove Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein while speaking at Texas A&M Sunday.
"We must be prepared to act when terrorism and weapons of mass destruction threaten us, and if necessary, that will involve military action and regime change," Blair said. "To let Iraq develop weapons of mass destruction is to ignore the lessons of Sept. 11, and we won't allow it."
Blair visited the George Bush Presidential Library Complex after spending the weekend at Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas, where he and the president discussed Iraq, the crisis in the Middle East and other pressing international issues.
Texas A&M U.
In an interview with The Battalion, Blair stopped short of seconding the Bush administration's commitment to remove Hussein through military action, but said Britain is seriously considering the option.
"Iraq would be a much better place without Saddam Hussein," Blair said.
Blair has encountered strong opposition from within his own Labor Party to military action in Iraq, and many observers say Blair's plummeting poll numbers are the result of growing dissatisfaction with Blair's unwavering support of America's war on terrorism. However, Blair dismissed anti-American sentiment in Britain as a small but vocal minority, and said Britain did not lack the resolve to topple Hussein.
"We'll take whatever action is necessary, and most people just want to know if that action is measured and reasoned," Blair said.
In his speech, Blair racketed up the rhetoric against Hussein, describing the Iraqi regime as "detestable" and "brutal." Blair said sometimes it is necessary to forcefully remove a rogue regime, citing Serbia and Afghanistan as recent examples.
Blair also addressed the situation in the Middle East, where a wave of suicide bombings prompted Israeli forces to move into parts of the Palestinian-controlled West Bank to root out terrorist groups. He called on the Israelis to withdraw from the occupied territories and for both sides to observe a cease-fire and resume negotiations. However, many critics say Palestinian leader Yassir Arafat's continued support for terrorism disqualify him as a peace partner.
Blair said he welcomed Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah's peace initiative, which calls for Israel to withdraw to its 1967 borders in return for Arab nation's recognizing Israel's right to exist.
Because of globalization and the integration of the world economy, Blair said it was in the self-interest of the United States and Europe to ensure world stability and prosperity by actively promoting freedom and democracy. Cooperation between the two is crucial to the success of the war on terrorism, Blair said.
"The world works better when the United States and Europe stand together. Our common interests dwarf the divide," Blair said.
Blair also discussed the special bond between Britain and the United States, and praised America's response to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"The British people will always be with you at times like these," Blair said. "We're not half-hearted friends, and we never will be."
Blair said the time is ripe to forge a new relationship with Russia, where President Vladimir Putin has taken a pro-Western stance, but said Russia joining NATO is not in the works.
Blair also discussed Africa, where he said the developed world had a once-in-a-generation opportunity to help the continent out of its disastrous decline by increasing assistance for education, good government and opening world markets to African goods.
"Africa is a scar on the conscience of the world, and it is time we react to the plight of the people there," Blair said.
Blair spoke to an overflow audience in the George Bush Conference Center, with some watching the speech in separate rooms. Many people with tickets were turned away at the door.
(C) 2002 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 8, 2002


End of Document