Blair outlines tough security plans;
Citing terrorism, he said national ID cards were long overdue and called for an FBI-type agency.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 24, 2004 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A07
Length: 613 words
Byline: Ed Johnson ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Prime Minister Tony Blair put the fight against crime and terrorism at the center of his campaign for a third term, pledging yesterday to fast-track plans for national identity cards and a new police agency similar to the FBI.
With parliamentary elections expected in May, the government wants to highlight law and order. Security lies at the heart of the legislative program unveiled yesterday.
"The threats faced by this country and every other major country around the world are real," Blair told the House of Commons as he outlined plans for compulsory ID cards. "This is a big change, but frankly with terrorism, illegal immigration and organized crime . . . identity cards in my judgment are long overdue."
Political opponents accused Blair's government of seeking to frighten voters. "It is clear that they are trying to raise the fears from terrorism in the country at the present time," said Liam Fox, of the opposition Conservative Party. "Now I think that is quite despicable, but it is a desperate government."
Despite widespread public opposition to British participation in the Iraq war, Blair's Labor Party is comfortably ahead in opinion polls and is expected to win a third consecutive term in office.
In a ceremony rich in pomp and pageantry, Queen Elizabeth II outlined to Parliament the government's legislative agenda for the coming year. Reading from a speech written by ministers, she announced plans for a Serious Organized Crime Agency to crack down on drug gangs, people-traffickers and Internet pedophiles. The agency has been called the British equivalent of the FBI.
The government also promised new counterterrorism legislation, having said it wants to introduce special antiterrorism courts without juries and to allow wiretap evidence in trials.
The Queen's Speech also outlined legislation that would allow compulsory testing for drug abuse, tackle antisocial behavior, and protect scientists from abuse by animal-rights activists.
But the government's legislative priority is to pass a law allowing a national database of names, addresses, and biometric details - such as fingerprints and iris scans - of everyone living in Britain. The information would be linked to ID cards.
Officials say the cards will help combat identity theft, illegal immigration and welfare fraud. Ministers hope to phase them in for voluntary use by 2007, then make them compulsory by 2012.
Britain has not had compulsory ID cards for ordinary citizens since shortly after World War II. Such cards are mandatory in many western European countries, including Germany, France and Italy, but the idea alarms civil rights activists, who worry about infringements on traditional libertarian values.
The government says it would not be compulsory for people to carry the ID cards at all times. However, the cards would have to be produced to access key public services, such as claiming welfare benefits or receiving health care.
The Queen's Speech was preceded by a leak from a government source who said police and security agencies had thwarted a Sept. 11-style attack in London that allegedly targeted Heathrow Airport and three skyscrapers in the Docklands district of East London. Reports in the Daily Mail and on ITN television did not say when the plot was thwarted or how advanced it was.
Ministers insisted the government was not trying to scare voters.
"I reject entirely the idea that this is pandering to fear," said Peter Hain, the government's leader in the House of Commons.
He appeared to confirm, however, that the government was trying to outflank the Conservatives on law-and-order issues. "We are crowding out any space for them on the security agenda," he told reporters.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Tony Blair is seeking a third term as Britain's prime minister.

Load-Date: September 2, 2005


End of Document