Blair proposes crackdown on extremism in Britain His measures would expel foreigners who preach hatred, close extremist mosques and keep Muslim radicals out of the country.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 6, 2005 Saturday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 26
Length: 617 words
Byline: BY MARA D. BELLABY The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


Prime Minister Tony Blair is proposing strict anti-terrorism measures that would expel foreigners who preach hatred, close extremist mosques and bar entry to Muslim radicals.
"The rules of the game are changing" because of the bomb attacks last month, he said Friday.
The proposals also target extremist Web sites and bookshops. They are aimed primarily at excluding radical Islamic clerics accused of whipping up hatred and violence among vulnerable, disenfranchised Muslim men.
"We are angry about extremism and about what they are doing to our country, angry about their abuse of our good nature," Blair said.
The suicide attacks on London's transit system on July 7 and the failed attacks on July 21 stunned Britons. The bombs raised fresh concern about the freedom Britain offers to individuals and groups known for extremist activities.
Blair said the focus of the anti-terrorism proposals was on foreigners, because authorities believe "the ideological drive and push is coming from the outside."
But some among Britain's 1.8 million Muslims expressed concern that moderate Muslims would be subjected to new prejudice and restrictions.
Some British officials feel that human-rights legislation has hampered Britain's ability to deport foreigners. Under the European Convention on Human Rights, Britain is barred from deporting people to a country where they may face torture or death.
Blair hopes that by winning pledges from countries that deportees would be spared from ill treatment, Britain can take a tougher line. Such an agreement has already been reached with Jordan, and Britain is talking to Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt.
Blair said the government was prepared to amend human rights legislation if legal challenges proved insurmountable.
Under the proposals:
- Anyone who preaches hatred or violence could be deported.
- Those linked to terrorism would be automatically refused asylum.
- Naturalized citizens who preach violence could lose their citizenship.
The government also will consider a request from police and security services to hold terrorism suspects for three months without charging them. The current limit is 14 days. The measures also would extend the use of home arrest for Britons who can't be deported.
New powers would close mosques that foment extremism. Authorities will draw up lists of radical preachers who will be barred from Britain. They'll also compile a list of radical Web sites and bookstores. Any foreigner who "actively engages" with those places could face deportation.
Membership in extremist Islamic groups such as Hizb-ut-Tahrir would also become a crime, as would the glorification of terrorism.
Iqbal Sacranie heads the Muslim Council of Britain. He said the group would be seeking more details from Blair. But his early response was concern. "Our democratic values need to be upheld, not undermined," he said. 
Ajmal Masroor of the Islamic Society of Britain said, "No one should have the right to close down an institution such as a mosque. It will only ignite further anger and frustration in the hearts and minds of Muslims."
But other Muslims called the proposals long overdue. "Day after day, these lunatics on our behalf are really messing up our lives here," said Omar Farooq, also of the Islamic Society of Britain.
Also Friday, a trustee of a London mosque said mosque leaders warned police in 2003 that a group of extremists including July 21 bombing suspect Hamdi Issac was "inciting racial and religious hatred."
Toaha Qureshi, trustee of the Stockwell Mosque in south London, said mosque leaders wrote to police urging action against the group.
The Metropolitan Police said it considered all correspondence it received confidential and could not comment.

Load-Date: August 7, 2005


End of Document