Blair has ambitious plans for his final year in office
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 16, 2006 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 274 words
Byline: By David Stringer the Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


Terrorism, crime and climate change will dominate Prime Minister Tony Blair's final legislative agenda, set out Wednesday by Queen Elizabeth II in a speech to Parliament.
As Britain's head of state, the queen lays out proposals for new laws on the prime minister's behalf, but has no role in drafting them. Blair has said he would step aside next year.
The queen said Blair's government will try to push through a sweeping package of about 30 new laws in the next year. She said the plans contained "action to provide strong, secure and stable communities, and to address the threat of terrorism."
The queen said Blair's government remains committed to bringing a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to continuing to support the fragile governments in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Blair's proposed agenda includes a raft of law enforcement measures with plans for harsher jail sentences for violent criminals, tougher rules on applications for asylum and a streamlining of Britain's court system - including the introduction of nonjury trials in complex fraud cases, government officials said.
The government also plans to put into law a target to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 60 percent by 2050.
The government also plans to raise the state pension age from 65 to 68 for both men and women by 2046 in an attempt to secure the long-term financial viability of Britain's pension system.
Queen to visit U.S.
Also during the ceremony, Queen Elizabeth II said she and her husband, Prince Philip, will make a state visit to the United States in May to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Jamestown, Britain's first permanent settlement in America.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Britain's Queen Elizabeth II at Parliament Wednesday.  The Associated Press 

Load-Date: November 16, 2006


End of Document