BLAST BRINGS FEAR OF TERRORISM THE MOOD IS JUBILANT AMONG SOUTH AFRICAN BLACKS DURING FIRST VOTE
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 27, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P
Length: 446 words
Body


JOHANNESBURG, South Africa - With a new flag heralding the birth
of democracy, Nelson Mandela cast the first vote of his life in an
election expected to make him the country's first black president.
But a bomb blasted Johannesburg's international airport,
renewing fears of a terrorist campaign.
The blast came minutes after a jubilant Mandela voted at a
polling station in the hills outside Durban, a coastal city about 300
miles southeast of Johannesburg.  Police confirmed 18 injuries, two
of them serious, and said a white man was being questioned.
The attack was a reminder of the obstacles facing Mandela's
African National Congress if, as expected, it comes to power after
the election.
Right-wing extremists have vowed to wage war rather than live
under a black government, and at least 21 people have died in
bombings since Sunday.  Police said the man being questioned in
today's bombing was dressed in khaki, the color usually worn by the
extremists.
The bomb shattered the euphoria that spread across the country
after voting opened Tuesday to the sick, elderly and other "special
voters" who needed extra time to cast ballots.
Blacks impatient for their first taste of democracy arrived at
polls in wheelchairs and even wheelbarrows in some rural areas.  At
hospitals, they roused themselves from sickbeds and hobbled to
hospital polls wearing their nightclothes.
Many broke into tears after making their mark.  "We need
freedom," said 72-year-old Florence Ndimangele, voting with other
elderly people near Cape Town.  "We are tired of being slaves."
"It is the beginning of a new era," Mandela said after
dropping his ballot into a simple brown box outside a school founded
by John Dube, one of the first ANC leaders.  "It is a realization of
our hopes and dreams - the dreams of a South Africa which represents
all South Africans."
The day dawned with a new flag flying over the nation, and the
sounds of a new national anthem lingering in the chilly air. The
changeover occurred at midnight in the nine cities that will serve as
provincial capitals under the new, post-apartheid constitution, which
took effect today.
The old flag, seen by many blacks as a symbol of white rule,
was lowered for the last time at nationally televised ceremonies as
the old anthem, "Die Stem," ("The Call"), was sung.
As the new flag was raised, the anthem of the anti-apartheid
movement, "God Bless Africa," was sung for the first time as one of
the two official national anthems.  "Die Stem," an Afrikaner hymn,
will remain as the second anthem.
Despite late-arriving ballots and waits so long in some places
that people collapsed, the mood among blacks casting the first vote
of their lives was jubilant.
BLAST9A Blast 1A 30

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document