Blasts kill dozens in Iraq; Militants target apartment buildings in latest attack; at least 119 dead over 5 days
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 7, 2010 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-04
Length: 523 words
Dateline: BAGHDAD 
Body


 BAGHDAD - At least seven bombs ripped through apartment buildings across Baghdad yesterday and another struck a market, killing at least 49 people and wounding more than 180, authorities said.
 The explosions were the latest in a five-day wave of attacks in and around the capital that have killed at least 119 people. Several bombs were planted inside empty apartments, the government said.
 The violence, which largely has targeted families and homes, is reminiscent of the sectarian bloodshed that tore Iraq apart from 2005 to 2007 and prompted the United States to send tens of thousands more troops to the front lines. But even since that time, sectarian violence and attacks on civilians have flared in cycles, especially surrounding important events such as the election.
 Iraqi and U.S. officials blamed the latest spike in attacks on al-Qaida insurgents seizing on gaping security lapses created by the political deadlock that has gripped the country since its March 7 parliamentary election failed to produce a clear winner.
 "This is blamed on the power vacuum of course, and on how democracy is being raped in Iraq," former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi said. His political coalition, Iraqiya, came out ahead in last month's vote, nar- rowly edging Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki's bloc by two seats. He also raised the prospect that the country's political impasse could last for months as both sides try to cobble together the majority needed to govern.
 "It could either be formed in two months, or it could last four or five months," he said.
 Al-Maliki adviser Sadiq al-Rikabi challenged Allawi's suggestion that Iraqi security forces had let down their guard since the elections.
 "It is true that terrorism and attacks are attributed to the political situation the country is experiencing, and we have faced terrorism before elections as well," al-Rikabi said. "Some parts are using terrorism events for political goals."
 Maj. Gen. Qassim al-Moussawi, an Iraqi military spokesman for Baghdad's operations command center, said the attackers detonated homemade bombs and, in one case, a car packed with explosives. He said there were at least seven blasts. The U.S. military in Baghdad said there were eight.
 The first blasts hit about 9:30 a.m. in the primarily Shiite neighborhood of Shula in northwest Baghdad, striking a residential building and an intersection about a mile away, according to police and hospital officials who also spoke on condition of anonymity.
 A few minutes later, at 9:45 a.m., a bomb left in a plastic bag exploded at a restaurant in the Allawi district downtown, near the Culture Ministry. Several of the bombs were planted inside empty apartments by renters who "lured the owners" by paying high prices for the properties, the government said in a statement.
 Several hours later, a parked car bomb exploded in a market, killing six civilians, police and hospital officials.
--------------------------
U.S. casualties
IRAQ
Killed...... 4,391*
From Virginia......154
Wounded......31,770*
AFGHANISTAN
Killed......1,028*
From Virginia......42
Wounded......5,510*
*Pentagon tally, updated weekly
--------------------------

Load-Date: April 8, 2010


End of Document