Blasts wound two in Rome Anarchists suspected after the incidents at the Swiss, Chilean embassies.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 24, 2010 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 392 words
Byline: BY FRANCES D'EMILIO • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


ROME - Mail bombs exploded in the hands of employees at the Swiss and Chilean embassies in Rome on Thursday, seriously wounding two people and triggering heightened security checks at diplomatic missions just as holiday deliveries deluge their mailrooms.
Italian investigators suspected the attacks were the work of anarchists, similar to the two-day wave of mail bombs that targeted several embassies in Athens last month - including those of Chile and Switzerland. One of last month's booby-trapped packages, addressed to Italian Premier Silvio Berlusconi, was intercepted in Italy.
Late Thursday night, the Italian news agency ANSA reported that a claim by anarchists was found in a small box near one of the wounded employees, and was being examined by anti-terrorism police squad.
Anti-terrorism police at Rome police headquarters refused to comment on the claim, which ANSA said was made by a group called the Informal Anarchist Federation, or FAI.
"Long live FAI, long live anarchy," the claim reportedly said.
Anarchists were blamed by authorities last week for bloody clashes between protesters and police in Rome that marred otherwise peaceful demonstrations by students against a university reform law. The legislation received final approval in parliament Thursday.
For Thursday's twin embassy mail bombs, less than three hours apart, Italian investigators are pursuing the "trail of anarchists-insurrectionists," Interior Minister Roberto Maroni, whose ministry includes anti-terrorist police, told reporters. "Various elements lead us to think that this is the correct path."
"These are very violent groups that are also present in Spain and Greece and are very well connected," the minister said.
In Athens, Greek law enforcement officials said that Greek anti-terror police were contacted in the evening by Italian colleagues but that no link with the Greek parcel bombs was immediately apparent.
The bombs seemed aimed to injure if not maim or kill those opening them.
Surgeons removed an iron bolt that had embedded itself in the chest of the Chilean embassy employee who opened the package, said Massimiliano Talucci, a spokesman for Umberto I Polyclinic, where the man was hospitalized. The Chilean also suffered a serious hand wound and face injuries, and risks losing the sight in one eye. The Swiss official suffered hand and chest wounds.

Graphic

 
 Photo by Andrew Medichini • Associated Press - Police officers stand guard outside the Chilean embassy in Rome on Thursday after a bomb exploded there and at the Swiss embassy. The bombs injured the two people who opened them, officials said. Police ordered checks at all the embassies in the city. 

Load-Date: December 24, 2010


End of Document