BLASTS SPUR U.S. ACTION ON TERRORISM BILL< CLINTON URGED CONGRESS TO TRY TO PASS A MEASURE< BEFORE SUMMER RECESS. HE DREW SOME GOP SUPPORT.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JULY 30, 1996 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 843 words
Byline: Heather Dewar, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


After back-to-back explosions that rocked the nation, President Clinton called Republican and Democratic congressional leaders to the White House yesterday and urged them to swiftly pass many of the same counterterrorism measures that they had rejected in the spring.
The President called for a "long, disciplined, concerted, united effort" to combat terrorism - and drew some assurances of support from GOP leaders.
Leaders in both parties agreed to try to rush the measures through Capitol Hill by Friday, when Congress begins its summer recess. But the legislation could be slowed because of concerns over civil liberties and opposition from gun lobbyists.
"When the bomb went off in Centennial Park in Atlanta, that park immediately became our national common ground, a symbol of our determination" to defeat terrorism, President Clinton said at the start of yesterday's meeting. "When we are attacked, whether it's from within or without, we come together."
A pipe bomb blew up in Atlanta early Saturday, 10 days after the explosion of TWA Flight 800 off Long Island, which investigators strongly suspect was caused by a bomb.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, "speaking as a representative of Atlanta and a representative of the people of Georgia," pledged "to cooperate in any way we can" in passing new counterterrorism measures.
Meanwhile, Reno and top officials from eight other countries are meeting in Paris today, seeking quick agreement on measures they can take to fight terrorist bombers and airplane attackers.
Justice Department antiterrorism experts said the United States would suggest setting up an international fingerprint database of known and suspected terrorists; creating standardized formats for passenger lists and cargo manifests, and placing identifying numbers on vehicles and vehicle parts manufactured in each of the countries.
Congressional leaders also agreed to reconsider the following Clinton proposals:
* Passing an amendment to the Electronic Communications Privacy Act to allow law officers to conduct "roving wiretaps" on criminal suspects who switch phones frequently, and to get copies of suspects' local phone records.
* Making a change in the Posse Comitatus Act, which strictly limits the use of the military in law enforcement. The amendment would allow military experts to investigate cases in which biological, chemical or nuclear weapons were used.
* Creating a protocol that would permit law officers access to computer data transmitted in code.
* Commissioning a faster and more sweeping study on the potential use of "taggants" - chemical markers that can help trace the sources of some explosives.
* Making it a federal crime to post bomb-making instructions on computer networks.
* Giving the FBI access to local telephone records without a court order. The bureau already can get long-distance records without a judge's approval.
House Republicans rejected those measures in April, in part out of fear that federal law agents would have carte blanche to violate Americans' civil liberties. Congress ended up passing a narrower antiterrorism bill.
"Because of the bombing in Atlanta and the destruction of TWA Flight 800, people are taking another look," said Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware, the top Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee.
White House chief of staff Leon Panetta is to lead the hastily assembled summit of 16 legislative leaders.
"We're going to go right down the list in the morning and say, 'OK, wiretaps - in or out? Taggants - in or out?' " Biden said. "And then we're going to put together the best bill we think can quickly pass and bring it to a vote."
Some measures still will run into strong resistance from House Republicans, though. Sen. Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican and Judiciary Committee chairman, predicted the wiretap measures would be the most difficult to pass.
Although the proposal tracks current law in requiring a federal judge to agree in advance to wiretaps, many legislators see it as an infringement of Americans' freedoms, he said.
Other congressional leaders predicted Gingrich would have trouble with the taggants proposal, which the National Rifle Association opposes.
In April, Congress authorized a six-month study on the safety and effectiveness of the chemical markers, but it has not appropriated the $25 million needed to pay for the study. And with strong urging from the NRA, the House excluded from the study a common, inexpensive form of gunpowder called "black powder."
An FBI spokesman refused to say whether black powder was an ingredient in the Atlanta pipe bomb. But after Freeh and others briefed the congressional leaders yesterday, Biden and House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) said the substance had indeed been used in the bomb.
Gingrich refused to say whether he would back the wiretap and taggant proposals.
"As much as we want to get the terrorists, we want to do it in a methodical way to preserve our freedoms," he said. "The goal here is not to allow the terrorists to pressure us into suspending the very freedoms that make America precious."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO (1)
1. President Clinton meets with (from left) Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott to discuss antiterrorism measures. (Reuters, MIKE THEILER)

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document