Blaz team's got religion, but no Catholics A priest & a rabbi walk into a bar...Oh, wait, we don't HAVE a priest!
Daily News (New York)
November 22, 2013 Friday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 16
Length: 445 words
Byline: BY JENNIFER FERMINO CITY HALL BUREAU CHIEF With Erin Durkin and Rocco Parascandola
Body


A RABBI, a priest and a imam walk into City Hall - but only two of them are invited to be on Bill de Blasio's transition team.
The mayor-elect - whose Italian uncle was a priest - snubbed the religion of his ancestors by omitting Catholic clergy from his 60-member transition team Wednesday.
Making the snub even more glaring, the team - which de Blasio has repeatedly called "diverse" - includes five spiritual leaders from other major religions.
De Blasio appointed two rabbis, two Christian ministers, and an imam to the team, which will help him choose a cabinet and policy priorities for his term.
The absence of leaders from the world's largest Christian denomination - the religion practiced by more than half the city - sparked an uproar among some Catholics.
"De Blasio hasn't even begun, yet he has managed to insult a majority of New Yorkers," said Bill Donohue, head of the conservative Catholic League, in an email to supporters.
"This was clearly done by design. Looks like de Blasio's politics of inclusion has its limits."
De Blasio - who describes himself as "spiritual" and was not raised in the faith - did not respond to a request for comment.
The transition team - which he unveiled late Wednesday - is also short on crime and security experts, despite de Blasio's claim that fighting terrorism will be one of his top priorities in City Hall.
Jeremy Travis, the president of John Jay College, is the only member with a hefty law enforcement background.
A former special adviser to the late Mayor Ed Koch, Travis has mostly focused on domestic crime, like juvenile justice and prisoner reentry into society.
But he also headed the research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice in the '90s, pushing for more work on counterterrorism strategies.
Although he wasn't named to the transition team, David Kennedy - director of John Jay's Center for Crime Prevention and Control - has also advised de Blasio behind the scenes.
The mayor-elect is in frequent contact with state and federal authorities about terrorism, and has had conversations with outgoing Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly about the terror threat, according to de Blasio's spokeswoman.
De Blasio on Wednesday revealed he'd interviewed three candidates for the NYPD commissioner spot - former top cop Bill Bratton, Chief of Department Philip Banks and Rafael Pineiro, the NYPD first deputy police commissioner.
Mayor Bloomberg praised Pinero and Banks on Thursday.
"Both are very competent guys who I've worked with," he said.
Bloomberg called Bratton a "casual friend."
TRANSITION TEAM INCLUDES:
8 arts leaders
4 real estate heavyweights
5 Protestant, Jewish and Muslim clergy
1 criminal justice expert
0 priests

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: November 22, 2013


End of Document