Blaz: Sword slay is race terrorism
Daily News (New York)
March 25, 2017 Saturday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 381 words
Byline: BY JILLIAN JORGENSEN, SHAYNA JACOBS and MARY McDONNELL NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Rich Schapiro
Body


THE HATE-FILLED brute accused of using a sword to butcher a black man in Midtown carried out an act of "domestic, racist terrorism," Mayor de Blasio said Friday.
The comments come a day after the mayor refused to answer questions about the horrific attack and suspect James Jackson's alleged ties to hate groups.
"This is domestic, racist terrorism," de Blasio told Brian Lehrer on WNYC radio. "There's no question it is the equivalent of what happened in Charleston at the church, which was one of the most horrible incidents that occurred in this nation in many years - a racially motivated act of domestic terrorism."
Jackson, 28, stalked several black people Monday night before settling on 66-year-old Timothy Caughman, prosecutors said.
Approaching his victim from behind on Ninth Ave., Jackson plunged the 18-inch blade of his sword into Caughman's chest, prosecutors said.
The Baltimore-based racist, after surrendering to police, told cops he traveled to New York to get maximum attention for his sick plot to execute black men. Jackson was arraigned Thursday on several charges including second-degree murder as a hate crime.
De Blasio blamed the attack on a "dynamic of hatred" that grew out of the election of President Trump and has "unleashed forces of hate all over the country."
Later Friday, Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams called for prosecutors to bring domestic terrorism charges against Jackson.
"We need for (white supremacist groups) to be treated the same way as we treat ISIS," he said.
The Manhattan district attorney's office refused to comment Friday. Prosecutors said Thursday the charges could be elevated because they believe Jackson was seeking to instill fear in the black community. The killing was "most likely an act of terrorism," prosecutors said.
Criminal defense attorney Javier Solano, who is not connected to the case, said there may be legal roadblocks to bringing terrorism charges against Jackson.
Solano said the suspect's decision to turn himself in would make it difficult for prosecutors to prove that he was bent on terrorizing the city.
"He could have, for example, put out some statement: 'I will kill again, any black man that's outside, that I see in the street," Solano said. "You kill a guy and then you just surrender? I don't see it."

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: March 25, 2017


End of Document