Blog; Political Insider; Giuliani and abortion: Perhaps not the defining issue that many think, he says. Even so, the ex-NYC mayor says there's common ground to be had
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 16, 2007 Wednesday
Online Edition


Copyright 2007 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 00
Length: 314 words
Byline: TOM BAXTER, JIM GALLOWAY

Staff
Body


Wednesday, May 16, 2007, 02:40 PM
Rudy Giuliani finished his "town hall" meeting at Oglethorpe U. about an hour ago.
The majority of questions dealt with terrorism and immigration. One dealt with the fair tax. Another focused on the killing of dogs and cats. Seriously.
None touched on abortion. During his quick session with the press gaggle, we asked Giuliani whether he took the lack of questions on this topic as a sign that some issues --- like terrorism and immigration --- trump traditional GOP concerns.
"For certain people, they do, sure. That's what elections are all about," Giuliani said. (Click here for a sound clip)
"That's why I take a lot of questions. Questions more than polls tell me what people feel strongly about. Think about a poll. Somebody calls you up, you're at home, they impose 30 questions on you. They create the agenda and then you give the yes-no answer. Questions are about what people are passionate about, what's on their minds.
"I think there are many, many people who see the defining issues in this election are about how we deal with terrorism, how we create a safer America, from that point of view and other points of view, how we deal with our economy," he said.
But he held out the possibility of finding common ground with abortion opponents.
"For example, I would do everything I could do to reduce abortion, consistent with --- in my case --- I think there should be respect for a woman's choice here, and government [should] not coerce in that area," he said. "But as a constructive thing, I would look for ways in which we could reduce abortions. I think all Republicans and all Democrats just about agree on that --- that we should reduce abortions through free choice, through making information available, through making adoptions available. Through making the decision more of a complete choice.
"So maybe there's room for common ground there."

Load-Date: May 19, 2007


End of Document