BOARD COLOR-CODES TERRORISM TRAVEL POLICY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 12, 2003 Wednesday
SOUTH EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: METRO,
Length: 338 words
Byline: AL LOWE, TRI-STATE SPORTS & NEWS SERVICE
Body


Baldwin High School cheerleader Jodi Gift was in tears when she confronted the Baldwin-Whitehall school board over its discussion of student travel guidelines.
 Emotions ran high when more than 100 people heard the board eventually OK previously planned student trips unless travel would occur under the government-declared red alert. Then all trips are automatically canceled.
Gift objected to a board member's characterization of the cheerleaders' Florida trip as participation in a privately sponsored competition, not a school activity. "We're interfering with some winter vacations," board President Ron Boyle said.
 Gift asked how the cheerleaders could be expected to support the school's sports teams "when you don't support us."
 But Boyle and other board members said they did support the cheerleaders.
 "If I didn't like kids, I wouldn't be here," Boyle said.
 Backing away from last month's ban of most student trips due to the national emergency, the board at first decided to cancel trips only if they were to happen under orange or red alert.
 But Director Mike Stelmasczyk objected. "Orange means be prepared. It doesn't mean you should curtail your life."
 So the motion was changed to prohibit travel under red alert only.
 Then directors objected that if there were a red alert, the country would be at war and trips would be canceled anyway.
 "It makes no sense. They couldn't go under red," director Joan Etzel said.
 The motion was further changed to require parents to sign waivers for students undertaking trips and for the superintendent to develop guidelines for travel in Pennsylvania.
 Homer called the policy change "a step in the wrong direction."
 "Every day the color changes. It's up to parents whether students go on trips. It's not our decision at all," John Egger said. His remarks were applauded by the audience.
 The vote was 6-3, with Homer, Boyle and John Schmotzer dissenting. Even after the vote, parents berated the board for not consulting booster groups before making its original travel ban decision.

Notes

TOWNS SOUTH/ROUTE 51: BALDWIN-WHITEHALL SCHOOLS

Load-Date: March 13, 2003


End of Document