Body scanners key to anti-terrorism plan; Most changes will occur behind scenes
USA TODAY
January 8, 2010 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 707 words
Byline: Thomas Frank and Peter Eisler
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Obama's plan to correct the missteps surrounding the alleged Christmas Day terrorism plot focuses on improving the coordination of intelligence and strengthening aviation security.
The two-pronged approach Obama outlined Thursday will have little effect on domestic airline passengers and will involve many behind-the-scenes changes aimed at keeping terrorism suspects off U.S.-bound international flights.
In the U.S., air travelers could begin to see hundreds of body scanning machines at airports this year. Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said Thursday that she hopes to speed up their installation.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) bought 150 scanners in September for $25 million, but none has been installed. The machines create vivid images of passengers underneath their clothing. They would improve the detection of weapons such as the explosive powder a Nigerian passenger got through a metal detector in Amsterdam and allegedly tried to use to detonate on Dec. 25 in an airliner over Detroit, Napolitano said at a briefing after Obama addressed the nation.
"We should accelerate deployment," she said, adding that the TSA may install more than the 300 scanners it owns.
Other efforts to improve aviation security will rely heavily on international diplomacy to persuade other countries to improve their airport screening for U.S.-bound travelers.
Napolitano said she'll press for better security in foreign airports at a Jan. 21-22 meeting in Spain with her European counterparts. The meeting will be a first step to establishing "new international aviation security standards and procedures," she said.
The TSA has already tightened screening of U.S.-bound passengers by requiring extra scrutiny, such as a body scan or pat-down, of anyone traveling from 14 terror-prone countries or holding a passport from those countries.
Napolitano also said the department will add more armed air marshals, who fly on international and domestic flights, by borrowing agents from various Homeland Security agencies.
Obama also ordered changes in the nation's intelligence community, which was faulted in a review of the Dec. 25 incident released Thursday. The president said there was a failure to connect disparate strands of known information that could have helped thwart the attack.
Although Obama did not demand wholesale changes, he instructed top officials to take steps to better coordinate their operations, share information more efficiently and act more aggressively in putting terrorism suspects on government watch lists.
The office of the Director of National Intelligence, set up in 2005 to coordinate operations and facilitate information sharing among the nation's 16 intelligence agencies, was directed to "reaffirm and clarify" those agencies' roles and responsibilities. The office also was ordered to strengthen agencies' ability to analyze intelligence from intercepted communications and agents, and to improve the coordination of databases that help identify and track terror suspects.
The CIA will make several changes, spokesman George Little said, and will require information on suspected extremists and terrorists be disseminated across the intelligence community within 48 hours.
The CIA also will add analysts assigned to review intelligence from Yemen and other terrorism-prone countries. The agency will re-evaluate information on individuals it is watching from terror-prone countries to determine whether more of them should be added to U.S. government watch lists, Little said.
The changes will put increased attention on information and individuals from countries such as Yemen, which is a base of operations for al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the group that claimed responsibility for the alleged bombing attempt.
Obama also ordered a review of how people get placed on a "no-fly" list that bars them from boarding commercial airplanes. "We must do better in keeping dangerous people off airplanes."
The no-fly list now has names of about 3,600 individuals. The TSA two years ago removed many names from the list in response to complaints from innocent passengers that they were getting hassled at airports because their name was similar to a name on the no-fly list. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Charles Dharapak, AP

Load-Date: January 8, 2010


End of Document