Boko Haram: North-east residents commend military in fight against terrorism
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 29, 2018 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 458 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The Nigerian Air Force has given a detailed account of how the Air Task Force of Operation LAFIYA DOLE and Allied Air Forces provided air support to repel the attack by Boko Haram in Baga.
Therefore, no one could give accurate details of the encounter yet, as the troops have been reinforced and are busy with pursuit and mopping up operations against the terrorists.
Gov Kashim Shettima of Borno has summoned what was called "an emergency security meeting" to address the increasing attacks by Boko Haram terrorists in the state.
Buratai assured that the Nigerian Army would continue to conduct internal security operations in combating criminality and other security challenges in the country in line with its constitutional mandate of military aid to civil authority.
It was learnt that NAF scrambled its fighter-aircrafts including Alpha jets, Mi 25 attack helicopters for the decisive bombardments.
Brigadier-General A.S. Ishaq, the Coordinator Nigeria Police Force for Operation Lafiya-Dole , in a chat with PRNigeria, said there was nothing like Policemen absconding, but just a case of some recalcitrant personnel leaving their training base for a reason which was not cogent.
Former Chinese spymaster jailed for life over graft
Guo, who was repeatedly named in the court´s statement, is now a fugitive living in NY since he fled China in 2014. The court announced that his sentence was "light" due to his confession, regret, and return of bribes.
The military denied Baga had fallen, saying the attack had been repelled.
"The NAF appreciates the existing synergy with our gallant surface forces as well as our Regional Allies in adding value to our collective efforts to protect our territory and people", he said. They contested it but they lost the contest, " Lamidi Adeosun, the Army's Chief of Training and Operations said at a news conference in Maiduguri.
He said the exercise is expected to run concurrently in the six geopolitical zones of the country in the build-up to the 2019 elections, ensuring stability in troubled areas.
During the flag off of Operation Egwu Eke III (Python Dance) Buratai said the military had observed an upsurge of security challenges, such as stockpiling of arms by criminal groups, formation of ethnic militias and violence induced by political activities, noting that Operation Egwu Eke I and II, which took place in year 2016 and last year respectively in the South East, yielded positive results in checkmating the security challenges being witnessed in the region then.
Troops from the two bases withdrew to another naval base at Fish Dam on the shores of Lake Chad, the military source said.
In January 2015, Boko Haram took control of the town after killing hundreds of residents and forcing thousands to flee.

Load-Date: December 29, 2018


End of Document