Boko Haram claims kidnapping in apparent turn in conflict
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 16, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 453 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


More than 100 gunmen on motorcycles stormed the rural school north of Kankara town, forcing students to flee and hide in the surrounding bushes.
The resolution followed a motion moved bySenator Bello Mandiya from Katsina State on the abduction of about 330 students of a secondary school in the state recently by unknown bandits.
Stéphane Dujarric, a spokesman for António Guterres the Secretary-General of the United Nations, released a statement saying that "The Secretary-General reaffirms the solidarity and support of the United Nations to the government and people of Nigeria in their fight against terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime".
The kidnappings occurred in the home state of President Muhammadu Buhari, who condemned the attack and ordered security stepped up in schools, with those in Katsina state closed.
"What happened in Katsina was done to promote Islam and discourage un-Islamic practices as Western education is not the type of education permitted by Allah and his holy prophet".
There has been no independent verification of the audio message but Shekau has in the past released video and audio messages on Boko Haram's behalf.
"I amAbubakar Shekau and our brothers are behind the kidnapping in Katsina", said the leader of the group behind the 2014 abduction of hundreds of schoolgirls in Chibok, in a voice message issued on Tuesday, according toAFP.
Several armed groups operate in northern Nigeria where Katsina state is located.
Royal LePage sees Canadian home prices rising 5.5% in 2021
However, in Greater Vancouver, the aggregate price of a home in 2021 is forecast to climb nine per cent year-over-year to $1,262,600.
Initially, it was thought that the attack was the work of bandits, who are prevalent in the Kankara region where kidnappings for ransom are common.
The army said over the weekend that it had located the gunmen's enclave and that a military operation was under way.
Numerous more than 600 male students were able to escape during the attack while the attackers were in a gunfight with police, according to Katsina State police spokesman Gambo Isah.
The bandits may have transferred some of the kidnapped children to Boko Haram in exchange for money or weapons.
Jacob Zenn, analyst at the Washington-based research group The Jamestown Foundation who has written extensively on Nigeria, said Boko Haram's expansion efforts were years in the making.
"Na some pipo give me place to dey sleep each night and in di morning me and some oda parents come back to di school gate to spend our day hoping to hear good news about our children".
Boko Haram and the breakaway faction, the Islamic State West Africa Province, are fighting to impose strict Islamic Shariah rule in Nigeria.

Load-Date: December 16, 2020


End of Document