Boko Haram terrorism ends soon - Army
National Mirror
October 6, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 363 words
Dateline: Lagos 
Body


Lagos, Oct. 6 -- The Nigerian Army is confident that Boko Haram terrorism in northeast will end soon following successes in recent operations against the insurgents. Maj.-Gen. Lucky Irabor, the Theatre Commander of Operation Lafiya Dole, said in Maiduguri that the capture of the terrorists' last stronghold in Northern Borno was a pointer to the level of success recorded by the army.
"As you know, Malamfatori is in our kitty; our troops are consolidating on the capture of Malamfatori, Abadam and Gashigar. "The last time we met I told you that we were looking forward to capturing these areas which were the last strongholds of the Boko Haram terrorists, that we have done successfully," he said.
Irabor said that since the Sept. 27 capture of the areas, the army had consolidated its position by keeping the place safe. He, however, expressed regret that the army lost few equipment during the battle for the areas. "Let me state that our capturing the area is not without cost, we have lost both lives and equipment.
"But what I can tell you is that even though we lost a few soldiers, those wounded are in stable conditions in hospital, the few of the equipment damaged have been repaired and returned to service," Irabor said.
He attributed the loss to the use of Improvised Explosive Devises (IEDs by the terrorists. "In the cause of the operation, we have the issues of IEDs which the terrorists used on the road which cost damage to our vehicles.
"By and large we have cleared them from the area," Irabor said. He said that the success did not imply that the Boko Haram terrorists had been cleared finally. "But that does not mean that we will not hear from the Boko Haram terrorists again.
"No; there are other areas that we have not completed our operations, places like the Sambisa Forest. "Of course there are several aerial bombardments going on right now that I will not want to talk about, there are other areas our troops are carrying out operations too," Irabor said.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from National Mirror. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

Load-Date: October 6, 2016


End of Document