Boko Haram increasingly uses child bombers; UNICEF says numbers grew 11-fold in year.; TERRORISM IN AFRICA
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 13, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A4
Length: 445 words
Byline: By Michelle Faul
Body


KANO, NIGERIA - The number of child suicide bombers used by the Islamic extremists of Boko Haram has increased from four to 44 in a year with devastating consequences in communities that now see children as threats, UNICEF said Tuesday.
Seventy-five percent of the children used are girls, a new report said, emphasizing that these children, many believed to be captives, are "victims, not perpetrators."
"As suicide attacks involving children become commonplace, some communities are starting to see children as threats," said Manuel Fontaine, West Africa director of the U.N. children's agency. "This suspicion toward children can have destructive consequences. How can a community rebuild itself when it is casting out its own sisters, daughters and mothers?"
In one case, a woman in her 20s was freed by soldiers in an attack on a Boko Haram-held village. After she was reunited with her family in Maiduguri, Nigeria, last month, she told her mother that she had been trained as a suicide bomber. The mother so feared her own daughter that she turned her in to the military, according to a relative who spoke on condition of anonymity to protect the identity of her cousin.
Doune Porter, UNICEF spokeswoman in Nigeria, said the bombings couldn't be properly called suicide attacks because the children were either forced to carry them out or were not of an age to understand the consequences of their actions. Some may have been misled or brainwashed by adults, she said.
The number of children involved in suicide attacks in Nigeria and neighboring Cameroon and Chad rose 10-fold last year, with the frequency of all suicide bombings increasing from 32 in 2014 to 151 last year, UNICEF said. In 2015, 89 of these attacks were carried out in Nigeria, 39 in Cameroon, 16 in Chad and seven n Niger, the report said.
Boko Haram has sent bombers to mosques, market places and other soft targets since a multi-national military offensive forced them out of a large swath of the country that they held until a year ago. Boko Haram, which has aligned itself with al-Qaida, wants to create an Islamic caliphate in Nigeria, Africa's biggest oil producer, whose 170 million people are divided almost equally between Christians in the south and Muslims in the north.
Another new report, from Mercy Corps, found unemployment was not a leading reason for young people to join Boko Haram, as has been assumed. The study, based on interviews with 47 former members, did point to a financial motivation, however.
"BokoHaramhasexploited common desires of youth ... to get ahead economically," said the report from the Portland, Ore.-based charity.
The Los Angeles Times
contributed to this article.

Load-Date: April 13, 2016


End of Document