BOMBINGS IN EAST AFRICA: IN WASHINGTON;
Rescuers and Investigators Sent by U.S. Begin to Arrive
The New York Times
August 9, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 786 words
Byline: By JAMES RISEN 

By JAMES RISEN 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8
Body


As President Clinton vowed today that the United States would not buckle under to the threat of international terrorism, American Government personnel were arriving in East Africa to begin the grim tasks of helping the victims and opening an investigation into Friday's nearly simultaneous bombings of the United States Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Investigators were just beginning the arduous process of trying to identify the individuals or groups behind the car-bomb attacks in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. But American officials said today that the suspect at the top of their list was Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi-born financier who this year renewed his vow to wage a holy war against the United States.
A senior American official, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, said that Mr. Bin Laden was known to have an extensive terrorist network in Africa, and that United States intelligence had evidence that he has operatives in Kenya. American officials see this as circumstantial evidence of his possible involvement. But the official cautioned that there was no hard evidence linking Mr. Bin Laden or his agents to the bombings. The official added that the United States believed that there had not yet been any "credible claims of responsibility."
Still, American officials believe that the nearly simultaneous bombings made it clear that the attack was the work of sophisticated terrorists, and would have required many months of planning. Mr. Bin Laden's network is one that has the financial resources and the organization to pull off such an attack, the officials said.
"Bin Laden is high on everyone's list of suspects," an American official said.
Another group under suspicion by the United States is the Cairo-based Islamic Jihad, but that organization is also financed by Mr. Bin Laden, American officials said.
The son of a wealthy Saudi family that made its money in the construction business, Mr. Bin Laden has been a prime suspect in several acts of international terrorism over the last few years. But gathering evidence against him that could be used in court has proved elusive and frustrating for the F.B.I. and other American investigators.
Mr. Bin Laden is thought to have been involved in the bombings of two United States military installations in Saudi Arabia that killed a total of 24 Americans, including the attack on the Khobar Towers apartment complex bombing in 1996. But the United States has never issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Bin Laden because of a lack of evidence.
Mr. Bin Laden lived for a time in the Sudan. But he is said to live in Afghanistan now, under the protection of the Taliban, the radical Islamic group that controls most of the country.
In a telephone interview from Kandahar, Afghanistan, today, a spokesman for the Taliban, Abdul Hai Mutmatian, said the group had recently reached an agreement with Saudi Arabia to prevent Mr. Bin Laden, who lives in Kandahar, from conducting any "political activities" outside Afghanistan.
But the Afghans still provide Mr. Bin Laden with a haven, largely because of his longtime support for the Afghan rebels who fought against the Soviet occupation in the 1980's.
"He is not under house arrest here -- he is our guest," Mr. Mutmatian said. "But we have told him no political activity is to be initiated from here."
President Clinton, during his weekly radio address broadcast live from the White House today, stressed that the United States could not shirk its international leadership role in the face of terrorists bent on attacking visible American targets overseas. But he warned that apprehending and convicting terrorists sometimes takes years.
"Americans are targets of terrorism in part because we have unique leadership responsibilities in the world, because we act to advance peace and democracy, and because we stand united against terrorism," Mr. Clinton said. "To change any of that, to pull back our diplomats and troops from the world's trouble spots, to turn our backs on those taking risks for peace, to weaken our opposition to terrorism -- that would give terrorism a victory it must not and will not have."
The President also offered condolences to the families of the 11 Americans who were known so far to have died in the explosion in Nairobi.
The United States response to the terrorist attacks is moving on a broad front, officials said. Among the many medical, rescue and security teams being sent to Kenya and Tanzania, a 62-member fire-rescue squad from Fairfax County, Va., which is trained in searching through rubble for disaster survivors, left today for Nairobi. The group helped search for victims after the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal building in 1995.

Load-Date: August 9, 1998


End of Document