BOMBING THE HEARTLAND IF IT IS TO SERVE ANY LESSON, THE OKLAHOMA TRAGEDY SHOULD STRENGTHEN OUR WILL TO FIGHT GLOBAL TERRORISM. /
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 20, 1995 Thursday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A32; EDITORIAL
Length: 574 words
Body


In the wake of yesterday's horrendous bombing of an Oklahoma City federal building, President Clinton said that he would not let this country be intimidated by "evil cowards."
As rescue workers unearth the bodies of scores of innocent civilian workers and the remains of children blown up in the building's day-care center, the President's message should be taken to heart.
Such a murderous attack is enough to make ordinary people fear that the foundations of normal life are threatened. Apparently caused by up to 2,000 pounds of explosives packed into a car bomb, yesterday's bombing is painfully reminiscent of the 1983 attacks on the U.S. Embassy and Marine barracks in Beirut, as if America's heartland had suddenly been transported to Lebanon.
Coming two years after a similar bomb at New York City's World Trade Center that killed six and wounded 1,000, and after two unsolved poison gas attacks on Japanese cities (the second yesterday), this brutal urban massacre could feed into the widespread American unease about the future.
So far, no one knows who is responsible for the Oklahoma bombing, which came on the second anniversary of the raid on the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas, and also bears many similarities to the World Trade Center attack.
That is why it is so important to remember that this deed was done by "evil cowards" who are also fallible humans and can be caught. Four of the World Trade Center bombers are now behind bars, sentenced to 240 years apiece, and the alleged mastermind has just been located and extradited by a cooperative Pakistani government. This took years of tough forensic work and international investigation, but it was done.
The lesson to be learned from this tragedy is that local, state and federal governments, with governments of other nations, must develop new degrees of cooperation to combat the new variants of global terrorism - not only to catch those who have killed, but also to prevent future attacks.
The old terrorism was often state-sponsored, or the work of well-known political groups. The new terrorism, like the post-Cold War world, is more fragmented. But that doesn't mean that it can't be thwarted.
In the 1980s, American pressure, and the U.S. bombing of Libya, persuaded European police forces to cooperate more with Washington and to rein in Mideast terrorists who were using embassy pouches to smuggle explosives. Today, fortunately, many former communist sponsors of state terror, like the Soviet Union and East Germany, have disappeared. Their successor states are cooperating in the global anti-terrorism efforts.
Unfortunately, a more fragmented world may inspire more religious or cult fanatics to vent their grievances. As the Oklahoma and Japanese tragedies show, destruction can be wreaked with easily available explosives or chemicals, and taboos against the mass killing of civilians have fallen. The new terrorists seem intent on sowing fear more than on scoring political points, not even troubling to make their identities known.
This means a more aggressive mobilization of international and national police forces is necessary. Pakistan's cooperation in turning over the key World Trade Center suspect shows it is possible. It may require new U.S. anti- terrorist legislation.
Such efforts can't guarantee that no other city will suffer Oklahoma City's tragedy. But they are the best antidote to the fear and paralysis which the terrorists aim to spread.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document