Bomb Plot, Chapter 3: Enter an Accused Master of Terrorism
The New York Times
October 3, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 1126 words
Byline: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 

By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 
Body


Of the 20 men arrested so far in terrorism cases linked to the bombing of the World Trade Center, only one is thought to be a world-class terrorist.
And yesterday, after savoring the guilty verdicts on Sunday in the trial of 10 militant Muslims, Federal prosecutors turned their attention to the one man they feel was capable of masterminding such a devastating explosion: Ramzi Ahmed Yousef.
Beginning next spring, Mr. Yousef and another man, Eyad Ismoil, will go on trial on the last of three cases stemming from the February 1993 blast. And prosecutors hope it will paint a clearer picture of the terrorist network that they say Mr. Yousef was deeply involved with.
Not only will it illuminate Mr. Yousef's role in the trade center bombing, they say, but also detail a second, failed plot to bomb United States airliners in the Far East.
"The next case not only involves the trade center but also additional international acts of terrorism, and that picks up more evidence from abroad that may provide some more answers," said Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan.
Prosecutors from Ms. White's office have now won sweeping guilty verdicts against 14 people in connection with the trade center bombing -- four men convicted last year of the bombing itself and 10 others, including Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, convicted Sunday of a conspiring to carry out a terrorist campaign against New York landmarks. In addition, four others have pled guilty.
Judging from the evidence presented in the two trials, none of the men were highly trained professional terrorists. Even the Government acknowledged at the most recent trial that the bomb the defendants were building in a Queens garage would never have exploded.
But the evidence against Mr. Yousef suggests he is a more sophisticated terrorist, officials say.
Among the evidence are scores of documents on a laptop computer seized in the Philippines earlier this year and numerous telephone records and other documents seized from other members of the conspiracy, law enforcement officials said, requesting anonymity.
The officials maintain those records will show extensive links between Mr. Yousef and associates of Mr. Abdel Rahman in the United States, Denmark, Pakistan, the Philippines and other countries.
But it is unclear whether the evidence will ever answer the question of who sponsored the trade center attack and who paid for the bomb.
Mr. Yousef, a 27-year-old electrical engineer from Kuwait, was arrested in Pakistan last February after leading Federal agents on a two-year manhunt through the Far East.  While Mr. Yousef was on the run out of the country, four other men were arrested, tried and convicted of taking part in the trade center bombing, which killed six people and injured hundreds.
Three of them -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Mahmud Abouhalima and Nidal A. Ayyad -- were followers of Mr. Abdel Rahman, who was preaching at a Jersey City mosque. And though Mr. Abdel Rahman was convicted on Sunday of being the spiritual and political leader of a New York-based terrorist cell, it is Mr. Yousef who is charged with being the mastermind behind the bombing of the trade center. He gave what amounted to a ring of amateur terrorists the tools they needed to do some damage, officials said.
"He was the guy that came to make it all possible," said one law enforcement official, who asked that his name not be used. "Among the rest, there were certainly some folks who, left to their own devices, couldn't have done this."
According to evidence at the trial last year, Mr. Yousef arrived in the United States in September 1992, six months before the bombing, traveling on a bogus Iraqi passport. He immediately contacted Mr. Salameh in Jersey City and moved in with him. It is still unknown who asked him to come to the United States, who provided him the passport and who paid his passage.
Mr. Salameh and Mr. Yousef lived together in a series of apartments, including the one at 40 Pamrapo Street where the bomb was made. Several calls were placed from their apartment to the house of Mr. Abdel Rahman in the months leading up to the blast. On the day of the explosion, Mr. Yousef fled to Pakistan.
Beyond witnesses who spotted Mr. Yousef at the 40 Pamrapo apartment, the case against him relies heavily on fingerprints, law enforcement officials said. His prints were found all over the apartment, on beakers in a storage shed where the chemicals were kept, and on bomb manuals carried by another man he entered the country with, Ahmad M. Ajaj.
Mr. Ajaj, who was seized by immigration officials when he arrived at Kennedy International Airport with Mr. Yousef, was the fourth man convicted in the trade center bombing.  Although he was in custody when the blast occurred, the manuals he brought to the country had formulas used to make the bomb.
The second defendant in next year's trial, Mr. Ismoil, is charged with coming to New York from Texas shortly before the bombing. His fingerprints were also found in the apartment where the explosives were mixed, law enforcement officials said. A 25-year-old computer student from Jordan, Mr. Ismoil is thought to be a childhood friend of Mr. Yousef and not a major player in the terrorist conspiracy, they said. Still, he is charged with helping Mr. Yousef to drive a van packed with explosives into a garage under the trade center.
Another defendant, Abdul Hakim Murad, is not accused in the trade center bombing, but he is charged with conspiring with Mr. Yousef earlier this year to blow up several American airliners in the Philippines. Officials say that plot was thwarted in January when a fire broke out in a Manila apartment where the two men were mixing explosives.
A laptop computer was found in the burned-out apartment. In its memory banks were found details about the plot to bomb airliners, law enforcement officials said.
Another question the trial may shed some light on is how Mr. Yousef came to the United States.
In the first trade center trial last year, it was shown that Mr. Ajaj and Mr. Yousef met in June 1992 in Pakistan. The Government said Mr. Ajaj had traveled there from Houston to acquire the expertise needed to participate in the bomb plot, but Mr. Ajaj said the trip was to reinvigorate a student service business that he had run in Israel and that he wanted at that point to run from the United States. He said he barely knew Mr. Yousef but agreed to travel with him.
Law enforcement officials said they would present evidence at the next trial that Mr. Ajaj's meeting with Mr. Yousef was not an accident. The two men had some acquaintances in common.
"It's clear and it will be made clearer in documents that Ajaj and Yousef got together by something more than pure happenstance," one law enforcement official said.

Load-Date: October 3, 1995


End of Document