Bombings could indicate division in Hamas ranks
USA TODAY
March 5, 1996, Tuesday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 654 words
Byline: Bruce Frankel
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


NEW YORK - The succession of suicide blasts shattering prospects
of peace between Palestinians and Israelis is also exposing what
some fear may be a fatal and uncontrollable rift among Muslim
militants.
The bombings suggest a fragmented underground because they came
hours after one branch of the armed wing of the Islamic Resistance
Movement, known by its acronym Hamas, set conditions for ending the
deadly assaults.
Although they have long speculated on divisions between the
organization's political and military leadership in the West Bank
and abroad, experts here and in Israel say the rash of bombings
raise profound questions about who - if anyone - is in control of
Hamas operations.
"The suicide bombings set the stage for who will control the soul
of militant Palestine," says terrorism expert Brian Jenkins.
There is "confusion in the ranks," says Jamil Hamami, the Hamas
leader in the Jerusalem area.
The crisis within Hamas appears to stem from a long-simmering
feud between pragmatists who think Hamas should compromise with
Arafat and those who want to continue the jihad, or holy war,
against Israel.
Most experts had believed the lull in terrorism would last as
long as Arafat appeared to be winning land back from the Israelis,
says terrorism expert Noel Koch. "Now, it appears they think he's
got as much as he's going to get."
The situation changed drastically in January with the
assassination of Yehiya Ayyash, a mastermind Palestinian terrorist
nicknamed "The Engineer" for his technical wizadry.
Almost immediately, Hamas warned that it would exact revenge for
the murder and accused the Palestinian authority of collaborating
with Israel to carry it out.
A group calling itself "The Disciples of Yehiya Ayyash" claimed
responsiblity for Sunday's attack.
The bombings are calculated not only as revenge against Israel,
but as weapons to force Arafat into a political corner. Israeli
leaders are calling for an end to the peace process until Arafat
does what Israel has been unable to do - destroy Hamas.
On one hand, it "obliges Israel to become more repressive," says
terrorism expert Jenkins, of Kroll Associates. On the other, it
"demonstrates Arafat's impotence if he does nothing" to stop the
bombings. And if he cooperates further with Israel "it makes him
look like a quisling."
More than the future of the peace process is at stake.
"This is not just a strike against the peace process. It is
indicative of the larger Hamas mission of destroying Israel and all
Jews," says terrorism expert Steven Emerson.
Hamas was formed in late 1987, an outgrowth of the Palestinian
branch of the Muslim Brotherhood in Israel and has become the PLO's
principal political rival in the West Bank. Experts and government
sources say it receives funding from Palestinian expatriates in
Iran, private benefactors in Saudi Arabia and fund-raising in the
USA and Europe.
It is believed to have a small core of activists - perhaps as
few 500. Recent polls have shown that about 12% of Palestinians
support Hamas.
"But it no longer seems to be under the control of a political
apparatus," says Oliver Revell, former FBI counter-terrorism chief.
Without any rigid hierarchy, Hamas' terrorist cells develop
unpredictably around any number of charismatic leaders, like the
recent American militias.
Some experts speculate that Iran and Syria are supporting the
group. But few believe the recent attacks have been logistically
orchestrated by outside forces. Once, attacks involving plastic
explosives might have suggested direct state involvement. Today,
"there's as much plastique in the Middle East as Play-Doh," Koch
says.
Laurie Mylroie, of the Foreign Policy Research Institute, thinks
the solution is political, not military.
"These explosives are not being made in someone's garage," she
says, adding that the United States and Israel should tell Syria
that the peace process will not go any further unless Syria starts
jailing the Islamic Jihad and "kicks the Iranians out of Lebanon."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Rula Halawani, Reuters; In the West Bank: Israeli soldiers Monday guard the home of a Hamas suicide bomber who blew up a hiking station last week. The house is to be destroyed.

Load-Date: March 6, 1996


End of Document