Bombing reminds many of 9/11
University Wire
July 11, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-Wire
Length: 442 words
Byline: By Sylvia Hall, Daily Mississippian; SOURCE: U. Mississippi
Dateline: OXFORD, Miss. 
Body


The London bombings have created a sense of unrest across the world but hit a raw nerve in the United States.
The events of June 7 have caused a ripple as many recall the events of Sept. 11, 2001, and compare that day to what has happened in London.
At press time, 49 people had been confirmed dead, but the count is expected to increase as the search for bodies continue around the city.
Ole Miss senior Rick Prokupek said the events seemed like a cycle to him.
"I'm a little afraid of what could happen here. It seems to start to become a trend. I mean, with 9/11 here and what happened in London, you don't know when it might return to here," Prokupek said.
Carrisa Massey, 17, an Oxford, Miss., resident, said that the London bombings remind her that terrorism is not just here or in Iraq but around the world.
"I never would have expected a bombing in London. To see it and hear about it on the news just reminds me that we are not the only victims and targets of terrorism. Terror is not just in Iraq or Afghanistan. It is widespread and we cannot let our guard down if we can help it," Massey said.
Madeline DeJade, a Lafayette County resident, said that although the bombings were tragic, they should not distract us from our main goal.
"Fifty people have died in a senseless event that hurts more people than it will ever benefit. But I don't think that the bombings should be a deterrent from our goal of ending terrorism across the nation. We have worked so hard and to allow it to falter is a shame. Those people will have died in vain if their deaths cause fear and panic instead of spurring action and ambition. Their deaths should become benchmarks and reminders of where we have to go," DeJade said.
County resident LaShaunda Pettis said that because terrorism's goal is to deter action, victims and targets should work harder against terror.
"People always tell you that terrorism is going to make life harder. Terrorists want to make people so afraid that they won't fight back for fear of further terrorism," Pettis said. "We should just fight harder against terrorism. If terrorists keep getting the message that the more innocent lives they take the harder we're going to fight them, it won't be long before terrorists get the point."
Pettis' husband, Melvin, said that terrorism has an effect on society that terrorists sometimes forget.
"People have the ability to bounce back from any pain," Pettis said. "Terrorists forget that fear is not always an immobilizer, but often a motivator. I dare say that the bombings only made the resolve to fight terrorism stronger, and that's the best way to stop it."
(C) 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 11, 2005


End of Document