BOMBS MAY BE GONE, BUT LONDONERS STILL TIPTOE EVERYWHERE YEARS OF UNREST MADE TOUGH POLICE RULES PALATABLE. NOW SOME WORRY THAT THE RULES WON'T CHANGE.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 16, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL REVIEW & OPINION; Pg. E02
Length: 1378 words
Byline: Dick Polman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: LONDON
Body


An eerie quietude has settled upon the British capital.
For five blissful weeks, there have been no coded warnings to the police, no firebombs in doorways, no trash-bin explosions, no subway shutdowns, no mass evacuations of shopping streets, no threat of mortars at the airports, no cabbies being forced at gunpoint to drive bombs to Downing Street, no bomb- laden trucks rumbling into the financial district, no anything anywhere.
Six weeks into the total cease-fire by the Irish Republican Army, London is enjoying its own little peace dividend. And, with officials hinting that they could be negotiating with IRA representatives by Christmas, there's no reason to think the new calm won't last. Particularly since Northern Ireland's Protestant extremists declared their own cease-fire last week, making a lasting peace seem even more likely.
But few are willing to ditch the habits of vigilance - and the curb on civil liberties - that have become second nature after 20 years of undeclared war.
"It's too premature for that," says Paul Wilkinson, a British terrorism expert who is familiar with the thinking of top security officials. "Political conditions don't justify it. Most decision-makers are reluctant to predict when the machinery set up to deal with terrorism would have to be reviewed."
So, in many cases, you still can't see a movie without undergoing a bag check or a body frisk.
You can't dump your soda can in a subway station because the bins were removed as an anti-terrorist measure, and there are no plans to return them.
You can't leave your car at curbside near Downing Street, because police might blow it up as a precaution.
You still see transport cops searching the train terminals for bombs every few hours.
If you try to drive into the financial district, you must pass through a checkpoint where your face and license plate are automatically photographed.
And, if you are thought to be a terrorist suspect, you can be arrested, denied access to a lawyer, and held without charge for seven days - under a 20-year-old "emergency" law that the government is not anxious to overturn.
But you'd be wrong to assume that the average Brit is upset with any of this. Quite the contrary. Unlike in America, where people kick up a fuss and rush to the courthouse, most Londoners seem unperturbed by the growth of the security state, the infringements of their rights, and the strong possibility that the whole apparatus is here to stay. Acceptance is easy in a country with no Bill of Rights or written constitution.
"People here just don't complain, on the whole," says John Hine, a lawyer who works in the financial district. "Most people think, 'If something bothers me, then maybe I'll do something about it tomorrow.' But tomorrow never comes. We're this way as a nation. We don't know how to complain intelligently. If we buy a suit from a shop, and it doesn't fit, then we won't bother with the fuss of going back. I suppose it's complacency, isn't it?"
He sees this attitude every morning when he crosses London Bridge on foot and approaches the financial district. Road access is blocked by a police checkpoint. In 1993, after a huge IRA bomb rocked the district for the second straight year, the checks were set up at seven key sites. Thirty other roads into the district have been permanently sealed off.
These days, the traffic backs up on the bridge as each vehicle is photographed, providing a record for any future bomb investigation. When this system is perfected, each car will also be checked, within seconds, against information in a central police computer. In the meantime, police carry out random searches, even though British law requires "reasonable grounds for suspicion."
But the motorists don't protest. Hines, the pedestrian witness, says, "Most people don't dare to even put a finger on their car horns."
The complainers are a lonely bunch. Colin Gearty, an Irish-born law lecturer at King's College in London, says: "Unequivocally, it's time to scale back the security. The British should be sending the message that peace works, that there are benefits from the IRA cease-fire. If the IRA doesn't win in the political arena, if it doesn't get a united Ireland, then we have to show them that nonviolence (works), that at least there's been movement on human rights.
"The problem is, British security agencies have built up a vested interest in fighting 'Irish terrorism.' It's their raison d'etre, and they have to keep the threat alive. It's an institutional momentum. They've already created the framework for how they act."
John Wadham, legal director at the National Council for Civil Liberties, concedes: "After 20 years (of IRA violence), there's a culture of thinking, even among us, that some of our rights have to be sacrificed during a terrorist threat. It's become part of our consciousness.
"And when we've complained about the police checkpoints, we'd get the argument that a little inconvenience was better than being dead. That's a very powerful argument. But now, that argument no longer exists. A state that's no longer under threat can more easily let its citizens have the rights they are entitled to."
He would start by urging Parliament to dump its Prevention of Terrorism Act, or at least the act's most draconian sections. This "emergency" law was passed in 1974, and it has been renewed each March. Dissenting politicians have been labeled "soft on terrorism" and told that the IRA threat outweighed civil liberties. Wadham thinks the latter now outweighs the former.
Even the police have acknowledged that the detention of uncharged suspects, for up to seven days without a lawyer, has led to occasional human-rights abuses. Last year, they admitted wrongful arrest in the case of Sarah Cohen.
Cohen, a young Londoner, sustained a black eye, a bruised chest, and bruised nerves in her right hand. She was told only that she was being held for "suspicion of terrorism." At one point, she was denied food and water for 10 hours, and police refused to inform anyone of her arrest.
"I still have to face comments and remarks from neighbors," she says. ". . . It affected my relationships with my immediate friends. . . . The reality is that, to be innocent, you should ideally not be Irish, you should not have an interest in Irish political history, you should not live, work, or mix socially with Irish people."
*
Wilkinson, the terrorism expert, who reflects the views of security officials, says: "It's optimistic to assume you can get rid of that law next March (when it comes up for renewal). In theory, if you could have harmony, if you had a cease-fire that will stick, and political talks that leads to a settlement that makes violence irrelevant - if you can achieve all that by March, then I'd agree."
But the law, he says, "shouldn't be dropped until the conditions that necessitated it no longer prevail. We just can't put a time limit on it."
Michael Cassidy, planning chairman for the financial district, insists that the checkpoints have not been rendered obsolete by the IRA cease-fire: "You can't trust the present peace process. What about a splinter group that breaks away from the IRA and runs a bomb in here? So we're ultra-cautious. We're still the first port of call for a big splash."
As for the photographing of motorists, he says: "We don't want police trampling all over innocent people. We just think it's good for the other side to know that we're watching them."
Others, such as Gearty, the law lecturer, don't buy it. They think security sources are leaking scare scenarios to friendly reporters to keep the old threat alive and justify old habits.
The danger is that security measures imposed to combat the IRA will be continued, and extended, for other purposes. One top museum official says privately: "It's been convenient to cite 'Irish terrorism.' But once you put (security measures) in, it's hard to take them out. Without the real Irish threat, I'm not sure it's all justifiable."
Hines, the lawyer, says: "I'd like to think that the cease-fire will last. It's quite impressive that it has lasted as long as it has. But whether a real political solution can be found, who knows. I think we should just send a bunch of divers down into the water, and let 'em push Ireland way out to sea."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. British patrols standing guard in a Belfast neighborhood last week. In
some areas of Belfast, security was eased. In London, the habits of vigilance
are hard to let go. (Associated Press, JACQUELINE ARZT)

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document