BOMBS HIT 3 SITES IN ITALY, KILLING 5
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 28, 1993, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 448 words
Byline: STEVE ADDISON, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Body


At least five people died and 26 were injured when three bombs shook Rome and Milan in a new wave of Italian terrorism apparently aimed at cultural targets, police said yesterday.
The first exploded at 11:15 p.m. (5:30 p.m. EDT) yesterday near Milan's former royal palace, killing three firefighters, a policeman and a passer-by and seriously wounding at least seven people.
The second, soon afterward, damaged Rome's Basilica of St. John Lateran, the church of the popes in their role as bishops of Rome, causing several light casualties.
The third bomb, near Rome's Circus Maximus, exploded outside the 7th century church of San Giorgio in Velabro, some 100 yards from the Bocca della Verita (mouth of truth) monument visited by thousands of tourists every year.
Rescue services said at least five people had been injured there, none seriously.
''This is a horrible simultaneous attack against Christian and lay Rome,'' said Francesco Rutelli, a former environment minister and candidate for the vacant post of mayor of the capital.
Milan's mayor Marco Foremtini said: ''It was a trap. This is an attempt at intimidation. It is vital to save Italian democracy.''
The bombs follow May's blast in Florence in which five people died when a car bomb blew up outside the city's Uffizi gallery.
The bomb badly damaged the 16th century gallery, sparking fears of a wave of ''cultural terrorism,'' aimed at damaging Italy's matchless wealth of artistic heritage.
A shadowy Italian group known as the ''Armed Falange'' claimed responsibility for the bombs, Milan's police chief Michele Serra said. It wasn't immediately clear who they are.
Some officials had blamed the Florence bomb, and another in Rome earlier in May, on the Mafia, which they said was seeking to re-establish itself after a series of setbacks.
A growing number of informers and police sweeps have led to the capture of several suspected Mafia leaders this year, including Salvatore ''Toto'' Riina, the alleged ''boss of bosses'' who was arrested in Sicily in January after 23 years on the run.
But others have pointed to more shadowy conservative forces aiming to derail Italy's drive to clean up politics in the wake of the country's devastating corruption scandal.
Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi said today the government would not be intimidated.
''In the face of repeated attempts to create disorder and panic to slow the country's progress towards renovation, the government reaffirms its determination to guarantee the rights of Italians to democratic progress,'' he said in a statement.
One of the first leading officials to reach the St. John Lateran blast was anti-Mafia chief Bruno Siclari, but he declined immediate comment.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document