Bombs in India, And More Outrage
The New York Times
July 13, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 406 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Re ''Series of Bombs Explode on 7 Trains in India, Killing Scores'' (front page, July 12):
The sad events in Mumbai bring to light the scourge that terrorism truly is. The bombings took the lives of innocent people who will never know why they died. 
  It is critical that the Indian government take strong action against those who perpetrated this act and bring them to justice. Some officials suspect that Kashmiri militants were behind the bombings. The international community must bring pressure on the Indian government to negotiate to resolve the issue of Kashmir. 
  The Indian government and the Indian Army have continued a policy of repression and widespread human rights abuse in the occupied areas of Kashmir. Thousands of Kashmiri men, women and children have lost their lives because the Indian government refuses to acknowledge the need to solve this dispute. 
  The concept of terrorism cannot be restricted to misguided individuals using explosives, when in reality the very same use of terror has now become a hallmark of many governments.

Daanish Khan
Piscataway, N.J., July 12, 2006

To the Editor:
  Again, innocent people have perished by the destructive acts of those who take the law into their own hands. Again, Muslims are the suspects, this time members of a Kashmiri militant group. Again, the public will not realize that many of those killed or injured were Muslims. 
  Again will come the backlash against Muslims, who, in reality, revile the actions of those who committed the atrocities. Again, governments will take advantage of the chaos and a climate of fear. Again, Muslims in Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan and even America will pay the price. 
  Again, a few who fail to understand why they are being punished for a crime they did not commit will question democracy and its effectiveness. And again, the ignorant, the disenfranchised, the victims and the terrorists will take the law into their own hands.
  This is a vicious cycle that can end only when people look beyond simple solutions and address the root causes -- oppression, injustice and greed.

Rufiath Yousuff
Glen Waverley, Australia
July 12, 2006

To the Editor:
  I hope the bombings in India will help persuade the editors of your great newspaper that we are in a worldwide war against Islamic terrorism, and that government espionage and secret surveillance programs are crucial to our safety here.

William Tucker
Brooklyn, July 12, 2006

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 13, 2006


End of Document