Bombs again;
The IRA is definitely back in the terrorism business
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 20, 1996, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 348 words
Body


When the Irish Republican Army exploded a bomb in London on Feb. 9, killing two innocent people and injuring 36, some dogged optimists hoped that the attack was a one-shot outrage designed to pressure Britain into expediting political talks. Sunday evening's explosion on a London doubledecker bus dispels any such fond thoughts.
The question is whether those who have been pursuing peace in Northern Ireland -- including President Clinton -- can reinvigorate the peace process that produced a 17- month respite from violence. It would be comforting to think that a concession here or there might persuade the IRA to reinstitute its cease-fire. Alas, things aren't that simple.
In deciding to deal with Sinn Fein, the political arm of the IRA, the governments of Britain, Ireland and the United States were operating on two premises. One was that Sinn Fein spoke for the ''hard men'' of the IRA. The other was that, whatever its rhetoric, the IRA had given up the ''armed struggle'' against Britain in exchange for London's disavowal of any ''selfish interest'' in Ireland.
Both of those premises have been shattered by the recent bombings. Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader who has been reincarnated as a serious statesman, apparently was surprised by the end of the cease-fire. Yet he has stopped short of clearly condemning it.
This presents the leaders of Ireland and Britain -- and America -- with what may be the worst of both worlds. Unless Mr. Adams condemns the new acts of terror, his probationary status as a statesman should be revoked; but there is no guarantee that such a necessary condemnation will have any effect on the IRA anyway.
In condemning Sunday's explosion, President Clinton said ''we must not let the men of the past ruin the future of the children in Northern Ireland.'' True enough, but there is little the United States can do to prevent such atrocities.
It can, however, put Gerry Adams on notice that the price of his continued rehabilitation is that the guns fall silent -- and that he not only regret the violence that has occurred but forthrightly condemn it.

Load-Date: February 22, 1996


End of Document