Bomb found at conference on terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 28, 1990, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A
Length: 268 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body


A bomb was found Thursday in the speaker's lectern at a conference on terrorism, which was to be addressed by a government minister and the head of Scotland Yard.
 
    A small plastic lunch box packed with explosives was hidden under the top of the lectern in a building in St. James, yards from where a terrorist bomb exploded in the Carlton Club in June.
Baltimore Sun   The conference, organized by the Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism, was to have been held in the Royal Overseas League, a private club. It was canceled after the discovery x x of the bomb, which was defused.
 
    Conference speakers were to include William Waldegrave, a Foreign Office minister, and Sir Peter Imbert, who, as chief of Scotland Yard, is the country's top police officer.
 
    A television technician wiring a microphone to the lectern uncovered the bomb. The technician became suspicious when he noticed the top of the lectern, which had been steady the previous night, was unbalanced. He looked beneath it and saw the plastic box.
 
    "It would have killed the speaker and other people as well," said Cmdr. George Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's Anti-Terrorist Squad.
 
    He said the bomb looked like the work of the Irish Republican Army (IRA). "It is yet another example of the diversity of attack that can be used by this organization," he said.
 
    The IRA has attacked political and military targets on the English mainland.
 
    Churchill-Coleman said he thought the bomb was planted between 8 and 9 a.m., and was timed to go off about 10:30 a.m., shortly after the conference opened.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated Press; Cmdr. George Churchill-Coleman displays the plastic box in which the bomb was discovered at a conference on terrorism

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document