Bomb attacks keep Parisians and foreigners at home
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 18, 1986, Thursday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 669 words
Byline: By William Echikson, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Highlight: Wave of terrorism causes drop in local business and tourism
Body


''Please report all suspicious-looking packages and people.''
That warning, given Wednesday by a conductor on the high-speed TGV train, shows how concerned the French are, amid a wave of bomb attacks in Paris.
Yesterday, a bomb in a clothing store killed at least 4 and injured 62. The blast was the fifth in 10 days in central Paris.
Sirens have jarred the usual calm along Parisian boulevards this week, as police and firemen race to check out an average of 100 bomb scares each day. Cinema owners report a 20 percent drop in attendance, and restaurant owners have seen business drop off as much as 40 percent.
At the same time, the TGV conductor's warning shows how the country is mobilizing to fight back. Measures introduced this week to tighten security are receiving support among the French public and even abroad. New visa requirements for Americans and most other foreign visitors have provoked few complaints. In the past, Americans did not need visas.
France's European neighbors have voiced support. They agreed to the French demand for an emergency meeting on terrorism next week for the European Community's interior ministers.
Even among those who stand to lose the most, reaction has been surprisingly favorable. The French tourism industry, already suffering from a 40 percent drop in American visitors this year, is bracing for a deeper slump.
''The new controls will hurt,'' said Catherine Magnien, spokeswoman for the National Restaurant and Hotel Association. ''The real problem is terrorism. That's what's stopping Americans from visiting, so anything that hurts terrorism is good for us.''
The full impact of the new measures remains unclear for Americans planning trips to France. French officials said tourists can receive visas on arrival at Paris airports for the next two weeks, but they added that it is too early to say how long it will take after this grace period runs out to get a visa from a consulate.
Beyond the technical considerations are some political concerns. Civil rights groups fear the measures may serve as a smoke screen for increased discrimination against Arab immigrants and visitors.
Some foreign observers also question the overall effectiveness of the French measures. And French officials have admitted that the measures will take time to produce results.
Defense Ministry officials reported that so far only 200 soldiers have been deployed on a 220-mile section of the border. And Christian Leoty, police chief at Orly Airport in Paris, said that the seven people stopped at the airport under the new visa procedures also would have been stopped under past procedures.
''This will not stop the terrorists'' who have valid travel documents, Mr. Leoty said on French television. ''But it is important in the long term. We will now have better information on visitors in France, and eventually we will be better able to screen them.''
Perhaps even more important is the psychological shock of the new measures. Although Paris has long suffered from bombings, the French tended to accept them stoically. The present wave of attacks has struck in the most public places - a post office at City Hall, a restaurant on the Champs Elysees, the drivers-license section of the central police station, and - in yesterday's attack - a major clothing store.
''For the first time, I am scared,'' said one passenger on the TGV train. ''I want something done.''
The new antiterrorist measures mean to satisfy that national desire. And many leftist politicians who could be expected to voice strong criticism have kept silent.
Conservative Prime Minister Jacques Chirac has pledged to ''wage war'' against terrorism. And Socialist President Francois Mitterrand has said that ''the fight against terrorism is the entire nation's business.''
This tough line represents an important shift. ''In the past, many Frenchmen equated terrorism with freedom-fighting,'' says Philippe Moreau Defarges of the French Institute of Foreign Affairs. ''This reaction shows that this attitude has disappeared.''


End of Document