BOMB KILLS BASQUE GUERILLA CHIEF
The New York Times
December 31, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 341 words
Dateline: MADRID, Dec. 30
Body


With relations between Spain and France already badly strained over the question of Basque terrorism, a leader of the separatist organization E.T.A. was assassinated early this morning in the southern French town of Biarritz.
Jose Martin Sagardia, a 29-year-old Spaniard linked by the police here to terrorist killings, died when a bomb connected to the accelerator of his green Renault went off.
The assassination appeared to be the work of a Spanish ''parallel police'' group operating in southern France, which E.T.A. strategists use as a sanctuary to plan operations in the adjacent Spanish Basque region. France has protested the cross-border operations, while the Spanish Government maintains that the French authorities have not cooperated in extraditing known E.T,A. killers.
AN-A
The French were particularly incensed last month when gunmen sprayed a bar in the border town of Hendaye with bullets, killing two Frenchmen and wounding 10. Minutes later, a car with three men in it smashed through a nearby frontier post into Spain.
Spain's Interior Minister, Juan Jose Roson, told a parliamentary commission this month that the three were non-Spanish members of an ''information unit'' working for the Spanish police in southern France, but insisted they were not involved in the Hendaye killings.  Refusing to identify them, he said they were freed by the Spanish police at the frontier after a call to police headquarters in Madrid. The Spanish authorities have turned aside French demands to identify them.
Today, the usually well-informed Madrid daily El Pais, citing police sources, reported that for four years elements of the Spanish police have paid French and Algerian veterans of the defunct Organization de l'Armee Secrete, a terrorist group active at the time of Algeria's war for independence, to eliminate E.T.A. militants in southern France.
The newspaper added that two Algerians and one Frenchman made up the purported ''information unit,'' but said that it was not certain whether the three were actually involved in the killings.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of a wrecked car in France


End of Document