BOMB AT THE OLYMPICS: THE RESPONSE;
Clinton Says The Olympics Will Not Bow To Terrorism
The New York Times
July 28, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 6;  National Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 589 words
Byline: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr. 

By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr. 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 27
Body


Calling the bombing in Atlanta "an evil act of terror" and contrasting the cowardice of the act to the courage of Olympic athletes, President Clinton today said that the Games should continue as a signal that the nation and the world would not bow to terrorism.
He said officials would seek to increase the security at areas open to the public, like Centennial Olympic Park, the 21-acre plaza where a makeshift bomb exploded early this morning during a crowded concert.
"There was more concern about the Olympic Park than any other place," Mr. Clinton said, "because it was thought that there had to be some place where the general public could congregate."
Mr. Clinton praised the security arrangements at the Games in general, and congratulated security officers who he said had detected the bomb before it went off.
"They saw the package," he said. "They alerted the bomb squad. They cleared the crowd. They prevented a much greater loss of life."
The President spoke at a White House news conference two days after he imposed strict new security measures at the nation's airports because of concerns stemming from the crash of Trans World Airlines Flight 800.
"The bombing at Centennial Olympic Park this morning was an evil act of terror," he said. "It was aimed at the innocent people who were participating in the Olympic Games, and in the spirit of the Olympics -- an act of cowardice that stands in sharp contrast to the courage of the Olympic athletes."
While he said security at the games was better than at any previous Olympics, he also said officials had always been concerned about any open area where the public might congregate, like the park where the bomb went off. The site is one at which people come and go without tickets or schedules, swapping souvenir pins and spending time between sporting events.
"An act of vicious terror like this is clearly directed at the spirit of our own democracy," the President said. "We must not let these attacks stop us from going forward. We cannot let terror win. That is not the American way."
Mr. Clinton said he had consulted with Vice President Al Gore, Olympic officials, Mayor Bill Campbell of Atlanta, Gov. Zell Miller of Georgia, Attorney General Janet Reno and Director Louis Freeh of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. All had agreed that the Games should continue, he said.
"We will take every necessary step to protect the athletes and the people attending the Games," Mr. Clinton said.
He also noted that his daughter, Chelsea, had spent time in Olympic Park during her visit to the Games, and in answer to a question he said his first thought when he heard of the bombing during the night was to hope that children had not been hurt.
Mr. Clinton was awakened with news of the bombing at about 2 A.M. by his chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta. Mr. Clinton then called Mr. Gore, who had just returned from Atlanta himself, and stayed awake much of the night watching live television reports from the scene. This morning, he spoke on telephone conference calls to the other officials.
Later, he telephoned Republican and Democatic leaders of Congress and planned to call the likely Republican Presidential nominee, Bob Dole, said the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry.
Hillary Rodham Clinton was to have returned to Atlanta next week, and Mr. Gore was to be present at the closing ceremonies. Officials said today that both were still tentatively scheduled to attend but did not want to do anything that would increase security or logistical burdens for officials in Atlanta.

Load-Date: July 28, 1996


End of Document