Bomb Suspects' Lawyers To Need Security Checks
The New York Times
July 1, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 5; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 795 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


Citing the risk of a "disastrous security breach," a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday that lawyers for defendants in the embassy bombings and terrorism case must submit to Government security clearances.
Lawyers for three of five defendants accused variously of the bombings and other acts of terrorism protested that it was unconstitutional for the Government to force them to answer detailed questions about their travels, friends, drug use and other personal details before being allowed to review classified documents.
The bombings of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania last Aug. 7 killed more than 200 people and injured more than 1,000.
In ordering the security clearances, the judge, Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said he was making "no commentary on the reputations" of the defense counsel. But he suggested that his ruling was based on the extraordinary circumstances of the terrorism case before him. The Government is preparing to try the five defendants while it is also conducting a worldwide search for other suspects, including Osama bin Laden, who is believed to have masterminded the embassy attacks.
"The fact remains that it is practically impossible to remedy the damage of an unauthorized disclosure," Judge Sand wrote.
"We refuse to await the possibility of repairing what in this case might be a particularly disastrous security breach," he added, "when reasonable measures could have prevented the disclosure altogether."
The fight over the security clearances arose after the office of Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said it would require each defense lawyer in the case to undergo full background checks before making available to them classified materials that might pertain to their clients.
The three defense lawyers protested, arguing that the same Justice Department prosecuting their clients should not also be given the ability to effectively veto the lawyers' participation in the case by denying them a clearance.
Stephen Gillers, professor of legal ethics at New York University School of Law, said that given the circumstances of the case, Judge Sand's ruling had struck the right balance.
"It's a terrorism prosecution meeting the Constitution," Professor Gillers said. "How do you reconcile the sheer lawlessness of terrorism with the fundamental constitutional guarantees our nation affords?"
Michael A. Young, the lawyer for Mohammed Saddiq Odeh, argued that the law did not require security clearances, and that forcing him to disclose overseas trips he had made or meetings he had held could compromise his defense strategy, violating his and his client's rights.
"We are working here under an adversarial system," Mr. Young told Judge Sand in court last week. "When the Government starts setting standards on what sort of trustworthiness or any other quality I have to possess," he added, "it is unalterably changing the balance of the adversarial system."
But Ms. White's office had warned that members of Mr. bin Laden's group were in communication with one another, and that the continuing investigation could be compromised by leaks. One prosecutor, Kenneth M. Karas, told the judge that the clearances were "the best way to maximize the protection of highly sensitive information that is relevant to an ongoing investigation."
The prosecutors said they would insure that confidential information provided by the defense lawyers to investigators doing background checks was not disclosed to the prosecutors handling the case.
Judge Sand found that the defense's concerns were outweighed by the Government's reasonable objective of guarding against unauthorized disclosures of classified information. He did, however, call for additional steps to insure that information was not disclosed to the prosecutors, and suggested modifying certain questions to "minimize needless intrusion" into the lawyers' backgrounds.
The judge added that he, not the Justice Department, would be the final arbiter on disputes over the clearances, and said a defense lawyer could appeal a denial of a clearance to him. This suggests that he could allow such a lawyer to participate in the case, using some other method to protect secrets.
Ms. White's office had no comment yesterday, nor did Mr. Young, the lawyer who most forcefully fought the requirement.
One lawyer, Paul J. McAllister, who had not joined the fight against the clearances but had also waited to submit the necessary clearance forms, feeling that the process was onerous, said he finally applied this week, even before the judge's ruling.
"I saw the handwriting on the wall," he said. "I sent my application in on Monday. Fingerprints today. It's pretty clear to me. God knows what will happen when they interview my mother."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 1, 1999


End of Document