Bomb claims may top $ 630 million;
Losses may deplete terrorism pool
Business Insurance
May 3, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 1879 words
Byline: By ALINE SULLIVAN
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Insured losses from the April 24 terrorist bombing in London's financial district will be less than those from a 1992 blast.
Initial estimates of insured damage totaling 1 billion pounds ($ 1.57 billion) were revised downward shortly after the blast to between 300 million and 400 million pounds ($ 472.2 million and $ 629.6 million).
Insured losses from the recent bombing are expected to be lower due to a terrorism insurance pool backed by the U.K. government. The April 1992 bombing produced insured losses of approximately $ 700 million (BI, April 19; April 20, 1992).
However, the explosion has sparked concern about whether the pool, which was set up by the British insurance industry, will be able to absorb losses from this bombing and still meet future losses from terrorist attacks.
The bombing also prompted the Assn. of Insurance & Risk Managers in Industry & Commerce to renew its call for a compulsory terrorism levy on all property insurance policies.
Several buildings were destroyed, many others were damaged. One death and about 40 injuries were attributed to the bombing, for which the Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility.
Most of the businesses that had offices damaged by the blast were able to relocate staff and continue operations early last week. About 20,000 workers have been temporarily displaced from offices in the blast area.
Even at the lower insured damage estimates, claims from the blast are expected to exceed the funds held by Pool Re. Insurers and loss adjusters projected last week that claims from the blast will exceed Pool Re's reserves by more than about 200 million pounds ($ 314.8 million).
The pool was set up late last year to provide coverage after insurers introduced a terrorism exclusion in most commercial property polices for losses in mainland Britain. Terrorism losses in British-occupied Northern Ireland are covered under a separate government compensation fund.
Pool Re's total current reserves are unknown because individual insurers are holding the reserves in trust until the pool is signed into law, said a spokesman for the Assn. of British Insurers.
The British Parliament is scheduled to consider by mid-May the legislation to establish Pool Re -- which will be reinsured by the government. The government has indicated that it will respond to Pool Re claims as though the legislation was already in place.
Under Pool Re's arrangements, insurance companies and participating Lloyd's syndicates will pay 10% of claims above the pool's reserves.  The remaining 90% will be paid by the British government.
If the pool's reserves are depleted, the brunt of damage from any subsequent terrorist attacks will have to be paid by the government until Pool Re receives fresh funds as policies are purchased, said a spokesman for the British Department of Trade and Industry. The pool is funded by an extra premium on property policies written by participating insurers.
Pool Re's viability in the event of future bomb blasts has been called into question by some.
The ABI estimates that annual premium income from the terrorism levy will total about 250 million pounds ($ 393.5 million). But insurers and loss adjusters said this amount may be inadequate to meet the cost of any future explosions.
Losses in excess of the pool's reserves will be expensive both for insurers, which may be forced to raise rates, and taxpayers, who will have to foot a substantial portion of claims paid by the government.
The Department of Trade and Industry will meet with the ABI this week to discuss future arrangements for Pool Re, an ABI spokesman said. The government may pressure Pool Re to increase premium rates, which would be passed on to policyholders, he said. About 220 insurance companies and Lloyd's syndicates participate in the pool.
Pool Re's rates for properties in major cities, like London, range from 0.09% of insured values for property worth up to 5 million pounds ($ 7.9 million) to 0.023% for property valued at more than 500 million pounds ($ 787 million). Properties believed to be terrorist targets may be charged an additional 50% of their premium.
Pool Re rates have not changed since the explosion, the spokeswoman said.
AIRMIC Chairwoman Liz Taylor recently contended that Pool Re is underfunded and will not work (BI, April 12).
Last week, at the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. conference in Orlando, she reiterated AIRMIC's call for a compulsory levy on all commercial and personal property policies to cover terrorism losses.  The government could then reinsure the fund generated by the levy, which could total 300 million pounds ($ 472.2 million) per year, she said.
''We are very concerned that the government is going to have to pick up too much of this loss,'' said Ms. Taylor, group risk manager for Harrisons & Crosfield P.L.C. in Ipswich. ''This returns us to our original proposition for a compulsory levy so that everybody contributes toward this risk.''
Critics of the AIRMIC plan say that a compulsory levy would benefit only businesses in London -- which is the country's main financial center and a key target of terrorists -- and not the rest of the country.
''But the City of London is there for the benefit of the nation as a whole, and I think it's a bit of a cop-out for people not in London to say that they won't participate -- because they do benefit,'' said Ms. Taylor.
She also said a compulsory levy might deter the IRA from thinking that it is hitting the government's pocketbook with every bombing.
Many other British executives at the RIMS conference were affected by the blast, particularly executives of Willis Corroon Group P.L.C., Alexander & Alexander Services Inc. and others whose offices were damaged.
The April 24th explosion came almost exactly one year after a nearby bombing badly damaged the Baltic Exchange building and Commercial Union P.L.C.'s headquarters (BI, April 20, 1992). Insured damages have been placed at $ 700 million. The IRA also claimed responsibility for that attack.
The ABI said last week that early damage estimates of 1 billion pounds ($ 1.57 billion) from last month's explosion are likely to prove ''wildly inaccurate.'' Total damage is more likely to reach about 300 million pounds ($ 472 million), the insurer group said.
Many businesses damaged by the blast still have terrorism coverage under their property policies, the ABI noted. Policies that have not yet been renewed this year do not contain the new terrorism exclusion.  Some businesses that have renewed their coverage may have decided not to pay extra for terrorism coverage.
Most major British insurers expect lower losses from the April 24th blast than from last year's bombing.
A notable exception is Commercial Union P.L.C., which had not made any changes to its terrorism reinsurance arrangements this year prior to the explosion. That means the company will have to pay claims of up to 100,000 pounds ($ 157,400) under its standard commercial property polices.
Commercial Union estimates it will incur losses of about 25 million pounds ($ 39.4 million) net of reinsurance. ''We have since purchased terrorism reinsurance from Pool Re to protect against future attacks,'' a spokesman said. Commercial Union paid out 15 million pounds ($ 23.6 million) in claims from last year's bomb.
Sun Alliance & London Insurance P.L.C. expects claims of about 15 million pounds ($ 23.6 million), of which 5 million pounds ($ 7.9 million) will be covered by reinsurance. Sun Alliance bought terrorism reinsurance ''on the open market'' earlier this year, a spokeswoman said. Sun Alliance paid 39 million pounds ($ 61.4 million) in net losses in last year's bombing.
General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp. P.L.C. expects about 7 million pounds ($ 11 million) in claims from the explosion, roughly in line with last year's losses, a spokesman said.
Royal Insurance P.L.C. and Guardian Royal Exchange P.L.C. each forecast net losses of less than 5 million pounds ($ 7.9 million). Both bought terrorism reinsurance earlier this year from Pool Re to protect against losses under expiring property policies.
GRE incurred 10 million pounds ($ 1.6 million) in losses from last year's explosion and Royal paid 15 million pounds ($ 23.6 million) in net losses.
The ABI said last week that businesses affected by the bombing ''are likely to have carefully worked out contingency plans which should minimize the disruption and keep down business interruption claims.'' London's weak real estate market has also left office space open for relocating companies.
Press reports following the attack said that most firms displaced by bomb damage had found alternative space.
Three of the most important buildings in the City -- Lloyd's of London, the Stock Exchange and the Bank of England -- were not damaged..
Among the hardest hit was The Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank, which was the main tenant in the 99 Bishopsgate building.
The bank's offices will probably have to be demolished, said David Rowland, U.K. marketing director of Thomas Howell International, the bank's loss adjusters. He said the bank is covered for terrorism by its captive insurer and several insurers led by Sun Alliance. The coverage was renewed on March 1 and the risk is reinsured with Pool Re.
The Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank's London headquarters is in a different part of London and most of its staff will be moved to that and other sites in the city, a bank spokesman said.
National Westminster Bank's headquarters, the NatWest Tower, was badly damaged. A spokesman would not comment other than to say the bank is ''fully insured.'' Insurance for the building is spread throughout the London market and may be covered for terrorism losses under policies that had not yet renewed since Pool Re's formation.
A Pool Re spokesman said some of the insured terrorism claims from the NatWest tower may be reinsured by the pool. With little commercial reinsurance available for terrorism risks, some insurers have purchased reinsurance with Pool Re to cover losses in excess of the 100,000 pound ($ 157,400) automatic terrorism cover that is included in expiring insurance policies.
National Westminster's approximately 1,300 staff members who work in the tower have been been moved to other locations, said the bank spokesman. Last year's blast blew out about 100 windows at the NatWest Tower.
Willis Corroon relocated the 500 people who worked in its Camomile Street office to other offices. It is too early to say what the cost will be to Willis and its insurers for business interruption and office damage, said a spokesman.
Lloyd's broker Macey Williams Ltd.'s offices in St. Helen's Place were also damaged.
Three other British banks, Barclays Bank P.L.C., Lloyds Bank P.L.C. and The Bank of Scotland P.L.C., also lost office space in the blast.
Other affected firms include: stockbroker Baring Securities; the National Bank of Abu Dhabi and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority; Saudi International Bank; Tokai Bank; Long Term Credit Bank of Japan; U.S. law firm Simpson Thatcher & Bartlett; Mitsubishi Corp. Finance; and Korean securities firms Daewoo Securities and Coryo International.
Also, several London churches were badly damaged. Although most are insured for building damage and contents, they opted not to buy additional terrorism coverage.

Graphic

 
Photo, The Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank building, at right, is among the most severely damaged by the bombing in London's financial district.  AP/Wide World Photo


End of Document