BOMB PLANTED BY IRA INJURES 28 AT BUSYLONDON RAIL STATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 29, 1992, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 490 words
Body


LONDON - A bomb planted by the IRA exploded in the men's room of a busy Londonrail station during the morning rush hour Friday, spraying glass shards for 40 feet and injuring 28 people, officials said.  The city's rail and subway stations were shut down for 8 1/2 hours as a result of the blast.  No one claimed responsibility. But less than nine minutes before the blast, a caller using a known IRA code word told Ulster Television's London bureau that a bomb had been planted in a central London rail station, police said.  Prime Minister John Major, who has begun a bid to bring Northern Ireland's political leaders to the bargaining table, said the bombing would ''not make a scrap of difference to the government's policy on terrorism.'' The outlawed IRA, which seeks to end British rule in Northern Ireland, disrupted London rail service with bombings on Dec. 16, Dec. 23 and Jan.  30. A year ago, a bomb planted by the IRA killed a commuter at Victoria Station.  ''I am satisfied this was a typical, irresponsible, criminal and callous act carried out by the Provisional IRA,'' said Cmdr. George Churchill-Coleman, the head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorism unit.  He said that the warning had left too little time for evacuation and that the bomb had been ''designed to kill.'' Four of the injured were in serious condition. The blast took place at 8:30 a.m. in a platform restroom just as a crowded commuter train pulled into the London Bridge rail and subway station.
The station is the fifth-busiest in the capital; it handles 120,000 passengers a day.  Police quickly shut all railway and subway stations in the capital to search for other bombs. None was found, but the shutdown snarled traffic, forcing many commuters to walk.  The explosion smashed five large plate-glass windows and blew broken glass 40 feet across the tracks.  ''I was knocked through the air like the man on the flying trapeze,'' said Thomas Cranmer, 79, who was standing near the toilet. ''They say I blacked out for about two minutes. When I came to, I could see the train windows had been blown in.'' Twenty-eight injured people were admitted to Guy's Hospital, most with shock, ringing ears and lacerations, said Norman Kirby, a hospital spokesman.  ''Four of them are in a moderately serious condition,'' he said.  All subway and British Rail stations were reopened by 5 p.m. London authorities estimated the explosion would cost the capital $15 million in late arrivals, lost trade and work absences.  The explosion took place about a year after an IRA bomb hidden in a garbage can blew up at London's Victoria station, killing one man and injuring 38. The IRA put the blame for the casualties on authorities, who did not close all London stations in response to a telephone warning. On Feb. 18, 1991, a bomb exploded at London's Paddington station but caused no injuries.  They were the first IRA attacks on London rail stations since the early 1970s.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO...AP...A commuter being led away by an ambulance crewman from the London Bridge rail station on Friday. PHOTO...Reuters...Dogs checkin g the platform of the London Bridge rail station after a bomb explosion Friday.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document