BOMBINGS IN RUSSIA A CONCERN ON EVE OF GAMES
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 31, 2013 Tuesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: B; Pg. 2
Length: 387 words
Byline: Associated Press<br>
Body


The suicide bombings in Russia serve as a chilling reminder of what the Winter Olympics represent to terrorists: A high-profile target with more than 2,500 athletes, some world-famous, waving the flags of nearly 90 nations.
 So, while many Olympic leaders offered reassurance on the day after two bombings 400 miles from Sochi killed at least 31 people, some of those getting ready to compete in the Games spoke of a different reality. They know their security is never a sure thing.
 "I am concerned," said U.S. speedskater Jilleanne Rookard. "I'm scared their security may be involved. I don't know if I necessarily trust their security forces. But they don't want a national embarrassment, either. I use that thought to relieve some of my worry. I'm sure they want to save their image and their pride."
 Indeed, the Russians vow the athletes will be safe, even though they will be competing in a city 300 miles away from the roots of an Islamist insurgency that has triggered security concerns for the Games, which start Feb. 7.
 The country has spent a record $51 billion preparing for its first Winter Games
 Olympic chief Alexander Zhukov said the bombings didn't spark a need for additional security measures because "everything necessary already has been done."
 The threat of terrorism at the Olympics has been in the forefront since 1972, when members of a Palestinian terrorist group invaded the Olympic village and killed 11 Israeli athletes.
 Security rose to a new level at the 2002 Salt Lake City Games, which came only five months after the Sept. 11 attacks. Improvements in technology, along with ever-present threats of terrorism, have turned security into a top priority for any country hosting Games.
 Among the security measures Russia has put in place for these Games is a requirement that all ticketholders obtain and wear "spectator passes" while attending events. To get a spectator pass, fans have to provide passport and contact information to authorities.
 On Monday, IOC president Thomas Bach wrote a condolence letter to Russian President Vladimir Putin in which he expressed "our confidence in the Russian authorities to deliver safe and secure games in Sochi."
 The U.S. Olympic Committee works closely with the State Department and would welcome "closer cooperation" with Russia on security preparations.

Load-Date: January 7, 2014


End of Document