BOMBING RESPONSE GOOD, EXPERT SAYS
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 20, 1995, Thursday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P9A
Length: 535 words
Byline: Therese Cox
Body


He was going to talk about some obscure kind of medical injury
But after Wednesday's bombing and resulting carnage in Oklahoma
City, Dr. John Prescott dwelt on terrorism during his rounds at West
Virginia University School of Medicine this morning.
"Bombing is the No. 1 terrorism act in the country," said
Prescott, WVU chairman of emergency medicine and a disaster medicine
specialist.
"Oklahoma City is responding very well."
Just a few years ago, chaos, rather than speedy reaction, might
have reigned after such an violent and spontaneous incident.
Today, cities are planning for such attacks, he said.
"Life will go on. We are going back to work.  Terrorists will
win when we live in a state of fear."
Prescott, who also serves as medical director of the state
Emergency Medical Services, wrote a chapter on terrorism in a popular
textbook used in medical schools across the country.
In it, he said the U.S. remains vulnerable because of its
worldwide geopolitical stance, its open borders, large size and free
society with easy access.
And terrorists like the media attention, too.
The bombing was discussed by Prescott and his medical students
in several state locations on MD-TV, an interactive medical
television hookup.  They discussed how emergency medical personnel
need to be part of the planning, prepared for such events.
He said there's a low probability of a bombing occurring in West
Virginia.
"But we must think about it, plan for it, be prepared and hope
it never comes."
Such a bombing causes four major types of multiple casualties
and the victims are not just the healthy, young males that are
usually studied during wars.
First are the primary blast effect injuries _ a body can be
blown apart.  The force may cause traumatic amputations or transform
office furniture or a person into missiles.
The concussion can affect organs differently, he said, depending
on the bomb's location.  It damages ear drums, lungs and intestines
There could be burns, inhalation injuries and psychological
trauma.
"Besides the traumatic event, victims will feel violated,
vulnerable, out of control.  It takes a while for these things to
come back."
If a worker in the federal building is entrapped in the rubble,
he can survive for days, Prescott said.
However, if crushed, muscle and tissue will break down as toxins
speed through the body, affecting the kidneys and heart.
Reminiscent of the Civil War, at least one field amputation has
occurred, Preston said he heard.  "It is used only in the most
extreme circumstances."
Bill White, director of emergency services for Kanawha County,
said that unlike many other U.S. cities, Charleston years ago began
addressing what might be the response after a terrorist attack.
"Law enforcement, the sheriff and others created a civil
disturbance and terrorism plan," White said.
"Terrorism is here to stay," he said.
"You think you are prepared.  You plan.  You fantasize.  When
it happens, it is a difficult situation.
"It has to be taken care of and it will."
"Life will go on. We are going back to work.  Terrorists will
win when we live in a state of fear." Dr.  John Prescott WVU
chairmanof emergency medicine
"Terrorists will win when we live in a state of fear." Dr.
John Prescott WVU chairmanof emergency medicine

Load-Date: April 21, 1995


End of Document