Bomb guy in threats vs. Beto
Daily News (New York)
November 1, 2018 Thursday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 14
Length: 306 words
Byline: Larry McShane

New York Daily News
Body


Accused pipe-bomb mailer Cesar Sayoc., months before his domestic terrorism arrest, targeted Texas Rep. Beto O'Rourke with menacing Facebook messages about the Democrat and his family.
"Hug your loved ones everytime you leave home," read one of the ominous postings from Sayoc. "See you soon."
A spokesman for the Lone Star State candidate for Senate shared the threats Wednesday with the Dallas Morning News as prosecutors revealed that Sayoc began concocting his bomb-sending spree back in July.
The social-media threats started in April and were shared with both the FBI and the U.S. Capitol police, said campaign spokesman Chris Evans. Last Thursday, as the FBI hunted for Sayoc, the feds dispatched agents and bomb-sniffing dogs to screen the mail at O'Rourke's campaign office in El Paso.
Sayoc was arrested the next day outside a Florida auto parts store.
The messages from Sayoc to O'Rourke were accompanied by photos of the Democrat's wife and children, according to Evans. O'Rourke is trying to unseat incumbent Republican Sen. Ted Cruz.
Twitter apologized Wednesday to former Democratic congressional press secretary Rochelle Ritchie for its refusal to remove a similar Sayoc threat delivered to her earlier this month.
The O'Rourke revelation came after federal court papers charged that Sayoc collected photos of his intended targets and their homes on his phone while plotting his explosive scheme.
U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman, in a seven-page filing, said an FBI search of the jailed suspect's laptop and phone revealed that and more of his incriminating actions in the months before the homemade devices began arriving.
The phone held a photo of billionaire Democratic donor George Soros, among other Sayoc targets, along with a purported picture of ex-First Lady Michelle Obama's driver's license, according to the court filing.

Load-Date: November 1, 2018


End of Document