BOND PLAN WOULD TRACK, SCREEN ALIENS MORE CLOSELY;
 MEASURE WOULD BE ATTACHED TO ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 5, 2001 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 521 words
Byline: Karen Branch-Brioso Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Enlisting a Democrat and a moderate Republican as allies, Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond, R-Mo., introduced a plan Thursday to better screen foreign visitors to the United States and track them once they arrive.
Bond said his legislation was inspired by the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks allegedly carried out by 19 foreign visitors - some of whom had overstayed their tourist or student visas. He intends to attach the measures to an anti-terrorism bill expected to be taken up next week in both the House and Senate.
"Now that we all know how real a threat these illegal aliens can be, I hope we can include these provisions in the anti-terrorism bill," said Bond as he unveiled the plan with Sens. Kent Conrad, D-N.D., and Olympia Snowe, R-Me.
The proposed legislation would accelerate the enforcement of laws passed in 1996 that required monitoring of all foreign students at U.S. colleges and universities. The laws also required the Immigration and Naturalization Service to keep tabs on other foreign visitors to crack down on those who overstayed their visas.
Bond's plan would require the federal government to "immediately" implement the system at all U.S. airports, seaports and land borders. It also would expand the student-tracking system to include "flight schools, language schools, trade schools and vocational schools."
Several of the suspected hijackers from the Sept. 11 attacks attended flight schools in the United States. One, Hani Hanjour, entered the country on a visa to study English at an Oakland, Calif., college but never showed up at the school. Hanjour is believed to have helped hijack the flight that crashed into the Pentagon.
Bond's bill would require schools to notify the INS within 30 days if a foreign student fails to show up for class. Their names would be entered into an FBI database.
Sen. Diane Feinstein, D-Calif., has worked with Snowe on a similar plan that would also place a six-month moratorium on foreign student visas while security-tracking is put into place. Bond believes that to be too drastic a measure: "Ninety-nine percent of the foreign students here are a very vital part of U.S. relations," he said.
Snowe emphasized her support of another part of Bond's plan designed to keep terrorists from entering the country. It would require federal agencies - including the INS, FBI, the Central Intelligence Agency and Department of Defense - to regularly share their information on potential terrorists with the State Department. The information would go into an existing database available at all U.S. embassies and consulates that issue visas.
"Now, we have a situation where no law requires agencies like the FBI and CIA to share information on dangerous aliens applying for either immigrant or non-immigrant visas," Snowe said. "Think about what that means. We know that at least 16 of the 19 suspected hijackers entered the U.S. on non-immigrant visas."
Conrad said, "We're not talking about witch hunts. We're talking about common sense. We ought to be able to shut out known terrorists before they come in and share information that can prevent terrorism, and, we hope, save lives."

Notes

Reporter Karen Branch-Brioso; E-mail: kbranch@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880  

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document