Books Of The Times
The New York Times
February 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk; Review
Length: 969 words
Body


By John Leonard
THE SAFETY NET. By Heinrich Boll.  Translated from the German by Leila Vennewitz. 314 pages. Knopf. $13.95.
ALMOST everything goes wrong in ''The Safety Net,'' a new novel of the deepest seriousness by Heinrich Boll. It is so cluttered with characters that none can breathe. It is so dense with ideas that it sinks to the bottom of the mind. It broods on capitalism, without energy, and terrorism, without suspense. It speaks of ''chaos'' and ''disintegration,'' and yet it is so carefully programmed, so oppressed by pattern, that it might as well be a computer chip. It is about guilt, and nobody is to blame. It needs a joke or two, but Mr Boll, having won a Nobel Prize, is no longer permitted to be funny.
John Leonard reviews Heinrich Boll's latest book, "The Safety Net"Nevertheles s, we can't afford not to read him. Terrorism is too important to be left to the police, the tabloids and those typists ofthrillers who spin blood into cotton candy. To imagine it, we need writers as in telligent as Alberto Moravia in ''Time of Desecration,''and Mary McCa rthy in ''Cannibals and Missionaries.'' If they have written unsat isfactory novels on the subject, why not Mr. Boll? And if we are wil ling to think of ''The Safety Net'' as a meditation instead of a novel, it is heroic.
Briefly, this is what happens: Fritz Tolm, an aging and infirm art historian turned newspaper publisher, is elected president of the ''Association.'' The Association, consisting of bankers and technocrats, is ''the power center'' and ''the very heart of capitalism'' in West Germany. Tolm is elected its president precisely because he isn't one of the ''worst''; he is afflicted with ''too many humanistic thoughts, self-doubts, too much capitalist melancholy''; and two of his children belong to ''them,'' the disaffected ideologues of anarchism and Communism.
Tolm understands his election to be a sentence of death. The terrorists are in business to kill symbols. His ''safety net'' of constant surveillance is a noose that strangles. Will the birthday cake explode, or the bicycle, the shoes, the duck, the umbrella? Has he also flunked fatherhood?
Deliberately, I omit most of Mr. Boll's details. Even so, some of them are important to Tolm's emotional weather: Madonnas and castles, buzzards and priests. A ruling class is, indeed, terrified, as though it has just been asking for the kidnap. We visit the minds of war profiteers, security agents, money managers, disappointed wives and ''satellite children.'' Mr. Boll spends too much time on what he sees as the hypocrisy of the Roman Catholic Church in the Federal Republic of Germany; and West German journalism - as we have come to expect from a Nobel laureate who must read the Axel Springer pre ss - is reviled.
Forgive and forget the fiction. Stare, instead, at the argument.  Western society has a problem. ''Safety and order'' can't be guaranteed. Our children despise us. At the bank and in the pulpit, we are lied to. Turks and Italians do the dirty work of the proletatriat in West Germany. Listen to Mr. Boll.
On capitalism: We eat up too much energy and are too tired to love. Greedy for coal, we devour castles. The clouds in our sky, however interesting at sunset, are caused by nuclear power stations. ''It grows and grows, and you can't stop it,'' by ''inherent law.'' According to ''the union and the Association, state and church,'' we consume and proliferate. After French champagne and Cuban cigars and Russian caviar ''from the slashed bellies of sturgeons,'' after freeways and Drambuie, we are envious and bored. A peasant tells an industrialist about the industrialist's colleagues: ''They stink, you just can't smell it anymore.''
On terrorism: Children from ''another star, another world,'' with ''eerie calm,'' either murder or retire in ''our pride, our arrogance'' to milk the cows and cultivate the garden. ''In their way they are technocrats, separating business from emotions.'' Living on the garbage of ''established nothingness,'' believing in ''something mythical,'' they may be puritans and ask too much of us.  They will become ''victims'' and ''martyrs'' of a social system so ingenious as to profit from the consumption of its privileged babies. They are certainly the other, the Eros or Thanatos of capitalist society. They may be coerced ''like all the rest of us,'' but they aren't stupid.
On family: Fathers and mothers, daughters and sons, we are all accomplices. Whether by the Hegelian dialectic, about which I have my doubts, or by the psychoanalytic ''family romance,'' which may be equally suspect, we conspire at making sad history. Being liberal is being lonely and confused and culpable. Everybody is a ''nice monster.'' Tolm lacks courage and is less than ''dynamic.'' Still, as a father, he worries. For whom will he die, and why? Certainly his doctoral thesis, on the Rhenish farmhouse in the 19th century, is no reason. Mr. Boll will not permit liberalism, that high-culture caviar, to be gummed to death by greedy brutes.
And what about the grandchildren, those bomb-eating birthday cakes?
Unlike Mary McCarthy, Mr. Boll disdains the magic act of capitalist-terrorist mirror personalities. Unlike Mr. Moravia, he distinguishes between personal neurosis and social psychosis. Unlike such autobiographers of the radical left as Jane Alpert and Patricia Hearst, he demonstrates that more is involved in terrorism than a sexual hysteria expressing itself in a violence that, perhaps, might be redemptive. Mr. Boll would not, if I understand him, breed children in order to make a political statement, nor would he float like a bubblehead on the bloodstream toward an armored Brinks.
A good man has written a bad novel while trying to understand his angry children. We should all be so lucky as to have such fathers.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Heinric Boll


End of Document