Book Review: Tips for those who opt to survive a terrorist attack
Business Insurance
March 31, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 12
Length: 521 words
Byline: Michael Prince
Body


''The Complete Terrorism Survival Guide: How to Travel, Work and Live in Safety''
By Juval Aviv
Published by Juris Publishing Inc.
71 New St.
Huntington, N.Y. 11743
800-887-4064
www.jurispub.com 
$35
Surviving a terrorist attack is a matter of choice, according to a new book by an anti-terrorism expert.
Businesses can prepare for a terror attack by putting together preventive and recovery plans. Or they can do very little and invite trouble, according to ''The Complete Terrorism Survival Guide: How to Travel, Work and Live in Safety,'' by Juval Aviv, former member of an elite Israeli anti-terrorist military unit.
In this superbly researched and readable book, Mr. Aviv, now the president and chief executive officer of the New York-based corporate intelligence firm Interfor Inc., lays out what individuals and businesses must do to survive in this age of terrorism. In seven chapters, Mr. Aviv explains how individuals can protect themselves at home and while traveling and what businesses can do to discourage terrorism.
Not all companies are equally at risk for a terrorist strike, though. Those in big cities face greater risks. Department stores, supermarkets and other high-traffic locations are also more likely to be targets, he writes.
In addition to location, the type of business is important in assessing the risk of a terrorist strike. Transportation systems, financial institutions, oil refineries and infrastructure installations such as electric power and communications facilities are attractive targets for terrorists, he writes.
But the companies that are most at risk are those that are least secure.
''The most vulnerable businesses are those deemed to be high-priority targets with the weakest, most penetrable security. This reinforces our conclusion that terrorism survival is largely a matter of choice. The businesses least likely to be attacked successfully will be those with the best defenses,'' Mr. Aviv writes.
In the chapter on what businesses can do, Mr. Aviv ticks off point after point on how businesses can protect themselves. They range from the obvious, such as reporting suspicious activity to local and federal authorities, to the obscure, such as removing VIP signs posted in company parking lots that give away the identities of key personnel.
Some measures may simply disturb your employees. For example, the book recommends that businesses ask employees to volunteer DNA samples so their remains could be identified if they were to be killed in a terrorist attack.
The book also contains a bibliography with a list of publications from business and government groups on surviving a terrorist attack.
Even if the reader does not put most of the tips into practice, the book serves to urge business executives to formulate plans.
''If you plan ahead for terrorist attacks or other crises and if your employees already know what to do when all goes wrong,'' Mr. Aviv writes, ''your ability to limit the damage-in terms of lives, injuries and costs-and to maintain post-crisis business continuity is greatly improved.''
Michael Prince is an associate editor in Business Insurance's New York bureau.

Load-Date: April 2, 2003


End of Document