BOOK BUZZ: Facts of terrorism propel fiction
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 10, 2004 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Living;; Interview
Length: 726 words
Byline: DON O'BRIANT
Body


By day, Christopher Dickey writes about the world of terrorists, spies and suicide bombers as Newsweek's Paris bureau chief and Middle East editor.
By night, he writes about this same world, but as a novelist. Sometimes, he admits, it's difficult to know where the facts end and fiction begins.
His new novel, "The Sleeper" (Simon & Schuster, $24), begins on the morning of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, with American-born Muslim Kurt Kurtovic watching the news from his home in Kansas. Kurtovic knows who's behind the attacks because he was once one of them.
AJC
Kurtovic, a former Army Ranger (who was introduced in Dickey's first novel, 1997's "Innocent Blood"), is soon contacted by a federal agent who wants him to help track down the terrorists. As the story unfolds, Kurtovic's bloody pursuit takes him to London, Spain, Kenya and Guantanamo Bay. Although he is determined to thwart al-Qaida's plans, he is disgusted by American arrogance.
"When I wrote my first novel . . . Americans didn't understand the way the rest of the world was changing," says Dickey, 53, the son of the late poet and novelist James Dickey. "I hoped I could help them understand that, with this character who was blue-eyed, blond and a Muslim. Americans think the hatred toward them started on Sept. 11, but it had started long before then."
In a telephone interview, Dickey talked about how his novels are shaped by his experiences as a journalist in war zones.
Q: Why did you decide to turn to fiction?
A: I wanted to give people a sense of the anger that was building against the United States, and I thought fiction might be a way of getting the message across.
Q: Your first novel, "Innocent Blood," grew out of reporting you did on the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center. How did that foreshadow the attacks of 9/11?
A: Everything I learned about that investigation made it clear that there would be more attempts at apocalyptic terror by extremists. The threat was obvious, but the public seemed oblivious. I wanted to write a novel that would shake Americans out of their complacency.
Q: Aren't Americans taking terrorism more seriously now?
A: Not as much as they should. In "The Sleeper," one of the villains says that Americans live like people who are in the middle of a hurricane. There's death and destruction all around them, but they only look up and see blue skies.
Q: Why is America hated? Is it because of our relationship with Israel or our actions in Iraq?
A: After 9/11, Newsweek ran a cover story, "Why do they hate us?" I kept sending notes to the editor saying the question is not why they hate us, but why they think we hate them. One of the reasons is the way we have conducted our foreign policy. We go out and fight these wars, walk away and say the problem is solved. After our success in Kosovo, in which not a single American was killed, we began to think war was easy. Once you get the idea you can change the face of Europe with that kind of war, bring down the dictators and not lose a single American soldier, you get the idea you can do that almost anywhere.
Q: In "The Sleeper" you imply that some in the administration in Washington don't want the war on terrorism to end. Why?
A: Some believe that war is a righteous undertaking, the kind of thing that toughens the American people and eventually exalts them. Others believe the conduct of war represents a powerful and positive economic force. Unfortunately, the people who think this way at the upper levels of government are not people who are likely to spend much time on the battlefield themselves.
Q: How can America improve its image in the rest of the world?
A: We can't begin to reverse the damage done by the Iraq occupation. Look at what happened with Israel's occupation of Lebanon. They went in to get rid of the terrorist threat and to install a friendly government. A year later they and everybody who went in to help them were being blown up. It took them years to get out.
Q: Your father died in 1997. Did he read any of your fiction?
A: He had a chance to read large portions of "Innocent Blood." A lot of that novel is about Kurt's loss of his father and his search for his identity. At one point, he goes to his father's grave to come to terms with his memory. My father suggested I add one paragraph where I sum up what happens. That was the only suggestion he made, and he was right.

Graphic

 
Photo: Christopher Dickey; Graphic: MEET THE AUTHOR
Christopher Dickey will talk about his novel "The Sleeper" at 2 p.m. Sept. 18 at Chapter 11 bookstore at Ansley Mall. 1544 Piedmont Ave., Atlanta. 404-872-7986.

Load-Date: September 11, 2004


End of Document