Books Of The Times
The New York Times
September 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Weekend Desk; review
Length: 684 words
Body


By Anatole Broyard
THE CARE OF TIME. By Eric Ambler. 277 pages. Farrar Straus Giroux. $11.95.
ONE of the elements in the kind of sophisticated suspense novel that Eric Ambler writes is the question of just how far the cynicism of international politics will stretch without snapping. It used to be the spy or the private eye who flouted the law with a fine disdain and who believed in nothing; now it is nations.
Anatole Broyard reviews Eric Ambler's book, "The Care of Time"
The reassuring line between hero and villain has also become unpredictable. The hero's irony come so close to the villain's nihilism that, as Hamlet said about the courtier and the peasant, he galls his kibe, or steps on his heels.
In the new tradition, Mr. Ambler does violence to our morality as well as to his characters. The ultimate question in ''The Care of Time'' is: Will we care, in time, about anything? This is indeed an escape novel; we escape all categories and accept the fact that international diplomacy is merely a more convoluted form of terrorism.
Robert Halliday, the hero of ''The Care of Time,'' is a ghostwriter, a man who articulates someone else's anxieties and pretensions. Perhaps Mr. Ambler, in his sly way, means to say that Halliday speaks for us too, is the ghost, the haunting memory, of our old convictions.
 
Tale of an Anarchist
He is being asked to ghostwrite a book exposing international terrorism, a book called ''Children of the Twilight,'' which is built around an alleged memoir of a 19th-century Russian anarc hist who was an as sociate of Bakunin. The book's thesis is that democratic go vernments can be ''provoked into impotence'' by terrorism unless it is immediately brought under control.
Halliday is offered this job by a letter announcing the imminent arrival, also through the mail, of a bomb. The bomb's double fuse, cunningly disarmed, is his employer's chosen metaphor. Mr. Ambler is a poet of violent metaphors. Coupled with a fee of $50,000, it is the kind of offer that would naturally intrigue a hero.
After toying with the alleged anarchist memoir and exploiting its ambiguities, Mr. Ambler reveals it to be only a blind, a double or triple feint by a man named Zander, who is an undercover negotiator for the ruler of an Arab country. Zander is what might be called a metaspy, a sort of second-story man of international subterfuge.
These details are not, by the way, a betrayal of the plot of ''The Care of Time.'' Mr. Ambler has plot to spare: there is virtuosity in the way he pours it on. His determination to stay ahead of the rankand-file suspense writers sometimes approaches a brilliant desperation. There is a great deal of expository talk, for example, because Mr. Ambler belongs to a generation that finds good talk exciting.
 
A Change in Approach
''There, the French producer would be paid cash in West German marks for the balance of the rental and receive a postdated check in Swiss francs, drawn on the American Express International bank's Geneva branch, as a returnable deposit.'' Some readers will smack their lips over this sort of verisimilitude and others will shake their heads. Whatever else you may say about it, it's a change from a punch in the jaw or a bullet in the groin.
The real plot, as opposed to all the mock plots, has to do with a paranoid Arab ruler who wishes to build in Austria what is either a health clinic for his suffering subjects or a fallout shelter against World War III for himself. He is also offering NATO a military concession in exchange for what Halliday calls some ''shopping in the death department.''
Zander has a beautiful daughter who, when Halliday demonstrates an even greater cynicism than her father, becomes attracted to him. They sleep together most discreetly: there is no reference to her body, only to her ''pants.'' Mr. Ambler's proffered immorality is all geopolitical.
The word intelligence as used to describe international investigation and surveillance has always seemed an ironical choice.  In his novels, Mr. Ambler reintegrates the several meanings of the word, and for that we should all be grateful to him.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Eric Ambler


End of Document