BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
When Just Saying No Won't Do the Trick
The New York Times
December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Cultural Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Column 3;; Review
Length: 935 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT
Body


Narco-Terrorism
By Rachel Ehrenfeld
225 pages. Basic Books. $19.95.
Narco-terrorism, writes Rachel Ehrenfeld in this sobering if somewhat sketchy report, "is the use of drug trafficking to advance the objectives of certain governments and terrorist organizations."
In her paradigmatic case, a drug-producing subculture is offered protection by a politically radical organization. The organization sells the drugs to raise money for weapons and uses the weapons to promote revolution and to provide further protection for the drug producer.
"The major target for this deadly and illicit activity is and always has been the United States, as a natural consequence of economic and political factors," Ms. Ehrenfeld continues. "For the trafficker, the United States is the wealthiest and biggest consumer of illegal drugs in the world. The United States remains the 'main enemy' for the Marxist ideologue and other anti-democratic and anti-Western forces for whom drugs serve a threefold purpose. First, they destabilize American society; second, they undermine non-Marxist democratic governments in this hemisphere and elsewhere; and best of all, the results come at no cost to these regimes and their terrorist allies, since the whole enterprise in effect is paid for by the American and other Western drug consumers."
"As is always the case in these matters," she writes, "the proof for narco-terrorism is found in bits and pieces scattered across the globe.  Some elements are missing. Some only can be surmised. And since I am not putting anyone on trial, the body of evidence is not airtight."
All the same, what she has assembled is "a mosaic in which the patterns are distinct enough to form substantial conclusions." This mosaic comprises countries like Bulgaria, Cuba, Lebanon, Syria, Colombia, Peru and Bolivia. Typical of her survey is the Palestine Liberation Organization, which, she asserts, earns $300 million from the narcotics trade yearly, "approximately three times what it earned from supportive Arab regimes." In Peru, she writes, the Maoist guerrilla organization called the Shining Path exploits one of the world's richest sources of raw coca to finance its war against so-called Yankee imperialism and to win over the Indian population that harvests Peru's crop and constitutes the country's majority.
But almost equally to blame is the United States itself, whose rising demand for drugs continues to make narco-terrorism work. In her long polemical concluding chapter, "The Other America: From Grass to Crack," Ms. Ehrenfeld points an accusing finger at everything from the counterculture of the 1960's to Presidents like Jimmy Carter whom she considers drug-permissive to the sort of flabby thinking, as she sees it, that promotes the legalization of drugs.
Because America lacks the will to fight back, she argues, drugs have worked their way into every crevice of the country's life, and addiction will continue to rise, she says, until we acknowledge our true enemies.
Ms. Ehrenfeld, who has an advanced degree in criminology and is a research scholar at New York University's Law School, makes a powerful case on the whole, though there are certainly gaps in her logic. She tortures her argument somewhat to explain why President Fidel Castro's execution of General Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez for narcotics trafficking, among other sins, was done in part to cover up Mr. Castro's own involvement with narco-terrorism, and she goes to considerable lengths to explain why Colombia's drug trade isn't simply built on monumental greed and corruption.
In describing the cycle of drug use in the United States from the late 19th century to the 1930's, she neglects to mention the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914, so that one cannot tell from her text that drug consumption was legal at the start of the cycle and illegal at the end of it, or that the revival of drug use beginning in the 1960's occurred despite prohibition being in effect. Similarly, in describing what she calls the failure of Britain's experiment with legalization, she neglects to mention that in at least some people's judgment addiction and drug-related crime have continued to rise since prohibition was reinstated in 1971.
Her case against legalization in America is based on extremely limited source material, and her fanciful projection of what would happen if drugs were legalized can be refuted by an equally plausible scenario that would prove just the opposite. In fact, no one knows whether consumption would rise or fall if drugs were decriminalized, nor can one even guess what drugs would prove most popular.
Nonetheless, by calling attention to what drugs have done to societies other than to the United States's, "Narco-Terrorism" serves powerfully to raise one's consciousness of their danger. If things seem bad now, just imagine what it would be like if the country were "Colombianized," which Ms. Ehrenfeld contends is not far from remote, what with drug enforcement agents becoming more accessible to corruption, at least in her view, and prosecutors finding it increasingly difficult to find witnesses willing to give evidence to drug crimes.
In her opinion, it is not enough just to say no. "Narco-terrorism should become a major issue in bilateral discussions in the international community, including the Soviets and their explicit and implicit allies," she concludes. "Terrorist organizations and other subversive groups have witnessed the success of the drug business and the failure of democratic governments to deal with the problem; in all probability, this will embolden them to continue business as usual."

Graphic

 
Photo: Rachel Ehrenfeld (Basic Books)

Load-Date: December 17, 1990


End of Document