Book on terrorism has roots in Central Illinois
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
February 24, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 The Pantagraph
Section: News; Pg. C5
Length: 676 words
Byline: Pamela Lewis
Body


Title: Terrorism Factbook
Authors: Marc Miller and Jason File
Publisher: Bollix Books
Price: $11.99
BLOOMINGTON - Staley Krause and her husband watched the horrible events unfold on Sept. 11 and within two days, decided to publish a book about the tragedy.
Few Americans knew much about who attacked the United States and why, and the Krauses wanted to get the information out as soon as possible.
They envisioned a layman's guide to worldwide terrorism with thumbnail sketches of terrorist organizations. They wanted overviews of military capabilities and maps of terrorist and military strategies.
"It all evolved with a simple conversation with Mike. We were dumbfounded and uninformed about how the tragedy could happen and what led up to the attack," said Krause, a 1988 graduate of University High School in Normal.
The publishing part was easy. Both have experience and recently created their own publishing company, Bollix Books. Krause used to be senior editor of White Wolf Publishing in Atlanta. Husband Mike is White Wolf's director of national accounts and works out of their Peoria home.
Content for the 80-page book, "Terrorism Factbook" was gleaned from the expertise of two relatives. Krause's stepfather is Marc Miller of Bloomington. He is an expert on military strategy and history because of research he conducted as a designer of electronic war games. Miller also was a contributor to the Desert Shield Factbook published during the Gulf War.
The other author is Jason File. He is Krause's cousin and is a terrorism specialist at Yale Law School. He is earning a doctorate in international relations at Oxford University and was awarded a federal grant to study terrorism for three years.
Krause called File several days after the attack and he agreed to help. He had a cache of information and immediately began simplifying the academic language.
Miller and Krause's mother were vacationing in a rustic South Dakota cabin. It took a week for Krause to reach them, and when she did the couple headed back to Bloomington. Miller started writing his part of the book on his laptop computer during the long ride home.
The Krauses secured a graphic designer in Atlanta, Ga. They searched for a printer that could produce the book on short notice and without advanced payment.
"Then we just began this crazy process of getting the book out in two weeks. We communicated with everyone by e-mail and began arranging the book as each part came in," Krause said. "It was terrifying to me. The process changed my whole view of publishing. It cost $25,000 to print so there were a lot of sleepless nights."
Some 25,000 books were printed within 21/2 weeks of the tragedy. Her husband turned into a public relations machine, calling the media to alert them to the handbook. Miller and File appeared on a CNN program in early October and have made several return visits as terrorism experts.
Krause said 18,000 books were shipped to stores but firm sales figures aren't available because bookstores haven't returned unsold copies yet. The couple is expecting a full return on their investment and is donating 10 percent of the proceeds to the American Red Cross.
"We are able to make our $7,000 payment to the Red Cross. People are skeptical about those kinds of claims but we are doing it," Krause said.
Bollix Books is now gearing up to publish what was supposed to be the company's inaugural release. It's a children's book based on the play of the same name, "Master Stitchum and the Moon." It will appear in bookstores in October.
"I love this. I was senior editor at White Wolfe and it was my dream job," said Krause, who home schools her two children.
Krause grew up in Bloomington and is a 1988 graduate of University High School. Her family is proud of her first publishing endeavor, especially her father, Richard File of Bloomington.
"Sept. 11 was such an awful time but so many good things have come out of it," Krause said.
"Hopefully we were able to contribute on some level. We wanted to inform the public about why this happened. I know I learned a lot."

Load-Date: February 26, 2002


End of Document