Book keeps readers guessing
The Bismarck Tribune
October 10, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1B
Length: 318 words
Byline: AMY NELSON Citizen Reviewer
Body


Title: "Toxin"
Author: Paul Martin Midden
Assassinations ... terrorism ... rebellion - and, of course, romance.
"Toxin," a new work of fiction by Paul Martin Midden, has it all.
Focusing on the seemingly normal life of a moderate senator, this novel weaves an engagingly and not entirely unbelievable tale of intrigue and domestic terrorism. The senator, using skills gained from his time in an elite military unit, must almost single handedly save the country.
A band of prominent radical conservatives have banded together in a plot to overthrow the democracy and replace it with a theocracy. Starting with the fateful day that Sen. Telemark gets a cryptic call from one Isadore Hathaway, the reader is led on a conspiracy theory that is just believable enough to make you a bit nervous.
Dr. Hathaway has uncovered many aspects of the scheme, using methods that are less than legal but highly effective. She recruits Telemark to aid in her mission, but steals his heart as well.
This fast-paced novel moves along so quickly that the romance seems almost like an after-thought, and I think had the author spent a little more time, he could have made the romance more believable. However, this was such a small aspect of the larger storyline that it did not detract much from the story as a whole.
The characters are well-developed, and the author gives you a lot of background on their lives that led them to the situations they are currently involved in.
As the reader becomes aware of these different aspects of the characters' lives, the conspiracy gets more and more complicated, until you begin to wonder if the senator is really the one being fooled.
With an explosive ending that keeps you guessing until the very last page, Midden has written an engaging and unpredictable story that will have fans of politics and conspiracy theorists alike wanting more.
(Amy Nelson is a stay-at-home mom and mother of five.)

Load-Date: October 12, 2009


End of Document