Book on terrorist victims released on death anniversary of Swahid Kumud Hazarika
The Sentinel
December 24, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Byline: A Correspondent
Body


LAKHIMPUR: A book release programme on the occasion of the 30th death anniversary of Swahid Kumud Hazarika was held in North Lakhimpur Press Club on Wednesday. Notably, student leader Kumud Hazarika, elder son of Nagen Hazarika, resident of Sribhuyan village under Narayanpur area of Lakhimpur district, lost his life on December 20 in 1990 due to the oppression by a section of United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) cadres. Later, the All Assam Students' Union (AASU) declared him as swahid (martyr).
The book release programme began with the lighting of earthen lamp by terrorist victim family members, centegenerian Radhananda Borah and MadhabHazarika. Then profound homage was paid to the martyr by paying floral tribute to his portrait. BrojenHazarika, the younger brother of the martyr, explained the objective of programme. In the same programme, Radhananda Borah, Madhab Hazarika, mother of the martyr octogenarian Nirmala Hazarika, RameshwarNeog released the book titled ULFAr Kolonkito Adhyay . The book was edited by Ranju Neog Hazarika, the relative of KumudHazarika, and Amardeep Baruah, whose father was also killed by ULFA.
Stories on a total of 41 terrorist victims, torture by ULFA cadres on them along with a number of articles against terrorism have been incorporated in the book. As the members of terrorist victim families, Radhananda Borah, Amardeep Baruah, Rameshwar Neog, Brojen Hazarika, Nirmala Hazarika explained their grief and sorrows caused by the loss of their relatives due to terrorism while speaking on the occasion. All of them strongly opposed terrorism and expected the accused ULFA cadres to be punished for killing innocent people in the name of revolution. In this regard, they appealed to the State and Union governments to take steps to provide justice to the terrorist victim families.
On the other hand, writer and editor of the book, Ranju Neog Hazarika expressed resentment over the politically privileged life of terrorists who were once involved in killing innocent people. She also appealed to the government and administration to take action against them and to provide justice to the terrorist victim families.

Load-Date: December 25, 2020


End of Document