Bordering on obsession;
Fixation on terrorism since Sept. 11 has gone on long enough
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 19, 2002 Sunday Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 23A
Length: 913 words
Byline: Gwynne Dyer
Dateline: London, England
Body


One day your sister, who lives in a very safe neighborhood and
doesn't get out much, is burgled. Afterward she keeps calling you
up and talks of nothing else. What upsets her even more than her
actual losses is the fact that her home has been violated, so you
install an alarm system, put bars on the windows, and listen
patiently. She'll get over it in a while.
Only months pass, and she doesn't. She wakes at every sound, she
becomes a nuisance to the police with her constant false alarms,
and she fantasizes about funny-looking people lurking in the
neighborhood. All her other interests fade away and now the world's
only real problem is burglars. You try to put up with it, but after
eight months you snap. It's time for either frank talk or
psychiatric counseling.
Talk is cheaper, so let's start with that. Over 3,000 Americans
died horribly in the terrorist attacks eight months ago: a ghastly
toll, equal to a full month's shooting deaths in the United States.
The United States responded by destroying the headquarters of
Al-Qaida, the organization responsible for the attacks, and the
Taliban government of Afghanistan that sheltered it, which made
perfectly good sense.
President Bush did talk about launching a war on "terrorism,"
which would have been worrying if he really meant it. Terrorism is
not a country or an ideology. It's a technique that has been used
by a wide variety of ethnic, ideological and religious groups
around the world (including many that the United States has
supported in the past) against an equally wide variety of enemies.
If Bush really intended to take all the world's terrorists on,
then the United States was entering an unwinnable struggle of
enormous dimensions - but he clearly didn't mean that. In his
speech to Congress in late September, he actually declared war
against "terrorism of global reach": that is, foreign terrorists
with the will and the ability to reach out and hurt Americans.
We only know of one such group, Al-Qaida, with probably no more
than 5,000 or 10,000 active members, so the task rapidly dwindled
to a manageable size. Destroying or at least crippling Al-Qaida was
an attainable goal, and all of America's friends and allies
willingly signed up for it.
But eight months later, even with Al-Qaida's main base smashed
and its surviving leaders on the run, the U.S. government is still
a gibbering mess of insecurities, obsessions and paranoid delusions
about the "terrorist threat." Here is a partial list from just one
day in mid-May.
On May 13, former U.S. president Jimmy Carter was in Cuba touring
the Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. A harmless
visit to a respected research facility - but Carter spent the day
fighting off an accusation by John Bolton, undersecretary of state
for arms control and international security, that Cuba is helping
terrorist groups to buy or develop biological weapons.
It was mere propaganda, designed to perpetuate Cuba's isolation,
and eventually Secretary of State Colin Powell was forced to
recant: "We didn't say (Cuba) actually had some weapons, but it has
the capacity and capability to conduct such research." So what? So
do thousands of other biotechnology labs in universities and
industrial facilities around the world. The point is that nowadays,
the lying allegations are always about terrorist links.
On the same day, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft was in
Canada to discuss the "G-8 Counter-Terrorism Action Plan." When
uppity Canadian journalists suggested that this was all just to
reassure nervous Americans, Ashcroft replied that the September
attacks had been aimed at "the entire civilized world . . . . It is
not how other countries can serve the United States. The question
is how we . . . can serve each other in a war against those who
would destroy the things in which we believe, namely freedom, human
dignity, liberty and opportunity."
Nonsense. Al-Qaida's September attacks were aimed at the United
States because the militants who planned them hate America's
policies, and even its presence, in the Arab world where they come
from. They were wicked men, but they didn't spend one second
considering whether they should attack Sweden, Japan, Brazil or
anywhere else in the "civilized world."
As for "freedom, human dignity, liberty and opportunity," the
Al-Qaida terrorists couldn't care less. They are simply not
interested in America's domestic arrangements, so long as it goes
away and leaves them free to reshape the Middle East in their own
warped image. It won't, so it's going to have to fight them, but
this is really about regional politics, not high ideology (as the
United States pretends) or religion (as Al-Qaida pretends).
Also on May 13, in New York City, Democratic Sen. Charles Schumer
was issuing hysterical warnings about terrorists smuggling nuclear
weapons into the United States: "We probably have a year or two
before any terrorist gets hold of such a device and smuggles it
in." Who told him that? The risk of some terrorist getting control
of a nuclear weapon and smuggling it into a U.S. port has existed
ever since the '60s, but it has always been tiny - and it hasn't
changed a bit in all that time.
Taken a bit at a time, none of this foolishness is very harmful.
Cumulatively, however, the obsession with terrorism is distorting
American policies, distracting the U.S. government from its real
priorities, and driving everybody else crazy. It's time to get over
it.
- Gwynne Dyer is a London-based independent journalist and
historian whose articles are published in 45 countries.

Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION

Load-Date: November 20, 2002


End of Document