BOSNIANS GET ISLAM'S SUPPORT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 16, 1994, Friday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 421 words
Dateline: CASABLANCA, MOROCCO
Body


Islamic leaders Thursday urged military aid for Bosnia's Muslims and vowed to combat religious fanaticism.
But appeals for unity were undercut by rifts among Arab participants that remained unresolved at the close of a three-day summit of the 52-member Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Jordan's King Hussein failed to gain a mention in the final document on Jordan's role in overseeing Muslim holy sites in east Jerusalem. Palestinians objected out of fear it would weaken their claim to sovereignty over that sector of the city.
Iraq was angered by a resolution calling for it to refrain from menacing its neighbors and to comply with U.N. resolutions stemming from its 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
"Despite all the goodwill efforts, we regrettably found that the Gulf war has left an open wound which has to be healed," said Morocco's King Hassan II.
Participants, who came from Europe, Asia and Africa, found some common ground. They agreed on a 182-article communique on issues ranging from terrorism in the Islamic world to technology and culture.
The plight of Bosnian Muslims united leaders. Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic attended as an observer, and his government received pledges of $ 300,000 to $ 5 million from each Islamic state.
The Bosnia resolution went beyond the expected call to lift the arms embargo. The Islamic states said they would cooperate with any U.N. members "who exhibit a willingness on their own initiative to provide Bosnia with the means for self-defense."
They renewed a call to reinforce U.N. peacekeepering forces with Muslim troops, a suggestion rejected by Western countries, which fear it could allow fundamentalist countries like Iran to gain a foothold in Europe.
The Islamic leaders called for streamlining procedures to allow military support, including air attacks, to protect peacekeeping troops and civilians against Serbian attacks.
The leaders also approved a separate six-page document - the Casablanca Declaration - which complained about "a ferocious campaign to tarnish Islam," denounced "extremism and religious fanaticism" and called for a media effort to "rectify misconceptions" that have associated Islam with violence.
It condemned terrorism as "a blatant disgrace to Islamic teachings and a violation of our values, culture and heritage."
The resolutions on the Middle East made no mention of the boycott of Israel, which many Islamic states have pledged to honor until peace talks are concluded.
Participants agreed to hold the next summit in Tehran, Iran, in December 1997.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo By AP - French U.N. soldiers carry bread at their base in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, on Thursday. Two U.N. convoys delayed by Serbs arrived in Sarajevo Wednesday carrying 239 tons of food.

Load-Date: December 20, 1994


End of Document