Bosnians support strikes - Local immigrants remember terrorism in their homeland  
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 25, 1999, Thursday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 433 words
Byline: CHARLOTTE FERRELL SMITH
Body


Arsen Balunovic, who knows firsthand about the horrors of terrorism,
hopes airstrikes on Yugoslavia will be successful.
But he has his doubts about how speedy that success may be. For one
thing, the geography of the land will make it difficult for NATO
forces to destroy weapons hidden in valleys and woods.
"Mr. (Yugoslav President Slobodan) Milosevic will learn very slow," he
said. "He don't care how much soldiers he lose."
Balunovic's family was one of several brought to West Virginia from
war-torn Bosnia through efforts of the Unitarian-Universalist
Fellowship of Kanawha Valley.
He has been in Charleston for more than a year but still carries
mental and physical scars inflicted when Serbs broke into his home.
His heart aches for friends and relatives now living in a city under
Serb control, although he declined to say exactly where they reside.
He remains riveted to news accounts of NATO airstrikes on Yugoslavia.
He compared terrorism in Bosnia to that in Kosovo.
"I think the situation is the same," he said. "The Serb communists do
not respect any other nationality or religion. They do not respect
others' ways of life."
Balunovic said in an earlier interview that many people think ethnic
cleansing means only killing. But he explained it also means people
have no work or freedom and are physically beaten.
Balunovic, who apologizes for his still broken English, conveys a
strong message: terrorism is wrong and it must be stopped.
He is worried that people he loves may be in danger.
"I'm concerned about my mother, cousins and friends," he said.
Meanwhile, Nevzeta Nikocevic of Charleston is a former resident of
Bosnia who has lived in West Virginia for three years.
She has been trying to reach relatives in Kosovo for days.
"We can't reach anybody," said Nikocevic with deep concern seeping
into her thick accent.
She believes the airstrikes were necessary but long overdue. The
situation should have been halted long ago before the loss of so many
lives, she said.
"I think U.S. do right things," she said. "They have to be done
earlier. It was clear aggression, ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. World is
lucky to have someone who can stop this violation.
"We are lucky we are here."
Asked what she thinks the outcome of the airstrikes will be, Nikocevic
said, "I cannot predict."
In the Kosovo region, a civil war between Yugoslav forces and ethnic
Albanian rebels has taken a toll of 2,000 lives within a year. Another
400,000 have been left homeless.
NATO airstrikes were launched after diplomatic efforts failed to
persuade Milosevic to accept terms of peace.
Writer Charlotte Ferrell Smith can be reached at
348-1246.

Load-Date: March 26, 1999


End of Document