BOSNIA TURNS OVER TERRORISM SUSPECTS TO U.S.
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 19, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 454 words
Byline: ALEXANDER S. DRAGICEVIC, Associated Press writer
Body


SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina -- Bosnia gave six Algerians suspected of having terrorist links to U.S. military authorities early Friday, despite a ruling by the country's highest court that they be released.
The men, who were arrested by Bosnia based on U.S. intelligence information after the Sept. 11 attacks, are now in the custody of U.S. forces, said Naval Cmdr. Rex Totty, a spokesman for the U.S. European Command in Stuttgart, Germany.
A senior U.S. official in Europe, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they will be taken within days to the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where dozens of al-Qaida and Taliban prisoners are detained.
"We don't want them to stay in the theater very long," the official said.
Most of the men worked for Islamic humanitarian agencies in Bosnia, and all had Bosnian citizenship until it was revoked when they were jailed. One also had a Yemeni passport, officials said. They are suspected on involvement with Islamic militant groups, either Algeria's Armed Islamic Group or Egypt's al-Gamaa al-Islamiya.
Bosnia's highest court Thursday ordered the Algerians released for lack of evidence, prompting the United States to request that they be handed over to its custody. U.S. and Bosnian authorities believe the six "still pose a significant threat," a U.S. military statement said.
The State Department, meanwhile, commended the Bosnia government for handing over the suspects. Spokeswoman Lynn L. Cassel called it "a significant contribution to the war on terrorism."
The U.S. official said the suspects posed a credible security threat to U.S. personnel and facilities and to the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Bosnian prosecutors had asked the United States to provide evidence against the suspects. But U.S. officials refused, saying the intelligence information was too sensitive, and asked the Bosnians to find evidence themselves, a senior U.S. official said.
"We do have a good cooperation with the authorities here, but we can't share everything we have," the official said.
The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights had criticized the men's detention without charges or evidence against them.
It was not immediately clear where the men are. U.S. Maj. Mike Odom, spokesman for the NATO-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia, would only say the six were taken to a "secure location."
The U.S. Embassy in Sarajevo said Friday that the six suspects "will be treated humanely and in accordance with international law."
The handover Friday came after an all-night standoff outside the jail in Sarajevo where the men had been held since October.
Hours after the court's order, crowds formed outside the holding facility. Police using batons dispersed the crowd, and the men were driven away.

Load-Date: January 20, 2002


End of Document