Boston Seen Through a Prism of Broken Glass
The Forward
April 26, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Forward Forum; Pg. 8
Length: 1042 words
Byline: 
Contact J. J. Goldberg at
Body


Moments after the bombs exploded on  Monday, April 15 along the Boston  Marathon route, it was already clear  what the attack's main goal was. It was a  deliberate assault on America's public order  and national self-confidence. That's the purpose  of all terrorist actions, whoever their  perpetrators. They're intended to terrorize,  to unsettle.
That's why President Obama declared  the next morning that beyond the certainty  that the crime would be solved, we also  know this: The American people refuse to be
terrorized.  Less obvious was
the attack's secondary  impact. Intentionally or  not, the bombing opened  a new front in America's  ongoing culture wars.  Within minutes of the  blasts, the Twittersphere  came alive with fingerpointing  and outraged  denials. The right flatly
declared it to be jihadi terrorism. The left just  as insistently named other possible culprits  on the domestic far-right. Each side's assumptions  left the other righteously appalled.
Liberals noted the symbolic timing of the  attack, coinciding with Tax Day, Patriot Day  and the approaching anniversary of the deadly  1995 Oklahoma City bombing, all red meat  to far-right extremists. Conservatives simply  asserted what was obvious  to them, anyway   given the past decade's headlines, the  upheavals in the Muslim world and repeated  attacks on American targets.
Next came indignation. The left accused the  right of bigotry for rushing to blame Muslims  before any facts were known. The right professed  shock at the left's politically correct  denial of the obvious and decried its tarring  of patriots and anti-tax protesters  that is,  the Republican base.
First out of the box was the New York Post,  which reported an hour after the explosions  that Boston police were holding a Saudi suspect.  Boston police immediately disavowed  the report. It later emerged that a Saudi  national had been questioned but wasn't a  suspect. By then, however, the Post version  had gone viral: More than 3,000 Facebook  posts, and 10,000 tweets. Some right-wing  websites were hinting at a police cover-up.
Some of the indignation reached almost  comical proportions. MSNBC host Rachel  Maddow on Monday evening listed past terrorism  cases that had been cracked by the federal  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms,  went on to lament that the bureau hasn't  had a director for six years because of Senate  obstruction, hinting that this might hamper  the Boston investigation  and then promptly  said she didn't want to politicize the crisis.
Bill O'Reilly attacked Obama for calling  the attack a tragedy rather than terrorism  at his Monday press conference, even  though investigators still weren't sure what  happened, much less how to classify it. By  Tuesday morning, commentators from Obama  on down were calling it terrorism. Also, a  tragedy.
Amid the fireworks came endless chatter  about Americans coming together in crisis. In  a way, we did: First responders and bystanders  leapt forward in extraordinary acts of  heroism, trauma surgeons performed miracles,  Bostonians donated blood, ordinary  Americans everywhere watched and prayed.
In the moment, that is, we came together  and refused to be terrorized. It was afterward,
Partisan attacks began  almost right away.
as we grappled with what happened and why,  that we came apart.
The debate isn't new. It's been percolating  for decades. It resurfaces whenever an attack  occurs without an obvious perpetrator, and  again when a new report attempts to analyze  the threats.
Conservatives erupted in April 2009 over  a Homeland Security report on right-wing  extremism, begun under the Bush administration,  that cited rising threats following the  economic downturn and election of a black  president. Under pressure, Homeland Security  secretary Janet Napolitano finally withdrew  the report and reassigned all but one of her  domestic terrorism investigators.
In July 2012, House Republicans hammered  Napolitano over a training program that examined  right-wing threats alongside Muslim  extremism. One congressman, Paul Broun  of Georgia, complained that security officers  were being taught to look for gun-owner,  Christian-conservative, pro-life types. That's  me, Broun said. How are you going to prevent  me from being identified as a terrorist?
In 2010, liberals protested a House committee  hearing on extremism among American  Muslims, saying it unfairly tarred an entire  faith. Dozens of federal, state and local law  enforcement agencies have been accused  since 2001 of profiling Muslims and spying  on mosques. Publicly, police said they weren't  spying. Privately, they said that's how they  catch terrorists.
The numbers suggest that both sides are correct.  Available statistics are wildly conflicting,  depending on who's counting and what's  included, but it appears that since 2001, jihadist-inspired American Muslim terrorists have  carried out between five and 10 attacks, killing  either 17 or 33 people. (The higher numbers  include killers who spouted vague Islamist  ideology, notably the so-called Beltway Sniper  who killed 11 people in 2002.)
In all, between 150 and 172 jihadist terror  suspects have been arrested. Significantly,  about 45 other attacks were foiled in that period.  Some interdictions resulted from intelligence  work, others from Muslim community  cooperation. That spotlights a dilemma in  domestic espionage: It saves some lives, but  threatens others by undermining community  trust.
In the same period, right-wing domestic terrorists  were responsible for at least 16 lethal  attacks resulting in 40 deaths. They include  white supremacist, anti-government and antiabortion  extremists. Non-lethal incidents  include at least nine bomb and arson attacks  on abortion clinics.
A dozen others, all domestic right-wingers,  were arrested for collecting chemical, biological  or nuclear weaponry. In all some 300  far-right terrorists and plotters were arrested.  Only a handful of left-wing terror acts  occurred, mainly environmental or animal-rights,  none lethal.
America has two distinct terrorism problems.  Both are serious, but neither poses a  strategic, existential threat. Our greatest danger  is within ourselves: our inability to listen  to each other.

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: April 29, 2013


End of Document