Boston Massacre
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
April 16, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 12
Length: 375 words
Byline: In Our View
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Here are the pictures; see for yourself.
Red blood spat over pavement and shattered glass. Plastic drink bottles, sunglasses, a shoe with something protruding from it.
Bali and Tel Aviv. Basra and Sarajevo. Beirut.
Boston.
Terrorism works by indignity. The soldier in battle kills you before you can kill him; the mugger may kill you for your money. The terrorist seeks nothing from you but your death. Not your vote, not your money, not your changed mind.
To the terrorist, the dead and maimed are mere props. The target is the audience who will be psychologically traumatized.
That would be us. Whoever did this wishes us to react in certain ways. Let us disappoint him.
One commentator Monday called the Boston Marathon a "perfect target for the kind of twisted mind that wants to create maximum shock value. What makes the event so special is what makes it so vulnerable."
That is true of all of America.
Let us remember past panicked reactions that turned out to be mistakes, often well-intentioned, and after these fresh deaths, let us resolve to be more American, not less so.
The terrorist seeks to achieve a political end primarily by using violence against civilians and non-combatants, with the primary aim of creating a psychology of fear and an awareness of threat in the body of people the terrorist wishes to manipulate.
Terrorism's victims are taken to death with full human deliberation and will and craft. But they are taken at random. To the terrorist, you and your children are living corpses waiting to be arranged for the camera in the most dramatic poses.
But being terrorized is not a requirement.
On Sept. 11, 2001, firefighters ran to towers that rained molten metal and flaming people like tears. They chose to not be terrorized. Monday, a surgeon from Kansas who had finished the 26-mile race moments before the blasts ran to help with the triage. He chose, too.
The modern marathon race is called that from the name of the great battle of 490 B.C., when the Athenians and their handful of neighbor-allies turned back the mighty Persian invasion that could have rung down the curtain on Western civilization when it had barely opened.
From that Marathon to this, let the dead and our response testify to the endurance of our human values. 

Load-Date: April 16, 2013


End of Document