BOSTON UPS 4TH SECURITY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
July 4, 2013 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5
Length: 549 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


BOSTON -- For many New Englanders, the Fourth of July means the Boston Pops performing the "1812 Overture" on the Charles River Esplanade and fireworks booming overhead.
This year, it's also the city's first large public gathering since the Boston Marathon bombings -- an attack authorities said the suspects first considered staging on Independence Day.
But as law enforcement officials put a ramped-up security plan in place Wednesday, many people in Boston said they wouldn't give in to fear of terrorism by changing their plans or staying away from public celebrations.
Boston Pops conductor Keith Lockhart said the tight security reminded him of what it was like during the city's first July Fourth celebration following the Sept. 11 attacks. He said before then, the thought of having bomb-sniffing dogs at the Esplanade was odd.
"The core of terrorism is psychological. I think this is a perfect time to come together as Bostonians," he said. "Events are a good way to move on from events like what happened."
Oregon experiments
SALEM, Ore. -- Going to college can seem like a choice between impossibly high payments while in school or a crushing debt load for years afterward, but one state is experimenting with a third way.
This week, the Oregon Legislature approved a plan that could allow students to attend state colleges without paying tuition or taking out traditional loans. Instead, they would commit a small percentage of their future incomes to repaying the state; those who earn very little would pay very little.
While the approach has been used in Australia, national education groups say they do not know of any U.S. university trying it.
Grief, patriotism in Ariz.
PRESCOTT, Ariz. -- The notoriously rambunctious annual rodeo contest in Prescott added a solemn new ritual this week: a cowboy leading a riderless horse around the outdoor arena, a fire helmet sitting on its saddle, fire boots resting in the stirrups.
Spectators in this Old West town of 40,000 placed straw hats over hearts and cried quietly during the tribute to the 19 firefighters who were killed Sunday, then went on to drink, laugh and cheer as heartily as the miners and ranchers who patronized the arena in the 1800s.
Emotional whiplash has become a matter of course here as residents try to move on and enjoy the biggest tourism week of the year, while also mourning the men who were the town's pride.
Zimmerman trial
SANFORD, Fla. -- As George Zimmerman's second-degree murder trial entered its eighth day Wednesday at the Seminole County Courthouse, jurors heard from a military prosecutor with the Army who taught a college class that delved into Florida's Stand Your Ground law.
Capt. Alexis Francisco Carter said Mr. Zimmerman stood out for his diligence in the course and earned an A, but last summer, Mr. Zimmerman told the Fox News Channel that he had never heard of the expansive and controversial law.
Jurors also heard from Anthony Gorgone, a crime lab analyst with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, who testified that he found no traces of Mr. Zimmerman's DNA in scrapings taken from Martin's fingernails. DNA belonging to Mr. Zimmerman was found on the grip of his gun. (DNA from a second person was also found on the grip, Mr. Gorgone testified, but it was ruled out that it came from Martin).

Load-Date: July 6, 2013


End of Document