Boston chief wasn't told FBI got Tsarnaev warning
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 10, 2013 Friday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 721 words
Byline: By ALICIA A. CALDWELL Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON • FBI agents did not tell Boston police they had received warnings from Russia's government in 2011 about suspected bomber Tamerlan Tsarnaev and had performed a cursory investigation, Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis told Congress on Thursday, in the first hearing into last month's terrorist attack on the Boston Marathon.
Davis said that none of four people he had assigned to the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force was aware that the FBI investigated the vague warning, found nothing and had closed the file. One of his detectives was in the dark despite being assigned to the unit that investigated Tsarnaev, Davis said.
"They tell me they received no word about that individual prior to the bombing," Davis said.
Davis said he would have liked to have known but conceded that it might not have prevented the attack. The commissioner said his detectives would have wanted to interview Tsarnaev.
"The FBI did that, and they closed the case out," he said. "I can't say I would've come to a different conclusion based on the information at the time."
The House Homeland Security Committee hearing came less than three weeks after Tsarnaev died in a police shootout. His brother, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, was arrested and faces federal terrorism charges.
The committee chairman, Rep. Michael McCaul, R-Texas, said the hearing will be the first in a series to review the government's initial response, ask what information authorities received about the brothers before the bombings and whether they handled it correctly.
The hearing began laying the groundwork for an expected push for more counterterrorism money. Both Davis and Kurt Schwartz, the Massachusetts homeland security chief, praised federal grants that for years have kept cities flush with money for equipment and manpower.
"People are alive today" because of money for training and equipment, Schwartz said.
McCaul and Rep. Bennie Thompson, the top Democrat on the committee, also spoke of the importance of federal money, as did former Sen. Joe Lieberman, one of the founders of the Department of Homeland Security, who took a new seat as a congressional witness.
Lieberman said it would have been possible, albeit difficult, to have prevented the bombing. He said the U.S. should have shared threat information with state and local law enforcement.
"When you're dealing with homegrown radicals, the community around them is going to be your first line of defense," Lieberman said. "State and local law enforcement will always have a better knowledge of the neighborhood, the institutions the people are going to be involved with."
Finish line warning
Five days before two bombs tore through crowds at the Boston Marathon, an intelligence report identified the finish line of the race as an "area of increased vulnerability" and warned Boston police that extremists may use "small scale bombings" to attack spectators and runners at the event.
The 18-page report was written by the Boston Regional Intelligence Center, a command center funded in part by the Department of Homeland Security that helps disseminate intelligence information to local police and first responders.
The "joint special event assessment" is dated April 10. It notes that at the time there was "no credible, specific information indicating an imminent threat" to the race.
"The FBI has not identified any specific lone offender or extremist group who pose a threat to the Boston marathon," the report reads.
Tsarnaev buried
The body of Boston Marathon bombing suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev has been buried in an undisclosed location outside the city of Worcester, where it had been held for a week at a funeral home, police said Thursday.
"As a result of our public appeal for help, a courageous and compassionate individual came forward to provide the assistance needed to properly bury the deceased," Worcester police said in a statement.
Meanwhile, Tsarnaev's widow continues to face questions from federal authorities and has hired a criminal lawyer with experience defending terrorism cases. She has not been charged with a crime.
Katherine Russell added New York lawyer Joshua Dratel to her legal team, her attorney Amato DeLuca said Wednesday. Dratel has represented a number of terrorism suspects in federal courts and military commissions.
The Tribune Washington Bureau contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
 A poster board with photos of those who died in the Boston Marathon bombing is put away during the House Homeland Security Committee at a hearing on "The Boston Bombings: A First Look," on Capitol Hill in Washington, Thursday, May 9, 2013. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)  Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis testifies before the House Homeland Security Committee at a hearing on "The Boston Bombings: A First Look," on Capitol Hill in Washington, Thursday, May 9, 2013. Former Sen. Joeseph Lieberman, I-Conn., sits at left, and photos of those who were killed at the Boston Marathon bombing are at right. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)  FILE - In this April 22, 2013, file photo, Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis salutes the American flag during a ceremony at the blast site on Boylston Street between Dartmouth and Exeter Streets near the Boston Marathon finish line in Boston. Davis will tell a lawmakers in a hearing on Washington on May 9 that government should tighten security around celebratory public events and consider using more undercover officers and technology, including surveillance cameras _ but only in ways that don't run afoul of civil liberties. (AP Photo/Robert F. Bukaty, File)  Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis is applauded by former Sen. Joesph Lieberman, I-Conn., as he is introduced before testifying at the House Homeland Security Committee hearing on "The Boston Bombings: A First Look," on Capitol Hill in Washington, Thursday, May 9, 2013. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)  Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis, center, listens to opening statements during the House Homeland Security Committee hearing on "The Boston Bombings: A First Look," on Capitol Hill in Washington, Thursday, May 9, 2013. Former Sen. Joseph Lieberman, I-Conn., is at left and Massachusetts Undersecretary for Homeland Security Director Kurt Schwartz, sits at right. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)  Boston Police Commissioner Edward Davis testifies before the House Homeland Security Committee at a hearing on "The Boston Bombings: A First Look," on Capitol Hill in Washington, Thursday, May 9, 2013. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh) 

Load-Date: May 10, 2013


End of Document