Boston officials scapegoat toons
University Wire
February 2, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 Badger Herald via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 763 words
Byline: By Andrew Wagner, Badger Herald; SOURCE: U. Wisconsin
Dateline: MADISON, Wis. 
Body


Are people scared by blinking electronic signs that flick them off? Have you ever wanted to see a city go completely haywire? If you answered "Yes" to either of these questions, I kindly direct your attention to events that occurred in Boston this past Wednesday.
During that day, Boston saw an innocent and benign marketing stunt turn into what was considered a potential act of terrorism by authorities.
This particularly idiotic episode of terrorism-fearing panic started with the Adult Swim television show "Aqua Teen Hunger Force." This show appears on the same channel as Cartoon Network, but later at night. I've seen this particular show a couple times myself during late-night channel surfing adventures. In my opinion, there never seemed to be anything particularly threatening or dangerous about it. Unfortunately for Boston, they do not share my opinion of the show.
The uproar in Boston began Wednesday afternoon. Apparently, there were several calls to the Boston Police Department reporting the presence of suspicious packages attached to buildings and bridges. What did these turn out to be? They were nothing more than a battery and a design of blinking light bulbs arranged in the shape of an Aqua Teen Hunger Force character called a "Mooninite." The only "threatening" thing about them might be the fact that they flick off passersby. Turner Broadcasting, the company that owns Adult Swim, has said the signs were a simple marketing campaign. Yet somehow, several Boston residents decided they were bombs.
Following these phone calls, police dispatched bomb squads to check out the devices. According to an Associated Press news report, the scare ended up shutting down several bridges and cost the city more than $750,000. One important thing to note is that Boston is the only city that experienced this panic. In response to the situation in Boston, Turner Broadcasting said the signs had been in place in a ten different American cities for the past two to three weeks.
If Boston's counter-terrorism response to a cartoon wasn't funny enough, the idiotic statements from Massachusetts governmental figures only compound their problem. Boston Mayor Thomas Menino said, "It is outrageous, in a post 9/11 world, that a company would use this type of marketing scheme." Sadly invoking Sept. 11 in his attempt to cover up the overreaction comes off as just plain dumb. Another stupid comment comes from Ed Markey, a Massachusetts congressman. He told CNN, "It would be hard to dream up a more appalling publicity stunt." Sorry, Mr. Markey, but I can think up quite a few worse publicity stunts. The kicker comes from the district attorney in this case. Suffolk County District Attorney Daniel Conley told the Associated Press, "Everyone can play a part by holding Turner Broadcasting to account for today's events." So if I'm to get this straight, Turner Broadcasting is at fault because Boston's police force overreacted to some blinking light signs? This laughingstock situation in Boston shows the reason why the all-out anti-terrorism mentality of many governmental figures is blind and dim-witted.
The sad part of this case is the way Massachusetts is treating Peter Berdovsky and Sean Stevens, the two men hired to put up the signs. Now, Massachusetts Assistant Attorney General John Grossman is characterizing their actions as malicious, saying, "It's clear the intent was to get attention by causing fear and unrest that there was a bomb in that location." The men have even been charged with felonies for the incident. I don't think the attorney general has much of a case, as the men were hired to market a show, not create a bomb scare. That's clearly evident by the fact that no one worried about the signs for at least two weeks.
The folly of Boston's overreaction to this marketing ploy is clear. The city incurred massive unnecessary expenses and pointlessly disrupted daily life while attempting to find and disarm the "Mooninites." Furthermore, attempting to blame Turner Broadcasting and its employees for the incident after the signs were up for at least two weeks is utterly ridiculous. Instead, the Boston Police Department needs to look at revising its response to incidents like this, especially once it is apparently not terrorism. As for the danger of real terrorism, I wonder why terrorists would even bother with explosives when a couple of boxes with wires on them can throw an entire city into chaos.
Andrew Wagner (awagner@badgerherald.com) is a sophomore majoring in computer science and political science.
(C) 2007 Badger Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 2007


End of Document