BOTCHED ANTI-TERRORISM RAID BLAMED ON BRITAIN'S ASYLUM POLICY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 17, 2003 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 438 words
Byline: SARAH LYALL, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: MANCHESTER, England
Body


Along the peacefully multiracial streets of the Crumpsall neighborhood yesterday, residents generally agreed about who was really to blame for the stabbing death on Tuesday of a local detective in a botched anti-terrorism operation.
 The culprit was the government, the residents said, with its habit of harboring and even cosseting terrorists who come to Britain in the guise of asylum seekers.
 "I think they should completely cut them off," said Razia Afzal, 41, whose family moved to Manchester from Pakistan in the 1960s after her father found work in a local textile mill. "We see these people now, and they get houses, money and all the benefits of people who've been living here and paying taxes for two and three generations."
Three men, described as Algerians ages 23, 27 and 29, were arrested on Tuesday after the raid that left Detective Constable Stephen Oake dead and four other officers injured in a frenzied knife attack in a one-bedroom apartment on Crumpsall Lane. The tenant of the apartment -- the 23-year-old suspect -- was a failed asylum seeker, the authorities said, whose rent of about $113 a month was reportedly being paid by the local council.
 Targeted for detention as a possible threat to national security under Britain's sweeping anti-terrorism laws, he was the original focus of the police operation. But when officials chanced upon the two other men in his apartment on Tuesday afternoon, they recognized one as a suspect connected to last week's discovery of the deadly toxin ricin in an apartment in London. All three are in police custody and awaiting charges, one in connection with Oake's murder.
 The police announced yesterday that a fourth Algerian, 32 years old, had been arrested in Manchester on suspicion of terrorism. But they did not reveal whether the arrest was linked specifically to the ricin investigation.
 That one of the suspects was even living in an apartment in this neighborhood at all is a sign of how much things have changed in Manchester over the years.
 When Margaret Calvert moved here half a century ago, it was a predominantly Jewish community, with leafy suburban streets and enormous one-family houses stocked with affluent residents and their servants. Although there is still a large population of Jews and other white Britons, the neighborhood is now also home to people from a number of ethnic minority groups, many of them of Pakistani or Bangladeshi descent.
 The once-posh buildings have been converted into group homes, single-room-occupancy hotels and apartment houses where transients can rent one-bedroom homes cheaply, quickly and with a minimum of fuss.

Load-Date: January 18, 2003


End of Document