Both sides mark Roe v. Wade;
Condemnation of the ruling and of terrorism near abortion clinics take the spotlight.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 23, 1997, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 03A
Length: 529 words
Byline: FROM OUR NEWS SERVICES
Body


The 24th anniversary of the Supreme Court's landmark decision legalizing abortion was marked Wednesday by protest, a bomb scare and condemnation of recent anti-abortion terrorism in Atlanta and Oklahoma.
"To those who committed the horrible deeds of Tulsa and Atlanta, I say this . . . the American people will not tolerate your cowardly crusade," Vice President Al Gore said of recent abortion clinic bombings in those cities.
As he and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke to the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, tens of thousands of abortion opponents rallied near the White House, then marched to Capitol Hill to protest the Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade decision.
In Atlanta, less than a week after two bombs exploded at a Sandy Springs abortion clinic, about 500 sign-carrying anti-abortion demonstrators flocked to the Capitol steps Wednesday to condemn the violence and to peacefully protest legalized abortion.
A block away, a small but vocal group of abortion-rights supporters blamed the anti-abortion activists for the violence.
Police stepped up security, closing streets and limiting access to Capitol buildings during the rallies, monitoring the crowd on foot, on horseback, on motorcycles and in patrol cars.
Gen Wilson, president of Georgia Right To Life, drew applause and shouts of "Amen" when she condemned the violence of Thursday's bombings at the Sandy Springs abortion clinic that injured seven people.
 
"Violence, bombings, terrorism are not pro-life," Wilson said.
The anti-abortion activists, many with teens and toddlers in tow, sang hymns and waved red "Stop Abortion Now" placards as they cheered speakers.
Georgia Right To Life sold "pro-life materials" such as 50-cent plastic fetuses, $ 1 teddy bear magnets that read "My Mom Chose Life," and $ 1 bumper stickers that read "Only Big Babies are Pro-Choice."
A Dayton, Ohio, nurse who is traveling the country condemning what are sometimes described as partial-birth abortions told the crowd she supported abortion until she witnessed three abortions performed after the first trimester.
"I actually saw babies pulled and ripped from limb to limb that were alive and moving," Brenda Pratt Shafer said. "It was horrible."
Conservative Georgia lawmakers are pushing a bill to ban late-term abortions and impose criminal sanctions against doctors who perform them. The chairman of the House Judiciary Committee has called the bill unnecessary, saying Georgia law already severely restricts abortions after the first trimester.
The Washington ceremonies got off to a shaky start several hours before the speeches when a worker at the hotel where Gore and Clinton appeared found a small fusing device used in grenade training. The device, with less force than many firecrackers, went off in the employee's hand two blocks from the hotel.
Police said there was no evidence the incident was related to the abortion controversy, even though it was found within a block of a Planned Parenthood clinic.
At a rally on the Ellipse, freshman Rep. Kenny Hulshof (R-Mo.) voiced concern that Gore and Hillary Clinton would "point to random acts of violence in an effort to taint our worthy cause."

Graphic

 
Photo: Mary Lou Greenberg (above), who does escort work at New York
 abortion clinics, Wednesday supports abortion rights as abortion
 opponents leave a Mass for the unborn at the Shrine of the Immaculate
 Conception in Atlanta. / JOHN SPINK / Staff
 Photo: Other abortion foes (below) march in Washington. / RUTH FREMSON /
 Associated Press

Load-Date: January 24, 1997


End of Document