BOTH RUSSIAN PLANES VICTIMIZED BY TERRORISM, EVIDENCE REVEALS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 29, 2004 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 601 words
Byline: ALEX RODRIGUEZ, CHICAGO TRIBUNE
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


Traces of explosives were found amid the wreckage of the second of two Russian airliners that crashed almost simultaneously last week, investigators said yesterday, giving the clearest indication yet that both disasters were the result of a coordinated terrorist act.
 Small amounts of an explosive known as hexogen were found on fragments of the Tupolev-134 jetliner that plummeted to the ground 120 miles south of Moscow late Tuesday, Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) spokesman, Sergei Ignatchenko, told the Russian news agency Interfax.
 On Friday, Russian investigators said traces of the same explosive agent were found on the fuselage debris of a Tupolev-154 airliner that crashed in southern Russia at nearly the same time the other jet crashed.
The crashes killed 90 passengers and crew. Both flights had departed from Moscow's Domodedovo International Airport within about an hour of each other. The Tupolev-154 jet was bound for the Black Sea resort of Sochi and crashed 500 miles south of Moscow. The Tupolev-134 aircraft was on its way to Volgograd, another southern Russian city, when it crashed near Tula.
 The crashes have sent shudders through a country that had grown accustomed to the spillover of violence from the breakaway southern republic of Chechnya but had yet to see terrorism manifest itself in the form of coordinated hijackings. Earlier last week, one Russian newspaper referred to the tragedies as Russia's "Sept. 11."
 Separatists in war-torn Chechnya have been fighting to break off their mountain province from the rest of Russia for the past decade. Chechen guerrillas have been blamed for a host of terrorist acts in southern Russia and in Moscow in recent years that have killed hundreds.
 Russian investigators are focusing their attention on two Chechen women who were aboard each airliner. No relatives of either contacted authorities after the crashes.
 The Russian newspaper Izvestia reported yesterday that one of the women, Aminat Nagayeva, was a 27-year-old Chechen market vendor whose brother had disappeared several years ago and was believed to have been captured by Russian forces. She bought her ticket for the Volgograd-bound flight an hour before takeoff.
 Izvestia said Chechnya's Interior Ministry is investigating Nagayeva and a Chechen woman with the surname Dzhebirkhanova who was aboard to Sochi-bound flight. That woman also bought her ticket just before the flight, The Associated Press reported.
 The Kremlin's reaction to the discovery of explosives aboard both aircraft has been subdued, a sharp contrast with previous large-scale terrorist acts when Russian President Vladimir Putin quickly blamed Chechen separatists and vowed harsh clampdowns on Chechens throughout Russia.
 In the wake of the airliner crashes, the Kremlin has veered away from calling the disasters terrorist acts, instead confining itself to calls for stricter security measures at Russia's regional and international airports. Putin handed responsibility for security at airports over to the country's Interior Ministry.
 In addition, Ignatchenko told Interfax that, "on instructions from the president, the FSB is studying international experience of combating terrorism on air transport."
 He added that the intelligence agency would focus on tactics used by Israeli aviation security.
 Aviation security experts say Russia has lacked the manpower and money to properly safeguard its civil aviation system from terrorism. Yesterday, Russian officials said they would require that a passenger's passport data, which includes place of birth, appear on his or her airline ticket.

Load-Date: August 31, 2004


End of Document