Both Israel, Palestinians are engaged in terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
May 25, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A14
Length: 295 words
Body


Questions about terrorism and justice: The Old Testament indicates that terrorists/sinners were punished by death along with killing their children, parents, grandparents and farm animals, in addition to destroying their homes. This was deemed justice for the time, but should it be deemed present-day justice?
Palestinian terrorists have attacked Israel on numerous occasions. Israel has responded by killing many more times as many Palestinians.
Israel has now invaded Palestine with troops, planes, bombs, tanks and bulldozers killing a few terrorists, along with innocent others, but also crushing homes, stores, schools, hospitals, businesses, utilities, sewer lines and water lines. They totally demolished the homeland so that the innocent remaining men, women and children will be without homes, food, livelihoods, sanitation - total poverty.
If life has been made hopeless for the Palestinians, aren't they more apt to provide more suicide bombers for both Israel and the U.S.A.?
By war, over 30 years ago, Israel took Palestinian lands and in the interim has bulldozed Palestinian homes therein and built subdivisions and homes for Israel. Over three U.S. presidents and the United Nations have directed Israel to return those lands to the Palestinians, as required by international law, to no avail.
The U.S.A. has provided Israel with the planes, bombs, tanks, bulldozers and military equipment for Israel's invasions, along with $3 billion annual expense money. The Palestinians' defense is limited to small arms, rocks and suicide bombs.
Does Israel plan to eventually build Israeli homes on the Palestinian lands it has just made uninhabitable for the Palestinians?
Isn't this extreme terrorism on both sides and a lack of justice for each?
George E. Brazitis
Champaign

Load-Date: May 29, 2002


End of Document