Bottom Feeders
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 10, 2009 Saturday
Final Edition


Copyright 2009 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 354 words
Body


 In their 2000 platforms neither Republicans nor Democrats addressed national security until the final paragraphs. The issue belonged at the top.
 When one party finally discussed terrorism, it had this to say:
 "Whether terrorism is sponsored by a foreign nation or inspired by a single fanatic individual, such as Osama bin Laden, Forward Engagement requires trying to disrupt terrorist networks, even before they are ready to attack. We must improve coordination internationally and domestically to share intelligence and develop operational plans. We must continue the comprehensive approach that has resulted in the development of a national counter-terrorism strategy involving all arms and levels of our government. We must continue to target terrorist finances, break up support cells, and disrupt training. And we must close avenues of cyber-attack by improving the security of the Internet and the computers upon which our digital economy exists."
 The other party talked about terrorism generally - yet despite taking a relatively hard line, did not mention bin Laden by name. Although both platforms were deficient, the plank that included bin Laden was superior to the plank that did not. In which document did the language occur? The Democratic.
* * * *
 After admitting that the operation has proved more difficult than advertised, defenders of the invasion of Iraq counter that at least the administration has kept the U.S. safe from a domestic terrorist strike since 2001. We have made the argument ourselves and continue to believe it makes a valid point. The point, alas, might not be so compelling as it appears.
 The first attack on the Twin Towers occurred in 1993. No further stateside enormities took place prior to 9/11. The U.S. suffered attacks overseas - against the Cole, for instance, and in Dar es Salaam. Since 9/11 the nation has suffered casualties abroad, too. Moreover, America's allies have taken major hits. If, as U.S. rhetoric asserts, we are all in this together, then atrocities in London and Madrid equal assaults against America itself - or does the U.S. not really mean what it proclaims?

Load-Date: January 15, 2009


End of Document