Brass blamed in Saudi attack
USA TODAY
September 17, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 319 words
Byline: Jack Kelley
Body


U.S. military commanders failed to protect a barracks in Saudi
Arabia from a terrorist bomb, says a Pentagon report out Monday,
and a top Air Force commander could face court-martial in the
wake of the June 25 attack.
"Intelligence indicated that Khobar Towers was a potential terrorist
target, and incidents from April through June 1996 reflected possible
surveillance of the facility," the report said.
Still, "the chain of command . . . did not take all measures
possible to protect the forces." The report also cites failures
in organization, lack of anti-terrorism standards and training,
and lack of involvement from senior commanders.
Nineteen soldiers were killed and 547 others injured when a huge
truck bomb exploded outside the complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Defense Secretary William Perry announced new military wide, anti-terrorism
steps, including anti-terrorism training for troops and increased
security patrols.
The report does not recommend specific disciplinary action but
includes documents from Perry and Air Force officials authorizing
court-martial proceedings, if appropriate.
Air Force Brig. Gen. Teryl J. "Terry" Schwalier, responsible
for the security of the nearly 2,000 soldiers at the barracks,
is expected to be a court-martial candidate.
President Clinton praised the report as "unvarnished, blunt,
straightforward."
"We intend to do everything we can" to protect troops in the
field, Clinton said. "We're going to aggressively implement the
Downing report."
The report was produced by retired Army Gen. Wayne Downing, ex-chief
of U.S. Special Operations Command.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., accused the Clinton administration
of being "consistently weak in its approach to protecting Americans
from terrorism. I think we need to do a great deal more to protect
our young men and women."
Since the attack, most of the 5,000 U.S. military personnel in
Saudi Arabia have been moved to a remote desert airbase.

Load-Date: September 17, 1996


End of Document