Braudy uses terrorism to define masculinity; Western societies have been embracing a sense of cultural diversity since WWII
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 7, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Local; Pg. e2
Length: 511 words
Byline: DON KNEFEL
Body


Cultural historian Leo Braudy was nearing the end of work on "From Chivalry to Terrorism: War and the Changing Nature of Masculinity" (Knopf, 2003) when the terror attacks of 2001 occurred.
In this, the second of a two-part review, I'll look at the provocative final chapters of Braudy's book.
Braudy writes directly about the attacks and what they mean in terms of his study of masculinity. Those events force us to remember that "ancient battles are still invoked to justify present politics, and different ways of being a man are either celebrated or stigmatized across whole cultures."
While most comment and analysis about the terrorist threat has focused on political and religious issues, Braudy sees these as extensions of the larger question of how masculinity is defined and enacted in the modern world.
The militant Islamist appeal to a "warrior" ethos is no accident. "Stereotyped beliefs about what is masculine or feminine survive long after the original reason for them has gone because they purport to be fundamental and unchanging, the bedrock of history rather than an expression of it."
And, like all fundamentalisms battling modernity, Islamist extremism is very much a man's game. It harkens back to a purportedly untainted past, a God-given sense of truth, a rigid separation of male and female, and the subjugation of women. Thus Braudy calls his closing chapter "Terrorism as a Gender War."
The "remarkable irony of history," he explains, is that just as the Western world seems to be entering a period in which the ancient warrior mythology is fading (except perhaps as nostalgic mass entertainment), Europe and America are "faced with an enemy emerging from the ancient lands of the Aryan warriors, whose own canons of sexuality attempt to re-establish a past from which the West has been distancing itself."
Since the end of World War II, Western societies have gradually embraced a sense of sexual and cultural diversity "which has nurtured the acceptance of racial, religious and ethnic difference." Definitions of male and female identity have been markedly loosened, to incorporate a variety of roles, attitudes and personal choices. Most see this as progress.
But from the fundamentalist perspective, "in a changing world, not changing becomes the mark of virtue. The enemies of Western technological and cultural power are also the enemies of a Western idea of gender" that has begun to see male and female not as fixed polarities but as part of a continuum. And that is blasphemy to the extremists.
Is Islamist terrorism "the last gasp of a militant warrior personality type that has survived the centuries?"
It may be foolish to think we are "at the end of a cycle in European history," Braudy writes, but perhaps "the conjunction of a fundamentalist warrior-oriented terrorism and an industrialized world willing to accept a wider spectrum of both male and female possibilities" is not a coincidence. Maybe it is "a necessary step in the emancipation of the human race from its own mind-forged manacles."
Knefel teaches writing at Loras College.

Load-Date: November 15, 2004


End of Document