Brazil`s market is cautious due to oil price rise and terrorism threat in US; Oil and terrorism suggest cautiousness
InvestNews (Brazil)
August 2, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 NoticiasFinancieras/Groupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 308 words
Byline: Silvia Araújo
Body


SÃO PAULO - The constant increase in the international oil prices and the new threats of terrorist attack against the US increased the cautiousness in the beginning of the week. This weekend, US Intelligence Service announced that terrorists have plans to attack building of important financial institutions of the country. Among them, the Citigroup, the NYSE, the IMF and the World Bank. The oil price broke a new record in the closing, at $43US.82 in the last trades. As well as the crisis involving the Russian company Yukos, the oil barrel price also responded to the concerns of the weekend. Inside this scenario, the long position was limited. In the foreign market, the appeal for Brazilian bonds was discrete, making the C-bond price to remain steady. The country-risk spread closed at 595, from 592 on Friday. In the local FX market, the dollar price did not rise more, ahead of the external scenario, due to the favorable results in the trade balance. In July, the trade balance remained positive in $3US.48bi, increasing the year-to-date result to $18US.5bi. The US currency had another day of high, closing at $3R.050 (+0.39%). The interest rates start to settle into a new level. The expectation is that, from now on, the forecasts should not change much due to the perception that the basic interest rates will remain for longer at the current 16%. The chairman of Bradesco, for example, said that the institution believes in a maintenance of the rate until the end of the year. 
The future inflation and managed prices forecasts are still feeding the idea of steady primary interests. In another round of the Focus survey, the analysts forecast a higher inflation for this year. The interest contract forecasted a rate at 16.64% for the end of the year, against 16.68% from the previous adjustment. The Bovespa closed in high of 0.50%.

Load-Date: January 5, 2005


End of Document