Breaking a Mold in Argentina
The New York Times
December 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL
Length: 441 words
Body


For eight years, generals and admirals terrorized Argentina with their lawless rule. Now, along with the civilian terrorists who provoked the repression, they are to be legally held to account. Argentina's newly elected President, Raul Alfonsin, is off to a brave and bold start.
Editorial on recent democratic election in Argentina, which installed Raul Alfonsin as Pres, and on hopes that for first time in four decades Peronists, who have not been given majority, will not be able to subvert democracy with military terrorism
History, of course, argues for skepticism. Does not the Latin pendulum regularly swing from exhausted military governments to tiresome civilians? Did not generals four times replace elected Argentine regimes in the last three decades? Why be hopeful this time around?
Because for the first time in four decades, a democratic election has failed to give a majority to Peronists, who too often subverted democracy. Mr. Alfonsin was the candidate of the Radical Party, Peronism's historic rival. The spell of the legendary Juan Peron and his second wife, Evita, has finally been weakened, if not broken.
Also, the new President has moved shrewdly to exploit his mandate. The terrorism will be examined before memory fades. The trials will mark a return to the rule of law, will be fairly directed at both the right and left and yet will let the military judge its own. The members of the last junta, who arranged for civilian rule, face no charges. And the prosecutions will concentrate on top officers who ordered the lawless arrests, torture and executions.  Equally encouraging is President Alfonsin's approach to other legacies of military rule. After the disastrous Falkland war, he seeks honorable reconciliation with Britain. And he is negotiating with foreign creditors for a more realistic schedule for payment of Argentina's crushing $40 billion debt.  Even if he had not himself made a point of it by receiving democratic dissenters from Chile and Uruguay, President Alfonsin's triumph poses a challenge to dictators throughout the hemisphere. If Brazil's democratization proceeds on schedule, the juntas may soon be in rout. There may even be a redeeming benefit in the Reagan Administration's unsolicited and inappropriate inaugural gift - a lifting of the ban on arms sales to Argentina. That at least sends a clear message to the repressive rulers of Chile, Argentina's potential adversaries, who remain on the embargo list.  President Alfonsin must defy Argentine history even to finish his constitutional term. But he seems to be doing all he can to improve the odds, and deserves the help of all the Americas.


End of Document