Breach at base forces evacuation; Man drives through gate, enters building before being detained.; WRIGHT-PATTERSON
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 25, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. B1
Length: 822 words
Byline: By Barrie Barber
Body


WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE - A man not authorized to be on Wright-Patterson Air Force Base drove through a security gate and made his way inside a building on foot before he was taken into custody, according to base officials.
Tuesday's security breach caused authorities to order the immediate evacuation of employees in Building 600 and Building 620 in the Air Force Research Laboratory's Sensors Directorate and led to a "shelter in place" order at a nearby child development center, according to base spokespersons.
"We can't speculate as to what the guy's motive was," spokesman Daryl Mayer said. "We just don't know at this time."
Security forces were holding the man, whose identity was not released Tuesday, while the investigation continued and to determine if federal charges will follow, Mayer said. The spokesman said there was no indication the man had "ill intent."
Terrorism and homeland security experts expressed concern that the man was able to penetrate security.
Daniel Goure, a defense and terrorism analyst at the Virginia-based Lexington Institute, was surprised at how far the intruder made it into the base and questioned why security forces did not react more "quickly" or "aggressively."
The incident occurred at a time of heightened sensitivity to terrorism after deadly attacks in Paris and Mali this month. Late Monday, the U.S. State Department issued a global travel warning on the increased threat of terrorism.
The incident occurred in Area B near National Road and Colonel Glenn Highway, said Mayer, who said the man had no affiliation with Wright-Patterson.
A police search did not turn up weapons on the suspect or inside the vehicle, Mayer said.
"The complete sweep of the area was done, including the vehicle, and everything was safe," he said.
Even so, Goure said, "You don't want to be in a position where you're chasing a potential terrorist in a vehicle that could either be loaded with weapons or, God forbid, explosives. Rapidly stopping these kind of events or these kinds of actors is extraordinarily important by the gate and not after they have penetrated the facility."
Goure called Wright-Patterson "a very important and sensitive facility," then added, "but you're talking about the lives involved if this was a serious terrorist incident."
James J. Carafano, a Heritage Foundation homeland security and terrorism analyst and Army veteran, said "the fact that somebody could brush aside the people screening them" onto the base and reach a work area was "pretty unsatisfactory."
The driver did not stop when he entered the base around 9:40 a.m. at Gate 22B near Interstate 675, Mayer said.
The suspect then drove to a parking lot and entered Building 620, where an employee challenged the man because he was not wearing a workplace security badge. Employees took the man, who did not resist attempts to detain him, to a building security manager, Mayer said. The suspect was kept there until he was turned over to Wright-Patterson security forces, Mayer said.
The base security threat level - now at Bravo - did not change before or after the incident, the spokesman said. The evacuations lasted more than two hours.
Many questions about the incident were unanswered, however, despite requests to interview a base vice commander and the police chief. Col. John M. Devil-lier, 88th Air Base Wing and installation commander, was on leave and unavailable for comment, Mayer said.
Devillier has said installation security is a top priority.
Mayer said he would not talk specifically about how the suspect passed the security checkpoint or what measures might be taken in response to the breach.
"As we generally say, we don't talk about security measures at any of the installation's gates, even in this incident," he said. "...As a result of this investigation, you can rest assured we will be reviewing all of our procedures so we can prevent an incident like this from ever happening again."
Timothy A. Shaw, a former FBI agent who was part of the joint anti-terrorism task force in the region, said he could not comment on whether a security breakdown occurred because he didn't have all the facts, but he said employees reacted appropriately to detain the man once he made it into the building without workplace credentials.
"I think this shows the heightened vigilance that we're having with the threat ISIS" has posed internationally, he said.
Ronald Colman, a military veteran who said he has lived on base for seven years, said the incident showed a need to beef up base security.
"Somebody's doing something wrong," he said. "Somebody needs to put more security out here, more officers out there."
Mayer defended security forces reaction and said employees followed security training procedures.
"We appreciate the way security forces responded the way they did and I think they did a remarkable job," he said.
Reporter Kate Bartley contributed to this story.
Contact Barrie Barber at 937-225-2363.

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document