Breakthrough on Terrorism Insurance
The American Banker
October 18, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 5
Length: 437 words
Byline: BY MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Negotiators representing the White House, Senate Democrats, and House Republicans reached agreement Thursday on long-stalled terrorism insurance legislation.
The details of the deal were being drafted at press time.
The House and Senate must each vote on the reconciled bill, which would set up a government reinsurance program to back up private insurers in case of new terrorist attacks. President Bush is expected to sign it into law.
The agreement was a major breakthrough in the nearly yearlong negotiations between Republicans and Democrats over whether insurers should repay the government for assistance they receive, and whether victims of terrorism should be able to sue employers, building owners, or other private-sector interests for punitive damages.
However, a final vote on the reconciled bill still could be stalled by Senate Republicans, including Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas, who have demanded limits on victim lawsuits.
The final vote in the Senate could come as early as Wednesday if no senator signals an intention to block it, according to a Senate Democratic aide who did not want to be named. If objections are anticipated, Senate leaders likely would let the House vote first on the measure, the aide said. That would ease the parliamentary path for bringing the measure up in the Senate.
It was uncertain at press time if leaders of the House, which adjourned late Wednesday night, might call lawmakers back to Washington for a vote before the Nov. 5 elections.
"It's unclear if members will be called back next week solely for considering risk insurance legislation," said a House leadership aide, who asked not to be identified. "If other legislation, like homeland security, is ready, then that might be enough to call members back."
The House aide cautioned that House Republicans were still reviewing the terms of the agreement Thursday afternoon and that leaders would not make a decision on scheduling a vote until all key lawmakers had signed off on it.
The financial services industry has long been calling for Congress to establish a government program. President Bush has said that $15 billion of construction projects have been halted because of a lack of insurance.
House Financial Services Committee Chairman Michael G. Oxley, the lead House negotiator on the bill, said: "As we continue to deal with the aftermath of 9/11, I expect the legislation to provide some needed certainty for the insurance markets, while removing an important obstacle that now stands in the way of development projects across the nation."
 
Copyright 2002 Thomson Media. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document