Breaking Ground for a Memorial in Oklahoma
The New York Times
October 26, 1998, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 694 words
Byline: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY 

By MICHAEL JANOFSKY 
Dateline: OKLAHOMA CITY, Oct. 25
Body


Standing upon the flattened three acres where a Federal office building stood until a bomb brought it down three years ago, killing 168 people, Vice President Al Gore broke ground today on a memorial to the victims and the ordinary people who helped Oklahoma City's physical and spiritual rebuilding.
"Today we gather to seek the light, to find in this soil, nourished with a million tears, the harvest of God's healing grace," Mr. Gore said at a solemn ceremony before he and about two dozen local, state and Federal officials, as well as relatives of some who were killed, dug out the first shovelfuls of dirt.
The Oklahoma City National Memorial, which is planned to include an empty chair for everyone who died, a reflecting pool and a National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism and Violence, is expected to open in phases, starting late next year.
Dick Cheney, the former Secretary of Defense who is serving as national fund-raising chairman for the memorial, said officials had raised about $18 million of the $24.1 million needed to build the project.
The scene of the ground-breaking was both haunting and hopeful. Surrounding the land where the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building once stood were shells of other places devastated by the blast, including a Y.M.C.A. and the main office of The Journal Record, a newspaper.
The temporary stage from which Mr. Gore, Attorney General Janet Reno, Gov. Frank Keating and other officials spoke was erected almost at the spot where a Ryder rental truck was parked at 9:02 A.M. on April 19, 1995, when it disintegrated from the power of the bomb it carried.
Arlene Blanchard, who worked at the United States Army recruiting office in the Federal Building and was on the fourth floor when it was devastated, spoke on behalf of the victims. She said the day of the explosion would "burn hot in the hearts, minds, bodies and souls of many Americans across this nation."
There were other reminders of the tragedy, ones that symbolize the spirit of Oklahomans who have vowed not to let the worst act of domestic terrorism in the nation's history blunt the memories of those who died. A chain-link fence surrounding the site that grew to life with cards, flowers and other condolences will become part of the memorial. So will a small elm tree nearby that survived the blast. Locals have named it the Survivor Tree.
Unmentioned by name through the ceremonies were the two men responsible for the bombing. One, Timothy J. McVeigh, was found guilty of conspiracy and murder in a Federal trial last year in Denver and was sentenced to death. Terry L. Nichols was convicted of conspiracy and involuntary manslaughter and was sentenced to life without the possibility of parole.
But their acts provided Mr. Gore and Ms. Reno yet another opportunity to promote the Federal Government's efforts against all forms of terrorist activity. The budget signed last week included an increase of nearly $3 billion to combat terrorism, largely as a result of the recent bombings of United States Embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, but also, Mr. Gore said, as a result of the bombing here.
"We will not back down in the face of terrorism," Ms. Reno said. "We will carry on and do our duty to the country and the people we serve, and we will not be intimidated by terrorists."
For Mr. Gore, the trip to Oklahoma City was one of his few outside Washington in recent months for nonpolitical purposes. Indeed, but for the Administration officials who traveled here with him, he was virtually surrounded by Republicans through the ceremonies, including Representatives J. C. Watts Jr., Ernest Istook and Frank D. Lucas, Gov. Keating and Senator Don Nickles, all of Oklahoma.
Oklahoma's entire Congressional delegation is Republican, and all those running for re-election this year, six House members and Senator Nickles, are expected to defeat their Democratic opponents without much trouble.
Even so, Mr. Gore made a point of the nonpartisan nature of efforts to help Oklahoma heal. He praised the strength of all the citizens who pitched in and credited Republicans for helping the Administration win the extra money to fight terrorism.

Graphic

 
Photos: Warren Noakes, whose wife, Melva, ran a day-care center where children died in the bombing in 1995, at the ceremony in Oklahoma City yesterday. (Associated Press); Lalo Hernandez and his daughter Jackie at the ground-breaking yesterday in Oklahoma City. His wife, Gina, was hurt in the 1995 blast. (Associated Press)
      

Load-Date: October 26, 1998


End of Document