BREAK-INS RAISE FEARS OF TERRORISM;
 PHONE FACILITIES HIT AS WACO ANNIVERSARY NEARS
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 17, 1998, Friday,
SPOKANE EDITION


Copyright 1998 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS,
Length: 510 words
Byline: Bill Morlin Staff writer
Body


Terrorism experts and detectives are investigating burglaries at four telephone switching facilities and offices in the Spokane area.
The timing of the crimes is troubling because Sunday marks the anniversaries of the Oklahoma City bombing and the raid on the Branch Davidian compound at Waco, Texas.
As the anniversaries approach, militias and other anti-government groups are using the Internet to hype revolutionary talk. Some of it boldly calls for acts of terrorism and anarchy on Sunday.
No one is linking that talk directly with the Spokane burglaries, but there is concern in law enforcement circles.
In the four break-ins, thieves took US West uniforms, hard hats, phone sets and grid maps of the phone system, authorities confirmed Thursday.
Other than an act of terrorism, detectives worry that the thefts could be the groundwork for well-planned bank robberies or burglaries. Banks depend on phone lines for their alarm systems.
''If they were stealing garbage trucks, we wouldn't be concerned. This is different,'' one law enforcement official said.
Sheriff John Goldman said he and other county and city law enforcement officials have been briefed about the burglaries.
''We don't know what it actually represents, but the potential is there, given the environment we're in and the time frame,'' Goldman said.
''We've tried to analyze what it means, identify possible targets and take steps to warn potential targets,'' he said. ''We have let banking and financial institutions know.''
A senior FBI official in Seattle said he hadn't been told about the phone company break-ins in Spokane. The FBI supervisor in Spokane didn't return a telephone call.
A US West security official told investigators there have been as many as eight break-ins at company facilities in Spokane County in recent weeks, but authorities could immediately confirm only four.
Investigators wouldn't release the dates or other details about the break-ins.
One of the burglaries occurred at US West's central switching facility for the Spokane area, known as the Walnut Center, company spokeswoman Dana Smith said. She refused to provide the location of the center.
Another burglary occurred at a US West facility on North Columbus, Smith said.
The most-recent break-ins occurred Sunday at US West switching stations at Newman Lake and Liberty Lake, authorities said.
''We are concerned, and we are working with law enforcement on this,'' Smith said from the phone company's regional office in Seattle.
A law enforcement source said US West employee identification badges also were stolen, but Smith said that wasn't true.
She also said the stolen maps are old.
''A grid map is not something that the average person can read,'' Smith said.
The sheriff said businesses or organizations that are high profile ''should exercise caution and vigilance'' in the next few days.
''If you have workmen coming to your area unexpectedly, be sure to ask for identification,'' Goldman said. ''If you have questions, don't hesitate to call either law enforcement or the company purported to be represented.''

Notes


This sidebar appeared with the story:
 THE LOOT
 In the break-ins, thieves took US West uniforms, hard hats, phone sets and grid maps of the phone system.

Load-Date: April 18, 1998


End of Document