Bremer backs Bush's plan to add troops in Iraq
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 2, 2007 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 475 words
Byline: By Greg Jonsson ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Body


President George W. Bush's plan for a surge of troops to stabilize Iraq is a risky but necessary move in a place that is the front line in the war on terror, America's former head of civil authority there told a St. Louis audience Thursday night.
L. Paul Bremer, who served as chief administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq in 2003 and 2004, said pulling out of the country too soon would hurt the United States' war on terror and encourage extremists who have a "burning hatred" of the West.
"Leaving Iraq will not change that hatred," Bremer told about 2,000 people at Powell Symphony Hall. "It will only make them think they've got us on the run."
Staying to help create a "relatively stable, democratic Iraq" could present a model for the rest of the region, he said.
Bremer, who served as ambassador to the Netherlands under President Ronald Reagan long before his role in Iraq, spoke as part of Maryville University's St. Louis Speakers Series. In his 23-year career in the State Department, Bremer dealt with crisis management, terrorism and homeland security.
He said he and other terrorism experts saw something like the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, coming as he kept an eye on terrorism in the 1990s. Instead of using limited attacks to draw attention to a cause, as terrorists had for decades, the "new terrorists" - Muslim extremists chief among them - sought to kill as many people as possible in what they saw as a war between Islam and "unbelievers."
"These new terrorists do not practice self-restraint," Bremer said. "They want to kill us by the thousands, indeed, by the hundreds of thousands."
He said Americans should recognize the successes in Iraq and called toppling Saddam Hussein "a great and noble thing."
He described his efforts to stabilize Iraq politically and economically during his time as head of the Coalition Provisional Authority. He detailed successes such as setting a timetable for elections, increasing employment levels and replacing Iraq's currency. Preparing Iraqis to provide security in the country was less successful at first, he said, but improvements have been made.
Overall, he said he remained hopeful about the situation there because of the Iraqi people. He said they want the same things people everywhere want - peace, stability and the opportunity to govern themselves.
His view of Iraq was a bit rosier than that of former Secretary of State Colin Powell, who spoke in December as part of the Maryville program. Powell said the war couldn't have been avoided, but the situation there has deteriorated and the U.S. should begin bringing troops home. He called the conflict there a civil war, which Bremer declined to do.
Upcoming speakers in the Maryville program include radio host and film critic Michael Medved, author Ron Chernow and former White House press secretary Ari Fleischer.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Bremer 

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document