BREZHNEV GIVES A WARM WELCOME TO QUADDAFI AND CRITICIZES THE U.S.
The New York Times
April 28, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 742 words
Byline: By SERGE SCHMEMANN
Dateline: MOSCOW, April 27
Body


Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, today welcomed the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, to Moscow as a ''comrade in the struggle for the rights and freedoms of peoples, against imperialist oppression and aggression.''
Mr. Brezhnev spoke at state dinner for Colonel Qaddafi, who arrived today for an official visit. It was the Libyan leader's second visit to the Soviet Union and his first in more than four years. He received full honors, including a laudatory front-page biography in Pravda and an airport welcome led by Mr. Brezhnev.
Brezhnev gives a warm welcome to quaddafi and criticizes the U.S.
The honors and Mr. Brezhnev's treatment of him came against a background of charges by the Reagan Administration that the Soviet Union and Libya were among the most active supporters of international terrorism.
Much of Mr. Brezhnev's address seemed to be intended to turn the accusations against the United States and other non-Communist nations.
''The liberation struggle of peoples causes their indignation,'' he said. ''They describe it as 'terrorism.' They use any pretext for interference in the affairs of other peoples, for their militarypolitical expansion, and when there are no such pretexts they create them artificially.''
 
Purpose of Visit Debated
Given the unorthodox and unpredictable nature of Libya's foreign policies, Western and Arab diplomats were hard-pressed to discern the purpose of Colonel Qaddafi's three-day visit. Although Libya receives many weapons from the Soviet Union and Colonel Qaddafi is strongly anti-Western, he is not a Marxist and Soviet-Libyan relations have been characterized by cautious cooperation rather than friendship.
According to the Libyan press, the visit was intended to carry out a mandate given Colonel Qaddafi by the so-called Steadfastness Front of Libya, Algeria, Southern Yemen, Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization a year ago to strengthen relations with Moscow.
But diplomats in Moscow speculated that the timing of the visit was rooted elsewhere in the mutual interests of the two countries.  Mr. Brezhnev, seeking to revive Soviet influence in the Middle East, has been courting support for the idea of an international conference on the region, which he proposed at the 26th Soviet Communist Party Congress this year. Last week the visiting Foreign Minister of Kuwait gave qualified support to the idea, and there are reports that after Colonel Qaddafi's visit, Yasir Arafat, head of the P.L.O., and King Hussein of Jordan may visit Moscow.
 
Possible Libyan Motives
As a key member of the Steadfastness Front, which was formed to oppose the Israeli-Egyptian accords, Colonel Qaddafi could bolster the Soviet initiative.
For Colonel Qaddafi, an important motive for the visit may be the need for public recognition by a powerful nation when he is somewhat isolated internationally.
His aid to revolutionary movements has given him a reputation as a troublemaker, and his dispatch of troops to help quell a rebellion in Chad in December angered France and much of black Africa. In the Arab world, Colonel Qaddafi has made enemies in countries such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Tunisia with his attempts to destabilize their Governments.
In his dinner speech, Mr. Brezhnev denounced the Camp David accords on the Mideast as a ''direct challenge to the Arab peoples'' and reiterated his call for an international Middle East conference. His major theme, however, appeared to be repudiating the recent American charges of aiding terrorism.
 
Code of Conduct Discussed
Mr. Brezhnev denounced what he described as efforts to make the Soviet Union and its allies agree to a ''code of conduct'' in the developing world. The code proposed by the Reagan Administration, he said, lays down rules ''that would perpetuate imperialist brigandage.''
He outlined instead what he said was ''the code of conduct that we recognize and are always prepared to observe.'' This code, he said, would include renunciation of attempts to put developing countries in the ''sphere of interests'' of any power. It would also bar ''outside support for any separatist movements aimed at partitioning those countries,'' he said.
Mr. Brezhnev said the code would also include strict respect for the territorial integrity of developing countries, recognition of their sovereignty over their natural resources and respect of the status of nonalignment ''chosen by the majority of African, Asian and Latin American states.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Col. Quaddafi and Leonid Brezhnev


End of Document