Bridge Day to require finger scans for participants
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 28, 2014, Sunday


Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1B
Length: 506 words
Byline: Erin Beck, Staff writer
Body


Bridge Day organizers are planning to make sure participants aren't terrorists by scanning their fingerprints before future events, according to the chair of the Bridge Day commission.
Organizers of Bridge Day, the largest one-day festival in the state, started requiring background checks for jumpers, rappellers and vendors after 9/11, according to Sharon Cruikshank, the commission chair.
She said finger scans will be a less invasive security measure than routine background checks because participants will no longer have to provide their Social Security numbers and dates of birth.
"To me it's less intrusive, he said. "We're not capturing anybody's information. The coordinators for the BASE jumpers and the rappellers don't have to keep anybody's personal information.
Bridge Day is held annually on the New River Gorge Bridge on the third Saturday in October.
Under the new rules, participants' index fingers or thumbs will be scanned and checked against a terrorism watch list.
The new rule does not apply to spectators.
Scans will be compared to prints already on file, and only during the few seconds of the database search, Cruikshank said.
Scans will not be saved.
Cruikshank said the organizers are not looking for arrest records. She said organizers are only concerned with the terrorism watchlist.
She said the scans are required because jumpers and rappellers are allowed to enter the event with large equipment bags without going through Bridge Day security. She said searching every chute bag and rappel gear would be too time consuming.
She said the scanners will be similar to those found at DMVs.
State police will provide them.
Cruikshank said the change was "a requirement by the West Virginia State Police.
WVSP Major Bill Scott said it was a suggestion by the State Police.
"The State Police is not making anybody do this, he said.
Scott said State Police suggested finger scans as a less invasive, quicker way to make sure participants are not on a terrorism watch list.
"If you're going to have people from all over the world that come to participate, you kind of want to know who they are, he said.
Scott said the scan takes approximately 30 seconds.
"It's just a matter of scanning someone's finger and then verifying valid photo ID, he said.
Cruikshank said reaction to the announcement so far has been mixed.
"Some of the BASE community is not happy with it, she said. "I know the rappel community hasn't had any issues, nor the vendors. Those people have been pretty excited that we're just doing finger scans and the finger scans won't retain any information so it's less intrusive rather than keeping people's date of birth and Social Security numbers.
The Bridge Day Commission is compiling feedback for review and compiling a report from the comments. To add a comment, email officialbridgeday@officialbridgeday.com People are asked to specify if emailed comments should be not considered public or they will be added to the report.
Reach Erin Beck at erin.beck@wvgazette.com, 304-348-5163 or follow @erinbeckwv on Twitter.

Load-Date: December 29, 2014


End of Document