BRIEFING
The New York Times
December 6, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 765 words
Byline: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.
Body


Cease-Fire Promise
 Charles T. Manatt, the Democratic Party chairman, quietly obtained a temporary cease- fire promise from the Rev. Jesse Jackson yesterday afternoon, just hours before six of the eight Presidential candidates left on a national fund- raising tour intended to show harmony within the party.
Mr. Jackson had announced that he would use the tour through the South as a platform for challenging the party's delegate-selection rules as racially discriminatory.
Mr. Manatt, eager to avoid the spectacle of an Atlanta-to-Albuquerque argument with the party's only black candidate, telephoned Mr. Jackson and suggested that they delay the discussion of party rules demanded by Mr. Jackson.
Under the truce terms worked out between them, Mr. Jackson and Mr. Manatt agreed to meet Dec. 19 to discuss the complaints in detail.
Repr Don Young introduces bill to impose death penalty for 'maliciously damaging the US Capitol by means of fire or explosives'; Sen Charles Percy, chairman of Foreign Relations Committee, says he has gotten rid of his special license plates because of threat of terrorist attack (S)
The delay will also give the Jackson campaign more time to draft a policy paper and try to build support for his position among state party officials.
Mr. Jackson contends that winner- take-all rules in some primaries mean that there will be fewer black delegates at the national convention in San Francisco next summer.
Party officials counter that there will be plenty of minority delegates.  Mr. Jackson's true concern, they say, is that too few of those delegates will be pledged to him.
 Orwellian Thinkfest
As 1984 approaches, there is no shortage in the capital of Orwellian references to what next year really means to mankind, especially Americans.
Still, the Smithsonian Institution's Office of Symposia and Seminars is going to try to pull it all together in a four-day thinkfest starting tomorrow.
Attempting to explain the message George Orwell offered in ''1984'' will be professors, authors, journalists and businessmen.
There will also be some pageantry, including an ''academic procession'' across the Mall to the sound of bagpipes and the pealing of bells in the tower of the Old Post Office Building, and a visit to the Hirschhorn Museum for a preview of an exhibit called ''Dreams and Nightmares: Utopian Visions in Modern Art.''
 Terrorism Is Topic
Terrorism is a common concern
and conversation topic in Washington. Two recent reflections are in a bill introduced in the House by Representative Don Young, an Alaska Republican, and in a remark made at a White House reception by Senator Charles H. Percy, an Illinois Republican.
Mr. Young's bill is a reaction to the bomb explosion last month on the second floor of the Capitol, which damaged walls but injured no one.
''Terrorist explosions that are intended to, or in fact, do damage the U.S. Capitol are wanton attacks against the institution of Government,'' the Congressman said. So his bill imposes the death penalty for ''maliciously damaging the U.S. Capitol by means of fire or explosive.''
Senator Percy, at a White House party, was talking to some other guests about his own response to the threat of terrorism in Washington. He hinted that, as chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, he might be a target for a foreign terrorist.
''I even got rid of my special license plates that I've had for the past 17 years,'' he said. The old license was Illinois plate No. 1.
 Potomac Fever Symptoms
To bright, young, idealistic people who have never tried it,
working near the center of the action on Capitol Hill can seem exciting.
Not necessarily so, says the Congressional Management Foundation. The foundation, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that studies Congress, has made a survey of what bothers the men and women behind the Senators and Representatives.
Of the 89 workers who responded to the survey, 80 percent complained of ''excessive interruptions while working,'' more than 70 percent said that work backlog was a problem, and 60 percent were troubled by ''staff burnout.''
Positive findings included the 80 percent who said that there was no difficulty with ''unethical behavior.''
''A lot of very bright people compete for Hill staff positions, so the raw material in those offices tends to be excellent,'' said Ira Chaleff, who prepared the survey. ''Few Hill staffers, however, have had prior management training or experience. This requires them to be quick studies in an environment where extraordinary workload demands make it almost impossible to develop effective management skills on the job.''


End of Document