Briefcase
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 24, 2020 Saturday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 006
Length: 337 words
Body


biz_201024_briefcase
^$^Mortgage rates continue declineWASHINGTON - U.S. long-term mortgage rates slipped this week as the key 30-year loan marked a new all-time low for the 11th time this year.
Home loan rates have notched a year-long decline amid economic anxiety in the recession set off by the coronavirus pandemic. Mortgage buyer Freddie Mac reported Thursday that the average rate on the 30-year benchmark loan edged down to 2.80% from 2.81% last week. By contrast, the rate averaged 3.75% a year ago.
The average rate on the 15-year fixed-rate mortgage declined to 2.33% from 2.35%.
The low borrowing rates have bolstered demand from prospective homebuyers. Real estate database Zillow noted that home sales have continued an impressive run into September, as buyers have "stayed their course" despite the ongoing pandemic and the persistent shortage of available homes for sale.
COVID-linked fraud on rise
PARIS - The international organization that monitors protections against money laundering and terrorism financing said Friday that fraud related to coronavirus is on the rise.
The Financial Action Task Force said fraud linked to counterfeit medical supplies, economic stimulus measures and online scams were hitting governments hard around the world.
AmEx profits take dramatic hit
CHARLOTTE, N.C. - American Express' fourth-quarter profits dropped by 39%, the credit card giant said Friday, as the pandemic's deep impacts on travel, entertainment and dining dramatically impacted the company's results.
The New York-based company earned $1.07 billion, or $1.30 a share, down from $1.76 billion, or $2.08 per share, in the same period a year earlier. The results missed analysts' forecasts, who were looking for AmEx to earn $1.39 a share, according to Zacks Investment Research.
While AmEx has not been as negatively impacted by defaults and delinquencies like other credit card companies, the company's bottom line has been hit hard by its business model tied into the well-to-do traveling and dining out.
From wire reports

Load-Date: October 24, 2020


End of Document