BRIEFS COLUMN; MEDICARE RECIPIENTS TO PAY HIGHER PREMIUMS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 28, 1992, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A; Briefs/Nation/World
Length: 595 words
Body


Medicare recipients will pay higher premiums for medical insurance and larger deductibles for hospital stays next year, the government said Friday.  Premiums for Part B insurance, which covers doctors' bills and outpatient services, will rise to $36.60 next year from the current monthly premium of $31.80 - a 15 percent increase.  For Part A insurance, which covers hospitalization, patients will have to pay a deductible of $676 for each hospital stay, the Department of Health and Human Services said. That's a 3.7 percent increase from the $652 deductible now in effect.  AP - +++++
WORLD SOUTH AFRICA Government And ANC To Meet On Elections The South African government and African National Congress will meet next week to discuss a date for elections to end white-minority rule, a joint statement said Friday.  The meeting is seen as a first step toward settling disagreements over when to hold the vote and resume talks on giving political power to the black majority. The ANC has rejected a government proposal to have elections in early 1994.  The talks, scheduled for Wednesday through Friday, also should cover the violence in black townships that has claimed about 9,000 blacks in three years and stalled talks on ending apartheid.   AP +++++
BRAZIL Suspended President Closer To Impeachment A Senate panel voted in favor of formal corruption charges against Brazil's suspended president Friday, moving him a step closer to impeachment.  The Senate Impeachment Committee voted 16-1 in favor of sending on a report recommending President Fernando Collor de Mello's impeachment to the full Senate.
The sole dissenter belonged to Collor's National Reconstruction Party.  Under a timetable for impeachment set up by the head of the Supreme Court, Sydney Sanches, the full 81-member Senate could vote on Collor's ouster as early as Dec. 18.  Reuters - +++++
FRANCE U.S. And Allies Warn Libya On Terrorism France, Britain and the United States issued a stern warning to Libya on Friday for failing to renounce terrorism or help bring Libyan suspects in two airline bombings to justice.  The nations vowed to make punitive sanctions against Tripoli "even more effective" but gave no indication how they intended to tighten the U.N.  embargo.  Libya contends that the U.N. sanctions that ban air travel and arms sales and curtail diplomatic relations have cost the country $2.4 billion since they were imposed March 31.  AP - +++++
IRAN Nation Claims Right To Bolster Military Iran said Friday it had no plans to buy nuclear weapons but insisted it had the right to bolster its military stocks to replace weapons lost in the eight-year war with Iraq.  Deputy foreign minister Ali Mohammad Besharati described media reports that Iran was planning to acquire nuclear weapons as "a lie and a plot." "We have no need for nuclear weapons. Iran is a signatory of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and honors this agreement," official Iran Radio quoted him as saying.  Western powers expressed anxiety when Iran in September said it had agreed to buy a small nuclear reactor from China. Iran stressed at the time it was for peaceful purposes.  Reuters - +++++
EL SALVADOR Coup Not Brewing, Defense Leader Says El Salvador's defense minister Friday rejected leftist rebel claims that top military officers were preparing a coup to wreck El Salvador's U.N.-brokered peace process.  "We can categorically affirm that there are no intentions of a coup inside the armed forces . . . . These rumors are totally irresponsible," Defense Minister Gen. Rene Emilio Ponce told reporters.  Reuters -

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document