Bring Americans Along on Terrorists
The New York Times
August 9, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 533 words
Body


President Bush will make his toughest calls on terrorism and dealing with hostages in the coming weeks. Whatever he does will involve political risks - like yesterday's rejection of an Iranian feeler to help with the hostages in return for release of Iranian assets in the U.S. He will also need backing from Congress and the public. To earn that support he will have to provide clearer information on what he knows about the terrorists. Here are some of the questions in the air: What's the state of U.S. intelligence on terrorism? Statements, including a recent one by the President to the effect that Washington isn't playing with ''a full deck,'' suggest that the Administration feels its information is incomplete. Mr. Bush need not divulge his sources and methods, but has to be frank about what he knows and what he doesn't.
Who are the terrorists directly responsible for kidnapping and apparently killing Lieut. Col. William Higgins of the Marines and holding seven other Americans? Are terrorist groups in southern Lebanon independent actors? Can they alone be held responsible for the abductions? The State Department contends they fall under an umbrella organization called Hezbollah, based in Lebanon. How is Hezbollah connected to Iran?
At times, Administration officials say Teheran pays virtually all Hezbollah's bills and makes key decisions. At other times, officials say that Hezbollah groups are controlled by individual Iranian clerics and not the Iranian Government. In sum, can Iran order the Hezbollah groups to release the hostages if a hostage trade can be arranged?
What's Syria's role in Hezbollah terrorism? The State Department minimizes Syria's power and knowledge. Yet Damascus maintains thousands of troops and a large intelligence apparatus in southern Lebanon.
What do the terrorists want? The State Department says Hezbollah aims at an Iranian-style revolution in Lebanon. That certainly would be opposed by Syria and all other Lebanese groups, but does that goal by itself threaten U.S. interests?
Does Hezbollah want the release of Shiite hostages held by Israel badly enough to set up a hostage trade? Or is the hostage-taking merely an instrument serving a larger goal? Is Iran still working toward an Islamic revolution throughout the Middle East? Are Iran and Syria also aiming at the destruction of the state of Israel? Are hostages the tool to drive a wedge between Israel and the U.S.?
What's the thinking of America's allies and what are they prepared to do?
Do the allies believe the terrorists, whoever they might be, are simply or predominantly a problem for the United States and Israel? Will they limit their help to entreaties to the terrorists not to kill the hostages and condolences should the worst happen? Would they join with Washington in bearing down on Syria and Iran diplomatically and economically? If Mr. Bush deems military action to be necessary, would they condemn it?
Administration officials have been saying and hinting for days now that the President is seeking an overall solution to the hostage tragedy. For that he will need the kind of public understanding that can only come from sharing with the country what he knows and thinks.


End of Document