British Study Charitable Organization for Links to Plot 
The New York Times
August 25, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 967 words
Byline: By HEATHER TIMMONS; Ian Fisher contributed reporting for this article.
Dateline: LONDON, Aug. 24 
Body


The British Charity Commission said Thursday that it was formally investigating the aid group Crescent Relief and had frozen its funds, after allegations that the charity was linked to a thwarted terrorist plot to blow up trans-Atlantic flights. 
  The commission said it was looking into what it called ''very serious'' allegations of potential ''terrorist abuse of charitable funds'' at Crescent Relief.
''The inquiry will focus on whether or not the charity's funds, or funds raised on its behalf, were used unlawfully,'' the statement said. ''It will also consider the financial policies and practices of the charity.''
  Crescent Relief was registered as a charity in July 2001 and its list of original directors included the father of Rashid Rauf, a suspect arrested in Pakistan in connection with the foiled airline bombing plot earlier this month. 
  According to its Web site, Crescent Relief's aid projects include providing food, books and medicine to victims of the earthquake last year in Kashmir and the 2004 tsunami in Indonesia. The group has denied financing terrorism. The charity's actions raised some red flags at its bank last year, after one member tried to send about 50,000 pounds to Pakistan without the proper identification. 
  Also on Thursday, British police said they had charged a 12th suspect in the plot, saying he had failed to disclose information that could have helped prevent it. The suspect, Umair Hussain, 24, is the brother of Mehran Hussain, 23, who has been charged in connection to the plot, and Nabeel Hussain, 22, who is being held but has not yet been charged. Eight suspects appeared in British court this week charged with conspiracy to murder and preparing to commit acts of terrorism. 
  The police also said they had arrested an unidentified 27-year-old Manchester man on suspicion of terrorism offenses. His arrest is not tied to the trans-Atlantic airline plot, the Greater Manchester Police said. 
  The action by the 150-year-old Charity Commission throws a spotlight on the organization, whose role in Britain's efforts to thwart terrorism is growing. The group has been an active partner as the authorities try to stamp out homegrown terrorism and extremism among Britain's Muslim communities, after the July 2005 London bombings and the most recent plot directed against airlines; both involved British citizens. 
  Financed by the government, the Charity Commission has 500 employees and oversees some 190,000 organizations and nearly a million trustees, including many of Britain's churches and church groups and most of its mosques. 
  Britain's Home Office, along with the Treasury Department, is currently conducting a review of potential terrorist financing in charities, and plans to make recommendations for changes this fall. ''We are aware that existing safeguards against terrorist abuse in the charitable sector need to be strengthened,'' said a spokesperson for the Home Office. 
  The Home Office's review is expected to lead to some changes, but it is unclear what they might be.
  As Thursday's action illustrates, the Charity Commission is already more than just a rubber stamp or a registration office: it has the authority to freeze the bank accounts of Crescent Relief until its inquiry is finished. 
  The commission does not begin formal investigations lightly; it made just 60 last year despite receiving thousands of complaints about the charities it regulates. 
  The commission has been involved in other high-profile actions aimed at thwarting terrorism; in 2002, for example, it removed a cleric, Abu Hamza, from his position as an officer of a mosque in London, because it said he was making statements that were of ''such an extreme and political nature as to conflict with its charitable status.'' 
  The Charity Commission has been reluctant to promote its role in the battle against terrorism, preferring to focus on the benefits that charities bring society. In an interview on Wednesday, the commission's chief executive, Andrew Hind, described the organization's mission as ''trying to encourage 1,000 flowers to bloom.''
  A strong individual volunteer sector is ''a fundamental element'' to a functioning civil society, Mr. Hind said. A former BBC executive, he said he believed that charity, and Britain's tradition of contributing time and money to the less fortunate, was comparable to the role of a free press in society. 
  The commission does not actively investigate organizations for their links to terrorism, he said, and often relies on tips from the public to prompt investigations. ''This is a very small part'' of the overall mission, he said. Since the terrorist acts of Sept. 11, 2001, there have ''not been more than one or two cases a year'' that involved concerns about terrorism, Mr. Hind said. 
  Currently the commission, which is staffed by lawyers, accountants and executives who have worked in charities themselves, employs about 50 compliance officers who conduct investigations into complaints about charities, and allegations of terrorist ties or political leanings.
  Law firms and charities that have worked with the commission give its investigative prowess high marks. ''They approach it with thoroughness, they go into things in depth, and they look for quality of answers,'' said Christopher Hallam, a charity law adviser with Robinsons Solicitors in London. 
  But the commission is not a regular part of the global discussions among the police and antiterrorism intelligence officials. 
  Mr. Hind said there were no regularly scheduled conversations with United States or European officials on the subject. Establishing regular communication with the United States would be unwelcome, Mr. Hind said. ''I hope it doesn't happen, because that would be indicative of larger problems,'' he said.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: The Crescent Relief aid group, at its address in Ilford, is under investigation by Britain's Charity Commission. (Photo by Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

Load-Date: August 25, 2006


End of Document