Britain to Help Insurers Cover Terrorism Risks
The New York Times
December 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Financial Desk; Column 5;
Length: 573 words
Byline: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON,

By RICHARD W. STEVENSON,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Dec. 21
Body


Faced with a potential crisis among commercial property owners and tenants unable to buy insurance against terrorist attacks, the British Government agreed today to help insure buildings against damages from bombs set off by the Irish Republican Army.
The Government, acting under pressure from the insurance industry, landlords and commercial tenants, said it would act as an insurer of last resort if insurance companies could not cover bombing losses.
With Britain enduring its worst wave of I.R.A. bombings and threats in decades, British insurers have stopped offering new policies to cover terrorist attacks and have said they will be unable to renew expiring policies as of Jan. 1. The actions will leave virtually all office buildings and other commercial structures in Britain uninsured against bomb damage.
 
Outbreak of Terrorism
 The insurers acted after a series of small I.R.A. bombings in London and other cities recently, and after the police foiled attempts last month to set off two one-ton bombs in London's financial district.
A bomb attack in April in the financial district caused $1.3 billion in damage. Business executives here had said they feared that the current wave of terror could cripple the property and insurance industries if the Government did not step in with financial assistance.
"Without this agreement, terrorism attacks on the British mainland would have meant utter disaster for the U.K. economy, for property companies, developers and business," said Tony Baker, a spokesman for the Association of British Insurers.
Insurers said they had been unable to find reinsurers -- which in effect provide insurance to insurance companies -- that were willing to share the risks of covering bomb damage. The Government said today that it would act temporarily as a reinsurer, paying damages above a certain level. That level is still being negotiated with the insurance industry.
Government officials said they had been reluctant to step in with financial help, feeling that a commercial solution would be better. But there were no signs that reinsurers were re-evaluating their positions. In addition, Government officials said they were increasingly fearful that a large bomb explosion, especially in central London, could cause the private sector immense economic harm and badly harm the reputation of London as a financial center.
"It is the Government's objective that its involvement should be of limited duration and should cause the minimum interference necessary with the working of the market," said Michael Heseltine, the Trade and Industry Minister.
Mr. Heseltine said details of the plan were still being worked out. But industry executives said the program would probably involve the insurance industry's adding extra money to its own reinsurance pool. The additional money would come from higher premiums on policies. Any damages above the amount in the pool would be paid by the Government. News reports have said the industry pool now has about $500 million.
With the Government providing reinsurance, insurers are expected to begin selling policies again, although at higher rates. Mr. Heseltine said the Government would help pay claims only on insured risks and would not reimburse property owners who did not buy insurance policies.
In Northern Ireland, the Government acts as an insurance company itself, covering losses from terrorist attacks in return for premiums paid directly to the Government.

Load-Date: December 22, 1992


End of Document