British raids net 16 terrorism suspects
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 3, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 284 words
Byline: By Beth Gardiner THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


Police said Saturday that they had arrested 14 people in and around London suspected of trying to train and recruit others for terrorist attacks. Two others were arrested in a separate raid in the northern city of Manchester.
Police said the arrests late Friday and early Saturday were not linked to an alleged plot that emerged last month to bomb as many as 10 trans-Atlantic jets or to the July 2005 suicide bombings on London's transit network, which killed 52 commuters and the bombers.
Fears about homegrown terrorism have been high since the transit bombings, which were carried out by three Britons of Pakistani descent and a Jamaican immigrant who grew up in England. Those concerns grew with the arrests Aug. 9-10 of 25 people in the alleged plot to bomb airliners with liquid explosives.
The 14 men, ages 17 to 48, were being held at a central London police station on suspicion of the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism, police said. Officers were searching homes around the capital, they said. The arrests followed months of surveillance and investigation. 
Some of the suspects were apprehended at a south London restaurant, police said. Among the sites being searched following the arrests was the Jameah Islamiyah Secondary School, a Muslim school near Crowborough, 40 miles south of London, Sussex police said.
The restaurant, called Bridge to China Town, is popular with students from nearby London South Bank University and with the area's large Muslim population because its menu is halal -- that is, in accordance with Islamic dietary practices.
A spokeswoman for Sussex police said searches at the Jameah Islamiyah school would continue for days and perhaps weeks.

Notes

 World 

Load-Date: September 3, 2006


End of Document