British Leader Acts to Tighten Terrorism Laws
The New York Times
August 26, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 6; Column 6; Foreign Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 345 words
Byline: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM 

By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM 
Dateline: LONDON, Aug. 25
Body


Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain announced today that he was calling Parliament back into session from its summer recess next week to toughen antiterrorism laws. Similar measures are being contemplated by the Irish Republic after the bombing in Omagh, in the British province of Northern Ireland, that took 28 lives and wounded 220 people.
Mr. Blair made the widely expected announcement when he visited Omagh today. British officials said he might ask Parliament either to tighten existing laws or to seek "draconian" legislation to obtain convictions against members of banned terrorist organizations.
The leader of the Conservative opposition, William Hague, said he expected Parliament to convene next Wednesday and Thursday.
The car bombing in Omagh has brought calls across both Ireland and Britain for tougher measures against political violence. The British and Irish Governments appear to be moving in sync to reassure the public that they are serious in their resolve.
Prime Minister Bertie Ahern of Ireland has already announced plans to tighten antiterrorism legislation and has recalled the Irish Parliament for next week to consider the measures.
In Omagh today, Mr. Blair found the town still in shock 10 days after a 500-pound bomb tore apart a commercial street, killing and wounding weekend shoppers. He met relatives of the victims and medical personnel who cared for them. His next stop was Belfast, to meet with leaders of Northern Ireland's main political parties.
While Mr. Blair did not elaborate on the measures to be taken, they are likely to include a provision for reinstating "internment" -- the power to hold terrorism suspects for several days without bringing charges. He is also expected to propose tightening bail conditions for those accused of crimes and narrowing the scope of their right to silence under questioning.
The most sensitive issue would be internment. The Blair Government abolished internment last year, and Catholics fear the measure could be used arbitrarily to round up political activists as well as potential terrorists.

Load-Date: August 26, 1998


End of Document