BRITONS SHOCKED, OUTRAGED BY ISTANBUL ATTACKS;
 QUESTION WHETHER WAR ON TERRORISM IS WINNABLE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 21, 2003 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 551 words
Byline: GLENN FRANKEL AND PETER SLEVIN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Yesterday was the day the war on terrorism truly came home to Britain.
 It started with two bomb blasts in a distant land targeted at British institutions: a consulate and bank. It continued with a U.S. president, wrapped in a blanket of tight security, standing side by side with a British prime minister to denounce the attacks, while tens of thousands of vocal but orderly anti-war protesters took to the streets to denounce the two leaders.
Ian Barton, a kiosk vendor on fashionable Regent Street selling newspapers headlined "Britons Die in Al-Qaida Bombings," said it was no coincidence that the bombs exploded during President Bush's state visit, resulting in split-screen television shots of Bush leaving Buckingham Palace yesterday morning while emergency crews raced to smoky scenes of damage and death in Istanbul.
 Barton, 34, supported the Iraq war. Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, he said, was "a danger to the world" and had to be defeated. But he wondered whether the war against terrorism was winnable. "Who are you really fighting?" he asked. "That's the worry. It's an invisible army."
 While Britons have died in recent terrorist assaults -- including nearly 50 in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and 28 in last year's bombings in Bali -- the Istanbul bombs marked the first time in the 2-year-old struggle that attackers singled out British civilian facilities.
 Lawmakers and officials expressed shock and outrage at the killings of British and Turkish staff members. "They posed a threat to no one," Foreign Secretary Jack Straw told the House of Commons. His counterpart, Conservative Party foreign affairs spokesman Michael Ancram, said he felt "horror, revulsion and condemnation" over the attacks.
 The Rev. Rowan Williams, the Archbishop of Canterbury, spoke of the "generous and warm hospitality" he received from one of the dead, Consul General Roger Short, just two days ago in Istanbul. "I cannot easily express the shock and grief that I and my family and staff are feeling," Williams told reporters.
 Addressing cheering demonstrators at Trafalgar Square last evening, British Green Party official Caroline Lucasput the blame for the bombings squarely on President Bush and his strategic partner, Prime Minister Tony Blair. "It shows that our world is anything other than more safe today," she declared, saying Bush is "a war criminal who has made this world an infinitely more dangerous place."
 Each side of the debate paid homage to the victims of the bombings, which claimed at least 27 lives. And each saw the attacks as justification for its own stand. But beyond the politics and posturing, there was a sense of sadness and anxiety, and the fear that the world was somewhat out of control and the future uncertain.
 Ian Campbell, 50, a civil servant in tweed jacket and tie who wheeled his bicycle through Leicester Square on the way home from work, said the bombings will harden attitudes, leaving those who support the use of force even more convinced that strong tactics are the only answer, while bolstering critics in their belief that the Iraq invasion was a mistake.
 "I don't think it will bring us together," said Campbell, who did not attend the demonstration, referring to the Istanbul violence.
 "I think it will force us apart, which is probably what it was intended to do."

Load-Date: November 22, 2003


End of Document