Brits arrive to keep the peace;
Bush hails 100 days of progress in campaign against terrorism
 Philadelphia Daily News
December 21, 2001 Friday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 09
Length: 899 words
Byline: Reuters
Body


BRITISH ROYAL Marines landed in Kabul yesterday as the vanguard of an international peacekeeping force, while President Bush heralded 100 days of progress in the U.S.-led war on terrorism.
With the war in Afghanistan giving way to a manhunt for Osama bin Laden, U.S. agents interrogated captured fighters for clues in the search for the Saudi-born militant suspected of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks on America that killed some 3,000 people.
In Washington, Bush said much had been accomplished in the first 100 days of the U.S.-led campaign against terrorism.
"We've built a broad international coalition against terror," he said. "We broke the Taliban's grip on Afghanistan. We took the war to the al Qaeda terrorists. We're securing our airways. We're defending our homeland. And we're attacking the terrorists' international financial network."
Bush also announced action to block the assets of two groups he said had links to terrorism: the Kashmir separatist group Lashkar-e-Taiba, also known as Army of the Righteous, and Umma Tameer-e-Nau, which he said was established by a former Pakistan atomic-energy commission official and masqueraded as a charity for the hungry in Afghanistan.
In reality, Bush said, the group gave nuclear weapons information to bin Laden's al Qaeda network.
"LET is a stateless sponsor of terrorism, and it hopes to destroy relations between Pakistan and India and undermine Pakistani's president, [Pervez] Musharraf. To achieve its purpose, LET has committed acts of terrorism inside both India and Pakistan," Bush said.
At Bagram Airbase in Afghanistan, 53 British Royal Marines landed yesterday to take up a security role in the capital ahead of the installation of a new interim government tomorrow.
Britain is leading the international force intended to nurture the country's fragile peace. The force was officially authorized yesterday by the U.N. Security Council.
Maj. Matt Jones, the company commander, said he and his men comprised the initial stage of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). "We are here to start providing security and assistance," he said.
"We will be assisting with the running and providing a presence at the inauguration of the interim government," he said referring to tomorrow's ceremony in Kabul, the Afghan capital.
Afghan factions agreed in Germany to set up a six-month interim government to replace the Taliban, routed by their local opponents backed by weeks of U.S. airstrikes.
Jones said the mission would begin today when his men, accompanied by Afghan security forces, would escort VIPs arriving for the ceremony from Bagram Airbase to Kabul.
Jones said the troops would be keeping a low profile. They would wear berets, not helmets, ride in unarmored Land Rovers and carry only light arms.
"Afghanistan, particularly, probably has a sensitivity to foreign troops. We have no reason to upset anyone," he said.
Francesc Vendrell, the deputy U.N. special envoy to Afghanistan, told reporters the force would give the interim government a sense of security.
"I think it will give the right atmosphere and will provide a sense of security for those people who are coming to participate in the interim authority who are not from the United Front [Northern Alliance] side," he said.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Senate approved a bill that would allow victims of the Sept. 11 attacks and their families to watch a closed-circuit television broadcast of the trial of Zacarias Moussaoui, an alleged conspirator.
The measure, approved on a voice vote, would allow closed-circuit broadcasts to at least six locations directly affected by the attacks - northern Virginia, New York, Boston, San Francisco, Los Angeles and Newark, N.J.
These were the sites of the attacks or were the take-off or scheduled arrival cities of the four hijacked aircraft and would be expected to have the highest concentration of victims and families.
Moussaoui, a French citizen of Moroccan descent, charged with six counts of conspiracy in the first criminal charges directly related to the attack, will be tried in federal court in Alexandria, Va. Federal courts do not allow proceedings to be televised.
In Peshawar, Pakistan, officials said all but five of the more than 20 suspected al Qaeda fighters who escaped on Wednesday after a bloody gunbattle with their guards, had been recaptured.
They said two Arab escapees and a Pakistani paramilitary officer were killed on a hill in the remote northwestern Kurram tribal areas near the Afghan border, bringing the death toll from two days of clashes to 18, he said.
The captives, arrested as they fled battles in Tora Bora across the border in Afghanistan, were being taken to jail by bus when they turned on their army guards, grabbed weapons and opened fire, North West Frontier provincial officials said.
Eight suspected al Qaeda Arabs and seven Pakistani soldiers and paramilitaries, including a bus driver, were killed.
There were these further developments in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks:
- Doctors injected four dozen people yesterday with the anthrax vaccine, as thousands began weighing the government's first printed list of the pros and cons of the experimental inoculations.
- The island home of the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island welcome visitors for the first time since Sept. 11. The statue itself remains closed.
- The number of victims of Sept. 11 attacks in New York drops to 2,963. *

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Associated Press
Refugee camp on outskirts of northern Afghan town Sar-e-Pul, where some 2,000 families started arriving about six months ago.

Load-Date: January 7, 2002


End of Document