British Agent Pleads Guilty to Terrorism in Northern Ireland
The New York Times
January 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 400 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: BELFAST, Northern Ireland, Jan. 22
Body


A man who spied for the British in Northern Ireland while a member of a Protestant group backing British rule there pleaded guilty to 20 terrorism-related charges today.
The guilty pleas averted a long trial that would have apparently led to disclosures about intelligence gathering by the British Army.
The Government dropped 15 other counts against the agent, Brian Nelson, including two charges of murder.
Mr. Nelson, 44 years old, pleaded guilty to charges that included conspiracy to murder. He had admitted plotting to kill five men, including a member of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, which is fighting to end British rule over Northern Ireland.
Mr. Nelson, a former soldier, belonged to the Ulster Defense Association, which offered his services to army intelligence.
 
Arrested After Police Inquiry
 He was arrested two years ago after a British police inquiry into collusion between Protestant groups and the security forces. Investigators concluded that members of the British security forces had passed along information on suspected I.R.A. guerrillas to Protestant gangs.
More than 90 people were arrested after the 1989 police inquiry, which began after militant Protestants said they had used security files to identify and shoot a Roman Catholic adversary.
Britain's Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, was involved in the decision to charge Mr. Nelson despite what was viewed as fierce army opposition.
Mr. Nelson, who once belonged to the Black Watch Regiment of the British Army, is being held in a top-security jail in Belfast. He is to be sentenced after the case resumes next week.
The state said had it reached its decision not to proceed with the 15 other counts "after a painstaking and scrupulous assessment of possible evidential difficulties with the prosecution and a rigorous examination of the interests of justice."
Some prominent Roman Catholic politicians protested the settlement, saying it appeared the Government was trying to cover up information about intelligence activities.
The case was adjourned after Mr. Nelson's lawyer said that a crucial witness who could provide mitigating evidence was abroad.
Mr. Nelson was recruited as an army agent in the mid-1970's.
In 1985, he got a job in Germany, where he was joined by his wife and two sons. But the British Army is said to have paid him sums exceeding a total of $50,000 to return to Belfast.

Load-Date: January 23, 1992


End of Document