British House leader analyzes terrorism in Notre Dame lecture
University Wire
January 23, 2002


Copyright 2002 The Observer via U-Wire
Length: 557 words
Byline: By Joe Ackerman, The Observer
Dateline: South Bend, Ind.
Body


Sept. 11 has come and gone, yet the aftermath of the attacks on America still lives on in many and affects their lives on a daily basis.
Originally scheduled to lecture on the topic of "Science and God," Shirley Williams geared her Tuesday night lecture on "War and Peace," as part seven of her eight lectures comprising the Erasmus lectures series at the University of Notre Dame.
To her audience in the Hesburgh Center Auditorium, the British House of Lords member discussed what she thinks in regard to the nature of terrorism itself and also what can and should be done to counteract its potential effects.
U. Notre Dame
Terrorism, Williams argued, has as its basis the dual problems of resentment and unmet expectations. It evolves from historical wrongdoings, that have long lasting ramifications among those affected which leads to strong views and even stronger convictions.
"Terrorism is parasitical on civilized society and will destroy it if it is not contained," said Williams.
In order to correct these historical wrongs, Williams said heavily symbolic actions can go a long way to repairing damage, such as the pope's apology for slavery and former German chancellor Brandt's apology to the Jews at the Warsaw ghetto.
In regards to the current U.S. war on terrorism, Williams said that, "Politically, by describing the attacks as an act of war was attractive." This she argued was due to the fact that it gave the President "great freedom of action."
However, Williams expressed concern over how the United States could go about a war on terrorism without addressing groups such as the IRA and Spain's ETA and labeling them with enemy status.
"Defining terrorists as the enemy is treacherous territory," she stated.
Williams went on to lay out a series of ideas, which she feels are essential to the problem of containing terrorism. Some of these ideas include a recognized system of international law, a more even distribution of wealth and resources and the recognition of responsibility for international peace by all nations, especially Western powers.
"No instrument is more appropriate," Williams commented in regard to a proposed international court system that would handle cases of terrorism at an international level. The U.S. Congress voted against joining the not yet operational court [which has been joined by 41 nations so far and will become operational when it reaches 60] on the grounds that it could take U.S. citizens under its jurisdiction.
Williams stressed a comparison between the attacks perpetrated by Osama bin Laden on New York and Washington, which killed 3,000 Americans, with the massacre of Muslims in the former Yugoslavia by former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, which killed 5,000 Muslims. She believes it is imperative that there be an international standard and method in place for dealing with such crimes and criminals so similar punishments can be meted out.
Ultimately, Williams argued, it is necessary for the nations of the world to realize these ideas in order to work toward the goals of containing terrorism and realizing world peace. International cooperation, through support of organizations such as the United Nations and the recognition of instability and inequity in the world is an essential step toward achieving these goals.
(C) 2002 The Observer via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 23, 2002


End of Document