BRITISH ASK SOVIET TO DECLARE ITSELF AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 725 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Oct. 25
Body


Britain called on the Soviet Union today to declare publicly its rejection of state-supported terrorism in the wake of allegations that Syria, a Russian ally, was involved in a plot to blow up an Israeli airliner.
Britain broke off diplomatic relations with Syria on Friday, citing ''conclusive evidence'' of Syria's involvement in the attempt to bomb an El Al Israel Airlines plane and its 375 passengers in April.
The Thatcher Government told Syria to close its embassy in London and ordered its diplomats to leave Britain. Damascus responded by closing the British Embassy in Syria.
Eavesdropping Is Disclosed
Government officials said today that British intelligence agents had been able to eavesdrop directly on conversations verifying the complicity of the Syrian Ambassador in the plot to bomb the El Al plane. The intelligence was a major factor in Britain's decision to break relations. [Page 6.] In Moscow on Friday, the Soviet Government called Britain's move a ''provocative action'' based on evidence that was ''obviously invented.'' There are several thousand Soviet servicemen based in Syria. Damascus is also regarded by terrorist experts as an extremely active sponsor of Arab terrorist groups, perhaps more active than Libya.
A Foreign Office spokesman today expressed the British Government's dissatisfaction with Moscow's reaction to London's decision. A senior British diplomat met Friday with the Soviet charge d'affaires, German G. Gventsadze, and explained the reasons for the British move.
 
'Helpful Response' Sought
After that explanation, the British Government hopes Moscow will express a ''more considered and helpful response,'' the Foreign Office spokesman said.
Britain wants the Soviet Union to ''make a public statement disassociating themselves from state-supported terrorism,'' the Foreign Office spokesman said, adding that the El Al bombing attempt was ''precisely the sort of terrorist case they should disassociate themselves from.''
The comments from the Foreign Office today are in line with statements made Friday night by the Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, in a broadcast interview. Sir Geoffrey said Britain would be seeking Soviet ''understanding and cooperation.''
Sir Geoffrey said he had discussed terrorism with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, when the two men met at the United Nations in September. ''He agreed that they would take part in a joint discussion of terrorism and what we might do together to curb it,'' Sir Geoffrey said. ''And this will be an interesting situation where we can test that general proposition further.''
Britain broke relations with Syria Friday after a London court convicted a Jordanian, Nezar Hindawi, of plotting to destroy the Israeli jet, using his Irish friend as an unwitting bomb courier. Mr. Hindawi, who traveled with a Syrian passport under a false name, was sentenced to 45 years in prison. According to the court testimony, Mr. Hindawi was provided accommodation by the Syrian diplomatic staff and met with Ambassador Loutof Allah Haydar after the bomb was discovered.
 
'Conclusive Evidence'
Separately, the British Government said it had ''conclusive evidence'' of Syrian involvement. The Syrian Ambassador, according to British officials, was personally active in securing for Mr. Hindawi the assistance of Syrian intelligence agencies. In addition, Mr. Hindawi tried to contact the Syrian officials in Damascus after he was arrested, the Foreign Office said.
In a broadcast interview, Mr. Haydar said it was common for Middle East journalists like Mr. Hindawi to travel under foreign passports. He said that although he met Mr. Hindawi briefly after the bomb was discovered, the Syrian Embassy was not involved in the plot and did not give Mr. Hindawi shelter.
Syria and the Soviet Union signed a friendship treaty in 1980, under which Soviet air defense units are deployed in Syria. And Syria's defense forces are armed with Soviet weaponry.
According to one Western European diplomat, the British Government may have figured that Syria might become more active as a sponsor of terrorist activity in London after the Hindawi verdict, no matter what action Britain took.
''By expelling Syria's diplomats and shutting down the embassy,'' the diplomat said, ''Britain is making it more difficult for Syria to try anything, at least in Britain.''


End of Document