British official speaking at U. Iowa says U.S., UK must fight terrorism
University Wire
January 24, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Daily Iowan via U-Wire
Length: 430 words
Byline: By Lawrence De Geest, The Daily Iowan; SOURCE: U. Iowa
Dateline: IOWA CITY, Iowa 
Body


A British consul general who visited the University of Iowa on Tuesday emphasized that the United States and Britain must fight terrorism together for the world's security because rapidly accessible technology has given terror groups more mobility.
"In a globalized world, terrorist organizations can use and exploit the gifts of globalization, such as the Internet and fast and efficient banking," British Consul General Andrew Seaton said during a speech hosted by the Iowa City Foreign Relations Council.
In his 45-minute lecture, Seaton detailed the "Four P's" of Britain's terrorist policy: Prepare, Protect, Pursue, and Prevent. While he acknowledged that preparing for a terrorist attack is difficult and limited, it depends strongly on pursuing known terrorist cells with active agendas against the West and then preventing future generations from engaging in "acts of criminality."
Seaton stressed that the United States needs to embrace its Muslim population to prevent the growth of anti-Western sentiments on its own soil, because potential terrorists -- as citizens -- could move more easily through Western nations.
Accordingly, he said, Americans must not form direct links between terrorism and Islam, reminding the 30-person audience that the radicals who use terrorist tactics are a small minority of the religion.
Pointing to the U.S. and British support of ethnic Albanian Muslims during the Kosovo conflict in the 1990s, Seaton said the West is not fighting against an entire religion but rather separate groups embedded within it.
He also described how global climate changes will affect the terrorism landscape. He estimated that a 2 percent increase in the world's temperature would lead to a 20 to 30 percent crop loss in Africa and the Middle East, and the evaporating resources will probably lead to higher levels of conflict and terrorism, throwing heavy energy consumers such as Britain and the United States deeper into the fire.
With Prime Minister Tony Blair most likely leaving office later this year, Seaton pointed to Gordon Brown as his potential successor. The move would come as British intelligence expands to twice the size it was in September 2001.
British intelligence foiled a large plot to explode American-bound airplanes last summer, and Seaton emphasized the importance of U.S. and British cooperation to prevent future attacks amid the escalating confusion in Iraq and the rise in immigration in the European Union and other Western countries.
Seaton's speech will be broadcast on WSUI on Jan. 28 at 8 p.m.
(C) 2007 The Daily Iowan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 24, 2007


End of Document