British Leader Seeks New Terrorism Laws
The New York Times
July 26, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 853 words
Byline: By JANE PERLEZ; Ariana Green contributed reporting.
Dateline: LONDON, July 25 
Body


Taking an early firm stand on terrorism, Prime Minister Gordon Brown told Parliament on Wednesday that his government would establish a highly visible border police force that would patrol airports and seaports, a proposal that the opposition Conservatives have long supported.
  In a wide-ranging package of anti-terrorism measures that stressed security over winning the hearts of Britain's Muslim population, Mr. Brown said he wanted to extend the period that terrorism suspects could be held for questioning without charge. 
  In the longer run, he said, Britain would require all visa applicants to have ''biometric'' screening after March 2008.
  A screening system, to be introduced as soon as possible, he said, would enable border officials to check passports of people entering and leaving Britain in real time against a database.
  ''Our country -- and all countries -- have to confront a generation-long challenge to defeat Al Qaeda-inspired terror violence,'' Mr. Brown said in the House of Commons. He said there had been 15 efforts to attack Britain since Sept. 11, 2001. Some of the government's proposals, in particular the extension of time for questioning suspects held without charge to 56 days from 28 days, had been discussed as possibilities before the Wednesday speech.
  But the plan for the border patrol police, which would combine immigration and customs officers, came as a surprise. It appeared intended to show that Mr. Brown meant business in reinforcing Britain's security measures and that he, a member of the Labor Party, was willing to include something from Conservative Party policy.
  The Conservative Party spokesman on security, David Davis, in an op-ed article in The Daily Telegraph on Wednesday criticized Labor for what he called its plans to introduce new laws rather than carry out current antiterrorism measures more effectively. 
  The Conservatives proposed a border police force five years ago. The new border patrol, Mr. Brown said, will  be fully in place ''very soon,'' after a report is delivered to the government about how to coordinate the various services that will make up the force. But visitors to Britain  will start seeing the new patrols next month, he said.
  Longer periods for interrogation of terrorism suspects is a hot-button issue in Britain, where some people believe such measures recall the policy of internment by the British security forces against the Irish Republican Army and its sympathizers. 
  In explaining his decision to call for a longer period of detention for terrorism suspects held without charge, Mr. Brown said that in the past year six suspects had been held for 27 days or the maximum 28 days.
  Three of those suspects were charged in connection with the plot last year to bring down trans-Atlantic airliners heading for the United States. Three others were released.
  The complexities of terrorist plots, which often involve multiple identities and the need for investigators to look at thousands of phone records and analyze computer hard drives, justified an extension to 56 days, Mr. Brown said. The airline plot involved 200 cellphones, 400 computers and 8,000 CDs, DVDs and discs, which together contained 6,000 gigabytes of data, he told Parliament. 
  Civil liberties groups, defense lawyers and British Muslim organizations oppose the extension of time for questioning, on the grounds that it would seriously erode individual rights.
  ''Twenty-eight days is already too long,'' said Louise Christian, a senior partner in Christian Khan, a law firm that specializes in defending terrorism suspects. ''It should never have gone to 14. It used to be 7 days.'' 
  She accused the British police, whose main lobbying organization has called for indefinite detention for questioning of terrorism suspects, of being ''allowed to play an undemocratic lobbying role.''
  Figures released by the Home Office recently showed that between Sept. 11, 2001, and March of this year, 1,228 people were arrested on suspicion of terrorism offenses. Of those, 669 were released without charge.
  The data also showed that only 241 had been charged with offenses under terrorism legislation.
  In outlining his plans for the longer period for questioning, Mr. Brown also said that he would consider an extension of the detention period to as long as 90 days, but that he preferred the period he was proposing.
  Mr. Brown also said his government had set aside $144 million, for local councils to set up programs to teach citizenship skills and English to Muslim clerics, many of whom come from Pakistan to take those positions.
  The prime minister said that the government would finance a BBC Arabic-language channel. Similarly, he said the government would finance  an editorially independent Persian-language station for Iranians.
  Failed terrorist attacks in London and Glasgow marred Mr. Brown's first days in office as prime minister. 
  Seven people living in Britain were detained for questioning in those failed bombings. Three were charged, three others were released, and one man remains hospitalized with severe burns from the failed attack. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Prime Minister Gordon Brown told the House of Commons that he was seeking, among other measures, the establishment of a border patrol. (Photograph by Press Association, via Associated Press)            

Load-Date: July 26, 2007


End of Document