Britain's Prime Minister Pledges an Inquiry Into the Torture of Terrorism Suspects
The New York Times
July 7, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 888 words
Byline: By JOHN F. BURNS
Body


LONDON -- Prime Minister David Cameron announced on Tuesday that Britain's new coalition government would appoint an independent inquiry into allegations that its security services, MI5 and MI6, colluded with the Central Intelligence Agency and other foreign organizations in the rendition and torture of terrorism suspects held in foreign prisons after the 9/11 attacks.
  Mr. Cameron had called for the inquiry before the spring election campaign against the former Labour government, which had endured years of criticism at home for being too cozy with the Bush administration in the reaction to terrorism.
  Mr. Cameron said a 76-year-old retired appeals court judge, Sir Peter Gibson, would head a three-member panel to review actions by the security services that have led to a dozen cases before British courts in which former detainees have alleged that the British agencies knew -- or should have known -- that the detainees were being mistreated.
  ''It's time to clear this matter up once and for all,'' he told the House of Commons. 
  He said he hoped that the inquiry would start before 2011, and that he would have the panel's full report within 12 months of its first sitting. While the panel would hold ''some of its hearings'' in public, he said, much of its work would be conducted behind closed doors. 
  ''Let's be frank,'' he said, ''it is not possible to have a full public inquiry into something that is meant to be secret.''
  In a further bid to end the controversy, he said the government was committed to a role of ''mediation'' in the civil suits for damages that former detainees had brought against the British security services and, ''wherever appropriate,'' to pay compensation. It was the closest any British minister had come to acknowledging outright that British agents knew or suspected that the detainees were being abused, and did little or nothing to prevent it.
  ''While there is no evidence that any British officer was directly engaged in torture in the aftermath of 9/11, there are questions over the degree to which British officers were working with foreign security services who were treating detainees in ways they should not have done,'' Mr. Cameron said. He said this had ''led to accusations that Britain may have been complicit in the mistreatment of detainees.''
  Under the Labour government, MI5, responsible for Britain's internal security, and MI6, responsible for external security, issued strong denials that their agents were complicit in mistreatment. The agencies received vigorous backing from the government, at least until court disclosures began to show that the detainees' allegations against them might have had some validity.
  Mr. Cameron said that the security agencies were being ''paralyzed by paperwork'' as they defended themselves against the allegations in court, and that Britain's international reputation was being damaged, too. 
  ''Public confidence is being eroded, with people doubting the ability of our services to protect us and questioning the rules under which they operate,'' he said. ''And terrorists and extremists are able to exploit these allegations for their own propaganda.'' 
  Former detainees have said that British agents who questioned them while they were detained, or who were working closely with American and other foreign agencies overseeing their interrogations, were complicit in their being shuttled through the C.I.A.'s secret archipelago of ''ghost prisons.'' In several cases, the detainees said the agents either witnessed the abuse or knew enough to conclude that they were being mistreated.
  Among other charges, the detainees have claimed that they were subjected to sleep deprivation and painful ''stress positions,'' as well as to excessive noise, cold and threats of being killed or ''disappeared.'' One widely publicized case involved Binyam Mohamed, an Ethiopian-born former detainee with a British right of residency who was released from the prison at Guantanamo Bay last year and returned to Britain; among the charges are that his genitals were sliced with a razor while he was being held in Morocco.
  In his Commons statement, Mr. Cameron trod warily around the implications of the inquiry for relations with the United States. In Mr. Mohamed's court case, the Labour government fought -- and lost -- a bid to keep secret information about his treatment that was provided to Britain by the C.I.A. At one point, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton warned Britain's Foreign Office that security cooperation between the countries would be harmed if the information provided to Britain in secret were made public by the court.
  Mr. Cameron said the inquiry would be expected to review aspects of Britain's cooperation on terrorism matters with the United States. ''Did we allow our own high standards to slip -- either systematically or individually?'' he asked. ''Did we give clear enough guidance to officers in the field?''
  But the prime minister also stressed the damage that could result if the United States lost confidence in Britain. There were doubts, he said, about the British agencies' ability to ''protect the secrets'' of allied agencies like the C.I.A. He added, ''This has strained some of our oldest and most important security partnerships in the world -- in particular, that with America.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Minister David Cameron, center
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, left
 and Foreign Secretary William Hague were briefed by members of Britain's security services on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER MACDIARMID/GETTY IMAGES)                                              

Load-Date: July 7, 2010


End of Document