BRITONS PROTEST GOVERNMENT PLANS TO ALLOW EAVESDROPPING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 3, 2012 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 498 words
Byline: Alan Cowell, The New York Times
Body


LONDON -- British lawmakers and rights activists joined a chorus of protest Monday against plans by the government to give the intelligence and security services the ability to monitor the phone calls, emails, text messages and Internet use of every person in the country.
In a land where tens of thousands of surveillance cameras attest to claims by privacy advocates that Britain is the Western world's most closely monitored society, the proposal has compounded arguments that its citizens live under what critics call an increasingly intrusive "nanny state."
The debate in recent years has pitted those who justify greater scrutiny by reference to threats of terrorism and organized crime against those who cleave to more traditional notions of individual privacy.
But the current proposal would raise the question of how security agencies can themselves keep track of a proliferation of newer technologies such as Skype, instant messaging and social networking sites that permit instant communication outside more traditional channels.
"What we do need to make sure is that, as technology changes, we are able to maintain our current capability in this area," a spokesman for Prime Minister David Cameron said, speaking anonymously under departmental rules.
The Home Office said the new measures were vital to provide police and security services with "communications data to investigate serious crime and terrorism and to protect the public."
Under the proposal, made public in The Sunday Times of London, a law to be introduced this year would allow authorities to order Internet companies to install hardware enabling the government's monitoring agency, the Government Communications Headquarters, or GCHQ, to examine individual communications without a warrant.
A similar effort to enhance authorities' powers was made by the previous Labour government in 2006 but was abandoned after ferocious opposition, including from the two parties that now form the coalition government -- the dominant Conservatives and the smaller Liberal Democrats -- and are now re-introducing the same legislation.
Currently, government eavesdroppers and police need a warrant to monitor specific communications. But the new system would permit authorities to track communications data such as "time, duration and dialing numbers of a phone call or an email address," the Home Office said in a statement.
"It does not include the content of any phone call or email, and it is not the intention of the government to make changes to the existing legal basis for the interception of communications," the statement said.
GCHQ is run in close collaboration with the National Security Agency in the United States. It is one of three British intelligence agencies, along with the domestic MI5 security unit and the overseas MI6 secret intelligence service. Information gathered by GCHQ has played a major part in the security service's efforts to foil purported terrorist plots since the July 7, 2005, London bombings.

Load-Date: April 3, 2012


End of Document