Britain Offers Plan to Restrain, Not Jail, Foreign Terror Suspects
The New York Times
January 27, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 369 words
Byline: By LIZETTE ALVAREZ
Dateline: LONDON, Jan. 26 
Body


The British government announced a plan on Wednesday to overhaul its antiterrorism laws, hoping to grant itself broad new powers to monitor and control foreign terrorism suspects without having to detain them indefinitely without charges, a policy that was declared illegal last month by Britain's highest court.
 The measures, which must be put forward to Parliament as a bill, would give the home secretary, Charles Clarke, the ability to give suspects curfews, tag them with electronic bracelets, limit their access to telephones and the Internet, restrict their communications with ''named individuals'' and, as a last resort, place them under house arrest. 
  The new ''control orders'' would apply to foreigners and British citizens, addressing the court's judgment that special treatment for foreign detainees was discriminatory and violated the European Convention on Human Rights. The orders, the government said, could be applied if there are ''reasonable grounds'' for suspecting terrorist activity. Prosecuting a suspect on charges requires a higher threshold.
 In announcing the plan to the House of Commons, Mr. Clarke said that the suspects now in detention -- the number is thought to be between 9 and 12 -- would remain in jail until the ''control orders'' were in place, adding that they continued ''to pose a threat to national security.'' Some of the men have been in detention for three years. 
 ''There remains a public emergency threatening the life of the nation,'' Mr. Clarke said. ''The threat is real, and I believe that the steps I am announcing today will enable us more effectively to meet that threat.''
 The plan would revise the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act, passed shortly after the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States. Reaction was mixed, with some opposition politicians questioning whether the measures might create resentment and stoke terrorism, rather than fight it. 
 Human rights lawyers said the plan, while better than indefinite detention in jail, still raised considerable concerns, particularly since house arrest is a serious measure and suspects should be presumed innocent until proven guilty.                                                               

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 27, 2005


End of Document