British Court Frees 2 Arrested As Suspects In Terrorism Plot
The New York Times
February 8, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 337 words
Byline: By JANE PERLEZ
Dateline: LONDON, Feb. 7 
Body


A court on Wednesday ordered the release of two men arrested last week as suspects in a terrorism plot that the authorities said involved kidnapping a British Muslim soldier and broadcasting video images of his killing on the Internet.
  The judge, Daphne Wickham, also ruled that the police had only an additional 72 hours to present evidence against seven others who were arrested at the same time, a much shorter period than the two weeks the police had requested.
 The lawyer for the two men, Gareth Peirce, said in an interview on Wednesday that they had barely been questioned by the police during the seven days they were held. Further, she said, the police never raised the subject of a possible plot to kidnap a British Muslim soldier. 
  ''One man over seven days was interviewed for less than two hours,'' Ms. Peirce said. ''The other man for not much more.'' When the police did question them, she said, they had ''nothing meaningful'' to ask. 
  Of the suspicion that there was a plan to behead a British Muslim soldier, ''not one single word was mentioned by the police'' to her two clients, Ms. Peirce said. 
  Nine Muslim men were arrested in poor, mostly South Asian areas of Birmingham last week. Under Britain's antiterrorism laws, the police can detain suspects for up to 28 days without bringing charges. The police must apply periodically during the 28 days, though, for permission to continue to hold suspects.
  ''There was a complete failure to reveal to the two detainees any specific reason why they had been detained; indeed, there was a refusal to do so,'' Ms. Peirce said. 
  She said she did not have permission from her two clients to disclose their names. 
  According to British press reports, the police arrested 1,082 people from September 2001 to August 2006 on suspicion of offenses under the Terrorism Act. The reports said 664 were released without charges, 175 were charged with terrorism-related offences, 174 faced nonterrorism-related charges and 69 were charged with immigration offenses.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 8, 2007


End of Document