BRITISH DEFENSE OFFICIAL IS KILLED IN GREECE; POLICE LINK ASSASSINATION TO;
TERRORIST GROUP;
SOME QUESTION WHETHER GOVERNMENT IS SERIOUS ABOUT STOPPING GROUP
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 9, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A2
Length: 557 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ATHENS, GREECE
Body


A British defense attache was assassinated Thursday, and police found evidence pointing to the terrorist group November 17, whose members have eluded capture despite a 25-year legacy of violence.
Greek officials are under enormous pressure to show results after what appears to be the group's 22nd slaying: a .45-caliber barrage into the chest and abdomen of Brig. Stephen Saunders, the defense attache in the British Embassy, while he drove to a meeting to discuss possible tank sales to Greece.
Another failure to make an arrest would be an embarrassing blow for a nation desperately trying to shed its image as an unstable corner of Western Europe. Greece is expected to receive approval to join the European Union's single currency group later this month in Portugal.
"Greece is unable to face the phenomenon of terrorism," complained Dora Bakoyannis, a member of Parliament whose husband, Pavlos, also a politician, was killed by November 17 in 1989. "We must not have taboos to take the steps needed."
Such demands are also coming from Washington. Among the November 17 victims are four American officials and one U.S. Embassy employee.
A report last week by a congressional commission proposed sanctions on Greece and Pakistan for "not cooperating fully" in the battle against terrorism. Hearings are scheduled next week. The State Department has described Greece as "one of the weakest links" in anti-terrorism efforts in Europe.
The spotlight also is on Greece to develop a security plan for the 2004 Olympics. Saunders, 52, was shot near the main stadium for the games.
Some critics allege that the governing Socialists lack the will to crack down on domestic terrorism, possibly fearing political upheaval.
In an interview published Thursday in the Greek weekly Pondiki, former CIA Director James Woolsey suggested that the Greek government was "not serious in its pursuit of November 17."
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for Thursday's assassination. But all signs pointed to November 17, which takes its name from the student-led uprising in 1973 against the military junta that ruled Greece from 1967-74.
A police ballistics test indicated that the .45-caliber pistol used to killed Saunders was the same gun fired in past killings claimed by the group. The site and method of the killing was almost identical to two other November 17 slayings.
Two gunmen riding a motorcycle pulled up to the passenger side of Saunders' car, which he was driving alone on a roadway clogged with morning commuters. The gunmen fired through the window and fled into the heavy traffic. Saunders died in a hospital.
Saunders was on his way to a meeting with a top British Defense Ministry official, Baroness Symons, to discuss Britain's attempts to sell Challenger 2E tanks to Greece. Britain is widely derided in Greece for its close alliance with the United States and its support of last year's NATO attacks on Yugoslavia, which were strongly opposed in Greece.
But some analysts see the attack as part of a new anti-EU position for November 17 and other smaller Greek terrorists groups that carry out hundreds of arson and bomb attacks every year.
A diverse collection of Greek Orthodox religious activists and ultranationalists see the 15-nation EU as a bureaucratic bully seeking to force a common culture and perspective on its members.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO (1) Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Police and onlookers stand by the blood-stained car at the scene where British Brig. Stephen Saunders was shot in Athens, Greece, on Thursday. Saunders, the defense attache in the British Embassy, died at a hospital.
 (2) Photo headshot (Brig. Stephen) Saunders
 Was going to discuss possible tank sales

Load-Date: June 9, 2000


End of Document