BRITISH POLICE DETAIN 12 ON SUSPICION OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 21, 2010 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 538 words
Byline: Alan Cowell and Ravi Somaiya, The New York Times
Body


LONDON -- In the latest of several European terrorism alerts, the British police arrested 12 men before dawn Monday in raids in three cities under counterterrorism laws -- the biggest operation of its kind in months.
The action, designed "to ensure public safety," as police put it, followed a suicide bombing in Sweden earlier this month and alarms in Germany over the reported threat of a terror attack modeled on the onslaught by gunmen in Mumbai.
But a Scotland Yard spokesman, speaking in return for anonymity, said the arrests were not linked to an unfolding terrorism investigation in Luton, just north of London, where Taimour Abdulwahab al-Abdaly, 28, a Swedish-Iraqi man who killed himself and wounded two others when he detonated two bombs Dec. 11 in Stockholm, is said to have lived and studied. The spokesman said no arrests have been made in that case.
The BBC said the 12 men arrested Monday were involved in a plot to bomb unspecified targets in Britain, inspired by al-Qaida. Some of the suspects were said to have Bangladeshi origins. John Yates, Britain's ranking counterterrorism police officer, said the detained men were from London, the Welsh city of Cardiff and Stoke-on-Trent in the English Midlands.
"The operation is in its early stages, so we are unable to go into detail at this time about the suspected offenses," Mr. Yates said in a statement. "However, I believe it was necessary at this time to take action in order to ensure public safety."
He described the raids as a "large scale, pre-planned and intelligence-led operation" involving several police forces. The officers who made the arrests -- apparently after weeks of surveillance -- were not armed, police said, suggesting that they had not moved to thwart an imminent attack.
The group was made up of five men in Cardiff, four living in Stoke-on-Trent and three from London. Police said they would be questioned "on suspicion of the commission, preparation or instigation of an act of terrorism" in Britain.
The arrests appeared to be the biggest since April 2009, when police arrested 12 across northern England and then released them without charge, saying an al-Qaida bomb attack had been averted in the northwestern city of Manchester.
European officials have insisted that there are no specific threats of attacks timed to coincide with the holiday season, despite some reports that the Dec. 11 bombing in Stockholm was part of an al-Qaida conspiracy to strike at that period.
The latest alarm came less than three months after the State Department in Washington cautioned U.S. citizens in Europe about reports of a planned attack on a European city.
Britain has been a focus of terrorism since four suicide bombers killed 52 people in attacks on the London rapid transit system on July 7, 2005. Currently, the official terrorism threat level stands at "severe," the second highest, meaning that a terrorist attack is highly likely.
A British former counterterrorism official, who did not want to be identified by name while discussing current operations, said in an interview last month that Scotland Yard is currently working on almost 100 terror cases. Thirty of those, he said, are pressing, with around 10 classified as urgent or imminent.

Load-Date: December 21, 2010


End of Document