Britain rolls back some 9/11 security restrictions
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
January 26, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 765 words
Byline: David Stringer Associated Press
Body


 LONDON ? Britain on Wednesday overturned unpopular curbs on personal freedoms imposed after the Sept. 11 attacks but stopped short of ending the contentious practice of detaining suspected terrorists without trial. Home Secretary Theresa May published a review of the country's tough anti-terrorism laws, which acknowledged some powers had been "out of step with other Western democracies." 
Britain's anti-terrorism policies have long been considered one of the toughest in the West, allowing police to hold suspected terrorists for up to 28 days before they must be charged or released. In contrast, U.S. authorities have only seven days and French police only six. U.K. police will now have only 14 days to hold terror suspects. May also limited the ability of officers to conduct random searches of the public. "For too long, the balance between security and British freedoms has not been the right one," she said in a statement. However, May said the government would be able to reintroduce more a stringent regime on short notice if there were fears of an imminent attack, or to handle a major terrorist plot. Civil liberties advocates complained that the most contentious counterterrorism power ? a house arrest-style program known as control orders ? had been largely retained. Eight people are currently being held under control orders, which can impose a curfew of up to 16 hours per day, require a suspect to wear an electronic anklet, restrict their contact with others and ban an individual from using the internet or traveling overseas. The restrictions are used to handle suspects deemed a risk to national security but who aren't accused of any specific crime and can't be deported because European law won't allow them to be sent to countries where they face possible torture. Control orders were imposed after Britain's courts outlawed the jailing of suspects without trial in 2004. "For the foreseeable future, there are very likely to be a small number of people who pose a real threat to our country but who cannot be successfully prosecuted or deported," May told the House of Commons. May said new powers ? which won't be called control orders ? will require suspects to wear an electronic tag and stay at a specific address overnight for about eight to 10 hours. An individual will have no Internet access via their cell phone, and only a limited ability to visit websites from any home computer. The High Court will need to approve the regime in advance and an individual must be freed after two years, unless authorities can produce evidence of new terrorist activity. "The right place for a terrorist is in a prison cell," May said, pledging new attempts to help prosecutors use intercepted evidence, currently not allowed in British courts. The changes will also end the practice of relocating some of the most serious suspected terrorists away from their family and friends. "This is a form of internal exile," Ken Macdonald, an ex-director of public prosecution who oversaw the review, said in his report. Critics said May's review had left the worst aspects of the control orders program in place. "As before, the innocent may be punished without a fair hearing and the guilty will escape the full force of criminal law," said Shami Chakrabarti, director of human rights campaign group Liberty. "This leaves a familiar bitter taste." The changes don't address other criticism that most suspects are told few details of the allegations against them. May promised to consider the issue in a wider review. However, she did say local authorities will no longer be allowed to use snooping techniques intended to trap terrorists to pry on members of the public suspected of littering, or allowing their pets to foul sidewalks. In the future, police will only be allowed to use stop and search powers for short periods and in specific sites ? such as around sports stadiums during London's 2012 Olympic Summer Games. May's decision to loosen the powers of police and prosecutor come despite recent jitters among security officials over possible terrorist attacks against Europe. Nine men were charged last month over an alleged plan to attack Parliament and the U.S. Embassy in London. After the 2005 suicide bombings on London's transit network that killed 52 commuters, Britain created new laws criminalizing speeches by hardline clerics deemed likely to incite violence, and developed new offenses of preparing or assisting terrorism. May said many measures had alienated British Muslims, hampering the work of law enforcement to gather intelligence on extremists. 

Load-Date: January 27, 2011


End of Document