BRITISH TO WEIGH A DEATH PENALTY
The New York Times
July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 613 words
Byline: By BARNABY J. FEDER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, July 7
Body


A motion to reintroduce the death penalty for murder was placed today on Parliament's agenda for next Wednesday.  The motion, and accompanying amendments naming various types of murder that might carry a death penalty, is the third major attempt to reintroduce hanging since the death penalty was abolished in 1964. The previous attempts, in 1979 and 1982, failed by a wide margin, but this week's motion is given a much better chance of passing. It comes just one month after general elections brought a large, new group of Conservatives in favor of capital punishment into Parliament.
LONDON, July 7 - A motion to reintroduce the death penalty for murder was placed today on Parliament's agenda for next Wednesday.
''This time we must focus on the real issues rather than generalities,'' said Teddy Taylor, a Conservative prominent among those trying to bring back hanging, in a recent interview. Capital punishment is currently outlawed throughout Western Europe.
Five offenses named in the amendments are murders committed as acts of terrorism, murder of a police officer, murder of a prison official, murder by shooting or explosives and murder in connection with theft. A sixth amendment would apply the death penalty to ''other offenses of murder.''
 
Thatcher Said to Favor Motion
The prompt scheduling of the debate before pro-death penalty forces can marshal an intensive lobbying campaign was seen as a setback for supporters of the motion. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has said she is in favor of a return to capital punishment, but many key Cabinet officials and leading Conservatives are opposed or split on which offenses merit the death penalty. The other major parties are all opposed to capital punishment.
The early debate on the motion was interpreted by some political experts here as a sign that Mrs. Thatcher was willing to give Conservative opponents of the motion every opportunity to defeat it in an effort to cut down on its divisive effects within the Party.  The issue is one of the few on which the Government has no official position, leaving members free to vote without party pressure.
Further evidence that Mrs. Thatcher's support for the death penalty might be lukewarm at best came when it was reported today that the Home Office would not introduce legislation giving effect to the motion, if it passed, for at least 16 months. Supporters, however, would be given time to introduce a bill giving effect to the motion if they wished.
 
Division Over Hanging Terrorists
Mrs. Thatcher and Home Secretary Leon Brittan are most favorably inclined to hanging for terrorism. They are bitterly opposed on this point by five of the six men who have been the Government's top administrator in Northern Ireland in the past decade, including James Prior, the current Secretary. All of them believe that the prospect of hanging would simply encourage terrorists by offering them a swifter martyrdom than hunger strikes.
Mr. Brittan will have the sensitive task of presenting an evenhanded view of the conflicting views within Mrs. Thatcher's Cabinet, thus sparing other members of the Cabinet from the need to square off against each other during the debate.
Polls show the majority of the public favors capital punishment for at least some offenses. The Police Federation said this week that it favored hanging for all kinds of murders. However, medical and legal groups are opposed. In addition, the Church of England has scheduled a special debate at its synod next Tuesday in which it is expected to strongly oppose the motion, and the six Roman Catholic bishops in Northern Ireland have said the return of hanging would lead to ''dreadful consequences'' there.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Margaret Thatcher photo of Teddy Taylor photo of Leon Brittan


End of Document