Briton is indicted in U.S. terrorism case
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 7, 2004 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 292 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn.
Body


A British computer specialist was indicted Wednesday on charges that he used U.S.-based Web sites to recruit al-Qaida, Taliban and Chechen fighters and outfit them with gas masks, night-vision goggles and camouflage gear.
Babar Ahmad, 30, was arrested in London in August and has been held there for extradition to the United States.
The indictment accuses him of supporting terrorism, conspiring to kill Americans and laundering money.
Ahmad allegedly ran several sites, including Azzam.com, which investigators say was used to promote holy war and funnel money to terrorists.
The Web site allegedly encouraged people to train in street combat, land mine operations and sniper combat.
Financial donors were told to smuggle cash into Pakistan and pass it to the Taliban's consul general, investigators said.
"If you're supporting the Taliban and the Taliban is killing American soldiers, we're alleging you're conspiring to kill American citizens abroad," Connecticut U.S. Attorney Kevin O'Connor said.
Investigators said Ahmad also obtained classified military documents describing the movements and formations of a Navy battle group. He was exchanging e-mails with an enlisted man aboard the Navy destroyer Benfold, authorities said.
Authorities have not identified the man, who investigators said was sympathetic to the jihad cause.
The charges were filed in Connecticut because Ahmad allegedly used an Internet service provider in the state to host one of his sites.
Babar also is charged with maintaining e-mail contact with a Chechen rebel leader.
Chechen rebels and their supporters have been blamed or taken responsibility for several terrorist acts in Russia, including a hostage-taking at a school last month that ended with more than 300 hostages dead.

Notes

WORLD

Load-Date: October 7, 2004


End of Document