Britons Protest Proposal To Widen Surveillance
The New York Times
April 3, 2012 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 932 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- British lawmakers and rights activists joined a chorus of protest Monday against plans by the government to give the intelligence and security services the ability to monitor the phone calls, e-mails, text messages and Internet use of every person in the country.
In a land where tens of thousands of surveillance cameras attest to claims by privacy advocates that Britain is the Western world's most closely monitored society, the proposal has touched raw nerves, compounding arguments that its citizens live under what critics call an increasingly intrusive ''nanny state.''
The debate in recent years has pitted those who justify greater scrutiny by reference to threats of terrorism and organized crime against those who cleave to more traditional notions of individual privacy.
But the current proposal would go a step further, raising the question of how security agencies can themselves keep track of a proliferation of newer technologies like Skype, instant messaging and social networking sites that permit instant communication outside more traditional channels.
''What we do need to make sure is that, as technology changes, we are able to maintain our current capability in this area,'' a spokesman for Prime Minister David Cameron said, speaking in return for anonymity under departmental rules.
The Home Office said the new measures were vital to provide police and security services with ''communications data to investigate serious crime and terrorism and to protect the public.''
Under the proposal, reported in The Sunday Times of London, a law to be introduced this year would empower the authorities to order Internet companies to install hardware enabling the government's monitoring agency, Government Communications Headquarters, known as GCHQ, to examine individual communications without a warrant.
A similar effort to enhance the authorities' powers was made by the previous Labour government in 2006, but it was abandoned after ferocious opposition, including from the two parties that now form the coalition government -- the Conservatives, who are dominant, and the Liberal Democrats.
Currently, government eavesdroppers and the police need a warrant to monitor specific communications.
But the new system would permit the authorities to track communications data like ''time, duration and dialing numbers of a phone call or an e-mail address,'' the Home Office said in a statement.
''It does not include the content of any phone call or e-mail, and it is not the intention of the government to make changes to the existing legal basis for the interception of communications,'' the statement said.
Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister and a Liberal Democrat, defended the plan, saying he was ''totally opposed to the idea of governments' reading people's e-mails at will or creating a new central government database.''
''The point is, we are not doing any of that and I wouldn't allow us to do any of that,'' he said, arguing that the authorities wanted to update ''the rules which currently apply to mobile telephone calls to allow the police and security services to go after terrorists and serious criminals and updating that to apply to technology like Skype, which is increasingly being used by people who want to make those calls and send those e-mails.''
Opponents, like the Conservative lawmaker David Davis, said the measures would give the authorities far greater powers to intrude into areas that have traditionally been private.
''It is not focusing on terrorists or criminals,'' Mr. Davis said. ''It is absolutely everybody. Historically, governments have been kept out of our private lives. Our freedom and privacy has been protected by using the courts, by saying, 'If you want to intercept, if you want to look at something, fine; if it is a terrorist or a criminal, go and ask a magistrate and you'll get your approval.' You shouldn't go beyond that in a decent, civilized society, but that is what is being proposed.''
''This is an unnecessary extension of the ability of the state to snoop on ordinary innocent people in vast numbers,'' he said.
Malcolm Bruce, a Liberal Democrat member of Parliament, said: ''The problem we have had in the past is this information has been leaked, lost, stolen. I think there would be very, very real concerns that it could be open to all kinds of abuse.''
''We have had a situation where police have been selling information to the media,'' Mr. Bruce said, referring to testimony at a judicial inquiry into news media ethics and practices. ''I think we are in a very, very dangerous situation if too much information is being passed around unnecessarily.''
GCHQ is run in close collaboration with the National Security Agency in the United States. It is one of three British intelligence agencies, along with the domestic MI5 security unit and the overseas MI6 secret intelligence service.
British officials have taken to warning that London will be a potential target for terrorism when it hosts the Olympics this summer, strengthening the case for enhanced powers to intercept communications. But opponents of the proposed legislation are pointing out that the coalition came into office promising to respect individual rights.
Nick Pickles, director of a privacy advocacy group called Big Brother Watch, said ''no amount of scare-mongering can hide the fact'' that the planned law had been attacked by lawmakers in all major parties. ''The government has offered no justification for what is unprecedented intrusion into our lives, nor explained why promises made about civil liberties are being junked,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: David Davis                                                     

Load-Date: April 3, 2012


End of Document