Britain and Syria Restore Ties After 4-Year Break
The New York Times
November 29, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 515 words
Byline: AP

AP
Dateline: LONDON, Nov. 28
Body


Britain and Syria today restored diplomatic relations, which were severed four years ago when Britain accused Syria of sponsoring terrorism, the two Governments announced.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd told the House of Commons that Britain had received assurances from the Syrian Government that it rejects acts of international terrorism and will take action against convicted terrorists.
The resumption of ties was also announced in Damascus.
A communique carried by the official Syrian Arab News Agency said the heads of interest sections in the respective capitals would be elevated immediately to the post of charge d'affaires.
The Syrian communique confirmed that Damascus renounced terrorism, but added, "Syria does not consider resistance against Israeli occupation as terrorism."
The Syrian Government said Britain had pledged to try to resolve the Arab-Israeli dispute, support the Syrian-backed Government in Lebanon and work to improve ties between Syria and the rest of Europe.
Mr. Hurd told British lawmakers that the Syrians had promised to continue "strenuous efforts" to obtain therelease of the 12 Western hostages believed held by pro-Iranian extremists in Lebanon.
Syria is the main power broker in Lebanon, with 40,000 troops based there under an Arab League mandate. It helped obtain the release of two Americans, Robert Polhill and Frank Reed, in April and an Irishman, Brian Keenan, in August.
The Syrian Government newspaper Tishrin said this month that Britain should resume relations with Syria if it wanted the remaining captives freed. They include six Americans.
The restoration of ties comes after recent meetings in Damascus by British lawmakers and a Foreign Office official with the Syrian President, Hafez al-Assad, and his Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
Britain severed relations with Syria in October 1986, hours after a London jury convicted a Jordanian, Nezar Hindawi, of trying to bomb an El Al jet leaving Heathrow Airport in London with 375 people aboard on April 17, 1986.
 
Sentenced to 45 Years
 The 32-year-old Mr. Hindawi, who planted plastic explosives in the hand luggage of his pregnant Irish fiancee, was sentenced to 45 years in prison.
Britain said Mr. Hindawi had acted on orders from Syrian intelligence, traveled on a Syrian passport and met the Syrian Ambassador, Loutfallah Haydar, at the Syrian Embassy afterthe bomb plot was uncovered.
Syrian denied any involvement in terrorism on British soil.
Mr. Hurd said today that Britain had received "confidential account of the Syrian position on the Hindawi affair." He did not elaborate.
Britain's improved relations follow a similar move by the United States.
American-Syrian ties improved this summer, when Damascus sided with the alliance against Saddam Hussein after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2. Syria has committed nearly 20,000 troops to a military buildup in the Persian Gulf.
Syria is on a State Department's list of countries that sponsor terrorism. But Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visited Damascus in September, and President Bush met with Mr. Assad in Geneva last week.

Load-Date: November 29, 1990


End of Document