Britain Plans an Identity Check on Europeans
The New York Times
May 14, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 416 words
Byline: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,

By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, May 13
Body


Prime Minister John Major is confident he can persuade other European countries to let Britain keep checking documents of travelers arriving from the Continent after the European Community abolishes internal customs controls next January, aides said today.
The British plans, set out by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd to a skeptical audience of community foreign ministers in Brussels on Monday, have been criticized as a violation of the spirit, if not the letter, of the 1987 treaty establishing a single European market, which will become reality next Jan. 1.
"We are justified and indeed obliged for our own protection to maintain the kind of controls that we have," Mr. Hurd said. "Being an island, we have concerns about things like drug smuggling and terrorism, and we can continue to take measures to control them," an aide said.
Most border passport controls have already been abolished between France, Germany and Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
"Our position is that a travel document will still be required in 1993," a spokesman for the Home Office said this afternoon.
The internal market is defined as "an area without internal frontiers." But an annex gives members the right "to take such measures as they consider necessary for the purpose of controlling immigration from third countries, and to combat terrorism, crime, the traffic in drugs and illicit trading in works of arts and antiques."
Britain also stands somewhat aloof from the treaty on European Union that Mr. Major agreed to with his partners in Maastricht, the Netherlands, last December. That treaty, which provides for a common European currency and increased cooperation on foreign and security policy, will also go into effect next January if all 12 members ratify it this year. The House of Commons is expected to give its approval next week.
After the end of the year, customs declarations and inspections will no longer be carried out at entry points on travelers coming from other community countries, even in Britain.
But identity checks will continue, at least here. British officials say they are unwilling to rely on the thoroughness of entry controls in places like Athens or Italy to keep terrorists out. As things are, they carry out random ID checks on passengers arriving in London from Belfast, which is British territory.
At all British ports and airports, arriving travelers follow separate lines for "E.C. passport holders" and "all others," and apparently will continue to be treated this way.

Load-Date: May 22, 1992


End of Document