British TV Station Defies Order to Identify Source
The New York Times
May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 625 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,

By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, May 2
Body


A television station's defiance of a court order demanding the identity of a man who took part in a broadcast about terrorism in Northern Ireland has become a major test of how far British journalists can go in protecting the confidentiality of their sources.
Executives at the London-based station, Channel Four Television, said on Friday that they would continue to resist the court order, which was brought by the Crown Prosecution Service at the request of the police last fall under the 1989 Prevention of Terrorism Act. They said that to surrender the name of the man would put his life, and perhaps the lives of others, at risk.
Unless lawyers for the television station are able to persuade a High Court judge next month that it is not in contempt of court, it will most likely face fines and other penalities, including the seizing of its assets, until it agrees to comply with the order.
The case marks the second time in recent weeks that the Government has used the two-year-old Prevention of Terrorism Act against journalists. The act gives the police broad powers to seize materials from journalists that might otherwise be protected under British law.
 
ABC Complies With Order
 In March, the High Court ordered ABC News and its senior European editor, Pierre Salinger, to turn over to the police tapes and notes of interviews with the two Libyans accused of planning the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. ABC said it had agreed to comply because the order did not require the disclosure of confidential sources.
Since Britain has no formal written constitution guaranteeing freedom of speech and press, as the United States does, there are few constraints on the Government's ability to restrict journalists, particularly in cases involving claims of national security.
For example, in 1988, with a simple administrative notice, the Government barred British radio and television from broadcasting live or recorded interviews with members of the outlawed Irish Republican Army or its political arm in Northern Ireland.
"There are certain stories that will never come into the public domain unless journalists are able to protect sources whose lives are in danger," said Liz Forgan, the director of programs at Channel Four. The station's broadcasts are carried nationwide in Britain.
 
Collusion Suggested
 The dispute involves a program broadcast by Channel Four last October suggesting there had been collusion between the Royal Ulster Constabulatory and members of mostly Protestant paramilitary groups in a series of sectarian killings in Northern Ireland.
An important source in the program was a man, seen only in silhouette, who was said to be a member of what was described as a secret commmittee made up of members of the security forces and Loyalist paramilitary groups and prominent Protestant bankers and businessmen.
Fewer than four weeks later, the Government, in proceedings that only became public this week, obtained a court order demanding that the station and Box Productions, an independent company involved in making the program, produce names and other materials described as being of "substantial value" to an investigation into terrorist activities.
Although the television station and the production company voluntarily turned over some materials, they refused to obey the court order. Among other things, they insisted that the man was not a member of a paramilitary unit himself, so they were not withholding the identity of a terrorist from the police.
A spokeswoman for the Crown Prosecution Service said it could not comment on the substance of the case. In Belfast, a spokesman for the Royal Ulster Constabulatory also said he could not comment since the matter was pending before the courts.

Load-Date: May 3, 1992


End of Document