British Court Rejects Tactic Used in Cases Of Terrorism 
The New York Times
June 29, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 756 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON, June 28 
Body


Throwing down a new challenge to the government's tactics against terrorism, a High Court judge ruled Wednesday that so-called control orders -- a form of house arrest without trial -- were incompatible with European human rights laws.
  The government is expected to appeal the ruling, issued by Justice Jeremy Sullivan, while civil rights groups depicted it as a victory in a sharpening duel over the state's efforts to amass ever greater powers, ostensibly to combat terrorism.
 The debate, mirroring similar concerns in the United States, began after the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon. But it has become more intense here following last July's bomb attacks in London.
  If the government's appeal fails, the authorities will have to seek some other mechanism to continue holding the six suspects -- a Briton and five Iraqis -- whose cases prompted the ruling.
  In his decision, Justice Sullivan said control orders conflict with the right to liberty under the European Convention on Human Rights. The authorities, thus, had no power to make the orders, he ruled. 
  Control orders provide for the electronic tagging of terrorism suspects who have not been charged with a crime, and for their confinement to their homes for most of the day. So-called controlees may be forced to relinquish their passports and permit unrestricted searches of their homes.
  The government of Prime Minister Tony Blair has displayed increasing irritation with the European human rights legislation, which was drawn up in 1950 and written into British law in 1998. 
  Last month, Mr. Blair criticized a judge who cited human rights considerations as an argument to prevent nine Afghan airplane hijackers from being deported to Afghanistan. Mr. Blair called the decision ''an abuse of common sense.''
  Earlier this week, David Cameron, the leader of the opposition Conservatives, called for replacing the European code with a British bill of rights.
  Control orders were introduced after Britain's highest court, the Law Lords, ruled in 2004 that indefinite detention of foreign terrorism suspects in prisons also contravened the European Convention. Control orders can be used against both Britons and foreigners.
  Natalia Garcia, a lawyer representing people held under control orders, said her clients were ''prisoners without rights who have not been charged with an offense and who, it is now clear, are denied their liberty for political reasons.''
  The government, for its part, argues that protecting the public against terrorist attacks and controlling the movements of people it considers dangerous outweigh such arguments. 
  ''Public safety is our top priority,'' John Reid, the home secretary, said in a statement in response to Wednesday's ruling.
  In a separate case last April, Justice Sullivan found that the 2005 Prevention of Terrorism Act, which authorized control orders, was also incompatible with the European Convention because people held under control orders had not received a fair hearing.
  Both of Justice Sullivan's rulings are likely to be scrutinized at the Court of Appeal, possibly on Monday. The six men will remain under the control orders during the appeal.
  The details of the six cases have not been made public, but they highlight the difficulties the authorities have faced in marrying their security concerns to human rights strictures championed by lawmakers and upheld by the courts. 
  The British man held under a control order was accused by the authorities of planning to go to Iraq to fight British and United States forces. 
  Beyond the six men, another six people previously held under control orders have appealed government plans to deport them, and are now being held on a form of bail that restricts their movements in much the same way as control orders, according to lawyers acting for them. The newest ruling does not apply to their cases. 
  After the July 7 bombings, Mr. Blair threatened a series of new measures to combat terrorism but did not put some of them into effect, like closing mosques used for firebrand sermons and outlawing one Islamic group called Hizb ut Tahrir.
  But in a series of parliamentary contests, he has secured legislation extending the period during which suspects may be held without charge, to 28 days from 14 days.
  The law has also been changed to criminalize the glorification of terrorism, raising worries that freedom of expression could be restricted. 
  The police have also been accused of using broader powers to stop and search people on the street. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 29, 2006


End of Document