British government proposes new anti-terrorism measures; Contentious new powers raise several concerns
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 27, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a9
Length: 382 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Prime Minister Tony Blair's government on Wednesday proposed sweeping new powers to tackle terrorism, including electronic tagging, curfews and house arrest without trial for terror suspects.
The measures provoked swift dissent from civil libertarians and opposition politicians.
Home Secretary Charles Clarke said the new "control orders" would apply to both foreigners and British nationals, and he promised to introduce legislation as soon as possible.
Eleven foreign terrorist suspects who have been held for three years without charge would not be released until the new powers were in place, he added.
"There remains a public emergency threatening the life of the nation," Clarke told the House of Commons. "The threat is real and I believe that the steps I am announcing today will enable us more effectively to meet that threat."
Many Britons disagreed, however, expressing fears that extending the government's power would upset the balance between individual rights against the need for security.
The British government tried "internment" - locking people up without trial - in Northern Ireland, but abandoned that as a failure.
"I am very well aware that the proposals … represent a very substantial increase in the executive powers of the state in relation to British citizens who we fear are preparing terrorist activities and against whom we cannot proceed in open court," Clarke told lawmakers.
"This will be contentious but I believe the need for us to protect ourselves against the threat justifies the changes I propose," he added.
Clarke said the government preferred to try terrorist suspects in court. But he said in some cases prosecution was impossible "given the need to protect highly sensitive sources and techniques."
Instead, the new restrictions could be imposed if there were "reasonable grounds" for suspecting terrorist activity - a lower standard of proof than is required in trials.
Measures would include bans on meeting certain people, restricting access to telecommunications including the Internet, curfews and electronic tagging. The proposal also included a new power to place suspects under house arrest without charge or trial.
But Clarke argued that telephone taps should continue to be excluded as evidence as it may compromise the work of intelligence agencies.

Load-Date: January 27, 2005


End of Document