Britain Releases And Curbs Extremist
The New York Times
February 14, 2012 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 1260 words
Byline: By JOHN F. BURNS
Body


LONDON -- Abu Qatada, a militant Islamic preacher held without charge for more than six years as a threat to Britain's national security, was released from prison on Monday night after an immigration judge signed off on strict bail conditions earlier in the day.
The case has set off a national furor over a European court ruling that has blocked the deportation of the Jordanian-born preacher, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman.
The conditions of his bail, the tightest permitted under British law, include a 22-hour-a-day curfew. They bar Mr. Othman from traveling beyond his home neighborhood and using cellphones, the Internet and public transportation.
They also prohibit him from attending mosques, leading prayers, or accompanying any of his five children between his London home and school, and they allow him to meet visitors only if they have been vetted by the police.
Television channels across Britain showed Mr. Othman hiding his face in the back of a van that was leaving the Long Lartin maximum-security prison in Worcestershire around 9:15 p.m. on Monday.
The developments were the latest in a long-running case that has inflamed politicians and public opinion in Britain and turned Mr. Othman, 51, into a symbol of Britain's difficulties in dealing with a pervasive network of Islamic militants with cells in many of the country's largest cities.
Officials have said that the cost to British taxpayers in the case, including legal aid for Mr. Othman's lawsuits and welfare support for his family, has exceeded $:500,000, or about $790,000. He has spent much of his time in detention at Long Lartin, about 100 miles west of London, and at other high-security jails, without ever facing criminal charges or a trial. Britain had hoped to deport him to Jordan for trial, but was barred from doing so last month by the European Court of Human Rights on the grounds that some of the evidence against him might have been obtained through the torture of potential witnesses. After the European ruling, John Mitting, Britain's top immigration judge, ordered his release last week, and approved his bail conditions on Monday.
The case has been the focus of intensifying protests in Britain before the Olympic Summer Games in London, beginning in July, for which a security force of about 25,000 people, including some troops, has been assembled.
Mr. Othman, who is of Palestinian descent, was originally arrested in the British police sweeps that followed the attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001. British security officials have said that copies of his sermons were found in the Hamburg, Germany, flat of Mohamed Atta, the lead Sept 11. hijacker, who was in the cockpit of the American Airlines jet that struck the World Trade Center's north tower.
Mr. Othman has also been accused of using sermons in Britain to encourage attacks on Jews and other ''nonbelievers,'' and Scotland Yard has said that in 2001 it found him in possession of more than $250,000 in cash, some of it in an envelope marked ''for the mujahedeen in Chechnya.'' He was arrested in October 2002.
A Spanish counterterrorism judge once described him as Osama bin Laden's right-hand man in Europe.
The legal tangle over Mr. Othman has played out against the background of the complexities Britain has faced in dealing with a succession of Islamic militant figures identified in court hearings or by officials of security organizations like Scotland Yard and MI5, the domestic security service, as posing unacceptable dangers with their advocacy of Qaeda-style terrorism and what are alleged to be their links with terrorist groups overseas.
Lacking the option of a Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, where the United States has held terrorism suspects for years without charge to keep them away from the American homeland and access to its civilian courts, Britain has been forced to handle individuals it regards as terrorist threats through its normal courts, a process that has led to recurrent rulings against the suspects' deportation.
In the case of Mr. Othman, successive governments have found themselves unable to bring him to court on terrorism charges, partly because of what officials have said are concerns among the security agencies about divulging intelligence sources and methods.
They have also been unable, so far, to deport him because of legal obstacles raised by British courts and, after the last of these was cleared by Britain's Supreme Court last year, by the European human rights court last month.
Mr. Othman was convicted in absentia by Jordanian courts for what is alleged to be his role in a series of terrorist bombing plots more than a decade ago that included one against a hotel used by Western officials and tourists. Jordanian officials have said he will face retrial for the bombings if he is repatriated from Britain.
The case has led to a groundswell of opinion against the European court that has crossed political parties, and drawn support from many prominent lawyers and jurists.
In an emergency House of Commons session dedicated to the case after the European ruling, the government of Prime Minister David Cameron faced a barrage of demands, many of them from Mr. Cameron's own Conservative benches, for Britain to ignore the ruling barring Mr. Othman's deportation. They have cited the precedents set by France and Italy in overriding the court's provisional rulings in several deportation cases involving Islamic militants.
Other lawmakers demanded that Britain withdraw from the jurisdiction of the court, which Prime Minister Winston Churchill, intent on preventing any recurrence of the Nazi atrocities of World War II, played a leading role in establishing in the early 1950s in the wake of Nazi atrocities in World War II.
The anger against the court surfaced again as news of Mr. Othman's imminent release spread. Robert Halfon, a Conservative backbencher, whose family migrated to Britain from Libya in the 1960s, told the BBC on Monday that the case touched on Britain's right to security. ''Are we a sovereign country, or are we not?'' he said. ''What about the human rights of people who want to be protected against terrorists?''
Mr. Cameron, who has described the European order as ''completely unacceptable,'' traveled last month to the court's base in Strasbourg, France, to demand that the court abandon its interference in national security cases that have been thoroughly reviewed in national courts, and focus instead on issues involving broad principles of human rights.
Last week, he telephoned King Abdullah II in Jordan to appeal for a formal pledge that no evidence based on torture would be used in putting Mr. Othman on trial there. To meet judicial objections to Mr. Othman's deportation, Jordan and Britain previously reached an agreement on a guarantee that Mr. Othman would not be physically abused in Jordanian custody.
Looking beyond Mr. Othman's case, the Cameron government has been concerned that several other Islamic militants detained in British jails could seek similar legal rulings in Strasbourg that would prevent Britain from extraditing them to the United States, where they are wanted on terrorism charges.
Lawyers for one of those men, known as Abu Hamza al-Masri, a former preacher at London's Finsbury Park mosque who described himself before Sept. 11 as Al Qaeda's chief representative in Britain, have said they will argue in Strasbourg, if the case reaches the European judges, that the prospect of an American prison term of 50 years or more for their client would be a breach of his human rights.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Abu Qatada had been held for six years.                                               

Load-Date: February 14, 2012


End of Document