Britain's two approaches to terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 25, 1998, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 799 words
Byline: SUSAN TAYLOR MARTIN
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Is it terrorism when a car bomb explodes and kills innocent people in a town  in Northern Ireland? Is it terrorism when a truck bomb blows up and kills  innocent people at a U.S. Embassy in Africa?
If the answer to both question is "yes," as most of us would agree,  should the guilty be treated any less severely in one case than in the other?
This isn't a philosophical debate, but the very real moral dilemma in which  the British now find themselves. How they're reacting illustrates the problems  facing any nation that tries to engage in what Secretary of State Madeleine  Albright calls "the war of the future" - the fight against terrorism and its  often shadowy perpetrators.
MARTIN
Given the close relations between his country and the United States, it was  not surprising that British Prime Minister Tony Blair strongly supported the  U.S. anti-terrorist strikes against Afghanistan and Sudan last week. They were  in retaliation for the recent embassy bombings thought to have been  masterminded by a rabidly anti-American multimillionaire named Osama bin  Laden.
"Terrorists the world over must know that democratic governments will act  decisively to prevent their evil crimes," Blair said.
The prime minister didn't stop there. He vowed that Britain would launch  air strikes against Islamic terrorist bases if they bomb British embassies.
But rather than rallying all 60-million Britons firmly behind him, Blair's  words have caused a fair amount of anxiety and even charges of hypocrisy.
You don't have to walk very far in London to realize the cause for the  nervousness. At a newsstand near Kensington Palace, you can buy 40 different  Arabic-language newspapers. The palace, of course, was home to Princess Diana  who, at the time of her death, was was dating the son of Egyptian-born  business tycoon Mohammed Fayed.
Fayed, who owns Harrods department store, is one of 2-million Muslims  living in Britain. And it's a safe bet that at least some of them are in  sympathy with Osama bin Laden, who sees the United States as an "infidel"  bent on destroying the Islamic faith and culture.
By aligning Britain so closely with the United States, some fear Blair  might have been encouraging terrorist retaliation against U.S. targets on his  own soil. At this time of year, Piccadilly Circus, Trafalgar Square and other  popular tourist spots are literally jammed with Americans, and even a smallish  bomb could cause terrible loss of life.
Already, dozens of protesters have demonstrated at the U.S. Embassy, and a  bomb threat from an unidentified source forced police to cordon off the area  last week.
Blair's get-tough-on-terrorism talk also rang hollow to many in light of  August's other horrific act: the car bomb that killed 28 and injured more than  200 in British-controlled Northern Ireland.
Today, the prime minister will be in Belfast to announce tough new measures  aimed at ending the violence between Protestants and Catholics that has  tormented Northern Ireland for decades.
But words can't disguise a simple fact: Blair and his government have been  compromising with Irish terrorists for well over a year.
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, was allowed to  take part in the recent peace talks even though the IRA had refused to give up  its weapons. As part of the peace agreement signed in April, the British  government agreed to release scores of prisoners, both Protestants and  Catholics, who have commited heinous acts. Even as Blair speaks today, a  cold-blooded killer who ambushed three mourners at a funeral and wounded  several others will be about to go free.
Critics of "terrorist appeasement" say it has created an atmosphere of  lawlessness in Northern Ireland whose inevitable result is tragedies like  Omagh. But the attack was so awful - uniting Protestants and Catholics in  utter revulsion against the perpetrators - that there is hope it may mark an  end to the violence. It is heartening that Sinn Fein feels enough a part of  the peace process - indeed, of the political establishment - that for the  first time its leaders condemned an attack.
This is not the first time the British have compromised on terrorism. They,  joined by none other than the United States, have finally agreed that two  Libyans accused of bombing a Pan Am flight over Lockerbie, Scotland, can be  tried in the Netherlands - not in Scotland, as originally demanded.
Acts of terrorism over the past decade - starting with Lockerbie, on to  Oklahoma City, Northern Ireland and the embassy bombings - show that the  potential aggressors in this new kind of war can be any demented and/or  fanatic souls with access to money and weapons. The same approach can't be  used on all of them - and Tony Blair, in his much-maligned way, seems to  realize that.

Load-Date: August 26, 1998


End of Document