Britain Grapples With Terror Challenges
The New York Times
July 4, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 882 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON, July 3 
Body


Britain's effort to curb terrorism -- like that of the United States -- is fought on a broad front, from the dark conspiracies of homegrown bombers to the resurgent Taliban in Afghanistan.
  On Monday, both contests seemed to have intensified, with suggestions that British troops in Afghanistan were overstretched while the government and the police at home were locked in a duel with the judiciary over the handling of terrorism suspects.
 Last week, the High Court rejected the government's use of a form of house arrest for terrorism suspects, saying it ran counter to human rights laws. The government filed an appeal on Monday. In Parliament on Monday, lawmakers discussed increasing the maximum period of detention without trial for terrorism suspects to 90 days, from 28 -- a proposal strongly opposed by civil libertarians. 
  At the same time, British commanders in Afghanistan say they have requested further equipment to fight insurgents in southern Helmand Province, where five British soldiers have been killed in recent weeks, two of them over the weekend. 
  The debates have sharpened as Britain prepares to commemorate the 52 people killed by four suicide bombers in London last July 7, offering a reminder of the stakes and scope of the campaign against terrorism.
  One year later, counterterrorism police officers are investigating 70 cases ''spanning London, the U.K. and the globe,'' said Peter Clarke, the chief of London's antiterrorism police, in a public statement on Monday in advance of the commemoration on Friday. ''That is the nature of what we face. The defense of the capital often starts many thousands of miles away.'' 
  The theme was echoed in Parliament when Tom Watson, a junior defense minister, told lawmakers that the battle in Afghanistan was intended to ensure that it never again became a haven for Al Qaeda or the Taliban. ''The risks are too great to us, our allies and the Afghan people for us to stand aside and allow the terrorists to return,'' he said. 
  Earlier, Brig. Ed Butler, the commander of Britain's 3,000 troops in southern Afghanistan deployed as part of a NATO force, told the BBC that his force levels were under review and that he was seeking additional equipment to take account of the ''changing circumstances.''
  But Mr. Watson denied that British commanders in Afghanistan had asked for extra infantry or air cover.
  British troops have been moving into Helmand Province since May on what was first depicted as a mission to protect reconstruction projects. But there has been a steady flow of accounts detailing sustained, close-quarters fighting with insurgents linked to the Taliban. ''We knew it was going to be a tough fight,'' Brigadier Butler said. ''The Afghan has fighting in his blood.''
  After a flurry of news reports saying Britain would send up to 1,000 reinforcements to Afghanistan to cope with a more intense Taliban campaign than expected, the office of Prime Minister Tony Blair said Monday, ''If extra resources are needed, extra resources will be found, but that's first and foremost a matter for military assessment and for military commanders to decide, not for politicians to decide.''
  Discussion of the fighting has stirred fears that the British mission there may be transformed into out-and-out combat, recalling Britain's ill-fated imperial adventures in Afghanistan in the 19th century. ''The cost of succeeding in Afghanistan may be very high indeed,'' Liam Fox, the opposition Conservative spokesman on defense, told Parliament. ''But the cost of failure would be intolerable.''
  British military commanders have denied that British troops have been drawn into what Maj. Gen. Peter Wall, deputy chief of joint operations, last week called ''mission creep.'' But, he acknowledged, ''I do think that we should have expected a reaction from the Taliban -- perhaps it has been a little more virulent than we had hoped.'' 
  With the July 7 anniversary approaching, the police and lawmakers have taken to warning that the threat of terror attacks has not been reduced. Mr. Clarke, the London counterterrorism chief, said three, and possibly four, attack plans had been thwarted in the past year. ''There are some 60 individuals awaiting trial in the U.K. for terrorist-related offenses,'' he said. ''This is unprecedented, and the flow of new cases shows no sign of abating. If anything it is accelerating.''
  Such arguments have been used by the police and the government to support their demand to increase the period allowed for detention without charge. It had earlier been increased from 14 days.
  A report published Monday by Parliament's influential Home Affairs Committee revived the argument. ''The growing number of cases and the increase in suspects monitored by the police and security services make it entirely possible, and perhaps increasingly likely, that there will be cases that do provide that justification,'' it said. ''We believe, therefore, that the 28-day limit may well prove inadequate.'' 
  Indeed, Mr. Clarke said, the counterterrorism officer, the police need to ''intervene at earlier stages -- to attack the fund-raising, to disrupt the logistics, to detect hostile reconnaissance -- because when we get to the point of attack the options are too limited and too dangerous.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Peter Clarke, the chief of London's antiterrorism police, before an interview in his office yesterday. (Photo by Lefteris Pitarakis/Associated Press)

Load-Date: July 4, 2006


End of Document