Britain: 2 Men Are Convicted Of Killing of a British Soldier
The New York Times
December 20, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 417 words
Byline: By KATRIN BENNHOLD
Body


LONDON -- Two British-born converts to Islam were found guilty on Thursday of the murder of a British soldier who was run over with a car on a London street and then hacked with knives and a meat cleaver as closed-circuit cameras recorded parts of the grisly scene.
The two men, Michael Adebolajo, 29, and Michael Adebowale, 22, both from Christian Nigerian families living in London, will be sentenced in January, Judge Nigel Sweeney told the Old Bailey court. They are facing life in prison.
Both men had pleaded not guilty in the death of the soldier, Lee Rigby, 25, in May as he was returning home from his barracks in the Woolwich neighborhood of southeast London. In his defense, Mr. Adebolajo called himself a ''soldier of Allah'' and claimed that the killing had been an act of war.
Relatives of Mr. Rigby broke down in tears as the verdicts were read. His wife, Rebecca, said the family was satisfied that justice had been done. ''These people have taken away my baby's dad, but Lee's memory lives on through our son and we will never forget him,'' Ms. Rigby told the BBC.
On May 22, Mr. Adebowale and Mr. Adebolajo swerved across multiple lanes of traffic and knocked down Mr. Rigby, an army bandsman and machine-gunner who had seen combat in Afghanistan. Shouting ''Allahu akbar,'' or ''God is great,'' they cut into Mr. Rigby, reportedly with the aim of decapitating him, before dragging his lifeless body into the street and waiting for the police to arrive.
The killing has shocked Britain as few events have in recent years, and it raised questions about whether the government had taken sufficient action to curb terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States and especially since the 2005 bombings of the London transit system.
Both assailants had been in contact with the police over the years, as victims of crimes and as perpetrators, though never in terrorism-related offenses, Assistant Commissioner Cressida Dick, the head of the Metropolitan Police's specialist operations, said before the verdict.
Their path to radicalization remains unclear. No evidence has been found that a third party had helped plan the killing of Mr. Rigby or, indeed, that anyone else had been aware of the plan, Ms. Dick said. The two men apparently hid near the barracks and waited for a target. Mr. Rigby, who wore a camouflage army rucksack that day but was not on duty, happened to be the first to walk by, they said.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/20/world/europe/2-found-guilty-in-killing-of-british-soldier.html

Load-Date: December 20, 2013


End of Document