British Intelligence Chief Sharpens Terrorism Warning
The New York Times
November 6, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 999 words
Byline: By SARAH LYALL
Dateline: LONDON, Nov. 5 
Body


Britain's chief domestic intelligence official said Monday that at least 2,000 people in Britain posed a ''direct threat to national security and public safety'' because of their support for terrorism, an increase of 400 in the last year. 
  The figure is not new -- Prime Minister Gordon Brown mentioned it in July. But the official, Jonathan Evans, director general of MI5, went even further, saying there may be 2,000 more would-be terrorists not yet known to the authorities. 
  Speaking at a conference in Manchester, Mr. Evans also said that extremists in Britain were more likely than before to be connected to networks in other countries, and that they were increasingly grooming young people, including children, to carry out terrorist attacks. And in a reminder that even though the cold war has ended, some of the old conflicts persist, he complained that MI5 was being forced to divert resources from antiterrorism work ''to defend the U.K. against unreconstructed attempts by Russia, China and others to spy on us.'' 
  Mr. Evans's stark assessment of the terrorist threat echoes remarks by his predecessor at MI5, Dame Eliza Manningham-Buller, in November 2006. But it is still highly unusual for the chief of MI5, which so shuns publicity that it does not even have a press office, to speak publicly. 
  Opponents of the government, however, pointed out that the speech  comes as Mr. Brown prepares to make new proposals for stricter antiterrorism laws. In July, Mr. Brown said he was considering introducing legislation that would increase the time that suspects could be detained without charge, to 56 days from the current 28.
  The matter is highly contentious. In 2005, after a bitter debate, Parliament rejected a government proposal to increase the allowable detention time before charges are brought to 90 days. 
  ''It is crucial that the security services do not get drawn into politics,'' Nick Clegg, the home affairs spokesman for the opposition Liberal Democrats, said in a statement. ''Experience suggests that breathless talk about the terrorism threat and the powers needed to counter it can have a damaging effect on opinion in precisely those communities that we need to keep on our side.''
  Mr. Evans was indeed bleak in his outlook, saying he believed that the terrorist threat had not reached its peak and that new recruits were arriving in a ''steady flow.'' 
  ''Terrorist attacks we have seen against the U.K. are not simply random plots by disparate and fragmented groups,'' he said. ''The majority of these attacks, successful or otherwise, have taken place because Al Qaeda has a clear determination to mount terrorist attacks against the United Kingdom.'' 
  He said that the would-be terrorists were cultivating ever younger volunteers and that people as young as 15 had been implicated in terrorist activity. 
  ''As I speak, terrorists are methodically and intentionally targeting young people and children in this country,'' he said. ''They are radicalizing, indoctrinating and grooming young, vulnerable people to carry out acts of terrorism.'' 
  Since the attacks on London's transportation network in 2005, which left 56 people dead, including the four suicide bombers, the British authorities have arrested hundreds of people as terrorism suspects and reported that many would-be attacks have been thwarted. A foiled plan in July to set off explosions in London and Glasgow was the 15th attempted terrorist plot on British soil since 2001, officials say. More than 200 people have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in Britain in the last six years.
  Officials say the police and security services are currently dealing with about 30 suspected plots and 200 terrorist-related groups or networks. 
  Striking a slightly defensive note, Mr. Evans said his agents were ''under acute pressure to prioritize'' and could not monitor every threat. ''There will be instances when individuals come to the notice of the security service or the police, but then subsequently carry out acts of terrorism,'' he said. ''Every decision to investigate someone entails a decision not to investigate someone else.'' 
  He also said espionage activities by Russia and China, among other countries, were siphoning resources from the fight against terrorism. ''A number of countries continue to devote considerable time and energy trying to steal our sensitive technology on civilian and military projects, and trying to obtain political and economic intelligence at our expense,'' he said. 
  Mr. Evans was particularly pointed in criticizing Russia, whose relationship with Britain has cooled considerably in recent months. 
  ''Since the end of the cold war,'' he said, ''we have seen no decrease in the numbers of undeclared Russian intelligence officers in the U.K. -- at the Russian Embassy and associated organizations conducting covert activity in this country.'' 
  A man answering the phone at the Russian Embassy here said he could not comment on the assertion that it was harboring spies. 
  Prison Term in 2005 Bombings
  LONDON, Nov. 5 (Reuters) -- A man accused of helping to plot botched 2005 bombings in London was sentenced Monday to six years, nine months  after pleading guilty to a lesser offense.
  Adel Yahya, who was born in Ethiopia, was one of six men tried on charges of plotting  attacks on the transport system on July 21, 2005, two weeks after suicide bombers killed 56 people, including themselves, in London.
  Detectives said the second plot failed only because the  homemade bombs failed to explode.
  Mr. Yahya was accused of being central to the plot, but not  of being one of the four men who tried to carry out the attacks. 
  While four of the five others were convicted and sentenced  to  life in prison for conspiracy to murder, the jury  reached no verdict on Mr. Yahya and on the sixth man, Manfo Kwaku Asiedu.
  On Monday, a week before his scheduled retrial,  Mr. Yahya pleaded guilty to collecting information useful for militants.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jonathan Evans, chief of the MI5 agency, said at least 2,000 people posed a threat. (POOL PHOTO BY MANCHESTER EVENING NEWS)                 

Load-Date: November 6, 2007


End of Document