British Police Announce Terrorism Arrests in Birmingham
The New York Times
September 20, 2011 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 527 words
Byline: By RAVI SOMAIYA and ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- The British police said on Monday that officers arrested six men and a woman overnight on terrorism-related charges in the central city of Birmingham, as part of what they called a ''large, intelligence-led counterterrorism operation.''
The men were arrested by unarmed officers in raids in five neighborhoods from 11 p.m. Sunday to 1 a.m. Monday, while the woman was detained at 6:30 a.m. Monday. The BBC said the investigation, believed to have included Britain's MI5 domestic security service, had uncovered links to Islamic militancy and was part of the most significant counterterrorism operation this year.
The men are ages 25 to 32, and the woman, who is accused of failing to disclose information, is 22, the West Midlands Police said in a statement.
A West Midlands police official, who requested anonymity because he was discussing an unfolding operation, said initial speculation that the arrests were linked to Irish republicanism was unfounded. The official declined to confirm the BBC report that those arrested were Islamic extremists, but said the operation was ''linked to international cases as much as local.''
The police statement said the men were arrested ''on suspicion of preparing or instigating an act of terror,'' and officers were searching their homes and seven other locations in Birmingham, Britain's second-largest city, which has an ethnically diverse population. The arrests took place in several areas, from impoverished city neighborhoods to comfortable suburbs.
Marcus Beale, the West Midlands assistant chief constable, declined to provide details of what the suspects are accused of planning.
''The operation is in its early stages, so we are unable to go into detail at this time about the nature of the suspected offenses,'' he said in a statement. ''However, I believe it was necessary to take action at this time in order to ensure public safety.''
Britain's Press Association news agency said the arrests were apparently unrelated to the annual party conference of the Liberal Democrats, the junior partner in Prime Minister David Cameron's coalition, which is under way in Birmingham.
The arrests were the first of their kind since April, when five men were arrested near the Sellafield nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in the north of England under antiterrorism laws. They were later released.
Last December, police officials said they had charged 9 of 12 men they arrested in a case that seemed to be a sign that Europe's concerns over potential terrorist attacks were spreading.
The nine, including five who British news reports said were of Bangladeshi origin, were accused of offenses that included reconnoitering targets, conspiring to cause explosions and testing incendiary material.
News reports at the time of the arrests said the men were accused of plotting attacks to coincide with the Christmas holidays and had gathered information on targets like the American Embassy, the London Stock Exchange and religious and political leaders.
In July, Britain lowered its assessment of the threat posed by international terrorism from severe to substantial, meaning there was a ''strong possibility'' of an attack.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Police investigators on Monday in Birmingham, England, where seven people were arrested on terrorism-related charges. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PHIL NOBLE/REUTERS)                                       

Load-Date: September 20, 2011


End of Document