British terror suspects to remain in custody; 23 are being held on a new terrorism law that lets suspects be held for as long as 28 days without charge
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 17, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a10
Length: 348 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


A district judge ruled Wednesday that British investigators have until next week to investigate the suspects arrested in an alleged plot to blow up as many as 10 trans-Atlantic jetliners, saying they could be kept in custody without charge.
It was the first major test of a new terrorism law that lets suspects be held for as long as 28 days without charge so investigators can solidify their cases.
The hearing, which addressed the cases of 23 suspects arrested in Britain's initial sweep last week, was held behind closed doors and attended only by the suspects' lawyers, investigators and government officials.
Scotland Yard said that 21 of the suspects could be detained for questioning through Aug. 23, while another two could be detained until Aug. 21. No reason was given for the difference in the length of time.
The final suspect, who was arrested Tuesday, was not involved in the hearing, Scotland Yard said, adding that he remained police custody.
Experts say the primary reason police could use nearly a month to complete a probe is because of the complexity of investigations into the alleged plot to smuggle liquid explosives hidden in hand luggage aboard flights.
"You've got laptops, you have to bring in translators to translate all the documents in there, and sometimes it's inopportune to release all your suspects - particularly terrorism suspects - while all that is being downloaded and translated," said Cliff Knuckey, a retired police detective who has worked on terrorism investigations.
"Terrorism investigations are different, simply because you're dealing with people who will do their best not to compromise their plans and who will do anything not to be compromised."
When police officials appeared in February before a House of Commons committee looking at Britain's terror legislation, they told lawmakers much the same thing. And Deputy Assistant Commissioner Peter Clarke, who commands the anti-terrorist police branch, said officers had found terrorist training videos spliced in the middle of normal Hollywood films, meaning hours spent scrutinizing videotapes.

Load-Date: November 1, 2006


End of Document