Britain Convicts 4 in Separate Terrorism Trials
The New York Times
July 6, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 855 words
Byline: By SARAH LYALL
Dateline: LONDON, July 5 
Body


Even as investigators tried to untangle the complicated web of connections among the suspects in last week's failed car bombings, four Muslim men were convicted of terrorist offenses in two separate trials in Britain on Thursday.
  In the first case, 37-year-old Omar Altimimi, who came to Britain from the Netherlands in 2002, was convicted in Manchester of possessing what the prosecution described as a ''vast library'' of material that included information on how to make explosives, how to detonate bombs remotely and how to set up terrorist cells in Britain. 
  In the second case, three men in London -- one British-born, the others from overseas -- were convicted of inciting terrorist murder through extremist Web sites they operated on the Internet, the first conviction of its kind in Britain. The sites included videos of beheadings by insurgents in Iraq, bomb-making instructions and exhortations to commit terrorist acts in the name of Islam. 
  The investigation into the foiled car-bomb plots has dominated media coverage in the last week, all but drowning out the news of the latest verdicts. In part that is because terrorism trials have become almost commonplace; Britain is awash in them. More than 100 people have recently been convicted, or are currently on trial, awaiting trial or facing verdicts in more than two dozen terrorism-related cases here. 
  A verdict is expected soon in one of the biggest cases: that of six men accused of the botched suicide bombing attempts on London's subways and buses on July 21, 2005. The failed attacks -- in which the bombs did not explode -- took place exactly two weeks after the July 7 attacks that killed 56 people, including four perpetrators.
  Another big case, that of the suspects accused in the audacious plot to use liquid bombs to blow up planes over the Atlantic last summer, has not yet gone to trial.
  Meanwhile, seven men were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 15 to 26 years last month for their roles as accomplices to a Qaeda terrorist planning attacks on targets in Britain and the United States, including the New York Stock Exchange and the headquarters of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. And in April, five men were found guilty of planning fertilizer-bomb attacks on targets around London, including a major suburban shopping center and a popular London nightclub. 
  The sheer number of cases shows how difficult it is for the authorities to keep on top of the activities of would-be terrorists in this country.
  While many of the suspects appear to be motivated by the same ideology -- hatred of the West and support for violent jihad directed at targets symbolizing what they regard as Western power or decadence -- the individual plots are hard to unravel. Relationships are complicated. Suspects work together or individually, with other Britons or people from abroad, often connected by evidence on computers or cellphones that requires painstaking investigation before charges can be brought. 
  ''We are not looking at discrete terrorist cells that can be investigated, isolated and dismantled,'' Peter Clarke, the senior antiterrorism officer at Scotland Yard, said in a speech in April. ''We are seeing networks within networks, connections within connections, and links between individuals that cross local, national and international lines.'' 
  The Manchester case came about because Mr. Altimimi was arrested last year on suspicion of money laundering. When the police seized his computer, they found files containing instructions on making bombs, detonators and explosives, and video clips of graphic executions of hostages in Iraq. Mr. Altimimi was also found to have links with terrorists in the Netherlands and with Junade Feroze, one of the men convicted last month in the plot to blow up targets in Britain and the United States. 
  The three men convicted in London on Thursday came to the attention of the police after a man arrested near Sarajevo, Bosnia, in 2005 was found in possession of a video that showed the three apparently preparing for an attack; they also appeared on his computer ''buddy list.'' 
  It is illegal in Britain to operate Web sites inciting terrorism, and the three men -- 23-year-old Younis Tsouli, originally from Morocco; 24-year-old Waseem Mughal, who was born in Britain; and 21-year-old Tariq al-Daour, originally from the United Arab Emirates -- were found guilty of doing just that. 
  Their laptops were full of incriminating material, including a PowerPoint slide presentation titled ''The Illustrated Booby Trapping Course,'' which contained a guide to the use of military and improvised explosives, including tips on making a suicide vest in which ball bearings could be used as shrapnel. They also discussed how their violent videos were being used to inspire jihadists and finance jihadist activities. 
  The three were also found to have close ties to Qaeda operatives in Iraq. In one e-mail message, Mr. Tsouli told Mr. Mughal that he had been asked by ''AQ,'' referring to Al Qaeda, to translate their official e-book, ''The Tip of the Camel's Hump,'' into English. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: From left, Tariq al-Dour, Youins Tsouli and Waseem Mughal, were found guilty of inciting terrorist murder through extremist Web sites.
 Omar Altimimi was convicted of possessing a ''vast library'' of material that included information on how to make explosives.(Photographs by Metropolitan Police)                                   

Load-Date: July 6, 2007


End of Document