Britain deports Muslim cleric to Jordan; He is charged with conspiring to carry out terror attacks there
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 8, 2013 Monday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 3
Length: 380 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan  
Body


 A radical Muslim preacher described as a key al-Qaida operative in Europe rejected terrorism charges Sunday linked to alleged plots targeting Americans and Israelis in Jordan, his lawyer said, hours after Britain deported him to bring an end to a decade-long legal saga over his extradition. 
Jordan first submitted an extradition request to British authorities for the militant cleric known as Abu Qatada in 2001. But it was blocked in British and European courts over human rights concerns. Last month, Britain and Jordan ratified a treaty on torture aimed at easing those worries, paving the way for the 53-year-old preacher's deportation.
Abu Qatada arrived at Amman's civilian airport early Sunday on a British aircraft. He was immediately whisked away by heavily armed anti-terrorism police for questioning at a nearby courthouse. Police sealed off the area as the convoy drove to the court building, just across the street from the airport. 
After nearly two hours of questioning, Jordanian prosecutors charged Abu Qatada with conspiring to carry out terror attacks in Jordan twice - once in 1999 for a foiled plot against the American school in Amman and another time in 2000 for allegedly targeting Israeli and American tourists and Western diplomats during new year celebrations.
Abu Qatada's lawyer, Tayseer Thiab, said his client told military prosecutors that he is not guilty of terrorism and rejected the charges against him.
Jordanian authorities ordered Abu Qatada held for 15 days pending further questioning, said one of the prosecutors. He said the cleric will be held at a prison in Amman. 
Thiab said he will try to free his client on bail today.
Outside the courthouse, Abu Qatada's father, Mahmoud, said his son is innocent and I hope the court will set him free.
Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, was described in courts in Britain and Spain as a senior al-Qaida figure in Europe with close ties to the late Osama bin Laden. 
Britain accused him of links with Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person charged in the United States over the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and with shoe bomber Richard Reid. Audio recordings of some of the cleric's sermons were found in an apartment in Hamburg, Germany, used by some of the Sept. 11 hijackers. 

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document