British Attache Is Assassinated On Greek Street
The New York Times
June 9, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 1255 words
Byline: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY 

By ALESSANDRA STANLEY 
Dateline: ATHENS, June 8
Body


Britain's senior military representative in Greece was gunned down here today, just days after a special report prepared for Congress described Greece as "disturbingly passive in response to terrorist activities."
Greek police officials said that two gunmen, identified as members of the left-wing terrorist group November 17, shot several times at Brig. Stephen Saunders, 53, the military attache at the British Embassy in Athens, while he was driving alone on a busy suburban street at 8 a.m. The gunmen escaped in traffic. Brigadier Saunders died at a hospital.
In a letter to an Athens newspaper on Friday, November 17 claimed responsibility, saying that Brigadier Saunders coordinated the NATO bombing of Serbia, Reuters said.
He was the first British official assassinated in an attack linked to November 17, but the killing was the 23rd attributed to the group, which emerged in 1975 with the slaying of Richard Welch, the Central Intelligence Agency station chief in Athens and the first of four American officials killed by the group.
In the last 25 years, no member of November 17 has been arrested, driving the State Department to identify Greece in an April report as "one of the weakest links in Europe's effort against terrorism." On Monday, a special American commission said it was not fully cooperating against terrorism.  Page A8.
The killing revived one of the most sensitive disputes between Athens and its allies. Greece is a member of NATO, and the Socialist government of Prime Minister Costas Simitis won Western gratitude by not obstructing the alliance's bombing of Yugoslavia last year, despite overwhelming domestic opposition. But United States officials have long complained that the government in Greece, which has been ruled by the Panhellenic Socialist Movement, known as Pasok, for nearly 20 years, has shown no signs of seriously trying to root out November 17.
The group took its name from the date in 1973 on which the American-backed Greek junta sent tanks to crush a student protest at Athens Polytechnic University, killing dozens of demonstrators. The Marxist-leaning group has remained anti-American and anticapitalist, and has acquired a harsh nationalist tone. It has taken responsibility for hundreds of violent acts, including the killings of a dozen prominent Greeks.
Most recently, members fired a rocket-propelled grenade at the German Embassy last May, narrowly missing the ambassador.
Today, Ken Bacon, the Defense Department spokesman, said that the assassination of Brigadier Saunders "highlights again that Greece needs to take a tougher stance against terrorism." The Clinton administration's views on the terrorist threat in Greece are repeated "every time we visit," he said.
And Senator Richard C. Shelby, the Alabama Republican who is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, echoed the allegation that Greece has been lax about November 17. "I've long been distressed by the failure of the Greek government to deal with this group," he said.
Privately, United States officials have speculated that the Greek government has not cracked down on November 17 because it fears that an investigation could disclose that some Pasok members had past ties to members of the terrorist group. And in an interview with a weekly Greek newspaper, Pontiki, published today, R. James Woolsey Jr., a former C.I.A. director and a member of the commission on terrorism that recommended sanctions against Greece and Pakistan, was quoted as saying: "I believe there are people within the Greek government who know some members of November 17. They are doing nothing."
In a statement that reflected British determination to press the Greek government, Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said, "I am in touch with the Greek authorities and am offering them our full cooperation in making sure that whoever perpetrated this brutal attack is brought to justice."
Accusations that Greece has dragged its feet on terrorism are dismissed as unfair by Greek officials and much of the Greek news media, reflecting the country's sensitivity to what it views as American interference. After the terrorism commission's report, which said Greece was "not cooperating fully" on antiterrorism, was released on Monday, Dimitris Reppas, a government spokesman, said, "The report's content bears no relation to reality."
The State Department ruled out sanctions but said it was pressing Greece for more cooperation.
Today, Greek officials expressed outrage and grief over Brigadier Saunders's killing, but played down any notion that terrorist attacks were more prevalent in Greece than elsewhere. Prime Minister Simitis assured his British counterpart, Tony Blair, "We will not spare any effort in apprehending those responsible and bringing them to justice, and we are determined to actively continue our difficult struggle against terrorism."
But in a statement tailored for Greek listeners, he took a slightly different tone, saying: "This terrorist act is contrary to the fundamental law of respect for human life. And it takes place at a time when Greece is charting a period of success, with increased international prestige." He added, "The Greek government will do its duty and will safeguard with all means the country's stable course and the security of its citizens."
Other Greek officials did not hide their concern that the attack could affect tourism, one of the country's chief sources of income. Public Order Minister Michalis Chrysochoidis condemned the attack but said it was "motivated by interests determined to plague our own."
No one has claimed responsibility for the killing, but the police said shells found at the site came from a .45-caliber pistol, the type of weapon used by November 17 in other attacks. The site and the method of the killing were almost identical to two other slayings attributed to the group.
There have never been widespread demands from Greeks for major antiterrorist sweeps. Most Greeks feel untouched by November 17 violence because it has been largely limited to foreigners and prominent people. Some of November 17's anti-American ideology is widely shared in Greece, a country that still resents American support of the junta from 1967 to 1974 and whose people bitterly opposed the mostly British, French and American bombing of Serbia, a neighbor that shares Greece's Orthodox faith.
Yannis Fokas, 31, a parking attendant, said he was not surprised to hear of another terrorist attack. But he was baffled by the gunmen's target. "Why a Brit?" he asked. "I was expecting them to attack an American after all this anti-Greek talk and reports that have been coming out of Washington lately."
Others seemed perplexed by the international outrage. "I'm surprised the British have not become immune to Greek terrorism as we have," said Irene Kafandaraki, 24.
Some Greeks, however, expressed criticism of their own government. "After 25 years, the Greek police is powerless to deal with such a phenomenon," said Dora Bakoyannis, a leader of the center-right New Democracy opposition party, whose husband was shot dead in 1989 in an attack attributed to November 17. "If we don't at some stage realize that terrorism has to be tackled, we will continue to be the only country which finds itself in this situation."
Stelios Papathemelis, a senior member of the Pasok party and a former minister of public order, was critical of his own political side.
"Greece must show stronger political will," he said today. "What is needed is a consistent and continuous policy against terrorism."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Brigadier Saunders was Britain's military attache in Athens. (Agence France-Presse); Police officers and photographers crowded around the car that Brig. Stephen Saunders was driving when he was killed yesterday. The police said the shooting resembled others by a terrorist group called November 17. (Associated Press)(pg. A8)
      

Load-Date: June 9, 2000


End of Document