Britain 'has choices to make' on new trade deal: European Union diplomats
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 18, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 583 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The two sides have a week to 10 days to find a way to unlock trade talks, Irish Foreign Minister Simon Coveney said this morning.
United Kingdom chief Brexit negotiator, David Frost, told Prime Minister Boris Johnson that a post-Brexit trade deal with the European Union can be expected early next week, The Sun reported.
Should no Brexit agreement transpire by then, they are expected to focus again on preparations for a chaotic breakdown in trade at the end of 2020 when Britain's continued participation in the EU customs union and single market ends.
If no agreement is in place at the end of December, goods travelling between the two areas will be subject to tariffs set out by the World Trade Organisation.
"We are working to get a deal, but the only one that's possible is one that is compatible with our sovereignty and takes back control of our laws, our trade, and our waters", Frost tweeted on Sunday.
The Health Secretary suggested Britain was not prepared to bend to demands from the bloc that it make concessions on fishing rights and state aid rules.
Last night Lord Frost said: 'We may not succeed.
Speaking to Sky News today Mr Hancock said: 'Our red lines haven't changed and we're preparing for whatever the outcome is. The two sides have "got to make big progress this week", he said.
The UK later called for the European Union to show more "realism" in the negotiations.
If Prime Minister Boris Johnson "respects them, there will be a deal". The discussions will be based on our largely common draft treaty texts. "We are working hard to find solutions which fully respect United Kingdom sovereignty, but it is far from certain that an agreement will prove possible and time is now very short".
PM Modi Says Nations Supporting Terrorism Should Be Brought to Book
The Prime Minister also addressed the issue of cooperation among the BRICS countries on the production of vaccine for COVID-19. The Prime Minister also highlighted reform initiatives undertaken by his government under the "self-reliant India" campaign.
I and our British team have been in talks nearly every day since 22 October.
'But, although there has been some progress in recent days, there is much work to be done and time is now very short.
There has so far been little movement on the most contentious areas - so-called "level playing field" fair competition rules and fisheries.
A failure to strike a deal will hurt both sides, with businesses facing tariffs and other barriers to trade starting on January 1.
A senior European Union diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the two sides were "still a bit too far away to be able to feel comfortable", repeating that Britain needed to make a choice because "the timetable is very tight".
In London, meanwhile, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was self-isolating in a flat in his Downing Street residence after he had contact with a British lawmaker who later tested positive for COVID-19.
For the United Kingdom, the EU must rescind its hopes of keeping permanent wide access to British waters for European fishermen.
The European Parliament has previously said it could give the necessary consent at its last plenary meeting scheduled for this year on December 15-16 - if the lawmakers received a finished text of a trade treaty on Monday at the latest.
But he said there did need to be "headlines" of a trade agreement this week.
Nevertheless, both the United Kingdom and the bloc "recognize that time is very short", Eustice told Sky News' Ridge on Sunday program.

Load-Date: November 19, 2020


End of Document