Britain files first charges in London terror cases Accused allegedly withheld information on suspects in July 21 case
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 4, 2005 Thursday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 468 words
Byline: BY BETH GARDINER The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


British police filed their first charges in the London terrorism investigations Wednesday, accusing a 23-year-old man of withholding information about the suspected transit bombers who botched their attempt on July 21.
Police say that in the week after the attack, Ismael Abdurahman of southeast London had information he knew might help police capture suspects involved in "the commission, preparation or instigation of an act of terrorism."
He was charged under antiterrorism legislation and is to attend a hearing in London today.
The charges could mark an important step forward for police seeking to build cases against the 17 people in custody in connection with the attempted assault on July 21, in which bombs planted on three subways and a bus failed to fully detonate.
Police also are trying to uncover the larger network that may have supported those attackers, who struck exactly two weeks after four suicide bombers -- also on three trains and a bus -- killed 52 victims on July 7. 
One of the suspected July 21 bombers, Hamdi Issac, has been charged in Italy with association with the aim of international terrorism. Britain is seeking to extradite him. Italy also has two of Issac's brothers in custody, and Britain is holding 14 suspects.
No suspects are being detained in connection with the attacks on July 7.
Police pursued international links Wednesday -- to Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Zambia -- as they hunted for possible conspirators in the bombings and tried to determine whether the two sets of attackers were linked.
Zambia announced it was deporting Haroon Rashid Aswat, a British citizen of Indian descent, to Britain, and President Levy Mwanawasa said Aswat was an alleged terrorist. However, it was unclear whether Britain suspected him of involvement in the London bombings.
British newspaper reports, citing security sources, have said in recent days that investigators don't believe he was linked to the London attacks. But Zambian authorities have questioned him about 20 phone conversations he reportedly had with some of the suspected bombers.
News reports have said suspects in both attacks worshipped at the Finsbury Park Mosque in north London, known as a hotbed for Islamic radicals.
Also, a Pakistani official said authorities there were trying to determine whether Ethiopian-born Muktar Said Ibrahim, a suspect in and possible ringleader of the July 21 attacks, may have been in Pakistan at the same time as two suspected July 7 attackers.
Investigators believe that any confirmation of a visit by Ibrahim to Pakistan would strengthen the theory of a link between the two groups.
Police have also been pursuing a possible Saudi connection. The newspaper The Sunday Times said Ibrahim took a month-long trip to Saudi Arabia in 2003, telling friends he was to undergo training there.

Load-Date: August 5, 2005


End of Document