British break up suspected plot; 6 men arrested in alleged terrorist plan to target Benedict XVI
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 18, 2010, Saturday


Copyright 2010 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3D
Length: 469 words
Byline: Nicole Winfield, Associated Press Writer
Body


LONDON - British police staged a pre-dawn raid at a London garbage depot Friday, arresting five street cleaners in a suspected terrorist plot against Pope Benedict XVI on the second day of his state visit to Britain. A sixth person was arrested later in the day.
The Vatican said the pope was calm despite the arrests and planned no changes to his schedule, but the arrests overshadowed a major address by Benedict to British politicians, businessmen and cultural leaders about the need to restore faith and ethics to public policymaking.
Acting on a tip, police detained the men, aged 26 to 50, under the Terrorism Act at a cleaning depot in central London after receiving information about a possible threat. The men were being questioned at a London police station and had not been charged as of Friday night. Police said an initial search of that business and other properties did not uncover any hazardous items.
Police said a sixth man - a 29-year-old - was arrested later in the day at his home in connection with the earlier raid. All six were arrested "on suspicion of the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism."
The pope's visit has divided opinion in officially Protestant, highly secular Britain. The trip has been overshadowed by disgust over the Catholic Church's clerical abuse scandal and opposition from secularists and those opposed to the pope's stances against homosexuality and the use of condoms to fight the virus that leads to AIDS.
The detained suspects worked for a contractor on behalf of Westminster Council, the authority responsible for much of central London.
Benedict spent much of the afternoon in Westminster Hall and Westminster Abbey; the depot where the men were arrested is responsible for cleaning another part of London that the pope is not scheduled to visit, however, police said.
Police confirmed that some of the suspects were thought to be from outside Britain but declined to comment on media reports they were of Algerian origin.
One street sweeper at the depot said at least one of those arrested was Algerian, and that he believed all five arrested in the morning were from North Africa.
At the scene of the arrests in Chiltern Street, close to London's Madame Tussauds' tourist attraction, police cordoned off part of the road, removing items from the Veolia depot and examining nearby garbage cans.
AP photos
A policeman holds binoculars as he keeps a lookout from the roof of St Mary's University College at Twickenham, London, before the arrival of Pope Benedict XVI on Friday. Five men have been arrested in London over an alleged threat to the pope, and police searches are under way at locations across the British capital, police said Friday.
Pope Benedict XVI greets school children as he arrives at St Mary's University College at Twickenham, London.

Load-Date: September 20, 2010


End of Document