BRITAIN PROPOSES EASING DETENTION IN TERROR CASES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 27, 2011 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 528 words
Byline: JOHN F. BURNS, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


LONDON -- For years, Britain has struggled with its own version of the U.S. debate over the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba: how best to deal with individuals regarded as terrorist threats who cannot readily be brought to trial, usually because of concern that relevant evidence would compromise intelligence sources.
Britain has no Guantanamo equivalent. But it has a major terrorism problem, with an extensive network of al-Qaida-linked extremists spread across Britain, and its security services run dozens of investigations at any given time into possible attacks. It has found, under two governments, that some suspects are beyond effective prosecution, or deportation, leaving it to hold some indefinitely under "control orders" -- an extended version of house arrest.
On Wednesday, such legal dilemmas came into sharp focus when Prime Minister David Cameron's government unveiled new measures easing some limits on terrorism suspects in the hope of at least partly meeting objections of human rights activists, who have compared the existing system to the repressive practices of many of the world's authoritarian governments.
The detention system subjects suspects to curfews that can run for 16 hours a day, forbids them access to cell phones and computers, and requires them to wear electronic tagging devices monitored by police. Currently, eight men are being held this way, all of them accused of being Islamic militants, all born outside Britain and all officially protected from being identified.
Home Secretary Theresa May announced the changes Wednesday, and said the measures would be presented for Parliament's approval as part of a new system, Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures, to take effect by year's end. For the first time, detentions would be limited to a maximum of two years. Curfews would be replaced by a more flexible "overnight residence requirement," cutting the stay-at-home rule to a period of perhaps eight to 10 hours. Suspects could use cell phones and home computers, as long as they provided police with their passwords. The government would also increase, by $30 million, the budget for physical and electronic surveillance.
As before, suspects would be forbidden from leaving the country, but their movements within it would be eased. Bans on visiting entire towns or neighborhoods would be narrowed to specific buildings -- mosques or community centers, for example.
The government pledged to step up efforts to negotiate deals to deport suspects to their home countries under guarantees protecting them from torture or other abuses.
The new proposals are the result of a wide-ranging review of Britain's counterterrorism laws and practices ordered by the Cameron government after it defeated the Labour government in May elections.
While senior Conservatives had clashed with Labour over its counterterrorism measures, calling them too severe, urgency was added to the review by Mr. Cameron's need to placate the Conservatives' junior coalition partners, the Liberal Democrats. They had demanded a wholesale reworking of the control measures, and made the scrapping of Labour's system a condition of joining the coalition.

Load-Date: January 28, 2011


End of Document