British Man Convicted of Plotting Attack on Theresa May
The New York Times 
July 18, 2018 Wednesday 00:47 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; europe
Length: 564 words
Byline: Megan Specia
Highlight: Naa’imur Zakariyah Rahman was found guilty of planning to kill the prime minister of Britain at her official residence.
Body


A British man was found guilty on Wednesday of plotting to kill Prime Minister Theresa May in a terrorist attack at her official residence.
The man, Naa’imur Zakariyah Rahman, 20, who is originally from the Birmingham area of England, was convicted at the Old Bailey courthouse in London on Wednesday, the BBC reported. He will be sentenced at a later date.
“I want to do a suicide bomb on Parliament,” Mr. Rahman told an undercover agent before his arrest, according to testimony. “I want to attempt to kill Theresa May.”
Mr. Rahman was detained late last year along with Mohammed Aqib Imran, 21, after the police discovered that Mr. Rahman was planning an attack that would include bombing the security gates that protect Mrs. May at her home and office at 10 Downing Street. He planned to stab the British leader to death, prosecutors said at the time of his arrest.
Mr. Imran, also from Birmingham, was accused of preparing acts of terrorism by attempting to travel to Libya to join the Islamic State militant group.
Mr. Rahman was arrested in November 2017 after, the authorities said, he picked up a backpack that he believed was filled with explosives from someone who he thought was affiliated with the Islamic State. The man was actually an undercover police officer.
During the trial, which began in June, the jury heard that Mr. Rahman began communicating with a British intelligence officer on the private messaging app Telegram, in the belief that he was an Islamic State member in Syria, the BBC reported.
In his interactions with the undercover agent, Mr. Rahman also praised the Manchester Arena bomber for an attack that had occurred months earlier and left 23 people, including the bomber, dead.
Prosecutors said during the trial that they believed that Mr. Rahman had been just days away from carrying out an attack. They shared video of him that they said showed him scouting out the location.
Mr. Rahman told the jury that his plans had been just a fantasy and that he had had no intention of carrying them out, the BBC reported.
At the time of his arrest in 2017, Britain was reeling from the Manchester Arena assault and a number of other terrorist attacks.
In June, three men drove a van into pedestrians on London Bridge and then stabbed people at the nearby Borough Market. Eight people were killed and 48 injured.
Later that same month, Muslim worshipers were attacked at a mosque in Finsbury Park. One man was killed and nine others were injured when a man drove a van into a crowd outside the mosque.
Earlier this week, another British man was given a life sentence for posting messages online glorifying terrorism and encouraging others to commit attacks. The man, Husnain Rashid, 32, had planned to travel to Syria to support the Islamic State, according to the Crown Prosecution Service.
His vitriolic online posts included one with a photograph of Prince George, the 4-year-old son of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, and the address of his school. “Even the royal family will not be left alone,” he wrote.
PHOTO: Police officers outside the gates of Downing Street, London, in December 2017, after a plot to attack the prime minister’s residence was discovered. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Alberto Pezzali/NurPhoto, via Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
Plot to Kill U.K. Prime Minister Foiled, Court Hears
After Terror Attacks, Britain Moves to Police the Web

Load-Date: July 20, 2018


End of Document