British Executive Whom U.S. Wants to Extradite Challenges Treaty
The New York Times
May 14, 2005 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 594 words
Byline: By HEATHER TIMMONS
Dateline: LONDON, May 13 
Body


A retired British manufacturing executive is challenging the use of a treaty with the United States under which his extradition is being sought in a price-fixing case, contending that the treaty, signed as the two countries were pledging increased cooperation to fight terrorism, violates his human rights.
 The retired executive, Ian Norris, 62, and his lawyers contend that price-fixing was not a criminal offense in Britain during the period the American investigation covers. They also say that it is unfair for the Justice Department to use the treaty because the United States Senate has not ratified it. 
 ''We have effectively denuded our own citizens of legal protection with absolutely no reciprocity,'' said Alistair Graham, a partner with White & Case who is representing Mr. Norris. ''This is a matter of huge public interest for U.K. citizens.'' 
 Mr. Norris and his lawyers join a growing chorus of the treaty's critics in Britain, including many politicians and human rights advocates. The treaty adds the United States to a list of European countries that can ask that British citizens be extradited to stand trial, without providing any evidence of their crimes, and vice versa.
 Critics of the treaty, signed in March, 2003, said they thought American prosecutors were overreaching. Many in Britain expected the British citizens who were identified for extradition under its provisions to be mainly terrorism suspects, but it has been used so far against a number of businessmen as well. 
 So far, the Home Office said, the United States has sought 43 extraditions under the treaty: 10 on drug charges, 3 on terrorism charges, 22 for fraud, 2 for murder and 1 for obstruction of justice. Six people have been extradited, though information was not available about which ones. 
 ''We are concerned that the American courts are exercising extraterritorial jurisdiction, particularly in financial fraud matters, that goes beyond anything the U.K. seeks to exercise,'' said William Goodhart, a member of the House of Lords who has proposed reviewing the legislation under which the treaty is carried out in Britain. ''The main argument against the act is that the treaty itself is not reciprocal.''
 Others whose extradition is being sought have also gone to court to challenge the treaty. Among them are three former NatWest bankers who did work with Enron. British regulators reviewed their involvement with the company, and did not seek to prosecute.
 Baber Ahmed, a computer expert accused of raising cash to support terrorism through the World Wide Web, also has sought court protection, contending that he will be treated unjustly if he is extradited.
 In response to questions about the treaty this week, the British Home Office issued a statement noting that the treaty was completely new, and required the consent of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee before it could be ratified by the United States government. ''We have been advised by the U.S. State Department that although the committee had a heavy schedule, the U.S. State Department has asked it to consider the treaty at the earliest possible time,'' the statement said. 
 In Washington, Andy Fisher, press secretary for Senator Richard G. Lugar, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the treaty had not made its way through the ratification process yet. ''The Senate received the treaty last year,'' he said. ''The committee has not had a hearing on it yet.'' He said he did not know when one would be scheduled.                                                             

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 14, 2005


End of Document