British approve anti-terrorism law
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 13, 2005, Sunday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P12A
Length: 456 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


LONDON u Britain's governing Labour Party claimed victory Saturday for pushing through its anti-terrorism law after an acrimonious two-day debate in Parliament. The opposition said it had forced the government to make key changes to the legislation.
Ten suspects who had been detained without trial for up to three years u including a radical preacher accused of links to al-Qaida u were free, although they faced "control orders'' imposing a nighttime curfew and severe restrictions on their activities.
Prime Minister Tony Blair won the support of Parliament for the Prevention of Terrorism Bill on Friday after one of the longest and most bitter standoffs in recent Parliamentary history.
The law allows terrorist suspects to be put under house arrest or curfew or electronically tagged without charge or trial.
The Conservative Party had opposed the legislation, saying it would infringe on civil liberties.
and demanding a sunset clause guaranteeing that the law would expire a year after being passed. The government claimed such an amendment would send a message that Britain was soft on terrorism.
On Saturday, House of Commons leader Peter Hain accused the Conservatives of "putting at risk serious anti-terrorism legislation and therefore the security of the country.''
But Conservative co-chairman Liam Fox said his party believed terror suspects should either be deported or tried.
"We don't want them behind their front doors, living amongst us in the community,'' Fox told British Broadcasting Corp. radio. "We want them behind bars or out of the country and that is one of the things we want to come back to.''
To break the deadlock, Blair eventually agreed to a timetable for Parliament to review and amend the law and promised Parliament time to draft more wide-ranging legislation later in the year. The Conservatives said that was a sunset clause in all but name.
The government insists its new law is needed to control a small number of dangerous suspects who cannot be tried because evidence against them is too sensitive to reveal publicly.
Legislation drawn up after Sept. 11 that allowed some terror suspects to be imprisoned without charge or trial was declared illegal by Britain's highest court in December and expires on Monday.
Ten suspects imprisoned for up to three years under that legislation were freed on bail this week. They include Abu Qatada, a radical Muslim cleric described by officials as Osama bin Laden's "spiritual ambassador in Europe'' and an inspiration for Mohammed Atta, the lead Sept. 11 hijacker.
Hours after the new law was passed, Home Secretary Charles Clarke signed control orders imposing restrictions on the 10 individuals. Under the law the orders must be approved by a judge within seven days.

Load-Date: March 14, 2005


End of Document