Broken Promise
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
February 8, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 10
Length: 393 words
Byline: In Our View
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


In January 2009, President Barack Obama called for the closing of the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The decision, he told State Department employees at the time, sends "an unmistakable signal that our actions in defense of liberty will be as just as our cause."
Two years later, Guantanamo remains open. During that time, the U.S. government has sent exactly one detainee from Guantanamo to a U.S. federal court to be tried.
Obama's decision to close Guantanamo met with controversy. A number of politicians contended that military commissions provided the best way to try detainees from Iraq and Afghanistan. They argued that the stricter rules of evidence in U.S. courts would lead to unwarranted releases of terrorists.
The facts prove otherwise. Military commissions have convicted a total of five people on terrorism charges in more than nine years.
Federal courts have convicted more than 400 on terrorism charges over that same period.
Now Defense Secretary Robert Gates has said that more military commissions will be established.
The Bush administration used Guantanamo to hold "detainees" - people who were not prisoners of war but were linked with terrorist groups or fought against the United States.
Many of these men have been imprisoned indefinitely and have not been formally charged.
The federal government contends that 48 unnamed detainees cannot be prosecuted, nor can they be released because they pose a risk to safety. But the government has not released their names, explained why they are being held or said why they cannot be prosecuted.
The only Guantanamo detainee to ever have been tried in federal court was Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani. He was convicted in a federal court in New York City.
The United States prides itself as a nation of laws. U.S. courts have a 200-year history. Terror suspects have been tried in more than 50 dictrict courts throughout the country. Not once have the proceedings disrupted regular business in the community.
When Obama vowed to close Guantanamo, he had the support of a number of military and civilian leaders, including Sen. John McCain, his 2008 presidential opponent.
"We intend to win this fight," he said. "We are going to win it on our own terms."
Don't alter those terms. The court system works. Transfer the detainees. Put them on trial in U.S. courts and close Guantanamo as promised.

Load-Date: February 9, 2011


End of Document