Brown: Afghan regions 'epicenter' of terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 14, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 5
Length: 290 words
Byline: NOOR KHAN The Associated Press
Body


KANDAHAR, Afghanistan - Britain's prime minister worked Sunday to mend relations with Afghan President Hamid Karzai and renew Britain's commitment to the war despite its unpopularity back home. Prime Minister Gordon Brown said he would ship helicopters, equipment and roadside bomb surveillance devices along with 500 reinforcements he recently announced will join 9,500 British troops deployed mostly in southern Afghanistan. 
Regions of Afghanistan are at the "epicenter" of the global terrorist threat, Brown said, defending his decision to sent more British forces to war. Brown recently sharply criticized the Afghan leader, saying that Britain would not continue risking the lives of its soldiers to defend a corrupt government. But in a news conference in Kandahar province, he refrained from confrontation. The change in tone appears to reflect the fact that the two governments must work in concert in coming months if they are to achieve their goals of restoring stability in the south, training Afghan security forces and enabling British troops to leave. "We have good cooperation and we're hoping, with the new (Afghan) Cabinet, to work on fighting corruption and take a step toward improving security in Afghanistan," Brown said. "Our plan is to weaken the Taliban and to strengthen the Afghan authorities." Brown spent Saturday night at an airfield in Kandahar - the first time he has stayed overnight in either Afghanistan or Iraq. For security reasons, his pre-holiday visit was not officially announced until Sunday. He offered condolences to the families of 100 British soldiers who have died in the war this year. "I feel for the families of whose who have lost loved ones, particularly as we move toward Christmas," he said.

Load-Date: December 14, 2009


End of Document