Brown Urges Global Push To Solve Global Problems
The New York Times
April 19, 2008 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 545 words
Byline: By KATIE ZEZIMA
Dateline: BOSTON 
Body


Europe and the United States must increase their efforts to solve global problems like terrorism, the environment, hunger and poverty, Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain said Friday in a wide-ranging speech at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum here. 
  ''We urgently need to step out of the mind-set of competing interests and instead find our common interests -- and we must summon up the best instincts and efforts of humanity in a cooperative effort to build new international rules and institutions for the new global era,'' Mr. Brown said. He was in Boston the day after visiting Washington to meet with President Bush and the three major candidates for the presidency.
  Making numerous references to the post-World War II era and to Kennedy's push for internationalism, Mr. Brown said that the world needed ''a new deal'' much like the Marshall Plan, and that countries like the United States and Britain must work to stabilize volatile nations and prevent crimes against humanity and terrorism.
  He praised President Bush for ''leading the world'' in the fight against terrorism, and reaffirmed his support for a unified response that includes freezing assets, tightening international law and imposing travel bans,  which he said he and Mr. Bush discussed Thursday at the White House. 
  ''He and I agree terrorism will ultimately be defeated only when it is isolated and abandoned,'' the prime minister said. More must be done, however, to intervene in countries shaken by conflict and to stamp out atrocities, he said. 
  ''Instability in one country will affect stability in all countries; an injustice anywhere is now a threat to justice everywhere,'' Mr. Brown said. ''And that is how we must respond: not walking away as we did in Rwanda at the cost of thousands of lives, but by engaging as hard-headed internationalists.'' 
  Mr. Brown continued to call for reform of the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and urged a greater role for China, India, South Africa and other emerging countries in those organizations and in the Group of 8, which consists of leading industrialized countries. He also said that the European Union, the African Union and other groups of countries should help with humanitarian aid and peacekeeping in troubled nations. 
  ''For the first time in human history, we have the opportunity to come together around a global covenant, to reframe the international architecture and build the truly global society,'' he said. 
  That covenant must include investments in education, disease prevention and the elimination of food shortages, the prime minister said. He suggested a series of international conferences next year to discuss how to make his proposals a reality. 
  With a nod to Kennedy's creation of the Peace Corps in the 1960s, Mr. Brown urged the creation of a global peace corps that would train its volunteers to help rebuild countries. 
  He continued to call for an international agreement to combat climate change, and urged the halving of carbon emissions by 2050. 
   ''American leadership will be and is indispensable,'' Mr. Brown said. ''And now is an opportunity for an historic effort in cooperation: a new dawn in collaborative action between America and Europe.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 19, 2008


End of Document