Brussels police raided terrorism suspect's apartment one week before the attack
The Bell Ringer: Augusta State University
March 26, 2016 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: GLOBAL-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 855 words
Byline: Gerald Bowen
Body


Brussels yesterday awoke amid growing suggestions that the bombings were the work of the same Islamic State group cell that attacked Paris past year.
Prosecutors declined to comment on reports from Belgian state broadcaster RTBF and France's Le Monde and BFM television that a fifth attacker may also be at large: A man seen on surveillance cameras in the Brussels metro carrying a large bag alongside one of the suicide bombers.
Ibrahim's brother Khalid carried out a suicide attack at Maalbeek metro station.
"Despite our warnings that this person was a foreign terrorist fighter, the Belgian authorities could not identify a link to terrorism", Erdogan said.
Van Leeuw revealed that airport bomber Ibrahim El Bakraoui had left a desperate "will" on a computer that he dumped in a trash can on the street, in which he said he was being "hunted everywhere".
Van Leeuw said the bomb did partially explode after police had already evacuated the terminal, injuring nobody.
European security officials say one of the suicide bombers who attacked the Brussels airport Tuesday is a suspected bombmaker for the Paris attackers. "And if I give myself up then I'll end up in a cell".
A taxi driver has come forward and told police he picked three men up from an address in the Schaerbeek neighbourhood and took them to the airport yesterday morning.
"We saw them at night working". The image shows three men pushing luggage. "Thirty people have been identified as linked to the Paris attacks".
French speakers with links to North Africa, France and Belgium appear to be leading the units and are responsible for developing attack strategies in Europe, said a European security official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss briefing material.
At least 31 people were killed and about 271 wounded in the attacks, the prosecutor said.
Ibrahim el-Bakraoui, who was identified from fingerprints, blew himself up at Zaventem airport.
He is believed to have made the suicide vests used in the November attacks in Paris, in which 130 people were killed, according to a French police official who said Laachraoui's DNA was found on all of them and in a Brussels apartment where they were made.
"Officials are investigating, but believe that the attacks were supposed to happen closer to Easter and were supposed to be much bigger".
He is also linked to another apartment in southern Belgium that Abdeslam and other jihadists used before the Paris attacks.
"We don't have to be proud about what happened", Justice Minister Koen Geens said of the government's failures to halt the attacks.
"He probably had 10 more at hand who would be ready to do the same thing tomorrow morning", she said, describing his Brussels acolytes as "like a scout troop... a troop of death". We will focus on reports from police officials and other authorities, credible news outlets and reporters who are at the scene.
European authorities are searching frantically for terrorism suspect Najim Laachraoui amid fears he has escaped authorities' clutches - again.
Ibrahim El Bakraoui, 29, received a nine-year prison sentence in 2010 for shooting at police following an attempted robbery of a currency exchange, while Khalid El Bakraoui, 27, served a brief sentence for attempted carjacking.
During the raid, Mohamed Belkaid, a jihadi previously unknown to authorities, was killed in a shootout with police while two people - now thought to have been the El-Bakraoui brothers - fled.
Belgium is holding three days of national mourning.
"Long live Belgium!" some declared. "Terrorist groups continue to plan near-term attacks throughout Europe, targeting sporting events, tourist sites, restaurants, and transportation".
Belgian authorities have said Brussels airport will remain closed for at least 48 hours. Eleven people were confirmed dead at the airport, 20 inside the Maelbeek subway station.
"The State Department alerts USA citizens to potential risks of travel to and throughout Europe following several terrorist attacks, including the March 22 attacks in Brussels claimed by [ISIS]".
State unemployment rate down to 4.4% despite post-holiday job
North Dakota and South Dakota tied for the nation's lowest jobless rate, at 2.8 percent. All twenty-four metro areas in the state had over-the-year job gains in January 2016.
Like this:
Carmelo Anthony: Carmelo Anthony would take pay cut for Big 4First victim of Brussels terror attacks identifiedCruz's comments after attack criticized by Muslims, othersJoe Garagiola, ex-player turned glib broadcaster, dies at 90Iraq Says It's Launched Offensive To Recapture IS-held MosulIndependent Investigators: State Officials Mostly To Blame For Flint Water CrisisAll New Toyota Prius Prime Debuts in NY Jeb Bush endorses Ted CruzMcConnell: No Supreme Court Justice Will Be Confirmed Under ObamaApple starts a busy week with new iPhone launchANC says ready to debate Gupta 'state capture'Senate Republican leader: No lame-duck hearing of court pickZika Virus: Causes, Symptoms and TreatmentObama, Castro come face to face in historic meeting in CubaFour Russian track-and-field athletes test positive for meldonium

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Document