Brussels? Paris? What about Mogadishu?
The Griffen: Canisius College
October 20, 2017 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 937 words
Body


By Nathan Baumgartner
Opinion Contributor 
Terrorism has become a fixture in domestic and foreign policies throughout the world. When discussing refugees and asylum seekers, specifically, a threat to security is often discussed vis-a-vis immigration policy. Some politicians go as far as to label refugees and asylum seekers as "radical Islamic terrorists," as our own president phrases it. Many nations, certainly so for the United States, have begun to undertake definitive "security" protocols designed to increase security therein.
We talk about how we have a problem with terrorism, yet we do not give attacks occurring in the developed world - which is used in a lot of political rhetoric against refugees and asylum seekers - much consideration. On 14 Oct. 2017, a truck bomb detonated in the Somali capital city of Mogadishu. 327 people were killed and over 400 were injured as a result of this attack, according to The Guardian and BBC News. In terms of casualties, this is double the amount of casualties in attacks in Paris (130 deaths, according to RTÉ) and Brussels (32 deaths, according to AFP). So why do we not give terrorist attacks like Mogadishu more coverage?
Income disparities are a theme often discussed regarding media coverage disparities between the developed and developing worlds. As the argument goes, because states in the developing world have less money than states in the developed world, security is a greater concern in the former more than the latter. While this may be true in certain situations, economics and greater security do not always overlap. For example, Costa Rica has been regarded as a stable economy but has a considerably lower income per capita when compared to the United States or Canada. Conversely, the United States has experienced abnormally high rates of gun-related incidents (both lethal and nonlethal injuries) compared to other similarly developed states in Western and Northern Europe. While this may begin to explain some causes of what happened, we cannot view this as an absolute truth.
The reality is that perceived security threats can exist anywhere at any time. Even with coverage from Western sources of attacks like Mogadishu, the information came from somewhere on the ground. We like to perceive these areas as near-constant quasi-battlegrounds where people die from these attacks every day. While statistics indicate that terrorist attacks occur more often throughout the developing world than in the developed world, what happened in Mogadishu is neither entirely indicative of what occurs there regularly nor of how the typical Somali conducts his/herself. We hear minimally of good events occurring in Somalia, like how Somalia has been able to secure a quota for female representation in their parliament and how the country has made significant strides to improve anti-corruption measures since 2010. Yes, the conditions within Somalia remain of poorer quality relative to much of the developed world. But change is happening at unprecedented rates in many aspects of Somali society. Sure, these attacks seemingly hold Somali society back.
Ultimately, we do not cover attacks like what happened in Mogadishu six days ago because we perceive them as a group entirely different from us. Stemming from my personal experiences, I have innumerable friends living in and near Paris, Brussels, Berlin, Barcelona and other cities throughout Western Europe which experienced terrorist attacks. I know of no one living in Mogadishu. When going on Twitter post-Paris and post-Brussels attacks, I saw an innumerable amount of people tweeting, "#IAmParis" or "#IAmBrussels." I am not intending to critique these Twitter tactics, as I believe it is always good to stand in solidarity against terrorism, but I am critiquing a lack of similar support to Somalia when Somalia could use it the most. Nor am I trying to show how such disparities are conscious decisions. I would say a majority of people within much of the developed world just remain uninformed about this attack, as well as others similar to it, and therefore do not demonstrate any regard towards it. And when we do talk about the developing world vis-a-vis refugees and asylum seekers, the framing of it in the context of terrorism does minimal good, either. For many people within the developing world, that skews our perception. We become unwilling, as a general population, to positively assist the developing world in combatting terrorism.
Consequently, in addressing the gap between the developed and developing world in media coverage, we need to not be afraid to speak out against these patterns. Something the United States has consistently lacked is good coverage of international news unless it revolves around terrorism. I use international media sources, typically based in Europe, because I view it as more in-depth surrounding international issues. Journalists there aren't worrying about the decline of journalism as is the case, generally speaking, in the United States and this generates a more motivated team of people working to report on news relative to here. We need to pop the bubble of American superiority - and supposed threats surrounding it - and look towards ourselves and how we have typecasted the situations like Mogadishu and people therein. Starting to address these issues will ultimately begin to create the conditions under which a truly international media within the United States and much of the world can thrive.  div.wpmrec2x{max-width:610px;}div.wpmrec2x div.u > div{float:left;margin-right:10px;}div.wpmrec2x div.u > div:nth-child(3n){margin-right:0px;}

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document