Brutal London attack yields two more arrests
USA TODAY
May 24, 2013 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 480 words
Byline: Kim Hjelmgaard, and Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY
Body


Scotland Yard says two more people have been arrested by officers investigating the hacking death of a British soldier on the streets of south London.
Counterterrorism officers arrested a man and a woman, both 29, on Thursday on suspicion of conspiracy to murder. The first two suspects, who were shot and arrested by police at the scene Wednesday, remained hospitalized in stable condition with non-life-threatening injuries.
The pair -- a 22-year-old man and a 28-year-old man -- were also subjects of earlier security service investigations into possible terror links, according to a British government official, the Associated Press reports.
Investigations by Britain's domestic security service, MI5, can include undercover surveillance, phone tapping and communications intercepts.
The latest arrests came as the Ministry of Defense identified the victim as drummer Lee Rigby, 25, of the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers.
Rigby, from Manchester, served abroad in Cyprus, Afghanistan and Germany. The ministry said in a statement that Rigby was "an excellent side drummer and highly competent machine gunner."
"An extremely popular and witty soldier, drummer Rigby was a larger than life personality within the Corps of Drums and was well known, liked and respected across the Second Fusiliers," the statement said. "He was a passionate and life-long Manchester United fan." He leaves behind a 2-year-old son.
Prime Minister David Cameron, who chaired a meeting Thursday of the government's emergency response committee Cobra, said the attack images are "deeply shocking" but would not deter the British people from standing up to terrorism.
"One of the best ways of defeating terrorism is to go about our normal lives," he said. "That is what we shall do today."
The assailants struck the soldier, apparently at random, with their car Wednesday, then attacked him with knives and cleavers. They stayed on the scene until police arrived.
During the night, police raided two homes, one in Greenwich and one in Lincolnshire.  Two women, believed to be sisters, were handcuffed and led away from a house in Greenwich, ITV News reports.
The BBC, quoting unidentified officials, reported that one of the suspects arrested Wednesday is Michael Adebolajo, 28, who comes from a devout Christian family but converted to Islam after leaving the University of Greenwich in 2001. Adebolajo is a Briton of Nigerian descent.
Adebolajo was named as the man recorded by a bystander, saying: "We swear by almighty Allah we will never stop fighting you," as he clutched knives in bloodied hands. "The only reasons we have done this is because Muslims are dying every day. This British soldier is an eye for an eye, a tooth for tooth. ... You people will never be safe. Remove your government. They don't care about you."
Stanglin reported from McLean, Va.
Contributing: The Associated Press 

Load-Date: May 24, 2013


End of Document