Brutal attack in London heightens terror fearsAttack in London heightens terror fears
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
May 22, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 286 words
Byline: Cassandra Vinograd and Paisley Dodds Associated Press
Body


 LONDON ? Two men with butcher knives attacked a citizen to death Wednesday near a London military barracks and one then went on video to explain the crime, shouting political statements, gesturing with bloodied hands and waving a meat cleaver. 
Soon after, police shot and wounded the unidentified assailants and took them into custody. The brutal daylight attack shocked the city and raised fears that terrorism had returned to London. Authorities did not identify the victim by name, but French President Francois Hollande referred to him as a "soldier" at a news conference in Paris with visiting British Prime Minister David Cameron. Cameron would not confirm that, but British media reported that the victim was wearing a shirt in support of troops and Britain's Ministry of Defense said it was investigating whether a U.K. soldier was involved. Calling it "an appalling murder," Cameron said there were "strong indications" it was an act of terrorism, and two other officials said there were signs the attack was motivated by radical Islam. The Cabinet's emergency committee was immediately convened and security was stepped up at army barracks across London. Cameron cut short his Paris trip to return to London and his office said he would chair another session Thursday. The incident unfolded Wednesday afternoon when officers responded to reports of an assault just a few blocks from the Royal Artillery Barracks in the neighborhood of Woolwich. Images from the scene showed a blue car that appeared to have been used in the attack and rammed into a signpost on a sidewalk that was smeared with blood. A number of weapons ? including butchers' knives, a machete and a meat cleaver ? were strewn on the street. 

Load-Date: May 23, 2013


End of Document