BUCKLEY, HIGGINS BURIED AS CAPTORS ARE WARNED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 31, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 16A
Length: 451 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Two Americans who died at the hands of terrorists in Lebanonwere buried Monday after a heroes' farewell and a pledge that their captors would be held to account.  William Buckley, who was the CIA chief in Beirut when he was abducted in 1984, was laid to rest in Arlington National Cemetery near 22 American servicemen killed in Lebanon.  Marine Col. William R. Higgins, who was serving with a U.N. peacekeeping force in Lebanon when he was seized in 1988, was buried at Quantico National Cemetery in Triangle, Va.  After the burial services, Higgins' widow - Marine Corps Maj. Robin Higgins - issued a statement urging Americans not to forgive the hostage-takers.  ''While I do not want to diminish the joy of the families of the live hostages who have come home, I want to remind the American public that I and my family are not sharing in that joy,'' she said. ''The filthy hostage fabric has spit out the bones of my husband.  ''If we forgive, if we forget, if we thank these savages, then we are merely inviting them - at a time and place they will select - to kill again.  Shame on us if we do.'' The flag-draped coffins of the two men were taken to the cemeteries after a ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md.  ''An ugly chapter in terrorism is ending, and the lessons are clear,'' Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney told relatives, friends and colleagues of the two fallen men.
''For its adherents, terrorism achieved nothing. For the people of Lebanon, it only prolonged the violence that has destroyed their ancient land.  ''For Americans, the hostage-taking simply reaffirmed the importance of our resolve - and we will hold those who bear responsibility for these murders to account.'' Flags of the United States, the Marine Corps, the CIA and the United Nations flew during the ceremony. The Marine Band played the national anthem, the Marine Hymn and other patrio tic airs.  Robin Higgins, a public information officer for the Marines, stood at rigid attention as her husband's casket was placed in the hearse for the trip to Quantico.  Vice President Dan Quayle told the mourners: ''These two great men sacrificed their lives for the country they love and for the pursuit of peace and freedom. I salute their sacrifice and their bravery. History will record Colonel Higgins and Mr. Buckley as American heroes.'' Among those attending the ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base was Terry Anderson, chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press and the last American hostage to be released. Anderson and another former hostage, David Jacobson, were held in the same room with Buckley, and Anderson has said he believes Buckley died while they were there together in the dark.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO (COLOR)....AP Photo...A military honor guard with a caisson bearing the remains of CIA official William Buckley on Monday at Arlington National Cemetery.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document