Bucs: Stadium Insurance For Terrorism Inadequate
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 22, 2002, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: METRO,
Length: 344 words
Byline: GARY HABER , ghaber@tampatrib.com  
Body


$2.5 MILLION COVERAGE OK'd
TAMPA - The Tampa Sports Authority approved a new insurance policy for Raymond James Stadium on Monday, despite objections from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers that the policy doesn't provide enough coverage if the stadium is damaged by a terrorist attack.
Sports authority board members agreed to purchase a policy from a consortium of insurers that includes $2.5 million of terrorism coverage, only a fraction of the $185 million value of the 65,000-seat football stadium.
The Bucs' lawyers sent a letter to the authority's lawyer in advance of the meeting, saying the proposed insurance coverage was inadequate.
Board members said they will remain open to additional coverage, if warranted, but they didn't want to delay obtaining new coverage because the current policy expires Nov. 7.
The sports agency's current insurance package, written before the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, includes full-replacement terrorism coverage. The annual premium was $309,816.
But, as sports authority board members learned Monday, the attacks changed the insurance landscape. Insurance companies now charge six-figure fees for coverage they used to include for free. Some sports facilities around the country have opted to go without such coverage.
And, even if the authority could find an insurer willing to offer full-replacement terrorism coverage, the cost would be prohibitive.
The sports authority will pay $346,902 in premiums, including $14,442 for $2.5 million worth of terrorism coverage, after a $25,000 deductible.
But, if members wanted to raise coverage to $100 million, the terrorism insurance premium alone would rise to $234,442, and the authority would have to pay for the first $1 million in damages out of its own pocket.
Henry Saavedra, the sports authority's executive director, told board members the coverage the agency decided to purchase is adequate and consistent with its contract with the Bucs. The authority must carry a minimum of $1 million of general liability, but the contract does not specifically require terrorism coverage.

Load-Date: October 26, 2002


End of Document