Buffett offers dire terrorism prediction
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 07, 2002, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E
Length: 419 words
Dateline: OMAHA, Neb.
Body


Investment guru Warren Buffett offered a bleak prediction for the nation's security, saying a terrorist attack on American soil is "virtually a certainty."
Envy and dislike of the United States have fueled rage against the country as the ability to build a nuclear device has spread, Buffett said Sunday at the final day of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.'s annual meeting.
"We're going to have something in the way of a major nuclear event in this country," said Buffett, the company's chairman. "It will happen. Whether it will happen in 10 years or 10 minutes, or 50 years . . . it's virtually a certainty."
Compiled from Times WiresBUFFETT7
Buffett, whose companies specialize in backing insurers, estimated that one such business faced a potential loss of as much as $ 3-billion from a hypothetical terrorism attack. National Indemnity Co., a Berkshire subsidiary, said in a state regulatory filing that the potential loss would stem from a "multiairline terrorism incident in Europe."
State insurance regulators require businesses such as National Indemnity to quantify the maximum amount they could lose from any one catastrophe. For several years before 2001, National Indemnity cited a California earthquake as its largest probable maximum insurance loss. Now, National Indemnity is writing policies to cover terrorism, taking advantage of demand for such coverage since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The $ 3-billion estimate - a snapshot of liability as of Dec. 31- is more than four times the losses and related adjustments of $ 695-million that National Indemnity incurred in relation to last year's terrorist attacks. General Reinsurance Corp., another Berkshire subsidiary, sustained $ 1.53-billion of losses.
Berkshire's shareholder meeting was not limited to issues of dire consequence, however. In a moment of levity, Buffett was asked the pressing question: Was he a boxers or a briefs man?
"When I wear underwear at all, which I rarely do . . ." began the 71-year-old Berkshire chairman, whose $ 835-million purchase of underwear company Fruit of the Loom was completed last week. He never finished, leaving it to the crowd to decide which style of underwear one of the world's richest men prefers.
Buffett said Berkshire vice chairman Charles Munger gave him another reason for the purchase.
"Charlie for years has been telling me, "Warren, we have to get into women's underwear,' " Buffett said. "Charlie is 78. It's now or never."
- Information from Bloomberg News and the Associated Press was used in this report.

Load-Date: May 7, 2002


End of Document