Bulgaria's prime minister denounces terrorism
University Wire
November 15, 2001


Copyright 2001 Washington Square News via U-Wire
Length: 578 words
Byline: By Caroline Sellke, Washington Square News
Dateline: New York
Body


Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha of the Republic of Bulgaria lectured informally on Wednesday night at New York University about the current issues facing his country, including the war on terrorism.
The prime minister, formerly King Simeon II of Bulgaria, spoke and answered questions from the audience in what was intended to be a formal lecture at the Lillian Vernon Center for International Affairs.
After a brief introduction by Fred Hockburg, son of Lillian Vernon, and outgoing NYU President L. Jay Oliva, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha approached the podium with no notes in hand.
New York U.
The prime minister announced that, in an attempt to avoid being "dull," he would refrain from giving a "brief lecture on current events."
Instead, he opted to give his speech by "delivering" as opposed to speaking or talking, saying he thought perhaps this sort of interaction would be "more dynamic."
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha told Oliva before his speech, "Anyone can ask me anything."
He kept his word by holding a 30-minute question-and-answer session discussing the current state of Bulgaria.
"These have been difficult years," Saxe-Coburg-Gotha said. "But we are on the road to a better condition or situation."
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha said the quest for the improvement of Bulgaria would include joining the European Union and NATO.
He said joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) would currently be a great help for Bulgaria because NATO is "showing its importance in times of crisis."
In terms of social issues, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha placed importance on addressing "the fight with poverty." He deemed it necessary to eliminate inter-governmental corruption.
"Although it may be overemphasized, corruption is still an enemy of society," he said.
In response to the questions of the audience members, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha revealed plans of a varying nature for the future of Bulgaria. He also said the "modernization of the energy sector" was a priority, and he would like to create a "self-contained ministry of energy as opposed to an agency."
The prime minister also addressed Bulgaria's new appointment to the United Nations Security Council as a non-permanent member.
"It is difficult to decide what to say about this," Saxe-Coburg-Gotha said. "But at this moment, it is an additional challenge [to sit on the UN Security Council]."
When asked about Bulgaria's role in international relationships, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha said his country is an island of peace compared to some areas. He also added, in reference to the UN seat, that he hoped Bulgaria would be a "positive contribution to backing the UN mission."
"If we can maintain our country and contribute with good will, good neighbor relationships in these conflicts are the most important," he said. "Again, we are a small country, and it is not in our interest to meddle in other country's policies or advise … if we mind our own business … that is what we need."
During the speech, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha touched on current issues and emphasized Bulgaria's opposition to terrorism, which he called "the threat of the 21st century."
"We have signed agreements and underlined determination to back the efforts against terrorism," he said. He also said that Bulgaria opened the airspace above its land to United States Air Force planes.
"Bulgaria is going to go along with the rest of the civilized countries and fight terrorism," he said.
(C) 2001 Washington Square News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document