BULLETPROOFED 'GUERNICA' GOES ON DISPLAY IN SPAIN
The New York Times
October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk
Length: 788 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, Oct. 23
Body


Installed in a 17th-century palace behind sheets of bulletproof glass hinged with metal, Picasso's masterpiece ''Guernica'' was unveiled today to art critics and the press in its new, and presumably final, Spanish home.
The giant mural, a universal symbol of the horrors of war since Picasso painted it in 1937, came to Spain in fulfillment of the artist's wishes on Sept. 10, after hanging for more than four decades in New York's Museum of Modern Art. A fierce opponent of the Franco dictatorship, Picasso had determined that the painting, commissioned by the Spanish Second Republic, should not come here until democratic freedoms were restored.
The stone building in which ''Guernica'' is lodged was part of a palace complex built under Philip IV, and it served as a royal ballroom. Since the beginning of this century it has been a museum, and it is now an annex of the nearby Prado museum - of which Picasso was named honorary director in 1936, at the outbreak of the Civil War.
Pablo Picasso's masterpiece "Guernica" finds new home in annex of Spain's Prado Museum
For security reasons, the stark mural, with its rudimentary coloring of black, white and gray, has been placed in a kind of fishbowl of thick glass sheeting, set in a light brown metal frame.  The main sheet, which inclines 10 degrees forward toward the viewer, measures roughly 8 feet by 25 feet and weighs more than a ton.
 
'Like a Ballot Box'
As the former ballroom is considerably larger than the hall in New York's Museum of Modern Art, where the painting had been until last month, the painting appears smaller and perhaps less striking in Madrid when viewed from a distance. But near the nonreflecting glass, the dramatic impact is similar, according to a number of people present at today's opening who had also seen the ''Guernica'' in New York.
''It looks a little bit like a ballot box,'' joked Rafael Fernandez Quintanilla, the Spanish diplomat who conducted the complicated negotiations that led to the painting's coming to Madrid. ''It is a shame that we have to have this box around it, but, unfortunately, in this age terrorism comes first.''
A West German correspondent, Volkhart Mueller, observed: ''It is a little bit sad that a Picasso painting condemning war has to be locked up in a jail.'' A photographer, Robert Royal, likened the glass case to an aquarium. ''You can just imagine a big white shark in there,'' he quipped.
 
Terrorism Almost Endemic
The extraordinary security measures for ''Guernica'' - only one safelike door leads to the painting in its encasement - reflect the understandable fears of the Spanish authorities in a nation where right-wing and left-wing terrorism have become almost endemic.
As the mural was inspired by the 1937 carpet-bombing of the Basque town of Guernica during the Civil War by German planes supporting Franco's armies, its presence here could conceivably make it a target of neo-Fascist groups. But Basques, too, have been angered by the siting of the painting in Madrid, and not in Guernica itself, and the Mayor of the town has urged King Juan Carlos not to attend its formal opening tomorrow. It is not known if the monarch, whose name is inscribed on a wall plaque next to Picasso's, will attend.
 
Picasso's 100th Anniversary
Though the seemingly sudden decision to transfer the mural from the Museum of Modern Art to Madrid annoyed some of Picasso's heirs, Paloma Picasso, a daughter, is planning to attend the brief ceremony at the Cason del Buen Retiro tomorrow. Richard Oldenburg, director of the Museum of Modern Art, is also expected.
On Sunday - the 100th anniversary of Picasso's birth in Malaga, in southern Spain - the Cason del Buen Retiro will be opened to the public, who will be able to enter free for a week. Thereafter, the entry fee will be 200 pesetas, or about $2.
After passing by armed civil guards and through a metal detector, visitors can also see the preparatory drawings for ''Guernica,'' which Picasso painted in Paris, and its so-called ''postscripts'' in two lateral rooms. These drawings and paintings are, like the mural, behind glass.
The public display of ''Guernica'' will be the highpoint of a year of celebrations of the Picasso centenary. Last night an exhibit opened in Barcelona showing Picasso's long connections with the Catalan capital, home of a museum dedicated to his early painting.
In Malaga, the city authorities have scheduled a number of celebrations and exhibits, as have galleries in other Spanish cities. The Socialist-controlled city hall in the capital has installed a mural of blue tiles with Picasso themes at the Madrid house where the artist lived in 1897 and 1898, and the Spanish post office will release a 200-peseta stamp of the ''Guernica.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of a civil guard protecting Picasso's 'Guernica'


End of Document