BULLET CAUSES OIL SPILL, CLOSES ALASKA PIPELINE MAN QUICKLY ARRESTED, NO TERRORISM CONNECTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 6, 2001 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 437 words
Byline: MAUREEN CLARK, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ANCHORAGE, Alaska
Body


Oil spewed like a geyser from the trans-Alaska oil pipeline for a second day yesterday, the result of a bullet hole shot in the line.
 Crews struggled to stop the leak and clean up an estimated 280,000 gallons of oil which under high pressure sprayed through a small hole onto about two acres of trees, brush and tundra.
 The workers were considering using a crane to install a hydraulic clamp over the line to cover the hole, but flammable vapors in the area made the operation dangerous.
"There's concern about the safety of the workers there. It is a very delicate operation with large machinery in a volatile environment," said Tim Woolston, spokesman for the line's operator, Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.
 The man suspected of shooting the pipeline with a .338-caliber rifle, Daniel Carson Lewis, 37, was arraigned yesterday on charges of criminal mischief, driving while intoxicated, weapons misconduct and felony assault.
 State Police had no motive for the shooting but said Lewis had been drinking. "It does not appear to be an act of terrorism," trooper spokesman Tim DeSpain said.
 Lewis, who was being held on $1.5 million bail, was arrested Thursday, four hours after the leak was discovered.
 Gov. Tony Knowles said state officials would be taking another look at security along the 800-mile pipeline. "Clearly, the fact that one person with a rifle can do this much damage is a point of concern in terms of vulnerability," Knowles said.
 A surveillance helicopter had spotted the spill about 75 miles north of Fairbanks.
 Cleanup crews dug ditches and deep holes to capture the oil, which was being vacuumed into trucks and transferred to storage tanks. "Our priority is that no oil migrates from the site to the Tolovana River a mile away," said Brad Hahn of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
 Alyeska had increased surveillance along the pipeline, much of which runs through wilderness, after the Sept. 11 terrorism.
 The pipeline carries about 1 million barrels of oil a day, or 17 percent of domestic oil production. Oil companies on the North Slope were asked to reduce their production by 95 percent during the shutdown.
 Woolston said people have shot at the pipeline more than 50 times but never caused enough damage to produce a spill.
 In 1978, about 670,000 gallons of oil spilled after a hole was blasted with explosives near Fairbanks. No one has been arrested in that case.
 In 1999, a Canadian man was charged with plotting to blow up the pipeline in an attempt to drive up oil prices and reap a profit. He is fighting extradition to the United States on explosives and terrorism charges.

Load-Date: October 9, 2001


End of Document