BUOYANT CAPITAL HAILS THE ACTION
The New York Times
October 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 938 words
Byline: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10
Body


Reagan Administration officials and legislators reacted exuberantly tonight to the news that American warplanes had seized the four hijackers who apparently killed an elderly American aboard an Italian cruise ship.
''Thank God we've won one,'' said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.
The comment summed up the mood in this startled capital after years of witnessing the Carter and Reagan administrations struggling in vain to cope with Middle East terrorism and attacks against the United States.
 
Iran Crisis Recalled
Officials pointed out that it was nearly six years ago that Iranian revolutionaries seized the United States Embassy in Teheran and virtually made a hostage of the Carter Administration. Mr. Carter found himself unable to fulfill his threats against terrorists and, in the case of a military raid to rescue the Americans held hostage in Iran, failed in a humiliating manner.
Mr. Reagan took office after criticizing his predecessor for not taking effective action, but he also found it difficult to carry out his promises that he would retaliate against terrorism.
Tonight the United States reacted successfully after years of futile rage.
''We cannot tolerate terrorism in any form,'' Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said after announcing that American F-14's had diverted to Italy an Egyptian aircraft carrying the four hijackers of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro.
 
'These Dastardly Deeds'
''We will continue to take every appropriate measure available to us to deal with these dastardly deeds,'' Mr. Speakes said. ''There can be no asylum for terrorism or terrorists.''
Congressional response was buoyant and bipartisan, although questions were voiced about the long-term impact of the move.
What does the United States retaliation mean in terms of United States-Egyptian relations? Are the six American hostages in Lebanon endangered? Are United States Embassy personnel in the Middle East under siege?
Nonetheless Administration and legislative reaction was one of relief. ''This will send some signal to those who will terrorize and commit violence that they're not going to get away,'' said the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas.
 
The Fear of Derision
Behind President Reagan's sending of aircraft to intercept the plane carrying the hijackers was a set of factors, prime among them the fear that the nation was looking like a ''pitiful giant'' - the term of derision used during the Carter Administration - making threatening growls but unable to stamp out a few terrorists.
Even today, as plans reached fruition for the move by the United States jets, Mr. Reagan voiced the same kind of frustration that he felt four months ago when an American Navy diver was beaten to death aboard a jetliner and American passengers were seized and held in Beirut for 17 days.
''You want to say retaliate when this is done, get even,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''but then what do you say when you find out that you're not quite sure that a retaliation would hit the people who were responsible for the terror and that crime, and you might be killing innocent people.
''So you swallow your gorge and you don't do it.''
Most members of Congress had no official word of the United States action today and heard the first accounts of the interception from news reports.
Representative Don Bonker, Democrat of Washington and a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said, ''If the American fighter planes successfully intercepted the aircraft and we can apprehend the terrorists, it's a major victory for our security forces. Everyone has been anxious to do something.''
''Fantastic!'' said Representative Daniel A. Mica, Democrat of Florida and a member of the Foreign Affair Committee. ''I hope they are given the swiftest possible trial. I hope it's fair. And, from a personal standpoint, I hope they are all executed. ''It's about time!'' he said. 'Something We Needed'
By late tonight, Mr. Reagan's supporters and political opponents were reacting much as Representative Mica did.
''It's something we needed for some time,'' Senator Dole said.
Within the Administration and Congress there was plainly a sense of somber relief that the United States had successfully thwarted a band of terrorists after years of humiliation. The plane hijackings, hostages seized, embassies blown up, sleeping marines killed, were, finally, diminished in tonight's action.
Speaking about terrorism, Mr. Dole observed, ''We are in a stronger position today than we were yesterday.'' By late tonight, Administration officials plainly agreed the battle against terrorism had taken a new - and successful - turn for the United States.
''It seems that we finally did something right, said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn and a member of the Foreign Relations Committee. ''It's terrific!''
Mr. Solarz said that the Egyptian Government's action could harm its relations with the United States. ''My only regret is that the Government of Egypt chose to let these people leave their territory long after they found out that the hijackers had been responsible fore the brutal murder of an American citizen.''
''I think a price will be paid,'' he said of Egyptian-American relations. ''There's going to be a profound sense of disappointment and dismay on the part of Congress and the country over the failure of the Egyptian Government to meet its responsibility.''
Late tonight White House officials were especially pleased that Mr. Reagan had finally put to rest - at least for the moment - the accusation that, aides said, had stung him: that he has failed to follow through on his threats against terrorists.


End of Document