BURIED '93 PENTAGON REPORT FORECAST TODAY'S TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 10, 1998, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,; WORLD VIEW
Length: 1455 words
Byline: ROBIN WRIGHT, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A few years ago, the Pentagon's secretive Office on Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict quietly buried one of the most comprehensive reports ever commissioned on the changing patterns of global terrorism.
The ''Terror 2000'' findings compiled by 41 experts - including former ranking CIA, FBI, State Department and Rand Corp. officials as well as an ex-KGB general and Israeli intelligence agent - were deemed too alarmist and farfetched. ''Outrageous,'' commented one CIA official. Even a sanitized version designed to promote public preparedness was axed.
The only catch is that many of its predictions have since come true.
Among them: International terrorism would reach American shores, potentially targeting a major U.S. financial center. Home-grown zealots would pose big-time threats to domestic security.
Within three years of the 1993 report, massive bombs at the World Trade Center in New York and the federal building in Oklahoma City became the deadliest acts of international and domestic terrorism ever carried out in this country.
Terror 2000 also predicted overseas extremists would use chemical or biological agents in a couple of major subway systems. In 1995, an extremist group released sarin nerve gas in a Tokyo subway, killing 11 and injuring thousands.
''There's only been one. But then we haven't yet hit the year 2000,'' project director Marvin J. Creton noted wryly.
The lesson, looking back, is that of all the forms of warfare that exist at the 20th century's end, terrorism may be the most intractable.
The simultaneous bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, on Friday underscored that lesson with deadly force. Whether motivated by ideological hatred, financial greed or religious passions, terrorists have moved further and faster in devising imaginative new targets and tactics than government counterterrorism officials can keep up with.
Looking forward in the aftermath of the East Africa carnage, Terror 2000 offers a road map. One of its fundamental conclusions, endorsed by a host of independent experts, is that trends in terrorism will continue to mutate in the post-Cold War world.
Even the most conservative prognosis contained in the report is that terrorist acts against the United States are likely to increase at an annual rate of at least 15 percent for several years to come. Since the report was issued, the rate has jumped up and down erratically, with no clear trend. But the volatile period envisioned in the report is distinguished by what it calls ''superterrorism,'' involving sporadic but sensational attacks, often featuring advanced weaponry.
''Future terrorists will find they need ever more spectacular horrors to overcome this (American) capacity to absorb what previously would have seemed intolerable,'' the report states. ''We must be prepared to defend against dangers that only a few years ago seemed impossible.''
Perhaps the most ominous development is that, like everything else, superterrorism is going global.
Consider one hypothesis about Friday's devastating car bombings in Kenya and Tanzania: The sites hit were in Africa. The real target was an ocean away in America. Several terror groups deemed capable of such an attack are in the Middle East and south Asia. If the bombs contained Semtex or C-4 - extremely powerful explosives used in several major terrorist acts - the raw materials may have come from a fourth continent, Europe.
On the eve of the new millennium, terrorism is evolving on several key fronts:
Targets
Terror 2000 warned that extremists who traditionally sought to shock and scare their foes through selective strikes are increasingly shifting to indiscriminate acts against mass targets.
Gone are the days when Marxist groups kidnapped American diplomats or businessmen to demand release of political prisoners, as was the case in the 1969 seizure of U.S. Ambassador to Brazil Charles Elbrick, the first modern act of anti-American terrorism.
Extremism instead is now characterized by attacks far grander in size, casualties and impact.
''In some ways, we're a victim of our own success,'' said Bruce Hoffman, director of Britain's Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence. ''As we've made it appreciably more difficult for terrorists to reach their traditional targets, they've just calculated how much bigger their bombs or weapons have to be to reach their targets, or how many lives it will take to have an impact.''
In one uncannily accurate prediction, Terror 2000 warned extremists may try to maximize their impact by moving beyond one-at-a-time attacks to multiple, simultaneous targeting, thus demonstrating their reach and taxing governments' ability to respond. That's exactly what happened in Africa, when the two car bombs exploded within minutes of each other in cities 450 miles apart.
Tactics
Public awareness, travel advisories and international cooperation have made favored past practices more difficult. Long-term hostage seizures, which traumatized the world in the 1980s, are now limited largely to Colombian groups out for ransom.
Extremism today is often characterized by fewer, but deadlier, attacks. Bombings are the primary tactic. In 1997, 108 of 123 anti-American attacks involved bombs, according to a State Department report called ''Patterns of Global Terrorism 1997.''
But new twists add chilling new dangers.
Air terrorism - once centered on hijackings in which most passengers survived unharmed - increasingly involves on-board bombings no matter what the cost in human life.
At the top of the list of future dangers are more sophisticated weapons, including chemical and biological agents and even nuclear devices.
The new dangers are attributable in part to the impact of the information age. Three Internet sites provide data on Semtex, a sophisticated plastic explosive used in the 1988 Pan Am 103 bombing. Some 400 sites discuss sarin, a Nazi nerve gas so lethal that a single milligram quickly kills.
''The means and methods of terrorism are readily available at bookstores, from mail-order publishers, on CD-ROM or even over the Internet, and therefore accessible to anyone with a grievance, purpose, agenda or any idiosyncratic combination of the above,'' said Hoffman, author of the book ''Inside Terrorism.''
Bomb-making ingredients are readily accessible. Many are used in making plastic, ink or fertilizer and processing foodstuffs, former CIA director John Deutch warned Congress in open testimony.
Potential perils are not limited to super-bombs like those used in New York and Oklahoma City. On a Moscow park bench, Chechen rebels in 1995 left radioactive material designed to produce radiation sickness that would destroy human cells and cause a slow collapse of body functions.
''Easy access to biological, chemical and nuclear technologies will bring many new players to the game of mass destruction,'' Terror 2000 warned.
Perpetrators
The good news is that many of the world's most notorious terror-masters have been contained.
Except for Iran, which continued to actively support terrorism in 1997, international pressure and sanctions largely have contained terrorism by other state sponsors such as Libya and Iraq, according to the State Department.
Also fading into history books are groups such as Italy's Red Brigade, Germany's Baader-Meinhof and Japan's Red Army.
With the demise of communism and the birth of dozens of new democracies, leftist groups across Latin America, Eastern Europe, Africa and Asia have lost their causes as well as their followers.
Secular terrorists such as Peru's Shining Path and the Palestinians' Abu Nidal have been replaced by religious zealots such as Saudi dissident Osama Bin Laden, who has recently called for terrorist attacks on U.S. targets, and cults such as Japan's Aum Supreme Truth. State sponsors and structured, well-organized groups are giving way to amorphous terrorist ''cells'' and free-lancers.
In the late 1960s, when modern terrorism took off, not one of the 11 known terrorist groups was classified as religious. In contrast, nearly a quarter of 50 identifiable groups around the world today are motivated largely by religion, Hoffman noted.
Overall, Terror 2000 predicts eight to 10 years of ''tumult and transition'' terrorism, and other forms of low-intensity conflict, until rules of the post-Cold War world are better established.
In the end, it suggests terrorism will level off and perhaps even decline.
''In the future, we expect peace settlements in many areas where violence has originated - in the Middle East, Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia, Russia and its neighbors,'' Creton predicted. ''But it will take time. And during that time terrorism is going to get worse before it gets better.''

Load-Date: August 10, 1998


End of Document