Burlco distributes tips on surviving potential disasters;
The 20-page booklet covers what to do when the worst happens, from tornadoes to terrorism.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
February 12, 2003 Wednesday JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B02
Length: 290 words
Byline: By Joel Bewley; Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Grab the kids, the dog, and important family papers such as birth certificates, the mortgage and insurance policies and… then what?
Many people don't know what the next move should be when faced with a disaster, either natural or man-made.
Whether it is a tornado or a terrorist attack, Burlington County emergency officials want residents to know how to respond and this week began distributing a 20-page booklet, Preparing for Disaster in Burlington County, that covers several scenarios.
"It is just good common sense," Sheriff Jean E. Stanfield, the co-chair of the county's Anti-Terrorism Task Force, said yesterday. "It is an area people would probably like to not think about, but it is front and center in our minds. It tells them things that they need to know, and that should be reassuring."
The booklet is timely, too, Stanfield said, since the Homeland Security Department raised the terrorist attack threat level from "elevated" to "high," or code orange, last week.
Floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, winter storms and forest fires are covered in the booklet, along with nuclear-plant meltdowns, nuclear attacks, terrorist attacks and biological and chemical disasters.
It suggests that residents keep a medicine kit, a flashlight and at least a three-day supply of water and non-perishable food in case they become housebound.
In case of an evacuation, the booklet says, people should designate a place away from home where families can meet. Each family member should keep the number of an out-of-state contact to call in case anyone becomes lost or separated.
Important documents should be kept together so they can be grabbed easily if evacuation is necessary.
Contact staff writer Joel Bewley at 609-261-0900 or jbewley@phillynews.com  

Load-Date: February 12, 2003


End of Document