BUS TERRORISM IN ISRAEL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 10, 1989, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 296 words
Body


When a Palestinian from a refugee camp in Gaza forced an Israeli bus off the highway last week, killing 14 people, he may well have ignited many explosive personal conflicts between Arab and Jewish civilians - and between dovish and hawkish Jews. This is the kind of provocation that fanatics like Rabbi Meir Kahane love as an excuse to unleash torrents of hate and bigotry toward all Arabs - and liberal Israelis of good will.
This provocation also gives rejectionist Israeli politicians legitimacy for their plan of keeping the occupied territories, regardless the costs in lives or Jewish values.  One Palestinian, probably acting alone, could not have struck at a worse time. Israeli public opinion has been hardening against peace efforts since the Palestinians began their uprising 19 months ago. Israeli moderates and leftists have seemed increasingly ineffectual in the face of hard-line politicians, who argue for simple solutions and tougher actions against the Arab population.  Smoldering relations between Arabs and Jews have been confined mostly to the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza, where Israeli soldiers have attempted to suppress the intifada by many of the 1.7 Palestinian residents.  Meanwhile, peace efforts, half-heartedly helped by Israeli politicians, the Palestine Liberation Organization and the United States, have lurched along, producing more frustration and wasted lives than anything constructive.  Now conditions for peaceful moves have turned ominous indeed. Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has tied himself publicly to the longtime Likud Bloc position of keeping the territories, regardless of the Arab population.  Threatening statements fly from PLO officials. And fear, distrust and vengeance take root in individuals' hearts.

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document