BUS, SUBWAY SYSTEMS ARE ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO PROTECT AGAINST TERRORISM,;
EXPERTS SAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 21, 1998, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 4
Length: 378 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The arrests in Nevada of two men accused of possessing possibly deadly bacteria highlight the findings of a recent federal report warning that public buses and trains are vulnerable to terrorist attack.
"For those determined to kill in quantity and willing to kill indiscriminately, public transportation offers an ideal target," said the report, commissioned by the Department of Transportation. Brian Jenkins, a terrorism expert, was the author.
Amy Coggin, a spokeswoman for the American Public Transit Association, the trade group for public transportation authorities, added in an interview: "There are multiple entry points (to transit systems), most of them on a street. There's no way to screen everybody who walks down a street. Unless we're going to become a police state, you won't see that thing happening."
The association holds an annual seminar on security, and transit systems are teaching all their employees - including cleaning and custodial crews - to be more alert, Coggin said. In addition, the Department of Transportation is helping local transit agencies improve security against bombs and chemical weapons.
But the department has no plans to set standards for transit security the way they have established rules for airlines.
"Preventative measures are beyond the control of the operator of the transportation entity," Jenkins wrote in his report. "Stopping the spread of biological weapons, the ability to develop intelligence about plots of this sort, that is the area you have to focus on for prevention. By the time somebody has some lethal chemical or biological substance and is wandering about with it, there is not a lot that can be done."
The report urges transit systems to develop efficient ways of responding to a terrorist attack. In November, New York City and federal officials practiced responding to the release of biological weapons.
James Kallstrom, a former FBI deputy director, said Friday: "Woe on us if we don't practice those types of things. We'd never want the firemen an d the emergency services people to go somewhere and deal with the casualties that a weapon of mass destruction would lay before the American public. But we need to make sure if it does happen, we know how to respond." He spoke on NBC's "Today" show.     

Load-Date: February 21, 1998


End of Document