BUSH'S TRIP TO HIS RANCH IS DARKENED BY TENSION;
 HE IS IMMERSED IN TERRORISM, ECONOMY AND MIDDLE EAST SITUATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 27, 2001 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 428 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WACO, TEXAS
Body


President George W. Bush arrived on Wednesday at his ranch in Crawford, Texas, for only the second time since the attacks of Sept. 11. On this trip he's faced with decisions that make his vacation last summer, when he wrestled with the thorny issue of embryonic stem cell research, seem like a simpler time.
Bush must consider the next target in the war on terrorism, the fate of John Walker, the American Taliban fighter, and how to jump-start the economy.
And he is starting work on framing his first State of the Union address to Congress next month. Beyond that, he will have to propose a budget for government spending squeezed by the recession and the demands of fighting terrorism.
He also must decide whether to circumvent the Democratic-controlled Senate and press polarizing nominees at the Labor and State departments. The Senate refused to vote on Otto Reich and Eugene Scalia before leaving for recess last week. So-called recess appointments by Bush would inflame tension between the White House and the Senate.
The president plans to keep a low profile on the ranch for the remainder of the holidays, when many Americans are absorbed in family gatherings.
He will receive daily briefings by video conference each day but plans few public appearances besides a trip to Austin next week, adviser Karen Hughes said. He is likely to make an out-of-state trip in early January.
At the ranch, Bush must decide whether and how to widen military, diplomatic and financial efforts against terrorists. Aides say Somalia is a prime target because some of Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida forces are believed to be in the country and because there is no central government to control their activities.
The United States also has asked Yemen to allow Marines to participate in a hunt for members of al-Qaida.
Terror target No. 1, Osama Bin Laden, remains at large, and Bush is trying to deliver on his promise to bring him to justice.
Other international conflicts loom: Anger is running high between Pakistan, a key U.S. ally in the war in Afghanistan, and India, after a suicide attack on India's Parliament Dec. 13.
Although there are signs that peace talks may resume soon in the Middle East, the violence continues. Israeli troops fired from tanks and helicopter gunships at Palestinian gunmen holed up in a West Bank house Wednesday, killing one man and wounding two in an incursion into a Palestinian-controlled town.
All this hung over Bush as he boarded Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland with Laura Bush and her mother, Jenna Welch, early Wednesday morning.

Load-Date: December 27, 2001


End of Document