Bush-bashing common at World Social Forum; 'Militarization':Activists accuse U.S. of using terrorism as an excuse to fight
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 4, 2002 Monday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a11
Length: 432 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PORTO ALEGRE, Brazil
Body


Anti-globalization activists at the World Social Forum took aim at the Bush administration Sunday, accusing Washington of seeking to spread war across the globe in the name of fighting terrorism.
In what has been a recurring theme at the five-day conference - a counter-summit to the World Economic Forum of global capitalism's elite in New York - delegates strongly criticized post-Sept. 11 U.S. policy.
"It is now clear the Bush administration wants to control the petroleum of all the world, in the Middle East and the Caspian Sea," said Emily Naffa of the Jordanian Arab Women's Organization. "We must all fight together against monopolies, against the corporations, against the militarization of globalization."
In another session, Naomi Klein, the Canadian author of "No Logo," a best-selling book that has become this year's anti-globalization bible, said it was wrong for Bush to try to force countries "to be with us or to be with terrorism."
"This is a deadly multiple choice exam and the only possible answer is 'none of the above'," Klein said. "There are many more than two choices available."
She said people around the world were becoming impatient because promises that globalization would mean a better, safer world had been broken. "Instead of the global village, they offer us global fortresses," she said.
The Social Forum has attracted some 40,000 people this year, more than double last year's attendance. Most participants oppose global capitalism outright, or at least want it reined in.
Many contend the shock of Sept. 11 that lined up the vast majority of Americans behind Bush has been exploited by the president to strengthen his - and America's - hand.
By threatening a new war on terror and dividing the world into countries that support the United States and countries that don't, Bush is seen here as striving to stamp out dissent against U.S. policy in general, not just on terrorism.
One of the Social Forum's organizers, Sergio Haddad, said before the alternative summit opened Thursday that "after Sept. 11, there has been a growing (global) discord led by the North Americans, and delegates here are bound to refer to that in their analyses."
Another organizer, Carlos Tiburcio of ATTAC, a group that wants an international tax to stem cross-border capital speculation, said at a news conference that the U.S. war on terrorism is "an attempt to impose a single line of thought throughout the world."
"That line of thought, one that criminalizes anyone who opposes neoliberal globalization, will not stand," he said. "It will be shattered right here in Porto Alegre."

Load-Date: February 4, 2002


End of Document