Bush may avoid fight with pick for Justice; Attorney general nominee 'good sign' for some Dems
USA TODAY
September 18, 2007 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 610 words
Byline: David Jackson
Body


WASHINGTON -- Attorney general nominee Michael Mukasey will spend this week courting the senators who will decide his fate as he tries to head off a protracted fight over leading the Justice Department.
President Bush cited the former federal judge's experience with terrorism trials as he formally tapped Mukasey, 66, on Monday to replace Alberto Gonzales, who resigned. A Bush loyalist from their days in Texas, Gonzales was a central figure in some of the White House's controversial anti-terrorism initiatives.
Mukasey is "clear-eyed about the threat our nation faces," Bush said, adding that the attorney general "has an especially vital role to play in a time of war."
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and other Democrats praised Mukasey for "his reputation for independence." Still, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy vowed to conduct Mukasey's confirmation hearings "in a serious and deliberate fashion" and not until the White House produces more information on warrantless wiretaps and the firings of nine federal prosecutors.
Mukasey meets today with Leahy and Sen. Arlen Specter, the judiciary panel's top Republican. A key focus for the committee: Mukasey's nearly two decades on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, including cases stemming from the 1993 World Trade Center bombings and of terrorism suspect Jose Padilla.
Having worked at the Justice Department in the 1970s, Mukasey said its duties have changed but its guiding principles "remain the same -- to pursue justice by enforcing the law with unswerving fidelity to the Constitution."
Reid said he was glad Bush did not pick "a partisan administration insider." Last week, Reid vowed to block former solicitor general Theodore Olson, a finalist for attorney general and a leading conservative who represented Bush in his 2000 election battle before the Supreme Court.
Conservatives such as Richard Viguerie, a direct-mail specialist, condemned Bush for passing over Olson. The president "chose to surrender to liberal Democrats," Viguerie said.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., urged quick confirmation for Mukasey. "Now is the chance for our Democratic colleagues to prove they were serious when they cried out for new leadership at the Justice Department," he said.
The White House acknowledged that relative ease of confirmation was a factor in Bush's pick, but not the chief concern. White House spokeswoman Dana Perino said Bush was impressed with Mukasey's knowledge of national security law. Bush also noted Mukasey's ability to get his court back into session soon after the 9/11 attacks. Bush "chose the person that he thought was best suited for the job at this time," Perino said.
White House chief of staff Joshua Bolten and counsel Fred Fielding, who headed the search team, received recommendations of Mukasey from Republicans and Democrats, according to Perino.
Mukasey was a top choice of Democrat Charles Schumer of New York, one of his home-state senators. Schumer said it is a "good sign" that Mukasey is "not a crony of the president."
Bush interviewed Mukasey on Sept. 1 and offered him the job Friday. 

About Mukasey
*Appointed by President Reagan to federal bench based in New York City,
one of the nation's busiest
judicial districts, just blocks from Ground Zero.
Served 1988-2006.
*Presided over trial of 1993 World Trade Center bombing suspects.
Sentenced the "Blind Sheik," the mastermind,
to life in prison.
*Wrote in 2004 that
"we are now in a struggle with an extremism that
expresses itself in the form of terror attacks."
*Is friend, adviser and
donor to GOP presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani.
Source: USA TODAY research 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Charles Dharapak, AP

Load-Date: September 18, 2007


End of Document