Bush, Rumsfeld renew warnings; Terrorism: Defense secretary says that terrorists will get weapons of mass destruction
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 22, 2002 Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 449 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush warned Tuesday that al-Qaida terrorists still "want to hurt us," while his Pentagon chief said terrorists inevitably will acquire weapons of mass destruction from countries like Iraq, Iran or North Korea.
In a shift from previous refusals to give Congress certain information, the administration showed members of the Senate Judiciary Committee portions of a July memo from a Phoenix FBI agent who issued a pre-Sept. 11 warning of Arabs attending U.S. flight schools.
Discovery of the memo, which didn't quickly catch the attention of top FBI officials, and last week's revelation that Bush was told before Sept. 11 of possible hijackings by Osama bin Laden's terrorists have sparked new scrutiny of the administration's handling of threats.
The new situation also prompted calls of alarm from the administration.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said terrorists are sure to obtain chemical, biological or nuclear weapons through their links with countries trying to develop them. He mentioned Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea as possible sources.
"Just facing the facts, we have to recognize that terrorist networks have relationships with terrorist states that have weapons of mass destruction and that they inevitably are going to get their hands on them, and they would not hesitate one minute in using them," Rumsfeld said.
In related developments:
* The FBI warned New York officials Tuesday that it received uncorroborated information that terrorists had made threats against the city, police said.
Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly characterized the information as "general threats." A law-enforcement official speaking on condition of anonymity said that city landmarks such as the Statue of Liberty were potential targets.
* No guns in the cockpit, the Bush administration decided Tuesday, saying pilots should concentrate on flying their airliners and let trained air marshals defend against possible terrorists.
Transportation Undersecretary John Magaw's announcement was criticized by some lawmakers and the pilots' unions, who said they would try to overturn the decision.
* The State Department branded Iran the world's most active sponsor of terror Tuesday as the Islamic fundamentalist state intensified support for Palestinian militants attacking Israel.
On the other hand, Libya and Sudan were taking steps "to get out of the terrorism business" and North Korea and Syria took smaller steps in that direction, but continued to host militant groups, the department said in its annual report to Congress.
The report named seven states as sponsors of terror, including Cuba and Iraq, the latter concentrating its terror on opponents of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.

Graphic

 
Police step over to inspect a vehicle at the entrance ramp to the Brooklyn Bridge in New York on Tuesday. Security at the bridge was visibly increased after FBI warnings of possible terrorism.

Load-Date: June 1, 2002


End of Document