Bush seeks to soothe Japanese ahead of G-8 summit In taking North Korea off terrorism list, the U.S. didn't address Japanese discord over kidnappings and spying.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 7, 2008 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 332 words
Byline: By Deb Riechmann The Associated Press
Dateline: TOYAKO, Japan 
Body


Global challenges such as soaring oil prices and the Earth's rising temperature await President George W. Bush at a summit meeting of top industrialized nations, but first he set out to soothe emotions on a sensitive Japanese issue that's entangled in the nuclear standoff with North Korea.
Bush touched down in Japan on Sunday, his 62nd birthday, and flew aboard the Marine One presidential helicopter to the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido for his eighth and final Group of Eight summit meeting. His first meeting was with Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda.
The Japanese government is a key player in the six-party negotiations that led to North Korea's recent declaration about its nuclear activities. Still, Japanese citizens are upset about the U.S. move to remove Pyongyang from the State Department's terrorism blacklist in exchange for North Korea's decision to admit to some of its weapons work.
Japan has long pushed for the resolution of North Korea's kidnappings of Japanese citizens in the 1970s and '80s as a condition for sending aid and improving relations with the impoverished, reclusive communist nation. The abductees apparently were used to train North Korean agents in Japanese language and customs.
Knowing that the U.S. action would put a wrinkle in U.S.-Japanese relations, Bush called Fukuda just before the U.S., on June 26, announced its plan to ease sanctions against North Korea and take the country he once labeled as part of his "axis of evil" off the terrorism list. Bush told Fukuda the U.S. would continue to push North Korea to resolve the kidnapping issue.
Before leaders began arriving for the summit meeting, more than 1,000 people marched Saturday in northern Japan to protest the event. Police arrested four protesters after a brief scuffle. Demonstrators at a park in central Sapporo demanded that the summit nations take urgent measures to stop global warming, grant indigenous people greater rights, combat world poverty and battle discrimination.

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - U.S. President George W. Bush (left) and Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda sit down for a meeting Sunday at a resort on Japan's northern island of Hokkaido in advance of the G-8 summit.  Evan Vucci | The Associated Press 

Load-Date: July 7, 2008


End of Document