BUSH VOICES OPTIMISM ABOUT WAR ON TERRORISM, SAYS VICTORIES ARE COMING "SLOWLY BUT SURELY";
 PRESIDENT CITES FROZEN BANK ACCOUNTS, SUPPORT FROM DISPARATE GROUPS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 2, 2001 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 501 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President George W. Bush cited progress Monday on anti-terrorism efforts, ranging from frozen accounts to international pledges of support to the capture of a man who had just finished serving time for an unrelated hijacking.
"Slowly but surely, the results are coming in," Bush said.
The president made a trip Monday to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and listed some fruits of the administration's intense focus on terrorism. Authorities have blocked $6 million in bank accounts linked to terrorist activity, Bush said, and have frozen 50 accounts, 30 of them in the United States.
Bush said he had gotten 46 pledges of support from groups ranging from NATO to the Organization of the Islamic Conference. He hinted at the gist of his conversations with other leaders, saying the United States has told the world, "This could easily have taken place on your soil, so you need to take threats seriously as well."
He spoke by telephone with President Vaclav Havel of the Czech Republic and Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia. Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, said Havel had told Bush that his nation would assist "in any possible way."
Bush expressed hopes of talking at greater length with Mahathir at the coming economic summit meeting in China and assured the Malaysian leader that the global anti-terrorism campaign now under way "was against evil, and not Islam," Fleischer said.
The president also spent 40 minutes at a meeting that his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, held with Indian Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh.
Singh said he came away understanding that the war against terrorism was focused on Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network and its various offshoots. He said he did not think that the goal was to remove the Taliban from power in Afghanistan, but added, "If the Taliban regime harbors terrorist organizations or permits terrorist activities, then I'm afraid (the) Taliban has to go."
Bush said a global web of shared intelligence is gradually yielding identities and hiding places of al-Qaida members. One hundred fifty people have been detained, and Bush promised more arrests.
He held up as an example the weekend arrest of Zayd Hassan Abd Al-Latif Masud Al Safarini, who had been jailed in Pakistan since the hijacking of a Pan Am flight there on Sept. 5, 1986. Safarini and five other people were charged in the 1991 indictment with 126 counts, including the murders of U.S. citizens Rajesh Kumar and Surendra Patel, who were among the 21 people killed in the incident.
Safarini was arrested by U.S. authorities Friday after being released in Pakistan. Bush said even though Safarini is not affiliated with al-Qaida, he illustrates the long reach of the anti-terrorism campaign.
On the military side, Bush said, 29,000 troops had been deployed, as well as an amphibious group and several hundred aircraft. About 17,000 military reservists have been called to active duty, and thousands of National Guard troops are working under state authority, he said.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - President George W. Bush shakes hands with an unidentified employee at the Federal Emergency Management Agency during his visit to FEMA offices Monday. Bush said during his visit that there has been much progress in the war on terrorism.

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document