Bush pushes security agenda; Democrats pressure Rumsfeld to quit over Iraq
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 6, 2006 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 894 words
Byline: KEN HERMAN

Cox Washington Bureau
Body


Washington --- President Bush on Tuesday sought to rally the nation in the war on terror, quoting extensively from captured al-Qaida documents to emphasize the continued threat posed by America's enemies as the fifth anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks approaches.
Among them: a manual he said was seized by British police in 2000, calling for the "dialogue of bullets, the ideals of assassination, bombing and destruction, and the diplomacy of the cannon and machine gun" against the West.
"History teaches that underestimating the words of evil and ambitious men is a terrible mistake," Bush said in a speech to the Military Officers Association of America.
"Bin Laden and his terrorist allies have made their intentions as clear as Lenin and Hitler before them," he said. "The question is: Will we listen? Will we pay attention to what these evil men say?"
His speech came as Democrats said they plan to force the U.S. Senate to vote this week on a resolution calling for the resignation of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who angered them last Wednesday when he told a veterans' group that critics of the Iraq war are like those who appeased the Nazis in the 1930s.
The Democrats blamed Rumsfeld for bungling the war in Iraq and released a report that House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi of California said "provides compelling evidence" that the war "has weakened our military, hindered efforts to defeat terrorism and diverted attention and resources from crucial security challenges."
But the White House stood by the Pentagon chief, saying he will not step down.
"It's not going to happen," said Bush's spokesman, Tony Snow. "Creating Don Rumsfeld as a bogeyman may make for good politics but would make for very lousy strategy at this time."
The White House released its own 23-page booklet called "National Strategy for Combatting Terrorism," which proclaims that the nation has made progress in the war on terror but al-Qaida has adjusted to U.S. defenses and "we are not yet safe."
It is part of an offensive that will continue today as Bush speaks from the White House on his plan to change the law so that detainees held at the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, can be tried for crimes before military commissions.
It will also bring Bush to Georgia on Thursday, where he is scheduled to make an address on national security to the Georgia Public Policy Foundation at the Cobb Galleria. Then the president will travel to Pooler to appear at a fund-raiser for GOP congressional candidate Max Burns.
Democrats dismissed Bush's actions as a public relations strategy that avoids real solutions.
"If President Bush had unleashed the American military to do the job at Tora Bora four years ago and killed Osama bin Laden, he wouldn't have to quote this barbarian's words today," said Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.), the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee. "Because President Bush lost focus on the killers who attacked us and instead launched a disastrous war in Iraq, today Osama bin Laden and his henchmen still find sanctuary in the no man's land between Afghanistan and Pakistan, where they still plot attacks against America."
Snow criticized Democrats for opposing what Bush sees as necessary tools for fighting terrorism.
"There have been some in the Democratic Party who have argued against the Patriot Act, against the terrorist surveillance program, against Guantanamo," Snow said. "In other words, there are some people who say that we shouldn't fight the war, we shouldn't apprehend al-Qaida, we shouldn't detain al-Qaida, we shouldn't question al-Qaida and we shouldn't listen to al-Qaida. In other words, they're all for winning the war on terror, but they're against providing the tools for winning that war."
The administration's updated "National Strategy for Combating Terrorism" acknowledges that the enemy has splintered into a less centralized entity. 
Asked if Osama bin Laden remains capable of giving orders, Homeland Security Adviser Frances Townsend said, "He certainly inspires like-minded individuals around the world.
"And in terms of his ability to give direct orders, I would decline to answer it, only because of ongoing investigations," she said, adding that al-Qaida continues "to obsess about killing mass amounts of Americans and mass amounts of our allies around the world." 
The updated anti-terrorism strategy said that while the nation has "substantially improved our air, land, sea and border security, our homeland is not immune from attack."
The document also said that acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists is a "dynamic and evolving threat."
"We will make clear that terrorists and those who aid or sponsor a WMD attack would face the prospect of an overwhelming response to the use of any such weapons," the report said.
An independent analysis released Tuesday by the Center for Strategic and International Studies offered a long list of accomplishments and continuing challenges five years after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
"The United States and its allies hold a mixed record of achievement in executing the global war on terror," the report concluded, noting improved domestic security and international intelligence capability but a "dramatically" changing terrorist threat that has complicated efforts to prevent attacks.
The Associated Press and Hearst Newspapers contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush wants to change the law on detainees.
Photo: DAVID SCULL / New York TimesPresident Bush shakes hands with soldiers after delivering a speech on the global war on terror to the Military Officers Association of America in Washington, D.C., Tuesday.
Photo: CHUCK KENNEDY / MCTFormer presidential candidate Wesley Clark speaks at a conference where Democrats released a report saying "failed Republican policies" have made America less safe.

Load-Date: September 6, 2006


End of Document