Bush coalition may erode as the terror war escalates;
The Madrid bombings and increasing attacks in Iraq cast doubt on U.S. strategy, some analysts say.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 21, 2004, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 19A
Length: 1185 words
Byline: James Rosen; Staff Writer
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


For more than a year, President Bush has connected the use of military force to topple Saddam Hussein with the broader war on terrorism he launched after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
     For nearly as long, Democratic presidential candidates have criticized the Iraq war as a distraction and a resource drain from the fight against Al-Qaida and affiliated radical Islamic groups.
     Now, two key events - the Madrid train bombings and subsequent election ouster of Spain's pro-U.S. government, as well as new attacks by insurgents in Baghdad - could move that dispute beyond the domestic political arena.
     A number of military and foreign-policy analysts, including some who previously served in Republican administrations, say the violence in Spain and Iraq casts new doubt on whether the Iraq war has helped or hindered the struggle against terrorism.
   'On the verge'
     More ominous for Bush, they express concern that those events - especially if followed by more attacks in Europe - could begin to erode the anti-terrorism coalition that, despite fierce disagreement over Iraq, has held together reasonably well.
     "The Bush administration's strategy for the so-called global war on terror may be on the verge of unraveling," said Andrew Bacevich, a Boston University international relations professor who is on a fellowship in Berlin. "In what [Defense Secretary] Donald Rumsfeld has called the administration's 'long, hard slog' against terror, Americans may find themselves in the months to come bearing an increasing share of the load."
     Before the war in Iraq, Bush and senior administration officials made controversial claims about ties between Saddam and Al-Qaida operatives. Some note the irony that the war itself has helped create that reality, as secular members of the former ruling Baathist regime have teamed with foreign Islamic militants to attack Americans.
     "Terrorism didn't exist in Iraq before," French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin told the Le Monde newspaper. "Today, it is one of the world's principal sources of world terrorism."
     At least in regard to his reelection prospects, a new Pew Center poll carries good news for Bush: A year after he launched the war in Iraq, 62 percent of Americans agree with him that the military effort there has helped combat global terrorism.
     But the same poll shows a huge chasm between the U.S. outlook and the perspective overseas. In eight European and Muslim nations, only 8 to 36 percent of those surveyed think the Iraq war has helped fight terrorism - and majorities in most of the eight believe it has hurt that effort.
     Anthony Cordesman, a terrorism expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C., said the Madrid bombings demonstrate that Al-Qaida and other extremist organizations seek to influence elections and other key political developments.
     With an Iraqi provisional government set to assume power on July 1 and Bush in the midst of a reelection campaign, Cordesman and other analysts fear the possibility of more strategically timed attacks by Islamic militants.
     "Whether it's in our election or in some other political moment, like the transfer of power in Iraq, they will read the calendar," Cordesman said.
     And if the next half-year or so brings more terrorist violence - especially in countries whose governments have backed the United States in Iraq - the anti-terrorism coalition could weaken as foreigners point to the attacks as proof that the Iraq war has put them under greater threat, not less.
     "The war against Iraq has made our war against terrorists more difficult," said Betty Glad, a political science professor at the University of South Carolina and editor of a forthcoming book on Bush's preemptive policies abroad. "By going into the Middle East and becoming an alien presence there, whatever good we do for Iraq in creating a better government, we've also created new people that hate us."
     Many analysts are less worried about whether Spain, under a new Socialist prime minister, keeps its 1,300 troops in Iraq and whether other nations follow recent expressions of skepticism about Iraq with withdrawals of their own small contingents.
     The more critical question, they say, is whether the larger number of governments that have backed Bush on anti-terrorism fronts far from Iraq will stay with him.
     More governments have been willing to aid the United States in anti-terrorism initiatives such as the Afghanistan war, cracking down on the Al-Qaida funding network and sharing intelligence.
     Some analysts warn that Bush is glossing over emerging cracks in the anti-terrorism coalition.
     Retired Gen. William E. Odom, director of national security studies at the Hudson Institute in Washington, said the Iraq war has already weakened the international unity that Bush commanded after Sept. 11.
     Then, Odom said, NATO for the first time invoked Article 5 of its founding constitution, essentially declaring that the terrorist attacks on the United States constituted attacks on the alliance as a whole.
     "Everybody was with us," Odom said. "Today, a remarkable number of people have left us. The question is when and why. It starts with the president's 2002 State of the Union message, when he announced the axis of evil. The Europeans were absolutely shocked. They said, 'We didn't sign up to fight Iraq, Iran and North Korea. We signed up to fight Al-Qaida.' "
     "That was the fork in the road," Odom said. "By waging war in Iraq, the president has managed to essentially erode the anti-terrorism coalition."
     Odom, a former senior White House military adviser who served under Democratic President Jimmy Carter and Republican President Ronald Reagan, said he voted for Bush in 2000 but now regrets the decision.
     "The war in Iraq has made that country safe for Al-Qaida," Odom said. "It was not safe for Al-Qaida before the war, because Saddam didn't trust Al-Qaida. Saddam didn't want terrorists running around the country. He didn't want the Iraqi military trained in roadside explosives or car bombings. Now you see those skills coming into Iraq from the outside."
     Working together
     James Dobbins, a former career diplomat, has also held senior posts under presidents from both parties. Now an international security analyst with the RAND Corp., a California think tank, Dobbins served as Bush's special envoy to Afghanistan in 2002.
     Despite deep differences over Iraq, Dobbins said, dozens of governments in Europe and beyond are working closely with Washington in intelligence, diplomatic and law-enforcement circles.
     "Over time, it's in their interests as much as ours to continue to act together against terrorism, so I think that cooperation is likely to remain effective," Dobbins said.
     Even in Iraq, Dobbins and other experts say, Bush and his national security team have decreased tensions with U.S. allies by heeding their calls for a quick transition to Iraqi rule and increased participation of U.N. forces.
     James Rosen is at jrosen@mcclatchydc.com  

Load-Date: March 23, 2004


End of Document