Bush hails strikes against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 15, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 1163 words
Byline: By Larry Margasak Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration Saturday hailed anti-terrorism arrests from suburban Buffalo, N.Y., to Karachi, Pakistan, and promised to tighten the noose on al-Qaida and the terrorism cells it supports.
"One by one we're hunting the killers down," President Bush said at Camp David, Md.
The capture in Pakistan of a suspected Sept. 11 operative, Ramzi Binalshibh, demonstrated that "we are relentless, we are strong and we're not going to stop," the president said.
Shortly afterward, five men -- Americans of Yemeni descent -- made initial appearances in federal court in Buffalo on charges of providing material support and resources to a foreign terrorist organization by attending an al-Qaida-run training camp in Afghanistan in the spring of 2001.
"We do not fully know the intentions of those who were charged today, and our investigation is continuing," FBI Director Robert Mueller said, adding authorities were not aware of plans for an imminent attack.
Bush also made it plain Saturday that the United States is willing to take Iraq on alone if the United Nations fails to "show some backbone" by confronting Saddam Hussein. "Enough is enough," Bush said.
"The U.N. will either be able to function as a peacekeeping body as we head into the 21st century, or it will be irrelevant. And that's what
we're about to find out," Bush said Saturday. He added: "Make no mistake about it. If we have to deal with the problem, we'll deal with it."
Vice President Dick Cheney echoed Bush. "We'd prefer to do this on an international basis with the approval and cooperation and support of other nations," he said in a CNN interview. "This is deemed to be such an important issue and such an important problem that we will address (it) by ourselves if we have to."
Bush spoke alongside Italian Premier Silvio Berlusconi, the second foreign leader in two weeks to visit Bush at Camp David for strategy sessions on Iraq.
Berlusconi, who has laid out a case in support of ousting the Iraqi president, has insisted that any action be taken with the U.N's approval.
He joined Bush in warning that the U.N.'s credibility was on the line. "The United Nations cannot continue to see its image undermined and its resolutions flouted," Berlusconi said through a translator. Italy will play a key role through its ties to European Union countries and through its "special friendship" with Russia, he said.
Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson praised the assistance of Muslims in the Buffalo area for aiding the investigation of the terrorism suspects. Still, many among the community's Muslims were stunned by Friday night's raids at six locations by the FBI.
"I am sick in my heart," said Fatim Mosed, the mother of one of the five, Shafal Mosed. "I know my son, and he is a good boy. Everybody is telling lies."
U.S. Magistrate H. Kenneth Schroeder unsealed the complaint against Mosed, 24; Faysal Galab, 26; Sahim Alwan, 29; Yasein Taher, 24; and Yahya Goba, 25. All five live within a few blocks of each other in the Buffalo suburb of Lackawanna, N.Y.
Thompson said the arrests in New York were the latest salvos in an effort to disrupt domestic terrorist activities. In the past few weeks, the government charged a man with trying to help al-Qaida set up a terrorist training camp in Oregon and accused three men in Detroit of supporting terrorism and acting as a "sleeper cell."
The government will "aggressively pursue terrorists and those who aid terrorists wherever they reside," Thompson said at a news conference with Mueller and New York Gov. George Pataki.
The five men trained at a camp where Osama bin Laden rallied the troops with a speech espousing his anti-American and anti-Israeli views, Thompson said. The training included the use of assault and anti-aircraft weapons, and artillery, according to the criminal complaint.
Another trainee there was John Walker Lindh, an American who pleaded guilty to aiding the Taliban and has been cooperating with the government as part of the agreement.
Thompson would not say whether Lindh provided any helpful information about the Lackawanna suspects.
Thompson said two members of the cell confirmed that they and six associates attended the camp. The complaint said there were three unidentified, unindicted co-conspirators -- two believed to be in Yemen and a third who was interviewed by the FBI at an unidentified location outside the United States.
A law enforcement source, who asked not to be named, said Lackawanna citizens provided initial information about the travels of the men.
One co-conspirator told authorities that two months ago he sent an e-mail to one of the other co-conspirators that included information police have interpreted as referring to possible terrorist activity, the complaint said. Authorities declined to elaborate on the information.
The training of the five New York men in the al-Qaida camp amounted to material support for a terrorist organization under a 1996 law. If convicted, they each face up to 15 years in prison.
The judge entered innocent pleas for each man and determined each was eligible for a lawyer paid for by the government. One suspect, who held a full-time job, was asked to contribute a portion of the legal fee.
The five, dressed casually and handcuffed and shackled, listened attentively, providing quiet "yes" or "no" answers to Schroeder's questions. He scheduled a detention hearing for Wednesday and ordered the men jailed until then.
Albaneh Mosed, the brother of Shafal Mosed, said he does not believe the accusations.
"Waking up, praying, going to work, coming home, praying, bringing home the bread, the butter that was their life," he said. "This is unfathomable. It's crazy. This is a made-up story."
"My son loves being an American citizen," Fatim Mosed said. She said her son did indeed travel to Afghanistan sometime in the last three years but only to further his Islamic education.
However, Thompson said, "The United States law enforcement has identified, investigated and disrupted an al-Qaida trained terrorist cell on American soil."
Thompson declined to comment on the next step for Binalshibh, a roommate of Sept. 11 hijacking leader Mohamed Atta in Hamburg, Germany.
Germany's interior minister, Otto Schily, said Saturday he would seek the extradition of Binalshibh to Germany, which had issued an international arrest warrant for him. It was not immediately clear how Germany's extradition request would affect U.S. plans for Binalshibh.
The capture by CIA operatives and Pakistani forces ended a one-year global manhunt for Binalshibh, who authorities alleged provided money and logistical support to the hijackers.
Binalshibh, 30, who was born in Yemen, was frustrated in his attempts to receive a visa to enter the United States in 2000, where, U.S. officials allege, he planned to join the other 19 hijackers.
He is considered an aide to Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, believed to be the mastermind of the Sept. 11 suicide hijackings.
Contributing: Marc Santora, New York Times

Load-Date: September 15, 2002


End of Document