Bush: Progress being made against terrorism
 Philadelphia Inquirer
November 17, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 286 words
Byline: By Lawrence L. Knutson; Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Amid new signs that Osama bin Laden may be alive and threatening new attacks, President Bush said yesterday that progress was being made toward combating and controlling terrorists abroad and at home.
"This was a productive week in the war against terror," Bush said in his weekly radio address.
"Our war against terrorists and their supporters is advancing on all fronts."
Bush cited a breakthrough in Congress to create a Homeland Security Department on his terms, "able to move people and resources without bureaucratic rules and lengthy labor negotiations."
The department would put 170,000 federal workers and dozens of agencies under one umbrella, coordinating the efforts of the Customs Service, the Coast Guard, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the Transportation Security Administration.
The President also credited U.S. efforts to enlist 90 nations in a worldwide coalition against terrorism, and said $113 million in terrorists' assets had been seized. He said American advisers were training counterterrorism units in the Philippines, Yemen, and the former Soviet republic of Georgia, and have "captured and interrogated thousands of terrorists."
The President did not mention bin Laden, whose survival and whereabouts resurfaced as an issue last week with the broadcast of a new audiotape attributed to the Saudi-born fugitive accused of masterminding the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Nor did he specifically mention new FBI warnings that bin Laden's al-Qaeda network may be planning "spectacular attacks" inside the United States.
Bush said "the threat of terror will be with us for years to come, and we remain resolved to see this conflict through to the end."

Load-Date: November 17, 2002


End of Document