Bush OKs bill to fight terrorism Ashcroft praises new efforts; some say it infringes on liberty

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 26, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 1001 words
Body


FROM WIRE REPORTS
WASHINGTON - Expansive new government powers to secretly search homes, tap telephones and computers, and arrest and detain suspects will be put to use minutes after sweeping anti-terrorism legislation becomes law, Attorney General John Ashcroft said.
The legislation, which also criminalizes improper possession of biological agents such as anthrax, was signed into law today by President Bush.
"Today, we take an essential step in defeating terrorists while protecting the constitutional rights of all Americans," Bush said in an East Room ceremony even as the government grappled with a series of anthrax cases that may be linked to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"This government will enforce this law with all the urgency of a nation at war," Bush said.
Ashcroft told the U.S. Conference of Mayors shortly before Senate passage that the Department of Justice is positioned to launch a new offensive against terrorism.
"The hour that it becomes law, I will issue guidance to each of our 94 U.S. attorney's offices and 56 FBI field offices directing them to begin immediately implementing this sweeping legislation," he said. The law will give the Justice Department "new powers in intelligence-gathering, criminal procedure and immigration violations," he said.
Ashcroft said Congress is giving the government "new weapons in the war on terrorism," which he said already is being waged through a policy of arresting and detaining any suspected terrorist on any violation of the law, no matter how slight.
The legislation, which covers 10 broad areas to strengthen the government's legal arsenal in pursuing and punishing terrorists, also authorizes at least $ 1 billion to upgrade technology and hire new border guards, customs agents and other staff.
Broadly, the legislation makes it easier for the government to conduct wiretaps and surveillance by streamlining legal procedures; boosts its ability to monitor the Internet and access e-mail and voicemail; allows criminal investigators and intelligence officers to share information for the first time; and lets the government detain noncitizens for seven days without filing charges. It also toughens money-laundering laws.
Ashcroft called the legislation's provisions "careful, balanced and long overdue improvements in our capacity to prevent terrorism" that are "the products of hundreds of hours of consultation and careful consideration by the administration, members of Congress and state and local officials."
The legislation approved by the Senate and House this week, however, is not as broadly drawn as the bill that Ashcroft sent to Capitol Hill within days of the Sept. 11 attacks with a demand for immediate passage.
Instead, it includes some limits on prosecutors' power, and a four-year "sunset" provision under which the law would expire unless Congress renews it. Members of Congress said that would give them the opportunity to rewrite the law if it is abused.
Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, said the final bill reflects current events and tries to strike a balance between tough new law enforcement provisions and America's traditional civil liberties.
"It's a whole new world," Leahy said. "It's not like World War II when we worried about armies marching against us. Small, dedicated groups of terrorists can wreak havoc in an open and democratic society."
In a statement, however, Leahy acknowledged some provisions "will face difficult tests in the courts" and will require "careful oversight" by Congress.
The American Civil Liberties Union vowed that it, too, would monitor the law for abuses. "This bill goes light years beyond what is necessary to combat terrorism," said Laura Murphy, director of the ACLU's Washington office.
Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., who cast the lone dissenting vote, said the legislation does not strike the right balance and accused the Justice Department of taking advantage "of the emergency situation to get some things they've wanted for a long time."
Feingold cited a provision that would allow investigators to get a warrant to search homes and offices and then conduct the search without first notifying the owner, which he called a violation of Fourth Amendment protections.
The Justice Department, however, planned to immediately put the new law to work, Ashcroft and his aides said, by sending out detailed interpretations and guidance to U.S. attorneys and FBI field offices minutes after the president signs the legislation.
Officials planned to move ahead particularly with the provisions allowing a single court to authorize wiretaps and computer surveillance spanning several judicial districts and the sharing of sensitive criminal and intelligence information.
Currently, federal law inhibits intelligence officers from sharing information they gather on suspected terrorists through telephone or computer intercepts with law enforcement agents.
Already, said Justice officials on the condition of anonymity, intelligence files have been prepared to hand over to criminal investigators, who will mine the information for leads in pursuing suspected terrorists.
In his speech to mayors Thursday, Ashcroft compared his battle against terrorism to former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy's war against organized crime 40 years ago.
"Robert Kennedy's Justice Department, it is said, would arrest mobsters for spitting on the sidewalk' if it would help in the battle against organized crime," Ashcroft said. "It has been and will be the policy of this Department of Justice to use the same aggressive arrest and detention tactics in the war on terror."
In the six weeks since the terror attacks, the Justice Department Thursday said it had so far arrested and detained 952 people.
But Justice Department officials made clear that the government does not want to become trapped in "fighting the last war," but rather is on the alert to arrest anyone who might commit a terrorist act, even if it is not related to Sept. 11 or the al-Qaida terrorist network.

Load-Date: October 26, 2001


End of Document