Bush CIA destroyed videos of suspects Also, memos indicate an attitude that fight against terrorism voided some rights.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 3, 2009 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 436 words
Byline: By Devlin Barrett and Matt Apuzzo The Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - The administration of President Barack Obama threw open the curtain Monday on years of secrets from the presidency of George W. Bush, revealing anti-terrorism memos that claimed exceptional search-and-seizure powers and divulging that the CIA destroyed nearly 100 videotapes of interrogations and other treatment of terrorism suspects.
The Justice Department released nine legal opinions showing that, after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Bush's administration determined that certain constitutional rights would not apply during the coming fight.
The memos reflected a belief within the administration that the president had broad powers that could not be checked by Congress or the courts. That stance, in one form or another, became the foundation for many policies: holding detainees at Guantanamo Bay, eavesdropping on U.S. citizens without warrants, using tough new CIA interrogation tactics and locking U.S. citizens in military brigs without charges.
Among the arguments of the Bush administration's Office of Legal Counsel:
•Fourth Amendment protections against unwarranted search and seizure did not apply in the United States as long as the president was combating terrorism.
•First Amendment speech and press rights may also be subordinated to the overriding need to wage war successfully.
•The president has an unfettered right to transfer suspected terrorists to other governments without regard for whether they would be subject to torture.
The Fourth Amendment memo did not specifically attempt to justify the government's warrantless wiretapping program, but it provided part of the foundation for the actions.
Bush's administration eventually abandoned many of the legal conclusions, but the documents themselves had been closely held. By releasing them, Obama continued a house-cleaning of the previous administration's most contentious policies.
"Too often over the past decade, the fight against terrorism has been viewed as a zero-sum battle with our civil liberties," Attorney General Eric Holder said in a speech a few hours before the documents were released. "Not only is that school of thought misguided, I fear that in actuality it does more harm than good."
Obama's administration also acknowledged in court documents Monday that the CIA destroyed 92 videos involving terrorism suspects, including interrogations - far more than had been known. Congressional Democrats and other critics have charged that some of the harsh interrogation techniques amounted to torture.
Obama's administration pledged Monday to begin turning over documents related to the videos to a federal judge.

Load-Date: March 4, 2009


End of Document