Bush insists warrantless taps are legal His argument: "Congress gave me the authority to use necessary force to protect the American people, but it didn't prescribe the tactics."
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 24, 2006 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 658 words
Byline: By Jennifer Loven THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MANHATTAN, KAN. 
Body


President George W. Bush pushed back Monday at critics of his once-secret domestic spying effort, saying it should be termed a "terrorist surveillance program" and contending it has the backing of legal experts, key lawmakers and the Supreme Court.
Several members of Congress from both parties have questioned whether the warrantless snooping is legal. That is because it bypasses a special federal court that, by law, must authorize eavesdropping on Americans and because the president provided limited notification to only a few lawmakers.
"It's amazing that people say to me, 'Well, he's just breaking the law.' If I wanted to break the law, why was I briefing Congress?" asked Bush in an address at Kansas State University.
Bush's remarks were part of an aggressive administration campaign to defend the four-year-old program as a crucial and legal terrorism-fighting tool. The White House is trying to sell its side of the story before the Senate Judiciary Committee opens hearings on it in two weeks.
Back in Washington, Air Force Gen. Michael Hayden, the former National Security Agency director who is now the government's No. 2 intelligence official, contended the surveillance was narrowly targeted. He acknowledged that the program established a lower legal standard to eavesdrop on suspected terrorism-related communications than a surveillance law implemented in 1978.
Under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, government officials had to prove to a secretive intelligence court that there was "probable cause" to believe that a person was tied to terrorism. Bush's program allows senior NSA officials to approve surveillance when there was "reason to believe" the call may involve al-Qaida and its affiliates.
Hayden maintained that the work was within the law. "The constitutional standard is reasonable. . . . I am convinced that we are lawful because what it is we are doing is reasonable," he said at the National Press Club.
Hayden also rejected suggestions that the NSA rank and file had problems with the electronic monitoring, saying that the agency's independent watchdog told him Friday that "not a single employee" had registered a concern with that office about the program. 
Democrats countered that important questions remain.
"We can be strong and operate under the rule of law," said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev. "These are not mutually exclusive principles -- they are the principles upon which our nation was founded."
In his remarks, Bush said allowing the NSA to monitor the international phone calls and e-mails of Americans with suspected ties to terrorists can hardly be considered "domestic spying."
"What I'm talking about is the intercept of certain communications emanating between somebody inside the United States and outside the United States, and one of the numbers would be reasonably suspected to be an al-Qaida link or affiliate," Bush said at Kansas State. "In other words, we have ways to determine whether or not someone can be an al-Qaida affiliate or al-Qaida. And if they're making a phone call in the United States, it seems like to me we want to know why." 
He said he "had all kinds of lawyers review the process" to ensure it didn't violate civil liberties or the law.
And he insisted that a recent Supreme Court decision backs his contention that he had the authority to order the program through a resolution Congress passed after the 2001 terrorist attacks that lets him use force in the fight against terrorism.
"I'm not a lawyer, but I can tell you what it means: It means Congress gave me the authority to use necessary force to protect the American people, but it didn't prescribe the tactics," Bush said.
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales is to deliver a speech on the program today. And Bush was going to NSA headquarters outside Washington on Wednesday.
---
STLtoday.com/current Do you back the administration's surveillance program? Talk about it in our Current Affairs forum

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Army troops from Fort Riley, Kan., listen to President George W. Bush speak about terrorism in his visit Monday to Kansas State University in Manhattan, Kan. Evan Vucci | The Associated Press 

Load-Date: January 24, 2006


End of Document