Bush Terrorism Fight May Be Fodder in F.B.I. Confirmation
The New York Times
May 31, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1095 words
Byline: By JONATHAN WEISMAN and SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The pending nomination of James B. Comey to be director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation will probably shine a fresh light on some controversial chapters in George W. Bush's war on terrorism, with Republicans more likely than Democrats to question his role in the Bush Justice Department.
But senior Senate aides said no immediate red flags were raised on Capitol Hill to indicate a bruising confirmation fight when President Obama makes his choice official. The White House said nothing publicly about the nomination on Thursday, and according to officials, the F.B.I. had not begun a formal background check on Mr. Comey when news broke on Wednesday evening that Mr. Obama had settled on him as the nominee.
Mr. Comey, 52, a Republican and former deputy attorney general in the Bush administration, received a muted response from Congress, since lawmakers are away for the Memorial Day recess. But there is little recent precedent for a confirmation battle. The five F.B.I. directors confirmed since J. Edgar Hoover's death in 1972 all sailed through the Senate. (The very first nominee, L. Patrick Gray III, withdrew from consideration in 1973 amid concerns over Watergate.)
As for Mr. Comey, many of the policy disputes in the years after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, had already faded by the end of Mr. Bush's second term.
Still, some Republicans familiar with Mr. Comey's tenure at the Justice Department -- while broadly praising him -- raised questions about clashes he had with higher-ups in the Bush White House.
One House Republican with experience in the Bush administration, who spoke on the condition of anonymity so he could be frank about a fellow administration official, talked of an ''unpredictable'' man who ''was not a good, solid member of the team.''
''Those wild-card aspects to his job performance in the past also apply to the nomination process,'' the lawmaker said. ''He could slip through, or he could blow up.''
Andrew H. Card Jr., one of the central figures in a now-famous episode involving Mr. Comey, gave him a ringing endorsement on Thursday.
''I would be glad to stand before anybody to say I think Jim Comey is a noble, honorable person that should have their confidence,'' said Mr. Card, Mr. Bush's longtime chief of staff.
In that episode in 2004, Mr. Card and the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, sought to persuade Attorney General John Ashcroft -- who was hospitalized and disoriented -- to reauthorize the administration's controversial warrantless eavesdropping program.
As Mr. Comey, who was then acting attorney general, has told it, he rushed to the hospital to tip off Mr. Ashcroft. Mr. Ashcroft weakly rose from his hospital bed and refused to sign.
Mr. Card said that he and Mr. Gonzales did not bring the issue to Mr. Ashcroft's bedside ''of our own accord,'' but that Mr. Bush had sent them. He said he had not even known that Mr. Ashcroft had named Mr. Comey acting attorney general, and when told, politely let the eavesdropping matter drop.
While saying he feels ''terrible'' about the dispute between him and Mr. Comey, Mr. Card called it a legitimate policy and legal difference, not a matter of politics versus legality, as Comey advocates have put it. And he offered some mild criticism of Mr. Comey's behavior that night.
''I think he reacted with a little more emotion than I would have expected,'' he said, ''but I thought he always performed well.''
Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, who as the former chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee will have no say in Mr. Comey's nomination but many dealings with him if he is confirmed, praised Mr. Obama's choice. ''I may have had differences as far as his interpretation of the surveillance act, but he's a thorough professional,'' Mr. King said.
Indeed, the one question raised publicly so far has focused on Mr. Comey's tenure as general counsel at a major hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, where he worked from 2010 to earlier this year.
''If he's nominated, he would have to answer questions about his recent work in the hedge fund industry,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, which has oversight over the F.B.I. ''The administration's efforts to criminally prosecute Wall Street for its part in the economic downturn have been abysmal, and his agency would have to help build the case against some of his colleagues in this lucrative industry.''
In the coming days, a special unit in the F.B.I.'s security division, which handles background checks of high-profile government appointees, will move forward with a short investigation of Mr. Comey's past, focusing in particular on the period after he left the government in 2004, working for Bridgewater Associates and before that, Lockheed Martin.
As part of that process, Mr. Comey will be asked to fill out a form about his finances and foreign travel. F.B.I. officials in Washington will then ask agents across the country to verify that information.
Mr. Comey's nomination has been described as an overture of bipartisanship similar to Mr. Obama's nomination of another Republican, former Senator Chuck Hagel, to be secretary of defense. Like Mr. Hagel, Mr. Comey is known most for his public break with Republican Party orthodoxy.
Mr. Hagel's breach, however, was over the Iraq war, still a raw subject in the party. Mr. King said issues like warrantless surveillance were grayer areas that both parties grappled with after 9/11.
''They were difficult times,'' he said.
In fact, key members from both parties might see Mr. Comey's past stands as a plus for a position like F.B.I. director.
Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah and a senior member of the Judiciary Committee, said Thursday that the director ''needs to be fiercely independent from the political pressures that, as we have seen, can affect even the Justice Department.''
Once his nomination is official, Mr. Comey's confirmation process will be overseen by the White House's general counsel, Kathryn Ruemmler, who was among the administration officials who interviewed him for the job, according to officials.
The White House has a short window to do something that has never happened before: have a new F.B.I. director in place when the previous one still has the post. In all other instances, there has been an acting director because the previous one has resigned or died. Robert S. Mueller III is mandated to leave his post on Sept. 4, so Mr. Comey would have to be confirmed before Congress takes a recess for the month of August.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/31/us/politics/comey-bid-at-fbi-and-role-in-terrorism-fight.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: James B. Comey, a Republican mentioned as President Obama's choice for F.B.I. chief, in 2004. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVAN VUCCI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)           

Load-Date: June 29, 2013


End of Document