Bush, British leader pledge to fight terrorism; But Brown signals goal is to leave Iraq
USA TODAY
July 31, 2007 Tuesday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 592 words
Byline: David Jackson
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Bush and British Prime Minister Gordon Brown pledged Monday to fight global terrorism together but diverged slightly when it came to how long their countries would keep troops in Iraq.
"This is going to take a long time," Bush warned as he declined to specifically answer a question about whether his successor would still be dealing with U.S. troops in Baghdad. He again urged Americans to wait for a mid-September report from the military before passing final judgment on his strategy of increasing U.S. troop levels to combat Iraq's sectarian violence.
Brown, making his first visit to the United States as Britain's leader, sounded a more hopeful note about the continued presence in Iraq of about 5,500 British troops. He noted that Britain has handed over security duties in three of the four southern Iraq provinces for which it is responsible. "We intend to move to overwatch in the fourth province," he said.
Bush and Brown wrapped up a two-day meeting at Camp David in Maryland, their first attempt to forge the kind of close relationship the president shared with Brown's predecessor, Tony Blair. Brown replaced Blair on June 27, and Blair's support for Bush and the Iraq war cost him political support in Britain.
In a short news conference, Bush and Brown stressed similar goals: winning the war against terrorists in Afghanistan, promoting Middle East peace talks and denying Iran the means to make nuclear weapons. They also discussed global trade and poverty, and ways to end the violence in Sudan's Darfur region. Brown said the leaders also chatted about climate change.
Bush called Brown "a principled man who really wants to get something done." He referred to the prime minister three times simply as "Gordon" and said the prime minister "understands that failure in Iraq would be a disaster for the security of our own countries."
Brown did not address his host by first name, as Blair did after their first Camp David meeting in 2001. At one point, Brown referred to Afghanistan -- not Iraq -- as "the front line against terrorism."
Echoing themes often sounded by Bush, Brown said, "We're in a generation-long battle against terrorism, against al-Qaeda-inspired terrorism." Brown also praised the U.S. president's Middle East peace initiative.
Bush called ties between the United States and Britain "our most important bilateral relationship," while Brown used the phrase "special relationship." After lunching on cheeseburgers and fries, the prime minister left for a visit to the United Nations in New York.
The two leaders met as Gen. David Petraeus, the top military commander in Iraq, and Ambassador Ryan Crocker prepare a progress report on Bush's Iraq security plan.
"I have said this is going to take a long time in Iraq, just like the ideological struggle is going to take a long time," Bush said. "And so I look forward to David's report, and then we'll respond accordingly."
Brown said he agrees that the goal for the United States and Britain in Iraq is to get Iraqi forces trained.
"Our aim, like the United States, is step by step to move control to the Iraqi authorities," Brown said.
Simon Serfaty, a Europe specialist with the Center for Strategic & International Studies, said the two leaders seemed to get along well, with "nothing too specific on Iraq." Serfaty predicted that Brown will probably give Bush a "decent interval" but pull troops out of Iraq next year because of intense anti-war feeling in Britain.
"Gordon Brown knows that, for him, Iraq is not a winning proposition," Serfaty said. 

Load-Date: July 31, 2007


End of Document