Bush pulls even with Kerry in state poll;
Concerns about terrorism were credited with helping him close a 10-point gap.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 22, 2004 Wednesday JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B01
Length: 935 words
Byline: Tom Turcol INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


President Bush continues to demonstrate surprising strength in New Jersey, with a new poll showing the race is a toss-up in a state the Republicans had long ago conceded to Democratic challenger John Kerry.
Fueled by positive views of his ability to fight terrorism, Bush pulled even with Kerry - at 48 percent - in a Quinnipiac University poll last weekend of likely voters and undecided voters leaning toward a candidate. Two percent backed independent candidate Ralph Nader.
Among all registered voters in the poll, Kerry was ahead by 47 percent to 43 percent, with Nader at 3 percent and 6 percent undecided.
The Kerry campaign insisted yesterday that it still considered New Jersey safe for the Democrats and had no plans to divert the candidates' time or money from battleground states such as Pennsylvania.
The Quinnipiac poll reflects a stark change from a month ago, when Kerry led by 10 points among registered voters in New Jersey and seemed a lock to carry the state, which has not voted Republican in a presidential election since 1988.
But Kerry's advantage came before the Republican convention, which drew sharp contrasts between the two candidates on national security and catapulted Bush past Kerry in most national polls.
"The Republicans have done very well in the last few weeks in ways that have made New Jersey voters briefly flirt with voting Republican," said State Sen. John Adler of Cherry Hill, a cochairman of the Kerry campaign in New Jersey.
But those voters, Adler said, "will come home just before Election Day . . . and New Jersey will return to its natural status as a moderate, progressive state rather than a right-wing state."
The Connecticut university's poll, conducted Thursday through Sunday and released yesterday, included 672 likely voters and had a margin of error of plus or minus 3.8 percentage points. Among the 943 registered voters overall, the margin of error was plus or minus 3.2 percentage points.
The only scheduled appearance by the Democratic ticket in New Jersey is next week's fund-raising visit in East Brunswick by vice presidential candidate John Edwards.
"I don't think you'll see any changes in terms of candidate appearances or a shift in resources," said Kathy Roeder, a spokeswoman for the Kerry campaign. The Kerry-Edwards ticket, she said, is "focused on the kinds of issues that New Jersey voters support."
Republican officials said yesterday that the party was evaluating whether to make a serious push to win the state's 15 electoral votes.
Buoyed by New Jersey polls that indicated Bush was gaining ground, the White House sent Laura Bush to the Trenton area for a campaign rally last week. No decisions have been made on whether the President or Vice President Cheney will follow suit, according to GOP campaign officials.
If the race remains close, both campaigns "will probably be paying more attention to New Jersey," said Ingrid Reed, a director at the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University.
Those decisions could be made after the first debates next month, according to officials in both parties.
As elsewhere in the country, Bush's surge in New Jersey has been driven chiefly by his success in centering the campaign on the issue of national security and portraying himself as better able to fight terrorism than Kerry.
A plurality, or 30 percent, of those polled by Quinnipiac listed terrorism as the central issue and - by 55 percent to 38 percent - said Bush would do a better job in that area.
The poll also seemed to confirm widely perceived weaknesses in Kerry's candidacy.
The Democrat, for example, was running about even with Bush even though 53 percent of the voters disapproved of Bush's job performance, compared with 45 percent who approved.
And while voters by 55 percent to 40 percent said the United States had erred in going to war against Iraq, most of those who expressed an opinion - 49 percent to 44 percent - rated Bush as better able to handle the war than Kerry.
"Voters trust Bush to do a better job on terrorism, and they see terrorism as a more important issue than the economy or health care, Kerry's issues," said Maurice Carroll, director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute. "And those Republican attacks on Kerry for speaking with senatorial fuzziness seem to be scoring."
According to Carroll and others, concern about terrorism resonates especially in New Jersey because of its proximity to the 9/11 attack in New York, which killed hundreds of the state's residents.
"The vacant skyline where the World Trade Center once stood brings the threat of terrorism home to New Jersey across the river," Carroll said.
While the Republican attacks on Kerry knocked the campaign off balance, Kerry is making the necessary corrections, Adler said.
Adler said the campaign "started recognizing a week ago that the message has to be clearer and that we have to appeal more directly to voters on the issues that affect their lives - Iraq, health care, jobs."
Reed said such a strategy was Kerry's best and perhaps only hope of reversing the campaign dynamics, which have swung clearly in Bush's favor.
"The challenge for Kerry is to erode the confidence that people have in Bush" on national security, Reed said. "He has not come up with a strong critique that's memorable of what has gone wrong under Bush."
In addition, she said, the Kerry campaign "is going to have to bring a little buzz into New Jersey" to help counter the positive publicity that Laura Bush generated in her hastily scheduled campaign stop near Trenton last week.
Contact staff writer Tom Turcol at 856-779-3854 or tturcol@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
CHART;
A Tightening Race (The Philadelphia Inquirer)

Load-Date: August 31, 2005


End of Document