Bush, Cheney host 9/11 panel President, vice president tell commission of efforts to thwart terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 30, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 578 words
Byline: Terence Hunt The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - Hoping to shape history's judgment, President Bush told the Sept. 11 commission Thursday that his administration tried to protect America from terrorists as warnings grew before the devastating attack of 2001. Members pressed him on his response to a controversial memo that raised the threat of plane hijackings and attacks with explosives.
"I answered every question they asked," Bush said after he and Vice President Dick Cheney met with the 10-member commission for three hours in the Oval Office. Presidential scholars called the session unprecedented.
Some of Bush's answers were "surprising" and "new," said former Sen. Bob Kerrey, a Democratic member, but he declined to give details. On Bush's demand, the questioning was done behind closed doors without a transcriber to make an official record, and the president refused to discuss the substance of the discussions.
Sitting in high-back chairs in front of the fireplace, Bush and Cheney faced questions about the lack of a U.S. military response after the 2000 bombing of the destroyer USS Cole that killed 17 American sailors, the administration's response to Sept. 11, and the presidential memo that Bush received a month before the attacks warning that Osama bin Laden was preparing to strike, commission members said.
It was Bush who responded to most of the questions, officials said. Cheney spoke only when Bush turned to him about details he didn't know, according to one participant.
Charged with investigating the Sept. 11 hijackings and recommending steps to prevent future attacks, the commission already has documented a string of urgent warnings communicated to the highest levels of government before Sept. 11. Thursday's meeting could reverberate into the November elections as the commission reports in late July on intelligence failures and missed signals before the attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people. Bush has made his handling of terrorism the centerpiece of his campaign.
Unlike the commission's televised hearings where tempers sometimes flared, there were no tense moments in the Oval Office, said former Gov. Jim Thompson, a Republican commission member. He called Bush "a bit of a tease" and said there was laughter at times.
Richard Ben-Veniste, a Democratic member and an aggressive questioner at earlier sessions, said, "It was a very cordial meeting" and everyone got to ask questions.
Chairman Thomas Kean, a Republican former New Jersey governor, said much of the discussion was devoted to brainstorming possible reforms in areas such as intelligence.
"We let the president know we're getting into the recommendation phase, and that it's very important," Kean said. "We said we hoped we could test some things out as to whether some of recommendations we were considering were indeed practical. The president said he was open to some ideas, and nothing was ruled out."
"It was a very good meeting," Kerrey said. "I do think it'll help - in particular the president's description of what happened during 2001 and most particularly on 9/11. The president's narrative was important to give."
"I was impressed by the questions," the president said. "I think it helped them understand how I think and how I run the White House and how we deal with threats." He said there was a lot of discussion about how to protect the nation better.
In a statement afterward, the commissioners thanked Bush and Cheney for their information, and said they had been "forthcoming and candid."

Load-Date: April 30, 2004


End of Document