Bush Aides Foresee Gains on Eavesdropping and Guantanamo 
The New York Times
August 12, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE POLITICAL EFFECTS
Length: 951 words
Byline: By JIM RUTENBERG; Carl Hulse contributed reporting from Washington for this article, and Adam Nagourney from New York.
Dateline: CRAWFORD, Tex., Aug. 11 
Body


White House officials said Friday that the fallout from the discovery of the British bombing plot could help the administration advance its agenda in Congress. The officials cited in particular battles over supervising the program of eavesdropping without warrants and how to try detainees held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
  Taking the White House's lead, Republicans throughout the country used the arrests of terror suspects in Britain to go on the offensive against Democrats for the second day in a row. They accused Democrats of failing to understand the nature of the terrorist threat facing the nation.
 Aides to House Republican leaders said they believed that the arrests would help them make their case on other issues that will allow them to keep the focus on national security, including the call for tighter control of the border with Mexico.
  Democrats promised to engage strongly in the newly energized debate on national security, saying they would not cede that ground. 
  They said they would argue that the White House and the Republican-led Congress had failed to provide the money necessary to protect Americans fully from the threat of terrorism and that President Bush had pursued a foreign policy, especially through the war in Iraq, that has fueled Islamic radicals and created more potential terrorists. 
  The debate intensified as Democrats and Republicans tried to reposition themselves in an environment that seemed to shift with the news on Thursday about potentially the strongest terrorist threat to the West since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. 
  Each side accused the other of politicizing the news of the plot. By the end of the day, it was clear that the midterm elections had taken a hard turn toward the central questions of safety on the home front and each party's approach to battle terrorism.
  White House officials said the moment could prove helpful beyond the realm of politics, saying news of the plot had served to focus the public on the White House's campaign against terrorism at a time attention seemed to be waning. 
  ''Yesterday simply reiterated the importance of the approach that the administration has taken,'' Tony Snow, the White House press secretary, said at a briefing here.
  Mr. Snow continued by listing antiterrorism measures supported by Mr. Bush, ''whether it be with the Patriot Act and the Patriot Act extension, whether it be with various surveillance techniques, of which members of Congress have been made aware.''
  Insisting on anonymity, a senior administration official in Washington said news of the plot against airliners would add momentum to efforts to create military tribunals for Guantanamo detainees that would strictly limit defendants' rights. 
  The administration has argued that such limits are necessary to protect intelligence sources that might be part of the case and are also necessary when the crime scene is a battlefield where evidence may not be easily collected. 
  The official said the arrests in Britain would also help the White House secure its compromise with Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, allowing a secret intelligence court to review the legality of its conducting wiretaps without warrants on Americans suspected of having ties to terrorists. Critics argued that the accord, reached after months of White House resistance to such a review, would leave such an important question in the hands of a secret court.
  Republicans have for months seen the debate over the program as advantageous in spite of the constitutional debate, giving the party an opportunity to highlight its efforts to protect Americans.
  Since the plot in Britain was disclosed, Republicans have been trying to focus attention on the debate and to draw a sharp distinction with what they characterize as a soft, overly legalistic approach by Democrats.
  ''The question all of us should be asking today is how much longer can we afford Democrat obstruction and opposition to important national security efforts that will make our nation and its citizens more secure,'' Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, said in a statement Thursday. 
  Mr. Cornyn was referring in part to Democratic complaints about the wiretap program.
  In an interview on Friday, a spokesman for Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois, Ron Bonjean, said the discovery of the terrorism plot ''helps us push for stronger surveillance monitoring of terrorist movements.''
  Representative Adam B. Schiff, a California Democrat who is a critic of the wiretapping program, said he did not believe that the debate would shift much. 
  ''I have no doubt that the administration will use this most recent terrorist plot as an additional argument for anything it wants to obtain in the war on terrorism,'' Mr. Schiff said. ''But as a practical matter, they've never shown why they can't constitutionally conduct surveillance in a way that protects the country.''
  In marked contrast with the last two national elections, Democratic leaders indicated they had no intention of easing their attacks against the administration over national security in the face of the terrorism arrests.
  Three Democratic leaders in the Senate -- Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader; Charles E. Schumer of New York, head of the Democratic Senate Campaign Committee; and Richard J. Durbin of Illinois -- offered a sharp attack on White House antiterrorism policies. They said the policies, particularly in Iraq, had made the world more dangerous. 
  ''Yesterday, Bush said we are safer today than we were before 9/11,'' Mr. Reid said. ''But if one looks around the world today, he could not be further from the truth.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 12, 2006


End of Document