Bush unveils terrorist list Battling terrorism is U.S. 'calling,' president says

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 10, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 501 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - With American pilots bombing at will from the skies over Afghanistan, President Bush declared today that "our calling" is the eradication of terrorism around the globe. "Now is the time to draw the line in the sand against the evil ones," he said.
At the FBI, Bush unveiled a new list of 22 most-wanted terrorists, Osama bin Laden among them.
The president spoke after a morning breakfast with senior congressional leaders, where he and they smoothed over a disagreement about the distribution of classified information concerning the nation's response to terrorist attacks of Sept. 11.
Leaving the White House, House Democratic Leader Dick Gephardt said the group had also agreed on their desire for quick action on economic stimulus legislation: "Get money out to people before the holiday season."
Bush and Republicans have proposed that Congress cut taxes; Democrats want any measure to be a blend of government spending and tax relief.
"I think we can work through this," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss. "Right now, the Democrats are coming at this from a different direction than Republicans, but we'll work through that."
Earlier, Secretary of State Colin Powell credited the military for claiming "free range" over the Afghan skies but said much more remains to be done.
The skies came alive with anti-aircraft fire over parts of Afghanistan a few hours later, apparently heralding a fourth straight night of bombing by American warplanes.
Bush, at FBI headquarters, made only passing reference to the conventional military campaign.
Instead, flanked by Powell, Attorney General John Ashcroft and other senior administration officials, he said the creation of the new most-wanted terrorist list was designed to "shine the light of justice on them."
"They must be found. They will be stopped, and they will be punished," he added.
Battling terrorist networks "is our calling. This is the calling of the United States of America, the most free nation in the world," he said.
Powell cautioned earlier in the day that statements made by bin Laden's terrorist organization and broadcast on televisions around the world may contain "some kind of message."
In an interview on CNN, Powell said analysts were looking at the statements, including one made Tuesday by al-Qaida spokesman Abu Ghaith praising the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the United States and warning there would be more.
Bin Laden has been blamed by administration officials as the mastermind behind the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon across the river from Washington. More than 5,000 people perished in the strikes, the worst act of terrorism ever in the United States.
With officials exercising extraordinary security measures, Bush bluntly accused lawmakers Tuesday of leaking classified information to the press - and made the point in person during Wednesday's breakfast meeting with Gephardt, Speaker Dennis Hastert, Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle and Senate GOP Leader Trent Lott.

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document