Bush, Brown work on rapport Talks between president and British leader are to include Iraq, Darfur, trade.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 30, 2007 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 486 words
Byline: By Ben Feller and David Stringer The Associated Press
Dateline: CAMP DAVID, MD. 
Body


President George W. Bush welcomed British Prime Minister Gordon Brown on Sunday with casual diplomacy.
Bush and Brown began their brief meeting - Sunday night and today- at Camp David, with an emphasis on private time between the two. Their agenda is familiar: terrorist threats, wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, crisis in Darfur, stalled trade.
Yet the overarching theme is rapport - and establishing some.
Bush is aiming for at least a solid relationship with Brown, shaped around their nations' mutual interests. That much is expected, but it is far from the kinship Bush had with Brown's predecessor, Tony Blair, who lost favor at home because of his close ties to Bush.
"It's a great pleasure to be here at Camp David because there's so much history associated with it," Brown told Bush.
En route to the United States, the new British leader said the world is indebted to the United States for taking the lead in the fight against terrorism. Brown said he would use his visit to strengthen what Britain considers its "most important bilateral relationship."
Officials in London and Washington are focused on "the biggest single and immediate challenge the world has to defeat: global terrorism," Brown told reporters traveling with him.
"In this century it has fallen to America to take center stage," Brown said. "America has shown by the resilience and bravery of its people from Sept. 11 that while buildings can be destroyed, values are indestructible.
"And we should acknowledge the debt the world owes to the United States for its leadership in this fight against international terrorism," he said.
Brown denied speculation that Britain's relationship with the U.S. was cooling.
His predecessor, Blair, was often accused at home of being too compliant with Bush's policies, especially regarding the Iraq war. Some analysts have urged Brown to be more like Prime Ministers Margaret Thatcher and Winston Churchill, who had close ties with the U.S. but remained frank about their own goals and policies.
Brown makes his first major overseas trip buoyed by a surprising degree of public support after a first month in office that included his handling of terrorist plots in London and Glasgow, Scotland.
Brown was joined on the flight by Foreign Secretary David Miliband.
Brown arrives with some thorny issues to manage, not least the fate of Britain's remaining soldiers in Iraq.
About 500 of Britain's 5,500 troops in Iraq are due to hand over the Basra Palace city center base within weeks, defense officials have said. Brown has not outlined plans for the remaining 5,000 personnel.
Brown's spokesman, Michael Ellam, said there was no plan to withdraw British troops before the Iraqi army is deemed capable of maintaining security.
Other difficult issues include the American push to build a missile defense system in Eastern Europe, the Iran nuclear showdown, Darfur and the status of the breakaway Serbian province of Kosovo.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - President George W. Bush welcomes British Prime Minister Gordon Brown to the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md., on Sunday.  The Associated Press 

Load-Date: July 30, 2007


End of Document