BUSH ENDS PLO DIALOGUE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 22, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2D
Length: 344 words
Body


Reluctantly, regrettably yet understandably, President Bush has told Yasser Arafat, head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, that as long as he insists on talking out of both sides of his mouth, the United States will listen to neither. Mr. Arafat has had numerous opportunities to show he means what he says when he insists he no longer backs terrorism in the Middle East.  But his refusal to come through left Mr. Bush with no choice: He had to break off the U.S. dialogue with the PLO.  That dialogue began 18 months ago, in the waning days of the Reagan administration, after Mr. Arafat agreed to two conditions he had long avoided: disavowing terrorism and recognizing Israel's right to exist. Skeptics never believed his assurances, and he never wholeheartedly followed through.  Since talks between U.S. representatives and the PLO began in Tunisia, scant progress has been made in solving the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate. But the hope always remained that as long as talks continued, a breakthrough could occur.  Those hopes, never strong, died May 30 along with four terrorists who staged a sea raid that was intercepted on the Israeli coast. It was launched by the Palestinian Liberation Front, led by Abul Abbas, who is an associate of Mr.  Arafat and a member of the PLO executive committee. Mr. Bush said Thursday that ''this terroristic act is sticking in our throat.'' Because Mr. Arafat has refused to renounce it, the U.S.-PLO talks were suspended.
At a time when Israeli intransigence had already clouded the prospects for peace with the Palestinians, Mr. Bush's decision makes increased hostilities even more likely. Palestinian hard-liners, citing Mr. Arafat's lack of success, may gain power in their camp; Yitzhak Shamir's new right-wing government, seeking to restore good U.S. relations, may perceive the rift with the PLO as an opening.  But both sides must realize they cannot talk about peace while continuing to undermine it. When Israel and the PLO are truly ready to talk, Mr. Bush should be ready to do whatever he can to help.

Graphic

 
Graphic Map; SKETMAP - Sketch of Yasser Arafat superimposed on a map of the Middle East.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document