BUSH CLAIMS SUPPORT IN ASIA;
 APEC FORUM TO ISSUE STATEMENT TO CONDEMN TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 20, 2001 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 536 words
Byline: DAVID E. SANGER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: SHANGHAI, China
Body


President Bush yesterday said "support is near unanimous" among Pacific Rim nations for both the military strikes in Afghanistan and the broader war he has declared against terrorism. But to cement the antiterror coalition, he spent his first day in China playing down a series of contentious issues with his hosts and with the president of South Korea.
 At a joint news conference yesterday morning in Shanghai with China's President Jiang Zemin, Bush made no mention of his missile defense plans, which China has opposed, and alluded only briefly to differences with Beijing over Taiwan, China's military buildup and its treatment of dissidents.
The Chinese, for their part, perhaps wary of how the first meeting with a new U.S. president would play out, did not broadcast the news conference live, and when excerpts finally ran on local television last night, they were edited to remove any hint of criticism of Chinese policy.
 The meetings with Jiang, a prelude to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum which begins today, included formal talks earlier yesterday and lunch at a Communist Party guest house on the edge of Shanghai.
 Officials familiar with these closed sessions described the interaction between the two leaders as gracious but without much warmth.
 And it was unclear whether China's promise to share intelligence on terrorist groups would prove of much value.
 "This wasn't like the first meeting with Putin," one senior official said last evening, referring to Bush's declaration that he had looked into the Russian leader's eyes and had seen a man he could trust. "It was quite scripted."
 Bush's declaration that Asian countries had overwhelmingly endorsed his strategy came as his aides were trying to toughen language in a statement on terrorism scheduled to be issued today by the Asia-Pacific forum, the loose group of 21 nations meeting in Shanghai. APEC is not known for taking bold stances, except on trade.
 The statement, as currently drafted, condemns terrorism but makes no mention of the U.S. airstrikes on Afghanistan, at the insistence of Muslim nations like Indonesia and Malaysia that have backed Bush's declared campaign on terrorism but not the military action against Afghanistan's Taliban rulers.
 Jiang yesterday ignored a reporter's question about whether China endorses the Afghanistan operation. Still, administration officials insist that the document gives them the support they need.
 Later in the afternoon, meeting South Korean President Kim Dae-jung, Bush publicly voiced support for the Nobel Peace laureate's "Sunshine Policy" of engagement with North Korea. Bush's refusal to do so at a first meeting six months ago at the White House opened a rift between the United States and South Korea.
 It also revealed the division within the administration between those who wanted a harder line on Communist North Korea and Secretary of State Colin Powell, who argued for a policy of engagement similar to the one pursued by former President Bill Clinton.
 After an administration review of Korea policy, Powell won the argument. Bush said yesterday, "My administration wishes to begin a dialogue with the government of Kim Jong Il," and noted that Kim has not responded..

Notes

Reuters News Service contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters: President Bush speaks with Chinese President Jiang Zemin upon their arrival for a joint news conference at the Western Guest House yesterday in Shanghai. Bush praised China for its immediate support after the Sept. 11 attacks.

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document