Bush failing to address true causes of terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
October 5, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A13
Length: 299 words
Body


I have just been analyzing G. W. Bush's policy toward the terrorists who destroyed the World Trade Center and killed almost 6,000 people.
According to the published reports, President Bush keeps talking about "war against terrorists" and "punishing the guilty."
Unfortunately, these policies will just increase the terrorist activities because they do not address the underlying causes leading to their activities.
As a result, recruitment of new terrorists will continue. We can expect a short-term decrease in terrorism and a long-term increase in terrorist activities toward the U.S. using these statements. One can never "kill" or "punish" all the terrorists. Actions taken to "kill" or "punish" existing terrorists will only increase the anger felt toward the U.S.
The underlying policies that result in their hatred of us include - but are not limited to - our policy of defending Israel, regardless of whether they are right or wrong; our economic policies toward the Muslim countries; our continuing to send proselytizing missionaries into their country; our insisting on overwhelming economic advantage toward the resources of underdeveloped countries and our insistence on never negotiating with those who differ from us.
Because we do not communicate with them, we can never understand their position and try to solve the problems as they perceive them. This will only result in continued hatred, misunderstandings and increased recruitment of more terrorists who will kill innocent American citizens.
Those interested in investigating this simulation on their PCs should examine the "Terrorism!" site on High Performance Systems Inc. home page, www.hps-inc.com . One may disagree with the factors used in this simulation, but the conclusions will still be valid.
Robert L. Cox
Rural Clinton

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document