Bush, senators reach accord on treatment of terror suspects
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 2006 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 485 words
Byline: By Anne Plummer Flaherty THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The White House and rebellious Senate Republicans announced agreement Thursday on rules for the interrogation and trial of suspects in the war on terrorism. President George W. Bush urged Congress to put it into law before adjourning for the midterm elections.
The agreement contains concessions by both sides, though the White House yielded ground on two of the most contentious issues. Bush's administration agreed to drop one provision narrowly interpreting international standards of prisoner treatment and another allowing defendants to be convicted on evidence they never see.
The accord, however, explicitly states the president has the authority to enforce Geneva Convention standards and enumerates acts that constitute a war crime, including torture, rape, biological experiments and cruel and inhuman treatment. White House officials said these provisions would provide the CIA the clarity it needs to continue with its interrogation program.
The pact follows more than a week of squabbling among Republicans that had threatened to derail an anti-terrorism agenda put together by the White House and GOP leaders going into the Nov. 7 elections. It was announced at a time when support for Bush's proposal in the GOP-run Congress had been crumbling, but the agreement could lead to enactment of one of Bush's top remaining priorities of the year. 
The House and Senate are expected to vote next week on the legislation.
"I'm pleased to say that this agreement preserves the single most potent tool we have in protecting America and foiling terrorist attacks," the president said after the agreement was announced.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona, one of three GOP lawmakers who told Bush he couldn't have the legislation the way he initially asked for it, said, "There's no doubt that the integrity and letter and spirit of the Geneva Conventions have been preserved," referring to the international treaties covering the treatment of prisoners in wartime. 
The central sticking point had been a demand from McCain, Sen. John Warner of Virginia and Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina that there be no attempt to redefine U.S. obligations under the Geneva Conventions.
---
Highlights
Details of the agreement between the White House and Senate Republicans dealing with the treatment of terrorism suspects:
Requires that a defendant being tried by military commission have access to any evidence given to a jury.
Drops a section of the administration's previous proposal that stated an existing ban on cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment satisfies the nation's obligations under the Geneva Conventions.
Prohibits "grave breaches" of the Geneva Conventions. Defines grave breaches as acts such as torture, rape, biological experiments and cruel and inhuman treatment.
Notes the president has the authority to interpret "the meaning and application" of the Geneva Conventions.
Allows hearsay evidence.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Load-Date: September 22, 2006


End of Document