Bush to view anti-terrorism projects ; Argonne lab:President will see demonstrations of devices
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 22, 2002 Monday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a12
Length: 492 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


A chemical sensor that detects cyanide gas, a biochip that can determine the presence of anthrax, and a portable device that finds concealed nuclear materials are among the items scientists at Argonne National Laboratory are working on to combat terrorism.
Today, President Bush will visit Argonne and is expected to view demonstrations of some of the lab's creations that could be used to fight terrorism and defend the homeland. Lab officials say they don't know what technologies Bush will see during his visit, and White House officials would not discuss those specifics.
The president also is expected to talk about the creation of the Department of Homeland Security and how the nation can use new technology for protection, said Scott Stanzel, a White House spokesman.
Argonne, a national laboratory located west of Chicago, was chosen for Bush's visit because it is one of the nation's oldest labs, and because of its efforts for homeland defense, Stanzel said.
Argonne is owned by the U.S. Department of Energy and run by the University of Chicago. Scientists conduct research in various areas such as high-energy physics, biotechnology, transportation, chemistry, mathematics and computer science.
Harvey Drucker, coordinator of Argonne's national security research, said the lab began many of the projects related to homeland defense years ago. But after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the lab recognized some of those projects could be further developed for other uses.
For example, the lab already had created a monitor to detect anthrax that could be used in a battlefield during the Persian Gulf War. After Sept. 11, lab officials realized the same technology could be used in detectors that could be placed in buildings or subway systems, Drucker said.
"This is not a defense laboratory. We don't think about weapons," Drucker said. "But we are pretty good at doing science and developing new technologies."
Another new development is a chemical sensor to detect cyanide gas or other lethal chemicals.
"We're not the only ones who have developed them, but we have made very small devices that have high sensitivity that can give you a quick analysis," Drucker said.
The lab also has developed a portable detector for finding concealed nuclear weapons.
"It's a small device that, with the appropriate sensitivity, not only can tell you that there are radioactive materials present, but it can tell you what kinds of materials are present," Drucker said.
Argonne spokesman David Baurac said the lab had been aware that some of its technology could be used to combat terrorism.
"There wasn't a lot of interest in using it for those specific interests before Sept. 11. Now there's an urgent need," he said.
The federal government now is asking Argonne to develop more products that can be used in national defense, Drucker said.
"We're in it because we feel it's critical to the nation," he said. "If we do the right things, maybe we'll save some lives."

Load-Date: July 22, 2002


End of Document