BUSH SAYS CARTER IS 'MEAN MINDED'
The New York Times
October 4, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 279 words
Byline: By B.DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ST. LOUIS, Oct. 3
Body


In one of his toughest attacks of the campaign, George Bush, the Republican candidate for Vice President, said today that President Carter was a ''small, mean-minded'' politician who would ''do anything'' to win re-election.
Mr. Bush also charged that the President had undermined Israel's security by condoning ''pro-P.L.O.'' and other anti-Israel actions that encouraged terrorism.
AN-A
He specifically mentioned Andrew Young, the former United Nations delegate, who once held talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr. Bush made his accusations in a speech to a convention of the National Newspaper Association and the Missouri Press Association. He later amplified them at a fund-raising event. Aides said he was ''fed up'' with the President's attacks on Ronald Reagan, who chose Mr. Bush as his running mate, and that Mr. Bush had decided that St.  Louis, with a significant Jewish population, was a good place to begin a counterattack.
 
'Growing Distrust of Mr. Carter'
Citing and paraphrasing media criticism about President Carter's aggressive, often personal campaign style, Mr. Bush said there was ''a growing distrust of Mr. Carter and his methods, both of governing and of campaigning.''
''The American people,'' he added, ''will not abide a small, meanminded do-anything-to-win campaigner in the White House.'' As for Israel, Mr. Bush said: ''This Administration, by various devices - including the pro-P.L.O. activities of its former U.N. Ambassador, Andrew Young - has given Israel less support than any American government since the birth of the Israeli nation in 1948. Jimmy Carter has undermined the security of an ally by encouraging Israel's enemies.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of George Bush


End of Document