BUSH SELECTS 6 TO FACE MILITARY TRIBUNAL ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 4, 2003 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 656 words
Byline: FRANK DAVIES, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush yesterday designated six al-Qaida terrorism suspects as the first likely defendants to face trial before military tribunals, a controversial form of justice that hasn't been used since World War II.
 The trials will take place on the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where roughly 680 suspected terrorists or their accessories are being held as "enemy combatants," a Pentagon briefer said, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
 The administration didn't identify the six suspects. Pentagon officials, who said trials weren't a certainty and that the six hadn't yet been charged, said it was possible that the suspects might not be identified even after they are charged.
Some of the six prisoners may have attended terrorist training camps and raised money or been involved in recruitment for al-Qaida, said the two Pentagon officials who briefed reporters.
 Tribunals were last used at the end of World War II to try Nazi and Japanese war-crimes suspects. Bush revived the system in November 2001, saying it would provide more security outside federal courts to handle terrorism suspects, but it has aroused great controversy, with critics objecting that it runs roughshod over America's due process of law.
 One of the system's controversial features is it permits no independent appeal process. And critics say the rules, especially the secrecy, give the prosecution an unfair advantage.
 The Pentagon has pledged that trials would be open whenever possible and defendants would have full counsel and basic legal rights, such as the presumption of innocence.
 But proceedings can be closed, and a flexible standard for evidence will allow prosecutors to present information that wouldn't be allowed in a civilian court or a court-martial.
 Some of the crimes for which the six suspects could be tried are punishable by death, said Maj. Michael Shavers, a Pentagon spokesman. But he said reports suggesting an execution chamber was under construction at Guantanamo were inaccurate
 Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz will decide which cases go to trial.
 Gene Fidell, the director of the nonpartisan National Institute for Military Justice, said yesterday's action showed the Pentagon "probably already has a draft set of charges drawn up against these individuals."
 The defendants would face charges of war crimes and possibly terrorism, based on procedures released earlier this year.
 CBS News reported that the six potential defendants include Australian David Hicks, who was captured in Afghanistan, and others from Great Britain, Yemen, Sudan and Afghanistan.
 The Pentagon wouldn't confirm the information.
 Last year, attorneys for Hicks argued unsuccessfully in a federal court that U.S. officials should release him or charge him with a crime.
 In April the Pentagon named a chief prosecutor and defense counsel for potential trials. Officials said courtrooms were ready in Guantanamo.
 The cases would be handled by a panel of three to seven military officers acting as judge and jury. Convictions require a two-thirds vote; imposing the death penalty would require unanimity.
 Air Force Col. Will Gunn, the acting chief defense counsel, said in a recent briefing that he was seeking attorneys who would fight vigorously for the detainees.
 It wasn't clear if potential defendants before tribunals include other terrorism suspects held in the United States or overseas.
 Mark Berman, a lawyer for alleged al-Qaida operative Ali Saleh Kahlah al Marri, said yesterday that he hadn't been contacted by the government. Al Marri, a 37-year-old Qatari national, was declared an enemy combatant last week by Bush, accused of helping sleeper cells prepare for a possible new attack on U.S. soil.
 He's the third person to be declared an enemy combatant in the United States.
 The other two -- Jose Padilla and Yasir Hamdi -- are U.S. citizens, so they couldn't be tried before a military tribunal under current guidelines.

Load-Date: July 8, 2003


End of Document