Bush-Cheney-Obama? Our view • A pragmatic reconciliation of national security and civil liberties. OPINION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 13, 2011 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A20
Length: 569 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


A routine 10-month extension of a few counter-terrorism provisions of the Patriot Act hit a minor snag Tuesday in the U.S. House. By Thursday, it was back on track; it stands poised for passage this week. The Senate then will take up the question.
Without the extension, which is favored by the Obama administration and Republican leaders, the provisions will expire on Feb. 28.
Some news analysts with a yen for drama saw Tuesday's glitch as a strange-bedfellows moment: libertarian-minded freshmen Tea Party Republicans joining the most liberal Democrats in rebellion against Patriot Act provisions that tread on liberty.
Yet of the 87 freshmen Republicans in the House, only eight voted against the extension on Tuesday in a special procedural vote requiring a two-thirds majority. Without the special rules, the measure passed easily on Thursday. Tahrir Square this was not.
The incident did affirm, however, an apparent harmony of perspectives on counter-terrorism between the Obama administration and its Republican opponents. This was not always so.
In December 2009, Republicans lined up to attack President Barack Obama after a failed terrorist attempt to blow up a U.S. airliner over Detroit. Among the most strident was former Vice President Dick Cheney.
"He seems to think," Mr. Cheney told Politico, "if he gives terrorists the rights of Americans, lets them lawyer up and reads them their Miranda rights, we won't be at war."
But last month, Mr. Cheney hailed what he called the president's acceptance of the Bush-Cheney approach: "In terms of a lot of the terrorism policies," he said in an NBC News interview, "I think he's learned that what we did was far more appropriate than he ever gave us credit for. . . . I think he's learned from experience."
The no-rules policies of Mr. Cheney and President George W. Bush abused the Constitution and U.S. statutes in the name of national security, particularly in authorizing torture in interrogations. Mr. Cheney's backhanded compliments repulsed liberals who had supported Mr. Obama's presidential candidacy.
They already were unhappy with Mr. Obama's escalation of the war in Afghanistan, his failed attempt to close the Guantanamo Bay military prison and his refusal to rule out military commissions as an alternative to federal courts for some terrorism cases.
"If Obama has indeed changed his mind ... as a result of all the Secret Scary Things he's seen as president," fumed the respected liberal blogger Glenn Greenwald, "then I genuinely believe that he and the Democratic Party owe a heartfelt, public apology to Bush, Cheney and the GOP...."
Both views are excessive. Mr. Obama has not embraced the Bush-Cheney approach. He banned their abusive interrogation tactics. He accepted the possibility of military commissions, but only if due process for defendants was assured. He took concrete steps to close Guantanamo, only to be thwarted by pandering public officials of both parties.
Even the president's support for Patriot Act extensions has been accompanied by specific, point-by-point assurances from Attorney General Eric Holder, in writing, of improved oversight and restraint.
As a U.S. senator in July 2008, Mr. Obama reluctantly voted for a compromise bill that expanded surveillance powers. That pragmatic approach has not changed, and neither the self-justifying praise of the right nor the absolutist criticism of the left describes it fairly.

Load-Date: February 13, 2011


End of Document