Bush: Keep Patriot Act despite criticisms
 Philadelphia Daily News
JUNE 10, 2005 Friday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 10
Length: 402 words
Byline: JENNIFER LOVEN Associated Press
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio
Body


President Bush, facing efforts by some in his own party to scale back the post-9/11 Patriot Act, says it has made America safer and should be made permanent.
"The Patriot Act closed dangerous gaps in America's law enforcement and intelligence capabilities, gaps the terrorists exploited when they attacked us on September the 11th," Bush said.
Lawmakers responded to the 2001 attacks by overwhelmingly approving the law 45 days later. It allowed expanded surveillance of terror suspects, increased use of material witness warrants to hold suspects incommunicado and permitted secret proceedings in immigration cases.
Now, more than a dozen provisions are set to expire. Those provisions, among other things, provide authority for nationwide search warrants, enable the FBI and intelligence agencies to share information about terrorism cases and gave the FBI the power to obtain records in terrorism-related cases from entities such as libraries.
During Bush' 2004 re-election campaign, he made preserving the law a common refrain, but he has rarely spoken of it since. His renewed focus came as Congress has begun working on the act's renewal amid fresh criticisms - from members of both parties - that it undermines basic freedoms.
Bush pressured Congress to make the expiring provisions permanent. His administration also is seeking greater powers for the FBI to subpoena records in terrorism investigations without the approval of a judge or grand jury.
"My message to Congress is clear: Terrorist threats against us will not expire at the end of the year and neither should the protections of the Patriot Act," Bush said.
The president credited the law with helping to bring federal charges against more than 400 suspects - more than half of whom have been convicted - and to break up terror cells in New York, Oregon, Virginia and Florida.
He spoke at the Ohio State Highway Patrol Academy to highlight the case of a Columbus man, Iyman Faris, who was accused of plotting attacks on a New York bridge and a Midwest shopping mall but was tracked down with the help of the Patriot Act.
Bush said Faris met Osama bin Laden in 2000 at an al Qaeda training camp in Afghanistan. Later, he received instructions from top terror leader Khalid Shaikh Mohammed to destroy the Brooklyn Bridge. Now, because of the Patriot Act, Bush said, Faris has provided information about al Qaeda and is serving a 20-year prison sentence. *

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Associated Press
President Bush went to the Ohio State Highway Patrol Academy yesterday to defend the Patriot Act. Critics warn that the act allows the government to spy on citizens and keep immigrants jailed in secrecy.

Load-Date: September 14, 2005


End of Document