Bush, GOP hit new lows in poll
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 8, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A26
Length: 293 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


President George W. Bush has hit new lows in public opinion for his handling of Iraq and the war on terrorism and for his overall job performance. Polling also shows the Republican Party surrendering its advantage on national security.
The AP-Ipsos survey shows that nearly 70 percent of Americans believe the nation is headed in the wrong direction -- the largest percentage during Bush's presidency and up 13 points from a year ago.
On an issue the GOP has dominated for decades, Republicans are now locked in a tie with Democrats -- 41 percent each -- on the question of which party people trust to protect the country.
As for Bush's ratings:
- Thirty-six percent of the public approves of his job performance, his lowest rating ever in AP-Ipsos polling. By contrast, the president's job approval rating was 47 percent among likely voters just before Election Day 2004 and 64 percent among registered voters in October 2002.
- Forty percent of the public approves of Bush's performance on foreign policy and the war on terrorism, another low-water mark for his presidency. That's down 9 points from a year ago. Just before the 2002 election, 64 percent of registered voters backed Bush on terrorism and foreign policy.
- Thirty-five percent of the public approves of Bush's handling of Iraq, his lowest in AP-Ipsos polling.
As bad as Bush's numbers may be, Congress' are worse.
Thirty percent of the public approves of the GOP-led Congress' job performance, and Republicans seem to be shouldering the blame.
By a 49-33 margin, the public favors Democrats over Republicans when asked which party should control Congress.
Bush's approval rating is down 12 points among Republicans since a year ago. Six in 10 Republicans said they disapproved of the GOP-led Congress.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC - Public pessimism expands AP 

Load-Date: April 8, 2006


End of Document