Bush Shifting Public Focus To Terrorism And Iraq War
The New York Times
August 31, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 787 words
Byline: By ANNE E. KORNBLUT
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Aug. 30 
Body


With the midterm elections approaching, President Bush is beginning an extended tour to draw attention to the threat of terrorism and the Iraq war, quickly pivoting to more comfortable territory after the focus on the Hurricane Katrina anniversary.
  Starting with an address to veterans on Thursday, Mr. Bush intends to outline what one adviser described as the ''consequences of victory and defeat,'' a theme he conveyed here on Wednesday night, when he warned that a hasty departure from Iraq would create a terrorist state in the heart of the Middle East.
Advisers said Mr. Bush would continue his speeches on Iraq and the broader struggle against terrorism for several weeks, keying off the five-year anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
  The White House has made national security and Iraq the centerpieces of its strategy to help Republicans retain control of Congress. Nonetheless, as Mr. Bush went to Arkansas and Tennessee on Wednesday to raise money for Republican candidates, he said of his series of speeches, ''They're not political speeches.''
  ''These are important times, and I seriously hope people wouldn't politicize these issues I'm going to talk about,'' Mr. Bush said after a fund-raiser at a house in Little Rock, Ark.
  A short time later, at a fund-raiser here, the president urged an audience to vote for a Republican Senate candidate to help keep the nation safe. Declaring his ''message of optimism,'' Mr. Bush said he needed colleagues on Capitol Hill who understood the importance of tools like the USA Patriot Act and domestic surveillance to help stop terrorism.
  ''I need people in the United States Senate standing side by side who understand our most important task is the security of the United States of America,'' he said.
  ''We face an enemy that has an ideology,'' Mr. Bush continued. ''They believe things. The best way to describe their ideology is to relate to you the fact that they think the opposite of the way we think.''
  He criticized detractors who have sought to withdraw troops from Iraq, saying that to leave that country ''before the job is done'' could lead to a much worse terrorist state. But Mr. Bush did not emphasize signs of progress in Iraq as he had in the past.
  The focus is shifting as other senior members of the administration have been attacking Democrats over the war and national security in general.
  In the most combative instance, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld set off a partisan battle by saying on Tuesday that critics of the war had not ''learned history's lessons'' and going on to allude to appeasement of the Nazis in the 1930's.
  The Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, called Mr. Rumsfeld's comments reckless on Wednesday. 
  Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, who is in charge of helping elect Democrats to the House, criticized the defense secretary as taking on a political role. 
  ''Donald Rumsfeld should spend less time thinking about the midterm elections and more time figuring out how to clean up the mess this administration made in Iraq,'' Mr. Emanuel said in a statement. 
  It is unclear whether Mr. Bush and his top officials can translate support for combating terrorism into political points in the fall. 
  Unlike the last two election cycles, when the threat of another attack helped bolster support for Republicans, strategists believe that the increasingly unpopular American presence in Iraq could hurt the governing party. 
  Mr. Bush's personal popularity remains low, with his approval ratings hovering at less than 40 percent. That has led some Republicans to distance themselves from the president and the war, raising questions about how Mr. Bush can be an effective advocate in the fall campaign.
  On Wednesday, Mr. Bush played the role of fund-raiser relatively quietly.
  Traveling from his ranch outside Crawford, Tex., in the morning, he appeared in Arkansas at a private event for Asa Hutchinson, the former Republican congressman who is running for governor. 
  Mr. Hutchinson is trailing his Democratic opponent, Mike Beebe, the Arkansas attorney general, according to polling data. 
  The governor's seat is now held by a Republican, Mike Huckabee, but term limits prevent Mr. Huckabee from running again.
  In the Tennessee race to fill the seat held by the departing Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, the Republican, Bob Corker, leads the Democrat, Representative Harold E. Ford Jr., in polls by a slight margin. 
  Republicans view victory here as critical to retaining control of the Senate. They have a six-seat margin, and at least four seats are considered highly likely to fall to the Democrats. 
  Organizers said they raised more than $1.5 million from the dinner on Wednesday.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. Mike Huckabee and Asa Hutchinson, left, greeting President Bush yesterday at the Little Rock airport. (Photo by Tim Sloane/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

Load-Date: August 31, 2006


End of Document