Bush's Chief Terrorism Adviser Is Leaving, Unscathed
The New York Times
December 22, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 631 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


For more than four years, Frances Fragos Townsend, President Bush's departing chief terrorism adviser, has worked at the center of contentious antiterrorism programs, but unlike other battle-scarred West Wing colleagues, she is leaving with barely a scratch. 
  That is partly because she kept such a low political profile. 
  ''I could have been out there,'' Ms. Townsend said in a recent interview. ''But the president didn't want me to. He made it clear that he didn't want me involved in partisan politics. It was less that I avoided it than I just wasn't pulled into it. I was just not viewed as a political voice.''
  Ms. Townsend, 45, a national security lawyer who once worked as a mob and narcotics prosecutor in New York, is stepping down on Jan. 4. She did not know Mr. Bush until she began working at the White House in 2003 as an aide to Condoleezza Rice, then the national security adviser.
  Promoted to domestic security adviser in 2004, she became a loyalist and said she was leaving wearied by the acrimony that hangs over Mr. Bush's last year in office.
  ''I find it both offensive and crippling,'' she said. ''When both career people and political people are worried about getting subpoenaed, it's hard to get a lot accomplished.''
  Ms. Townsend, who in her handwritten resignation letter compared Mr. Bush to George Washington, said she took the attacks on the president personally. ''You can disagree with him on the substance,'' she said, ''but the notion of personally attacking this man's integrity or commitment to the fight I find outrageous.''
  Her plans  are uncertain, and she says she may return to public service after a ''respite.''
  Ms. Townsend came late to the inner circle of Bush advisers, over the misgivings of Republicans who objected to her work on intelligence issues during the Clinton administration.
  During the first years of the Bush administration she was relegated to the fringes of national security issues as chief of intelligence for the Coast Guard.
  But at the White House Ms. Townsend developed a personal rapport with Mr. Bush, who associates said seemed to enjoy her tough, sometimes withering assessments of people and events. 
  One of the pictures she is taking from her White House office shows her meeting officials in Saudi Arabia -- unveiled.
  She recalled how Mr. Bush dismissed her doubts about the risk of offending the conservative Saudi government as she pressed it to take a larger role in combating Al Qaeda.
  ''I told him, 'I think you should reconsider,''' Ms. Townsend said, but Mr. Bush replied: ''What's important is that I am sending you. If they don't deal with you, they won't deal with me.''
  She managed the White House response to the terrorist bombings in London in 2005 and the airliner chemical bomb threat in 2006, and domestic emergencies like the recent wildfires.
  Mr. Bush tapped her to head the review of the government's failures in responding to Hurricane Katrina in 2005. 
  She said she looked back with pride on the reorganization of the country's intelligence agencies and the creation of the office of the director of national intelligence, a consequence of the failures before the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
  She said she was undeterred by the intense Congressional criticism of Mr. Bush's terrorism policies on surveillance and interrogation. ''What's important is that we have strong, aggressive policies that protect the American people whoever the president is,'' Ms. Townsend said. 
  She voiced frustration over the failures, most glaringly the administration's inability to capture Qaeda leaders. ''I feel like today we are better positioned to bring all of these people to justice,'' she said. But she added, ''I am frustrated that I won't be here in all likelihood when that happens.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Frances Fragos Townsend, the domestic security adviser and a former New York prosecutor, is stepping down on Jan. 4.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                                

Load-Date: December 22, 2007


End of Document