Bush won't retreat on anti-terror proposal The president is in a standoff with senators over a measure to allow military tribunals and harsh interrogations of suspects.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 17, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 263 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


President George W. Bush is standing firm in his battle to get Congress to approve the White House plan for detaining, interrogating and prosecuting suspected terrorists. The Senate, though, isn't backing away from its plan either.
The president's standoff with lawmakers is over legislation authorizing military tribunals and harsh interrogations of terrorism suspects.
In his radio address Saturday, Bush said his proposal provides clear rules for U.S. personnel involved in detaining and questioning alleged terrorists held by the CIA.
"The information the Central Intelligence Agency has obtained by questioning men like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (the alleged mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks) has helped disrupt terrorist plots, including planned strikes inside the United States and on a U.S. Marine base in East Africa, an American consulate in Pakistan and Britain's Heathrow Airport," Bush said.
"This CIA program has saved American lives, and the lives of people in other countries," he said.
The Senate Armed Services Committee defied Bush on Thursday and approved legislation the president has vowed to block.
The president's measure would go further than the Senate measure, allowing classified evidence to be withheld from defendants in terrorism trials and the use of coerced testimony.
The legislation approved by the Senate panel also would change the law that interprets the nation's obligations under the Geneva Conventions -- the treaty that sets the standard for treatment of war prisoners -- so that harsh interrogations of detainees would not be questioned in court.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Bush 

Load-Date: September 17, 2006


End of Document