BUSH AIDES PUSHED FOR ARRESTS BY MILITARY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 25, 2009 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 402 words
Byline: Mark Mazzetti and David Johnston, The New York Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- Top Bush administration officials in 2002 debated testing the Constitution by sending American troops into the suburbs of Buffalo to arrest a group of men suspected of plotting with al-Qaida, according to former administration officials.
Some of the advisers to then-President George W. Bush, including Vice President Dick Cheney, argued that a president had the power to use the military on domestic soil to sweep up the terrorism suspects, who came to be known as the Lackawanna Six, and declare them enemy combatants. Mr. Bush ultimately decided against the proposal to use military force.
A decision to dispatch troops into the streets to make arrests would be nearly unprecedented in American history, as both the Constitution and subsequent laws restrict the military from being used to conduct domestic raids and seize property.
The Fourth Amendment bans "unreasonable" searches and seizures without probable cause. And the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878 generally prohibits the military from acting in a law enforcement capacity.
In the discussions, Mr. Cheney and others cited an Oct. 23, 2001, memorandum from the Justice Department that, using a broad interpretation of presidential authority, argued that the domestic use of the military against al-Qaida would be legal because it served a national security, rather than a law enforcement, purpose.
"The president has ample constitutional and statutory authority to deploy the military against international or foreign terrorists operating within the United States," the memorandum said.
The memorandum -- written by the lawyers John C. Yoo and Robert J. Delahunty -- was directed to Alberto R. Gonzales, then the White House counsel, who had asked the department about a president's authority to use the military to combat terrorist activities in the United States.
The memorandum was declassified in March. But the White House debate about the Lackawanna group is the first evidence that top U.S. officials, after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, actually considered using the document to justify deploying the military into an American town to make arrests.
Mr. Bush ended up ordering the FBI to make the arrests in Lackawanna, N.Y., where the agency had been monitoring a group of Yemeni Americans with suspected Qaida ties. The five men arrested there in September 2002, and a sixth arrested in Bahrain, pleaded guilty to terrorism-related charges.

Load-Date: July 28, 2009


End of Document