BUSH BACKS ISRAEL'S ACTIONS TO CONFINE ARAFAT TO COMPOUND ;
 HE WANTS PALESTINIAN TO TAKE CHARGE IN ENDING THREAT OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 25, 2002 Friday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 568 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President George W. Bush understands Israel's confinement of Yasser Arafat to a West Bank compound and wants the Palestinian leader to do more to eliminate terrorism as a threat to Israel and to him, Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, said Thursday.
Bush discussed the Middle East with his senior security advisers at the White House. Reports promptly surfaced that closing the Palestinian office in Washington was an option, but no decision was taken.
A decision depends largely on what Arafat does about combating terrorism, a senior U.S. official said. No option, including closing the Washington office, is being ruled out, the official said.
Virtual house arrest
Asked about Arafat's confinement, Fleischer said, "The president understands the reason that Israel has taken the action that it takes, and it is up to Chairman Arafat to demonstrate the leadership to combat terrorism."
Terrorism, the spokesman said, "is a threat not only to Israel, but also to Arafat."
Arafat has been under virtual house arrest on the West Bank for almost two months. This prevents him from barnstorming the Middle East and Europe in search of support for the Palestinians and their territorial and statehood aspirations.
From his office window in Ramallah, Arafat can peer out at Israeli soldiers who are posted about 70 yards down the street in tanks.
In the town, a member of the Palestinian intelligence service, Riyad Sadi, 26, was killed Thursday in a clash with Israeli forces. In response to a Palestinian shooting attack, Israeli tanks tightened their cordon around Arafat's headquarters.
Richard Boucher, a State Department spokesman, said: "We've always been against incursions. We feel they aren't helpful."
But he stressed: "We understand Israel's need to take steps to ensure its security. We understand the need for Israel to take steps in self-defense."
Boucher also said there were no plans to send U.S. envoy Anthony Zinni back to the region, despite a request from Arafat. In two visits over the last two months, Zinni failed to negotiate a truce.
Fleischer said Bush still believed that "it is incumbent on Chairman Arafat to do more, take more steps, and show with action that he is committed to eliminating terrorism and combating it wherever it exists," Fleischer said.
Bush plans to meet Feb. 7 with Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, who will be making his fourth visit to the White House to see Bush. Arafat, by contrast, has never been invited.
The White House statement expressing understanding of Israel's treatment of Arafat emerged a day after the United States eased its criticism of Israel for targeting terror suspects for execution.
Hamas militant is killed
In the southern Gaza Strip, Israeli helicopter gunships fired missiles at a Palestinian car Thursday, killing a Hamas militant and seriously wounding two others, Palestinian and Israeli sources said.
The airstrike followed a shooting spree Tuesday by a Palestinian gunman who killed two Israeli women in Jerusalem's main shopping district.
Mahmoud al-Zahar, senior official of the Hamas Islamic movement in Gaza, called the strike in the Palestinian-ruled town of Khan Younis "a drop in the sea of Israeli crimes" and vowed to respond with "painful" retaliation.
Palestinian hospital sources identified the dead man as Bakar Hamdan, and Israeli security sources said he was targeted for his involvement in the killings of Israelis.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Chaya Berci (left), daughter of Sarah Hamburger, cries next to unidentified mourners as she listens to her mother's eulogy at the Givat Shaul cemetery in Jerusalem on Thursday. Hamburger, who survived the Hebron Arab riots in 1929, in which Jews were shot and struck with axes, was shot by a Palestinian seven decades later while she waited for a bus in Jerusalem.

Load-Date: January 25, 2002


End of Document