Bush's chance to halt terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 11, 1989, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 20A; COLUMN
Length: 718 words
Byline: A. M. ROSENTHAL
Body


Name: Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General    Command (P.F.L.P.-G.C.)        Date Formed: 1968        Estimated Membership: 500     
 Headquarters: Syria        Area of Operations: Middle East, especially Lebanon, Jordan and    Israel        Leadership: Ahmed Jabril        Other Names: None        Sponsors: Syria, Libya        That is an entry in a U.S. government publication profiling all    known terrorist groups.
 
     The report is dated November 1988. On Dec. 21, 1988, a Pan Am plane    en route from London to New York exploded. All 259 people on board were    blown up, most of them Americans. Eleven people living in the town    below, Lockerbie, Scotland, also died.
    American intelligence believes the evidence shows that the Jabril    group destroyed Pan Am Flight 103.
 
     The P.F.L.P.-G.C. has sophisticated technology, money and expertise    - and a long record of terrorism in the air. But U.S. intelligence is    not basing its belief about the guilt of the Jabril group only on the    record. It is going on information gathered from the wreckage and    elsewhere in Europe and the Middle East.
 
     The conclusion is not final, nor may a finding ever be possible    that could stand up in a court of law. But unless some other group    suddenly confesses, convincingly, American intelligence specialists are    unlikely to change their belief that the Jabril gang carried out mass    murder in the British skies. They also believe Iran helped the    terrorists plan and execute the operation.
 
     Assuming no contrary evidence shows up in the next few weeks, one    of President Bush's most important decisions will be what to do about    the Jabril group - and its sponsor nations.
 
     Libya in effect is already an enemy nation. Iran contemptuously    dismisses American fantasies about finding reasonable, lovable    ayatollahs.
 
     But the United States still hopes that somehow it can use President    Assad of Syria to further its interests - a dream he encourages and    which surely amuses him hugely.
 
     Jabril is a former Syrian army officer, intimately tied to Syrian    intelligence and dependent on Syrian arms, funds and safe haven. That    , means Assad knew of every major terrorist operation, before or when it    was carried out.
 
     Now consider this passage from the U.S. publication on terrorists:        "If we find states supplying money, weapons, training,    identification documents, travel or safe haven for terrorists, we will    respond. Our aim is to demonstrate to these countries that supporting    terrorism is not cost-free."
 
     George Bush wrote that, as vice president and chief of the American    task force against terrorism. It is not true now, nor was it when    written.
 
     The United States has known all along about safe havens in Syria,    Libya, Iraq and Iran, and camps in the Soviet Union. Aside from bombing    Tripoli in 1986, the United States never put a price tag on them. But    now Bush carries the responsibility of trying to protect American lives    - at least on American planes.
 
     To do his duty, he will have to face Mikhail Gorbachev and ask him    to join the United States in action against terrorism. If the Soviet    leader refuses, Americans should know about it quickly.
 
     Bush can use the only weapon the United States has short of war -    economic power - to embargo all commerce and air traffic with the    sponsor nations. That will not hurt them much unless our allies join    us.
 
     They will not like it; there's good business in the Middle East.
 
 But is the Western alliance so worthless to them that our major    partners will continue to value trade over the lives of Americans, the    principal foreign target of the terrorists?
 
     If so, the United States should do it alone until our allies join    us in economic warfare against the protectors of terrorism. American    travelers could speed the day by finding other places to visit than    countries that turn their back.
 
     These are difficult steps. But they are not nearly as painful as    being blown to pieces on the next American plane to go down, nor as    sorrowful as seeing the mighty United States pretend it is helpless to    stop such killers as Ahmed Jabril and their patrons.
 
  New York Times       

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document