Bush: Iraq, WWII had similar aims
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 31, 2005 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 437 words
Byline: BOB KEEFE
Body


Coronado, Calif. --- Facing growing criticism over the war in Iraq, President Bush commemorated the 60th anniversary of Japan's surrender in World War II Tuesday by drawing comparisons between the fight against terrorism and the fight against tyranny three generations ago.
Speaking to a crowd of mostly sailors and Marines at a U.S. Navy base here, Bush blended the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 and the war in Iraq in an address designed to boost sagging national support for his war policies.
"As we mark this anniversary, we are again a nation at war," Bush said at U.S. Naval Air Station North Island near San Diego. "Once again war came to our shores with a surprise attack that killed thousands in cold blood. Once again, we face determined enemies who follow a ruthless ideology that despises everything America stands for."
"Once again, America and our allies are waging a global campaign with forces deployed on virtually every continent," he continued. "And once again, we will not rest until victory is America's and our freedom is secure."
Yet as Bush appealed for national support for his war policies, dozens of protesters lined the streets nearby, waving signs such as "Support Our Troops --- End Bush's War," and "Coward-in-Chief" in a demonstration more reminiscent of Vietnam era dissent than World War II unity.
Even among the World War II veterans invited to hear Bush, there were questions about the president's comparisons.
"I don't know who drafted his speech, but I doubt they were around back then," said David Graham, an Atlanta native and World War II Navy veteran who lives near San Diego.
Wearing a Navy uniform, Graham, 80, urged support for the president but said he wondered whether the war in Iraq and a battle against terrorism was winnable.
In his half-hour speech, Bush also used his strongest language in some time to criticize his predecessors' past responses to terrorism, ranging from the hostage crisis in Iran during the Carter administration to the attack on the USS Cole during the Clinton administration.
Terrorists "concluded that free societies lack the courage and character to defend themselves against a determined enemy," Bush said.
"After Sept. 11, 2001, we've taught the terrorists a very different lesson," he said.
Now, Bush asked, "Do we return to the pre-September 11th mind-set of isolation and retreat, or do we continue to take the fight to the enemy and support our allies in the broader Middle East?
"I've made my decision," he said. "We will stay on the offensive. We will stand with the people of Iraq, and we will prevail."

Graphic

 
SUSAN WALSH / Associated Press President Bush greets World War II veteran Robert Wakefield after a ceremony commemorating the 60th anniversary of V-J Day at Naval Air Station North Island near San Diego on Tuesday.

Load-Date: August 31, 2005


End of Document