Bush and Brown, at Camp David, Are Allies if Not Buddies
The New York Times
July 31, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 1042 words
Byline: By JIM RUTENBERG
Dateline: CAMP DAVID, Md., July 30 
Body


On his first official trip to the United States as Britain's prime minister, Gordon Brown on Monday displayed what can best be described as a resounding -- if dispassionate -- show of like-minded camaraderie with President Bush.
  The two leaders showed none of the warmth and coziness that Mr. Bush had shared with Mr. Brown's predecessor, Tony Blair, a closeness that contributed to Mr. Blair's political tumble at home. 
  But Mr. Brown offered bullish comments on Britain's relationship with the United States. On Iraq, Mr. Brown said any future British decision to reduce troops and cede control of a sector to the Iraqis ''will be made on the military advice of our commanders on the ground.'' 
  Though it was taken by some in the British news media as a signal of Mr. Brown's independence, it is also a common formulation that President Bush uses in arguing that he will not be driven to withdraw by domestic politics. United States officials have been watching the British presence in Iraq as a gauge of the reliability of the new British leader. 
  On terrorism, Mr. Brown said, ''Let me just stress that we're in a generation-long battle against terrorism, against Al Qaeda-inspired terrorism, and this is a battle for which we can give no quarter.'' Several of Mr. Brown's ministers have criticized the term ''war on terror,'' used frequently by Mr. Bush. His new security minister, Sir Alan West,  said it ''demeans the value of a war.''
  On relations between their countries, Mr. Brown said, ''It's a partnership founded and driven forward by our shared values -- what Winston Churchill, who was the first British prime minister to visit Camp David, called the joint inheritance of liberty, a belief in opportunity for all, a belief in the dignity of every human being.''
  Despite some veiled differences, Mr. Brown stuck closely to a script that included what the Americans took as words of assurance that he had no plans for radical changes in the partnership, dodging several attempts by reporters here to get him to enunciate how his approach to the United States would differ from that of Mr. Blair.
  Mr. Brown's new Foreign Office minister for Asia and Africa, Mark  Malloch-Brown, declared recently that the relationship between Mr. Bush and the prime minister would not ''be joined at the hip like the Blair-Bush relationship was.'' But officials traveling with Mr. Brown described such statements as either taken out of context or unrepresentative of Mr. Brown's own views. 
  British analysts said Monday that Mr. Brown's comments reflected the fact that the two countries share so much at stake in Afghanistan and Iraq, on global trade and with intelligence efforts to combat terrorism that he needs a close relationship with his American counterpart, like most of the recent British prime ministers before him.
  His statements on Iraq were perhaps the most important to the Americans. ''Our aim, as is the aim of the United States government, is threefold: security for the Iraqi people, political reconciliation, and that the Iraqis have a stake in the future,'' Mr. Brown said after his second of two face-to-face meetings with Mr. Bush here.
  Mr. Brown said he hoped to continue what he called a ''transition to over-watch'' functions in Iraq, a reference to a process begun under Mr. Blair of turning over control of the areas where British troops are in charge to Iraqis. British troops in southern Iraq have moved from combat roles to ''over-watch'' in three of the four provinces where they hold security responsibility. 
  Mr. Brown left the door open for a withdrawal, if, he said, his commanders thought it was feasible. ''We intend to move to over-watch in the fourth province,'' around Basra, he said, but he said details would be completed only after Parliament returns this fall.
  When Mr. Bush was asked if he had faith in Mr. Brown not to ''cut and run'' from Iraq, a phrase the president had used to express his trust in Mr. Blair, Mr. Bush said he was sure ''that Gordon Brown understands that failure in Iraq would be a disaster for the security of our own countries, that failure in Iraq would embolden extremist movements throughout the Middle East.''
  Mr. Brown and Mr. Bush also said they intended to recharge the stalled Doha round of global trade talks and to work together toward a Middle East peace plan and toward a solution of the crisis in Darfur. The second-term president and the new prime minister also vowed to cooperate in toughening sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program, addressing climate change and alleviating poverty and disease in Africa.
  But the two did exhibit some nuanced differences when it came to terrorism. Mr. Brown began his remarks by calling Afghanistan ''the front line against terrorism.'' Mr. Bush regularly calls Iraq ''the central front in the war on terror.''
  Asked about the difference, Mr. Brown said, ''I think I described Afghanistan as the first line in the battle against the Taliban, and of course the Taliban in Afghanistan is what we are dealing with in the provinces for which we've got responsibility, and doing so with some success.''
  A spokesman afterward sought to clarify the remarks by saying, ''What he meant was Afghanistan was the first line and remains the first line in where we are taking on the Taliban and Al Qaeda.''
  Mr. Brown made clear, on the other hand, that he viewed Iraq as a battle against elements including, but not restricted to, Al Qaeda, saying, ''In Iraq, you're dealing with Sunni-Shia violence, you're dealing with the involvement of Iran, but you're certainly dealing with a large number of Al Qaeda terrorists.''
  Mr. Bush pronounced himself satisfied with Mr. Brown's position. ''There's no doubt in my mind that he understands the stakes of the struggle,'' he said.
  Yet there was not anything approaching the chemistry exhibited between Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair, who had developed a familiar, offhand banter over the years, with Mr. Bush calling his counterpart ''Blair'' and Mr. Blair calling Mr. Bush ''George.''
  Mr. Brown is more formal, and he stood stiffly next to the more freewheeling Mr. Bush, although they said they had shared stories about their families and what aides said was a mutual love of rugby.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush with Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain at a news conference at Camp David yesterday. (Photograph by Doug Mills/The New York Times)                                                         

Load-Date: July 31, 2007


End of Document