Bush warns opponents not to celebrate early
USA TODAY
October 26, 2006 Thursday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 469 words
Byline: David Jackson
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Bush mocked Democrats and the "punditry" Wednesday for predicting a Democratic sweep on Election Day, less than two weeks before voters decide control of Congress.
"They're dancing in the end zone," Bush said at a White House news conference. "They just haven't scored the touchdown."
Bush said Republicans would continue to hold both the House of Representatives and Senate because voters agree with his party on low taxes and an aggressive war on terrorism. He also lauded a "fantastic grass-roots organization" designed to bring more GOP voters to the polls.
Asked if he would ever admit the possibility of GOP losses, Bush said, "We're not going to lose, in my heart of hearts."
Bill Burton, a spokesman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, used his own football metaphor to stress his party is not overconfident. "We're still scrapping our way through the red zone," said Burton, referring to the area within 20 yards of the goal line. "No dancing yet."
Bush spoke out as a number of polls showed Democrats with a shot at recapturing both the House and the Senate. Bush believes Republicans will win by proving they are best on the economy and terrorism.
According to the latest USA TODAY/Gallup Poll, 54% of respondents said the economy is getting worse. Also, nearly 6 in 10  said it was a mistake to have invaded Iraq, which Bush has called a key to winning the war on terrorism. The poll also said 58% disapprove of Bush's overall job performance.
Bush said he did not mind the perception that some Republican candidates are distancing themselves from him, while Democrats try to link their opponents to an unpopular president through campaign commercials.
"Nor am I resentful that a lot of Democrats are using my picture," Bush said. "All I ask is that they pick out a good one. Make me look good, at least on the picture."
Bush has been unable with a GOP-led Congress to change Social Security to allow creation of private investment accounts, overhaul the tax system and push though "comprehensive" immigration reform that includes provisions for temporary guest workers. Asked if he might have a better chance of achieving these goals with a Democratic Congress, Bush said no.
Bush said he plans to stump vigorously prior to Election Day. His schedule calls for him to be on the road seven of the eight days before ballots are cast. That includes a Monday appearance in Texas for Houston City Council member Shelley Sekula Gibbs, who is conducting a write-in campaign for the seat vacated by Tom DeLay.
Bush predicted an enthusiastic turnout from the Republican faithful.
"The race is over as far as a lot of the punditry goes. They've got it all figured out," Bush said. He also taunted unnamed Democratic congressional leaders for "measuring their drapes" for new offices. 

Load-Date: October 26, 2006


End of Document