Bush names choice for INS director
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 5, 1989, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WASHINGTON DIGEST; Pg. 8A; DIGEST
Length: 389 words
Body


President Bush announced Friday he will nominate attorney Gene McNary,    the chief executive of St. Louis County, Mo., to be commissioner of the    Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). If confirmed, McNary, 53,    would succeed Alan C. Nelson, who recently announced his resignation.
 
 McNary, an unsuccessful Republican candidate for governor in 1984, has    been St. Louis County's chief executive since 1974.
 
 Educators see need    for more money   
 
 Two education leaders said Friday it will take money as well as    leadership to turn President Bush into the education president he has    said he wants to be. "As long as there is a budget deadlock and the    administration has its hands tied by its own budget policies, it's    going to be very difficult for Bush to be the education president,"    said Robert Atwell, president of the American Council on Education.
 
 Dick Rosser, president of the National Association of Independent    Colleges and Universities, said there is "an incredible need for    science facilities" and more federal money for research support and    student aid.
 
 
 Panel to study    air terrorism   
 
 President Bush announced Friday he was forming a seven-member    commission to investigate air terrorism, with particular emphasis on    the bombing last December of Pan Am Flight 103. Bush, in an executive    order, said the Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism would    study the adequacy of security procedures. The commission will be    composed of seven members appointed by the president - including two    senators and two members of the House.
 
 
 Senate's leader    sounds warning   
 
 Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell, D-Maine, sternly warned    President Bush Friday that the harmonious relationship he has built    with the Democratic Senate will be harmed if he takes the "unwise"    step of naming defeated nominee William Lucas to a recess appointment    as head of the Justice Department's civil rights division. Bush was    turned down when he appealed to Mitchell in a morning Oval Office    session to allow the full Senate to vote on Lucas before it recessed    for the August break. Lucas, the Democrat-turned-Republican who would    have been the first black head of the civil rights division, was    rejected by the Senate Judiciary Committee Tuesday.
 
    

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document