Bush seeks more anti-terrorism funds, Democrats sharply criticize proposal for $87 billion
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 8, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7A
Length: 437 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - President Bush, facing doubts about his handling of Iraq amid rising casualties, is asking Congress for $ 87 billion to fight terrorism and cautioning Americans that the struggle "will take time and require sacrifice."
Bush's money request - surpassing earlier unofficial estimates - would come on top of the $ 79 billion that Congress approved in April for the initial costs of the war and its aftermath and for worldwide efforts against terrorism.
Despite calls from Republicans and Democrats alike for more troops, Bush said the 130,000 U.S. forces in Iraq were sufficient. But he urged other nations, even those that had opposed the war, to contribute troops and money.
Today, Britain's Ministry of Defense said that country will send two additional battalions to Iraq, adding 1,200 troops to its forces already there. Britain has 11,000 troops in the country.
The president addressed the nation Sunday night, his first speech on Iraq since May 1 when he stood on the aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln and declared an end to major combat.
In the four months since, U.S. casualties have risen steadily, to the point where more have died in the aftermath of the war than during the combat phase.
The attacks on American forces continued today when an explosion struck a U.S. patrol convoy near the center of Baghdad. Two soldiers were wounded, a military spokesman said.
Bush described Iraq in his 18-minute speech as the central battleground of the terrorism war and blamed the violence on Saddam Hussein loyalists and foreign terrorists.
"We are fighting that enemy in Iraq and Afghanistan today, so that we do not meet him again on our own streets, in our own cities," Bush said, four days before the second anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Bush said that roughly $ 66 billion of the $ 87 billion he will seek from Congress for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1 is for military and intelligence operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere. Earlier cost estimates of the terrorism war had ranged between $ 60 billion and $ 80 billion.
Of the nearly $ 66 billion, $ 51 billion would be for Iraq, $ 11 billion for Afghanistan and about $ 200 million for the Horn of Africa, a congressional official knowledgeable about the request said today.
This source also said that $ 1.5 billion would be used for U.S. support of foreign troops participating in stabilizing Iraq; $ 5 billion for security there and $ 15 billion for work on restoring and upgrading the nation's infrastructure. Another $ 2.2 billion would be set aside for reserve mobilization, if necessary, said this official, speaking on grounds of anonymity.

Load-Date: September 9, 2003


End of Document