BUSH HEADS TO BALI: WAR ON TERRORISM, NOT ON ISLAM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 22, 2003 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 480 words
Byline: BOB KEMPER, CHICAGO TRIBUNE
Dateline: SINGAPORE
Body


President Bush heads today to Bali, Indonesia, the site of a devastating terrorist attack one year ago, to reassure leaders of the world's largest Muslim nation that his global war on terrorism is not a war on Islam.
 Amid extraordinary security, Bush will spend just 3 1/2 hours in Bali, where a terrorist bombing of a nightclub killed 202 people. He is expected to praise Prime Minister Megawati Sukarnoputri's crackdown on terrorists while emphasizing the need for Indonesia to remain on a moderate, democratic path despite internal threats from Islamic militants.
Bush stopped in Singapore yesterday on his way to Indonesia to demonstrate support for another key ally in the region, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. Goh earned Washington's gratitude, and a free-trade agreement, by dispatching security personnel to Iraq to help with the U.S.-led reconstruction and arresting operatives of the al-Qaeda-linked group Jemaah Islamiyah.
 Bush yesterday wrapped up the two-day Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Bangkok, where he spent most of his time lobbying Asian leaders to back the United States on Iraq and North Korea. The APEC leaders did not issue a written declaration backing the six-nation negotiations over North Korea's nuclear weapons program. But Thai Prime Minister and APEC host Thaksin Shinawatra ended the session by calling for a restarting of negotiations aimed at the dismantling of North Korea's program.
 A senior administration official played down the significance of not having a formal declaration of support from the Asian leaders, saying, "In many, many ways we have moved beyond statements."
 "We have six-party talks under way, and that's where we're focusing our efforts," the official said.
 Bush met with Singapore's Goh last night, becoming just the second U.S. president to visit the island city-state. Bush's father, former President George Bush, spent three days there in 1992.
 Tensions between the United States and Singapore were strained in 1994 when Singapore ignored a plea from then-President Bill Clinton and caned American teenager Michael Fay for vandalizing cars with spray paint.
 But no tensions were apparent when Bush and Goh appeared before photographers following a private meeting.
 "A lot of our discussion was how we can continue to foster our intent, which is one of peace and freedom as well as prosperity,'" Bush said.
 The two leaders issued a joint statement hailing the arrest of Riduan Isamuddin Hambali, the alleged leader of Jemaah Islamiyah and a central figure in last October's nightclub bombing in Bali.
 Bush and Gho "recognized that much headway had been made in disrupting terrorist networks but agreed that more needed to be done and that the campaign against terrorism required a sustained long-term effort," the statement said. Bush's trip to Indonesia is a highlight of his six-nation tour of Southeast Asia.

Load-Date: October 22, 2003


End of Document