Bush picks six prisoners who may face tribunals
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
July 4, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 413 words
Byline: JENNIFER LOVEN, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Bush has designated six prisoners to become the first terrorism suspects who could be tried before military tribunals, the Pentagon announced Thursday.
Officials refused to identify the six suspects being held in U.S. custody. All are believed to be either members of the al-Qaida terrorist network or otherwise involved in terrorism, said two Pentagon officials who briefed reporters on condition of anonymity late Thursday.
Some of the six may have attended terrorist training camps and some were involved in raising money and recruiting for terrorist groups, the officials said. Under Bush's order creating the military tribunals, only people who are not U.S. citizens can be subject to such trials.
The next step is for a chief prosecutor to draft charges against any or all of the suspects.
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz will then make a separate decision on whether the suspects will actually face trials by what the Pentagon calls military commissions.
The United States may not publicly identify the suspects even if they go to trial, a senior Defense Department official told reporters. None of the officials who discussed the matter Thursday would say where the suspects are being held, though all are in U.S. custody.
The Pentagon officials also raised the possibility that the military might continue to hold the suspects even if they are acquitted by a tribunal. The prisoners' status as "unlawful combatants" in the war against terrorism is separate from their guilt or innocence on charges brought before a tribunal, a military official involved in the tribunal process said.
Unlike traditional criminal trials, the proceedings of military tribunals can be kept much more secret.
Initial criticism of the administration's intent to use such trials was later tempered but only somewhat when the detailed rules governing them were released. Under those rules, defendants have many traditional legal rights, though they still do not have full constitutional protection, and the standards of evidence are looser.
While the six are the first to be declared subject to trial by tribunal, Bush may designate more suspects for possible military trials. The United States will continue to gather intelligence information for the war on terrorism from the suspects up to and during their trials, the Pentagon officials said.
Candidates for the tribunals include the 680 or so terrorism suspects being held at the U.S. Navy base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Load-Date: July 6, 2003


End of Document