Bush acknowledges secret CIA prisons
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 7, 2006 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1158 words
Byline: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg NEW YORK TIMES The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


THE PROGRAM Terrorism suspects were held in secret in places not monitored by independent agencies.
PRISONERS MOVED Up to 100 were held. All have been transferred, with the final 14 going to Guantanamo.
NEW PROPOSAL Bush said when Congress sets up tribunals he wants, the terrorism suspects will be tried.
---
President George W. Bush said Wednesday that 14 high-profile terrorism suspects held secretly until now by the CIA have been transferred to the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to face military tribunals if Congress approves.
The group includes Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, thought to be the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks. Bush said he had decided to "bring them into the open" after years in which they have been held by the CIA without charges in undisclosed locations abroad, in a program the White House had not previously acknowledged.
The announcement marked the first time the president had discussed the secret CIA program. He made clear he had fully authorized it. Bush defended the treatment the suspects had received, but would not say where the so-called "high-value terrorist detainees" had been held or the techniques used to extract information from them.
"This program has been, and remains, one of the most vital tools in our war against the terrorists," Bush said. "Were it not for this program, our intelligence community believes that al-Qaida and its allies would have succeeded in launching another attack against the American homeland."
The government says the 14 terrorism suspects include some of the most senior members of al-Qaida captured by the United States since 2001, including close associates of Osama bin Laden, among them those responsible for the bombing of the USS Cole in 2000 in Yemen and the 1998 attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Red Cross will monitor
With the transfer of the suspects to Guantanamo, which is run by the Defense Department, the International Committee of the Red Cross will monitor their treatment, Bush said. He used the speech to urge Congress to pass legislation that would authorize military commissions that put terrorism suspects on trial, to replace rules established by the administration but struck down in June by the Supreme Court.
"As soon as Congress acts to authorize the military commissions I have proposed, the men our intelligence officials believe orchestrated the deaths of nearly 3,000 Americans on Sept. 11, 2001, can face justice," Bush said, adding, "To start the process for bringing them to trial, we must bring them out into the open." To that end, Bush sent Congress legislation proposing new rules for the commissions and detailing specific standards for the humane treatment of detainees. Yet the new White House legislative proposal adhers closely to the previous commission model. It retains several provisions the court found troublesome, including language that permits defendants to be excluded from their own trials.
At the same time, the Pentagon released a new Army Field Manual that lays out permissible interrogation techniques, and specifically bans eight methods that have come up in abuse cases.
The speech was the third in a series Bush is delivering on the war on terrorism in the days before the fifth anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Program is criticized
The CIA program, though officially a secret, has been the subject of numerous news reports in recent months. By speaking publicly about it for the first time, the president presumably hopes to build support for it on Capitol Hill, and in the public.
The White House released biographies of all 14 of the suspects and details of their alleged offenses; they include such well-known Qaida operatives as Abu Zubaydah, who the administration said was trying to organize a terrorist attack in Israel at the time of his capture, and Ramzi Binalshibh, who authorities say helped facilitate the Sept. 11 attacks.
Human rights organizations were instantly critical of Bush's announcement.
"It's wonderful that at last the United States has acknowledged that these detention sites exist," said Larry Cox, executive director of Amnesty International USA, in an interview. But he described the program as "a form of torture," and said the United States should suspend it.
In his speech, Bush resisted that characterization.
"I want to be absolutely clear with our people, and the world," the president said. "The United States does not torture. It's against our laws, and it's against our values. I have not authorized it -- and I will not authorize it."
---
STLtoday.com/current What do you think of the CIA prisons? Talk about it in Current Affairs
STLtoday.com/links Read the president's speech
---
14 suspects transferred
President Bush announced Wednesday that these 14 prominent terrorism suspects have been transferred from secret CIA prisons to Guantanamo Bay for trials:
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the suspected mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, captured near Islamabad, Pakistan, in March 2003.
Ramzi Binalshibh, believed to have helped plan the Sept. 11 attacks. He was captured in September 2002 in Karachi, Pakistan.
Abu Zubaydah, was believed to be a link between Osama bin Laden and many al-Qaida cells; captured in Pakistan in 2002.
Ali Abd al-Aziz Ali, is accused of serving as a key lieutenant to Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in Pakistan, delivering funds to the Sept. 11 hijackers.
Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, allegedly helped coordinate the 1998 bombings of the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Captured in Gujrat in eastern Pakistan in July 2004.
Riduan Isamuddin, believed to be the main link between al-Qaida and Jemaah Islamiyah, the terrorist group blamed for the 2002 Bali bombings that killed 202 people. He was arrested in Thailand in 2003.
Mustafa Ahmad al-Hawsawi, reportedly arranged financing and travel for the Sept. 11 plot participants from Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep, allegedly helped transfer al-Qaida money for a 2003 car bombing at a hotel in Jakarta that killed 12.
Majid Khan, allegedly being groomed by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed for an attack in the United States. Went to high school in Baltimore.
Waleed bin Attash, an alleged al-Qaida operative accused of serving bin Laden as a bodyguard.
Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, suspected mastermind of the October 2000 bombing of the destroyer Cole and al-Qaida's operations chief in the Arabian Peninsula. He was caught in 2002.
Abu Faraj al-Libi, regarded by Pakistani intelligence as a successor to Khalid Sheikh Mohammed as the al-Qaida No. 3, and became the most wanted man in Pakistan for masterminding two bombings 11 days apart in December 2003.
Mohd Farik Bin Amin, a Malaysian, allegedly assisted Jemaah Islamiyah's operational planner case targets for planned attacks.
Gouled Hassan Dourad, a native of Somalia, allegedly headed a Mogadishu-based network that supported al-Qaida members there.
Sources: U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence and AP archives.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Notes

 World 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - A U.S. military guard walks past a prisoner being held in maximum security at Guantanamo Bay in June. Fourteen high-profile terrorism suspects have been transferred to Guantanamo, President George W. Bush said on Wednesday. Brennan Linsley | The Associated Press  PHOTO - 14 SUSPECTS Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, alleged Sept. 11 mastermind, is among them. See the list on A11.  PHOTO - Binalshibh 

Load-Date: September 7, 2006


End of Document