Bush Says 'We Cannot Rest' In Combating Terror Threat
The New York Times
December 30, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 578 words
Byline: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PINTLALA, Ala., Dec. 29
Body


President-elect George Bush said today that the United States should ''punish firmly, decisively'' those found responsible for the bombing that downed a Pan Am jetliner in Scotland last week.
''It's just terrible,'' Mr. Bush said of the airline disaster, speaking aboard Air Force Two as he traveled from a hunting trip in Beeville, Tex., to a fishing expedition in Pintlala, a town outside Montgomery. ''Unfortunately, we've seen that happen several times.''
As he left Beeville this morning, Mr. Bush told reporters gathered at Chase Naval Air Station that he did not know who was responsible for the bombing. He said the Government should ''seek hard and punish firmly, decisively, those who did this if you could ever find them.''
 
'You Do Everything You Can'
Asked whether the punishment might involve military action, Mr. Bush brushed aside the question.
''The most imprudent thing a responsible official can do is discuss what kind of action would be taken or would not be taken,'' he said. ''That would be imprudent and I wouldn't do that.'' But he added, ''When I say punish severely, that's what I mean.''
Asked about what could be done to build protection against such attacks, Mr. Bush replied, ''You do everything you can in your power.''
''It's almost impossible to guarantee against these cowardly acts, but we've got to keep trying,'' he added. ''We cannot rest.''
Asked if travelers are helpless against terrorists, Mr. Bush shook his head. ''It's a very difficult threat,'' he said. ''The American people know that. People all around the world know it. It's a whole new menace to try to effect political change by cowardly terrorist action.''
He said he would continue the policies of the Reagan Administration on terrorism. ''We have a fine antiterrorist policy,'' he said. ''I take great pride in having coordinated and to some degree written the antiterrorist report and I think it's setting high standards around the world.''
As Vice President, Mr. Bush headed a task force on terrorism that submitted about two dozen recommendations to President Reagan in December 1985; parts of the report were made public in 1986. In the key recommendation, the task force said a set of standards should be established to judge whether a military response was called for in retaliation against acts of terrorism.
It may be up to Mr. Bush, as President, to decide on retaliatory measures if the bombers of the Pan Am flight are identified. And if a Palestinian faction is tied to the attack, it could complicate the recently established dialogue between the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
 
REAGAN VOWS RETRIBUTION
LOS ANGELES, Dec. 29 - President Reagan vowed today to find out who planted the bomb aboard the Pan Am flight and to bring them to justice.
In a statement to reporters at Los Angeles International Airport before flying to Palm Springs for the New Year's holiday, Mr. Reagan declined to speculate on who was responsible for the bombing.
''What we want to do is find out who did it and bring them to justice,'' he said. ''Now that we know definitely it was a bomb, we're going to make every effort we can to find out who was guilty of this savage and tragic thing.''
Mr. Reagan also declined to say what he might do once he found out who planted the bomb aboard the plane.
''That's going to depend on who and where the individual is,'' Mr. Reagan said. He said that whoever put the bomb on board the plane ''would be charged with 270 murders.''


End of Document