Bush to Seek More Money To Fight Terrorism at Home 
 The New York Times
January 23, 2004 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 931 words
Byline:  By DAVID E. SANGER
Dateline: ROSWELL, N.M., Jan. 22  
Body


President Bush said today that he would ask Congress for another major increase in financing for domestic security, and, in a clear indication of the strategy his aides say he plans to pursue in his re-election campaign, he urged Americans against taking false comfort in the absence of terrorist attacks on American soil for more than two years.
     Mr. Bush's warning at the New Mexico Military Institute here came less than 48 hours after he used the State of the Union address to defend the invasion of Iraq and to counter arguments from Democratic candidates that his pursuit of Saddam Hussein hampered the broader fight against terrorism. 
 One senior political adviser to Mr. Bush described the president's strategy in the coming months as "a healthy mix of optimism and the fear factor," tapping into what White House officials believe is a wariness among swing voters about putting the nation's security into the hands of any of the Democratic aspirants.
While White House officials gave few details of the 9.7 percent increase Mr. Bush is proposing in the domestic defense spending -- about $2.8 billion, they calculated, though there is significant dispute about how to categorize many of those spending programs. Democrats and critics of Mr. Bush's domestic security strategy have argued that some of the money already sent to state and local agencies had been diverted to projects that had only a peripheral relationship to security efforts.
The new money for domestic security, the White House said, would include a 19 percent increase in counterterrorism financing through the Department of Justice, and a White House statement said the increase, just shy of $500 million, would allow the administration to "put more F.B.I. agents to work on counterterrorism activities." 
Mr. Bush touched only briefly on domestic defense in his speech before uniformed cadets here, saying he was working to improve coordination between the F.B.I. and the Central Intelligence Agency. But he expanded on what may have been the most pointed line in his State of the Union address, warning that the United States would never await "a permission slip to defend the American people." 
"There's a difference between leading a coalition of nations and shutting down efforts because a few object," he said in another clear reference to France, Germany and other countries that refused to authorize the attack on Iraq. When nations are divided, he argued, "nothing happens." 
Looking relaxed, Mr. Bush got one of his biggest cheers as he spoke in this flat New Mexico town best known for its history of questionable U.F.O. sightings when he declared that 45 of the top 55 officials in Mr. Hussein's government had been killed or captured. With a smile, he added, "The other 10 have got to be nervous."
While White House officials said Mr. Bush's appearance here was a policy event rather than a political one, this is a state he will be visiting a lot. He lost it by 366 votes in 2000, and his political aides do not intend to repeat that experience.
Part of that strategy is clear in what has changed in his stump speech, which now dwells on the continuing threats that the United States faces. "If we see a threat gathering overseas, we've got to pay attention to it," he said on Thursday. "If it gets so bad, we've got to do something about it." 
The line is a folksy version of the pre-emption strategy that Mr. Bush issued in September 2002, and one that the State Department has been trying to play down with uncomfortable allies in recent months. 
"The best way to protect America, however, is to go on the offensive, stay on the offensive," Mr. Bush said. He added, "The United States and our allies refuse to live under the shadow of this ultimate danger" with the United States "in a position where terrorists could show up with weapons of mass murder."
Mr. Bush's more aggressive approach clearly plays with his audiences, many of which are selected, as his quick tour through Ohio, Arizona and New Mexico in the last two days showed. His loudest applause came when he reminded audiences of his unilateral actions. 
That political instinct may be reinforced by a poll result released on Thursday by the Pew Research Center. In a survey conducted from Jan. 6 to 11, before Mr. Bush's State of the Union speech, it found that 65 percent of Americans believed that the decision to go to war was the "right decision," down only two points from the days after Saddam Hussein's capture in November.
The same survey, which had a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points, showed that 46 percent of Americans believed that Mr. Bush was sufficiently attentive to the concerns of allies, with 30 percent saying he was not. That is a potentially important finding, because one of the issues that has unified the Democratic candidates is their argument that Mr. Bush alienated the country's closest allies in a rush to war.
It is unclear how Mr. Bush's proposed increase in spending will fare in Congress in an election year. Some Republicans are openly breaking with his spending increases, and argue that more money has been poured into domestic defense -- by the White House estimates, spending has tripled since 2001 -- than could be spent wisely.
The Republican strategy is to meld the war in Iraq with the battle against terrorism, and on Thursday Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, introduced Mr. Bush by declaring that "if other voices had been listened to Saddam Hussein would still be in power."
"George Bush ignored those voices of weakness, and acted," Mr. Domenici said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 23, 2004


End of Document