Bush overruled advisers, Specter says; He said he had no deal on a court on terrorism surveillance until the president stepped in.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 22, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 361 words
Byline: James Rowley, Bloomberg News
Body


President Bush overruled his advisers in reaching an agreement to permit a special court to review his terrorist surveillance program, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Arlen Specter said.
Specter (R., Pa.) last week announced the deal with Bush on legislation permitting review by a secret court that monitors intelligence-gathering wiretaps. Under the legislation, the court would determine whether Bush's program to eavesdrop on suspected terrorists without a warrant was constitutional.
The Judiciary Committee plans a hearing next week on the legislation and is to vote on it Thursday. In the House, two Republican leaders have endorsed a competing bill.
Specter said he demanded a face-to-face meeting with Bush after presidential advisers balked at making an unequivocal pledge on the legislation.
"He overruled the staff in our meeting" and gave a "firm commitment" to the judicial review, Specter said. "He's come to grips with the specifics, and he's given his word."
The legislation stops short of requiring the president to submit the National Security Agency program he ordered after 9/11 for review under the 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which created the court that reviews wiretap requests in secret. Bush was unwilling to make an "institutional concession" that would bind future presidents, Specter said.
He described his meeting with Bush as "a very interesting part of our negotiations."
Bush pledged that if the legislation was not changed, he would ask the FISA court to determine whether it was constitutional to continue to wiretap phone calls between suspected terrorists in the United States and associates overseas.
Specter said Bush's pledge was part of a "good-faith effort" to try to accommodate lawmakers' demands that a court review the NSA program. "I trust the president," he said.
Specter raised the possibility that he would ask Bush to modify the legislation to allow U.S. trial courts to review 20 lawsuits challenging the surveillance program. The legislation as drafted would send all those cases to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.
"I don't know what the administration's response would be to that," he said.

Load-Date: July 22, 2006


End of Document