BUSH IS WASHOUT ON FOREIGN POLICY, KERRY CHARGES/ DEMOCRAT MAINTAINS WAR ON TERRORISM ISN'T MAINLY A MILITARY MATTER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 19, 2004 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 480 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


Democrat John Kerry on Sunday accused President George W. Bush of being "stunningly ineffective" at foreign policy and stuck by his argument that the war against terrorism isn't primarily a military struggle.
Kerry, in a wide-ranging interview on NBC's "Meet the Press," also stood by his promise to create 10 million jobs and halve the deficit in his first term if elected, though he conceded that soaring red ink could squeeze some proposals.
The Massachusetts senator and presumptive Democratic presidential nominee pressed his argument that Bush, the Republican incumbent, went about the Iraq war in a way that has left the United States and its troops shouldering too much of the burden. He said he would build an international alliance to share the responsibility for rebuilding Iraq.
"I think this administration has proven, frankly, stunningly ineffective in diplomacy," Kerry said, citing Bush's policy change on Israel last week. "There were Arab leaders that were taken by surprise by this announcement."
"I will immediately reach out to other nations in a very different way from this administration," he said. "Within weeks of being inaugurated, I will return to the U.N. and I will rejoin the community of nations."
The Democrat and Vietnam War veteran said he supports the long-term goal of stability in Iraq but warned that the public's patience may wear thin.
"If we are stuck for a long period of time in a quagmire where young Americans are dying without any sense of that (stability) being able to be achieved, I think most Americans will decide that's failure," Kerry said.
Kerry also defended his argument that the fight against terrorism is more than just a military operation.
"You need the best intelligence, the best law enforcement cooperation in the world," he said. "I will not hesitate to use those forces effectively. I think I could fight a far more effective war on terror."
Bush campaign spokesman Steve Schmidt said Kerry's statements were "filled with inaccuracies, attacks and pessimism toward the future of the country."
Kerry's interview came as he opened a three-day campaign swing through Florida, where the disputed 2000 election was decided in favor of Bush, who won the state by 537 votes.
In a nod to local politics and the influential community of Cuban expatriates, Kerry said he remained opposed to lifting the U.S. embargo against Cuba, though he favors talks with the country and possibly encouraging travel.
Despite the heated nature of the presidential race, Kerry agreed with Bush on a few points.
Kerry said he "completely" supported Bush's endorsement of a plan by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to hold on to lands seized in the 1967 Middle East War. Asked about Israel's assassination of Abdel Aziz Rantisi, leader of the Palestinian militant organization Hamas, Kerry echoed the White House by backing Israel's efforts to be secure.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Jessica Militare, 13, of Miami, gives her John Kerry campaign sign a glance as Kerry stumps at the University of Miami on Sunday. The Democratic presidential candidate said in an interview that he supports Israel's withdrawal plan.

Load-Date: April 19, 2004


End of Document