BUSH VOICES ANGER;
VOWS TO TARGET TERRORISM'S SOURCE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 12, 2001 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-5
Length: 379 words
Byline: Marsha Mercer, Media General News Service, William March of the Tampa Tribune, a Media General newspaper, contributed to this article.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Hours after the worst acts of terrorism in U.S. history, President Bush declared from the Oval Office last night, "We will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them."
The president, in a four-minute televised address, sought to reassure people that the country would seek out and punish those responsible while government and industry resume daily tasks.
He said government offices would reopen today, that the military is powerful and prepared and that financial institutions would continue. Airports were to remain closed, however, as are many schools and businesses in the Washington and New York City areas.
"Our country is strong," Bush said. "The search is under way for those who are behind these evil acts."
Bush said he has directed the full resources of the intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and to bring them to justice.
Projecting a steely image, the president spoke of the televised pictures of destruction, including "airplanes flying into buildings." He said the "thousands of lives lost" through acts of evil have left Americans full of "disbelief, terrible sadness, and a quiet, unyielding anger."
But the president stressed that "Terrorist attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings but they cannot touch the foundation of America. These acts shattered steel but they cannot dent the steel of American resolve."
Paraphrasing the 23rd Psalm, he said, "Even though I walk through the Valley of Death, I fear no evil, for You are with me."
Bush returned to the White House after having spent the day largely out of sight. He began the day in Sarasota, Fla., where he had been scheduled to lead an education event. He spoke briefly about the World Trade Center attack, saying, "This is a very difficult moment for America. Today we've had a national tragedy.
"Two airplanes have crashed into the World Trade Center in an apparent terrorist attack on our country."
He said he had spoken to Vice President Dick Cheney, the FBI director and the governor of New York, and had ordered "the full resources of the federal government to help the victims and their families, and to conduct a full-scale investigation to hunt down and to find those folks who committed this act."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 15, 2001


End of Document