Bush's myopic view of terrorism hurts human rights
University Wire
April 18, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 841 words
Byline: By Dara Purvis, Daily Trojan
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


Recently, the San Francisco Chronicle published an excellent profile of Shehnaz Bokhari, a domestic violence advocate in Pakistan.
The descriptions of Bokhari's plight are horrifying -- she founded and operates the Progressive Women's Association out of her home in Islamabad, helping women running from dangerous situations and advocating for improvements in women's rights.
Yet she is now facing 15 years in prison because she helped one wife escape a physically abusive husband.
The laws Bokhari is being charged under are called the "Hudood Ordinances," based in extreme Islamic rules, and were instituted under the reign of General Mohammed Zia ul-Haq, a dictator who ruled Pakistan in the 1970s.
U. Southern California
The laws make extramarital sex illegal, and institute an extremely anti-victim system of rape laws in which the burden of proof is on a rape victim. In addition, if a rape victim is unable to prove the crime, she is then subject to prosecution under the statues forbidding extramarital intimacy.
Bokhari and the woman she protected are charged with "attempted adultery" under these draconian, misogynistic laws.
The United States has been down this Manichean, blood-stained road before. When Communism was the Great Evil, we would embrace murderous regimes headed by the likes of Marcos and Somoza simply because they promised to be "anti-communist."
After Sept. 11, the mediocrity in the White House found his great crusade, his reason to love tyrants: the world-wide scourge of terrorism. In recent months, America's relationship with Pakistan has gone from a tenuous, yet cordial, diplomatic relationship to close and almost comfortable ties.
The reason behind the shift, of course, was President George W. Bush's desire to use areas in Pakistan as military bases for the air campaign against Afghanistan.
The terrorist attacks changed more than just our relationship with Pakistan. America's interaction with the rest of the world has changed immeasurably in the last six months.
Some of these changes have been positive -- putting more effort into cultivation of diplomatic relationships was something Bush's administration desperately needed to do anyway.
Britain's unqualified stand alongside us has brought our two countries even closer. America should have been directing attention to Afghanistan long before Sept. 11, and although the country has had unremitting war and strife wreaked upon it (not the least of which was in the past six months), the fall of the Taliban was a necessary step.
Many changes, however, are not as productive. The relationship between North and South Korea is an exquisitely temperamental one, and recent statements calling North Korea "evil" have not helped the lengthy and careful diplomatic process.
The wartime rhetoric against terrorists has exacerbated our relationship with Arab countries.
The problem stems from Bush's apparent inability to deal with more than one thought at a time.
True, terrorist attacks aroused a spirit for action not seen for years. And true, we must be clear and uncompromising in what goals we have for international involvement.
But even a national mandate behind a few goals does not support mindless unilateralism.
The hawkish rhetoric spewing out of Bush for the past few months has caused a great deal of damage, and ignores the complexities of international relations. Slogans such as "the axis of evil" signal a binary conception of the world: As Bush has put it, either you're with us or you're against us. Either you're pro-freedom or pro-terrorist.
Obviously, the world does not fit into two neat little boxes. A country such as Pakistan is suddenly our good friend, despite the horrific way it treats women like Bokhari. Members of the "axis of evil" are written off as cesspools of depravity.
Using Bush's rhetoric, Chechen freedom fighters are now evil terrorists to be exterminated by Russian armies; Chinese followers of Falun Gong, Tibetans seeking to preserve their culture in the face of Chinese "cultural cleansing" are terrorists to be jailed and suppressed.
Painting entire nations with the red swathe of "terrorism" does nothing to advance our understanding of or ability to deal with actual terrorism.
And whitewashing our allies with the Good Patriot Seal of Approval ignores and often worsens the many problems within those countries.
Bush's bipolar worldview is not confined to foreign lands. He and his leftover Reaganite handlers use their label guns on Americans, too. Anyone who questions Bush policies, or who seeks to preserve our hard-won civil liberties from the religious zealots and extreme rightists who now control the United States government, is called a "traitor."
But America is not full of simple-minded people who failed every international relations and government class they took. Freedom was not won and preserved by simpletons. To attempt to sort the nation into two camps is not only dangerous, but an insult to the people who recognize that.
(C) 2002 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 18, 2002


End of Document