Bush says Syria, Iran encourage terrorism
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 22, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 491 words
Byline: By Bennett Roth Houston Chronicle
Body


CRAWFORD, Texas -- President Bush on Monday lashed out at Syria and Iran, renewing his accusations that the countries are providing a haven for terrorists who are seeking to sabotage peace efforts in the Middle East.
"Today, Syria and Iran continue to harbor and assist terrorists," Bush said during an appearance with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi at his Texas ranch. "This behavior is completely unacceptable, and states that support terror will be held accountable."
Bush's broadside against the two nations comes as the United States is trying to prod Israeli and Palestinian leaders to implement a multiphased peace plan that is opposed by a number of militant factions in the region. The president took aim at those opposing the plan, and singled out the governments of Syria and Iran for trying to thwart the peace process by encouraging terrorists.
"Terrorism is the greatest obstacle to the emergence of a Palestinian state, and all leaders who seek this goal have an obligation to back up their words in real actions against terror," Bush said.
The president is scheduled to meet with Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas on Friday at the White House -- the first time Bush will meet with a Palestinian leader in Washington. He also is set to host Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon on Sunday.
Bush did not spell out what action the United States would take if Syria and Iran continue to allow terrorists to operate within their borders.
The president's meeting with Berlusconi was a show of gratitude for the Italian leader's support of the U.S.-led war against Iraq, which was not popular in Italy and much of Europe.
Bush welcomed Berlusconi's recent assumption of the six-month rotating presidency of the European Union -- a move that the administration believes may make it easier for U.S. officials to work with a body that has at times been antagonistic to the United States.
In coming months, the United States may have to call on Europeans for assistance in Iraq.
While Bush said he and Berlusconi did not discuss replacing U.S. peacekeeping troops with Italian soldiers, he added, "Obviously, the more help we can get, the more we appreciate it. And we are continuing to work with other nations to ask their advice."
The president said he did not believe another U.N. resolution was necessary to pave the way for countries who did not participate in the military invasion to now join the peacekeeping force. However, a number of those countries, including Russia, are wary of ceding control over their soldiers to the United States and Britain. They have pressed for a new resolution to clarify the role of participating forces.
Berlusconi emphasized the need to reduce tensions between the United States and Europe.
"My belief is that we really need to support and develop the culture of union and cohesion, and certainly not nurture the culture of division," he said. "Selfishness, narcissism, and division shall never win."

Load-Date: July 22, 2003


End of Document