Bush will tackle Iraq, terrorism on television tonight
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 13, 2004 Tuesday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 318 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush has scheduled a rare prime-time news conference for tonight, ending days of relative seclusion amid one of the most politically treacherous periods of his presidency.
Bush plans to open with a statement on Iraq, where casualties have soared in the past few weeks, White House communications director Dan Bartlett said Monday.
He said the president will be prepared to address questions about his response to a terrorism warning the White House had in hand just weeks before the Sept. 11 attacks. He also undoubtedly will be challenged on issues raised at the 9/11 commission hearings, which continue today and tomorrow.
Compiled from Times Wires
"After a tough week, there are important questions that are on the minds of the American people," Bartlett said.
Both issues, critical to Bush's re-election strategy, have taken center state in recent days, but the president has remained largely out of view as he took an extended Easter vacation at his Crawford, Texas, ranch last week.
"The upcoming election is going to be a referendum on his presidency, his leadership style and whether the American public trusts him. . . . It's an important time for him to talk to the American public," said Lori Cox Han, who teaches political science at Austin College in Sherman, Texas.
At his ranch Monday, Bush also suggested now might be the right time to "revamp and reform our intelligence services," which have been criticized for failures before both the Sept. 11 attacks and the Iraq war.
He did not say whether any reforms would be offered tonight.
 
HOW  TO  WATCH
 
President Bush will hold a news conference at 8:30 tonight in the East Room of the White House. Major broadcast networks and cable news channels were expected to carry it live. It will be his 12th formal question-and-answer session alone with reporters and only his third prime-time appearance. The others were Oct. 11, 2001, and March 6, 2003.

Load-Date: April 13, 2004


End of Document