Bush hails China for help in war against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
February 21, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 892 words
Byline: By Sandra Sobieraj Associated Press writer
Body


BEIJING -- Thirty years after President Nixon's historic visit to Beijing, President Bush thanked China for its anti-terrorism solidarity Thursday and promised to be a "steady partner." But he failed to persuade the communist power to stop its trafficking in weapons of mass destruction.
"Terrorism is a threat to both our countries," Bush said at a news conference following 90 minutes of talks with President Jiang Zemin. "I welcome China's cooperation in our war against terror. I encourage China to continue to be a force for peace among its neighbors."
On the last leg of his three-nation Asian tour, Bush had hoped to win China's agreement on halting the sale of missile and nuclear technology to Iran, Pakistan, North Korea and other nations. Iran and North Korea, along with Iraq, make up what Bush has called an "axis of evil," which he has targeted for the next phase of his drive to wipe out terrorism.
Instead, Bush and Jiang emerged from their closed-door meetings in the Great Hall of the People with warm praise for how far U.S.-Chinese relations have come since Nixon's first visit in 1972 -- and for the strengthened partnership the two countries forged after last fall's terror attacks on the United States.
Jiang broadly promised to "step up consultation and cooperation" in the campaign against terrorism.
Both presidents glossed over the impasse on weapons sales. National security adviser Condoleezza Rice told reporters that while there's no agreement yet, "that work is under way."
"It is natural for China and the United States to disagree on some issues," Jiang said. "As long as the two sides act in a spirit of mutual respect, equality and seeking common ground . . . we will be able to gradually narrow our differences."
Said Bush, "My government hopes that China will strongly oppose the proliferation of missiles and other deadly technologies."
The United States says China has failed to keep a commitment made in November 2000 to refrain from helping any country develop missiles that could carry nuclear weapons. The CIA said China provided significant assistance to Pakistan's missile program last year. The CIA, describing China's growing military might, said Beijing is expected to have between 75 and 100 long-range nuclear missiles aimed at the United States by 2015, roughly quadruple the current number.
With Jiang at his side, Bush said he asked his Chinese counterpart to help him make contact with Kim Jong Il, the leader of North Korea, and impress upon him that the United States is serious about its offer to sit down for talks.
"We would be willing to meet with the North Korean regime, and I asked his help in conveying that message," Bush said. "If he speaks to the leader of North Korea, he can assure him I am sincere in my desire to have our folks meet."
Bush, who flew here from the divided Korean peninsula, where he visited the hostile border between North and South Korea, said China can make sure that the anti-terror campaign, as it plays out in North Korea, will be a peaceful one.
"Not every theater in the war against terror need be resolved with force," Bush said. "Some theaters can be resolved through diplomacy and dialogue, and the Chinese government can be very helpful."
Jiang deflected queries from two American reporters about his government's repression of religion -- particularly the detention of Catholic bishops -- and his opinion of Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq. Jiang refused at first to answer either question, but returned to them at the end of the news conference.
While Bush listened intently, Jiang said he has read the Bible, the Koran and the scriptures of Buddhism, even though he said he ascribes to no religion himself. Those who were imprisoned, he said, were detained "because they broke the law, not because of their religious beliefs. I have no right interfering in judicial affairs."
The Chinese leader shrugged off his earlier deflections, saying: "When it comes to meeting the press, I think President Bush is much more experienced."
As Jiang struggled with the issues, Bush winked knowingly at the U.S. delegation and fought back a grin.
Regarding Iraq -- which could become a target of the U.S. war against terror -- Jiang said peace is "the important thing."
Bush tried to gently press Jiang on human rights and civil liberties, saying, "All the world's people, including the people of China, should be free to choose how they live, how they worship and how they work."
The two leaders later put business aside to dine on braised chicken with saffron and grilled mutton lamb chops at the Great Hall of the People, the seat of the Chinese legislature. White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said Jiang "stole the show" by singing "O Sole Mio," from beginning to end, while accompanied by an accordion.
Bush and Jiang agreed to meet again in the United States next fall. And Chinese Vice President Hu Jintao, heir-apparent to the presidency here, will meet in Washington with Vice President Dick Cheney. Bush plans to meet Hu briefly on Friday at Tsinghua University, where the vice president was introducing Bush to students.
After his speech at the university -- a speech that the Chinese government has promised to broadcast nationwide on state TV -- Bush and his wife, Laura, were venturing to China's must-see tourist attraction, the Great Wall, and then flying home.

Load-Date: February 21, 2002


End of Document