BUSH'S ANTI-TERRORISM DIRECTOR HAD BEEN RUNNING MATE CONTENDER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 2001 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11; PROFILE; GOVERNOR TOM RIDGE
Length: 1041 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge will coordinate the work of federal agencies involved in responding to the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11.
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, the president's choice to serve as America's anti-terrorism chief, is a popular two-term governor whose ethnic background, Harvard education and combat service in Vietnam almost made him President George W. Bush's choice for a running mate last year.
Bush picked Dick Cheney instead, but Ridge has stayed in the president's orbit, serving the administration as a stalwart supporter and defender of its policies. When Cheney's periodic heart problems prompt rumors that he will retire, Ridge is invariably mentioned as a possible successor.
Now Ridge will act as the head of the Office of Homeland Security. The new agency will serve as a command center within the White House for all activities related to terrorism, connecting the FBI, the CIA and more than 35 other departments, White House officials said. He also will be charged with leading Americans in the war against the terrorist threat.
He will resign as governor Oct. 5, his spokesman said.
"If your task is a worker in a plant or facility, be a better worker," Ridge urged Americans at a news conference Tuesday in Washington to support the president's war on terrorism. "If you're an employer, be a better employer. If you're an entrepreneur, think creatively about how you can harness the energy of your talent. … If you're a teacher, be a better teacher."
Ridge, 56, is well-regarded among Democrats as well as Republicans. He is "someone who will command the respect of every American as they come to know him. He is a leader," said Rep. Ed Markey, D-Mass. Markey's friendship with the Pennsylvania governor goes back to Ridge's 12 years of service in the House, from 1982 to 1994.
Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind., called Ridge "a first-class fellow." Bayh got to know Ridge when they both served as governors in the mid-1990s.
"I couldn't think of a better appointment," Bay said. "He will have the confidence of both sides of the aisle. He has been a chief executive; he has a law enforcement and military background. All those things will bring him the respect of people."
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D- Mass., said, "He's been a strong administrator. I think he's the right man for the job."
Ridge is a native of Erie, Pa., the son of a Slavic father and an Irish mother who was raised in modest circumstances in a veterans housing complex. Ridge, a 1967 graduate of Harvard, spent a year in law school. He then went to Vietnam as an Army staff sergeant, seeing combat and receiving a Bronze Star for valor.
Ridge returned home in 1970, got his law degree from Dickinson Law School in 1972, and worked in Erie as an assistant district attorney. Intrigued by politics, he made his first connection with the Bush family in 1980 when George H.W. Bush ran for president. Ridge ran for an open House seat in 1982. Bucking the Democratic tide that year, he became the first enlisted man with Vietnam combat experience to be elected to the House, according to the Almanac of American Politics.
As a member of the House, and also after being elected governor in 1994, Ridge had a reputation as a moderate Republican who could win the votes of his fellow Roman Catholics in a state where ethnicity plays a political role. He supported tax cuts, deregulation and tough measures to fight crime.
His biggest split with national Republican dogma is his support of abortion rights, which may have cost him a spot on the Republican ticket.
On Friday, the White House began finding office space for Ridge and feeding him paperwork.
The governor-turned-Cabinet member planned to spend his weekend reading reams of information about his new assignment.
"The White House is doing a pretty serious paper dump on him," said Ridge's spokesman, Tim Reeves.
So were Ridge's colleagues among governors and members of Congress.
One note, from Rep. Tom Carper, D-Del., read: "T-Bone! Congratulations (I think). Keep your head down and your spirits up."
Carper said of Ridge: "He's interested in what works. A big part of this job description is to get people to work together. He's aces at that. … And that's probably what's needed."
At the White House, aides looked for office space for Ridge in the West Wing. Beyond that, there was precious little for them to work with; Ridge was expected to meet with Bush aides in coming days to talk about a budget and a staff.
The White House would not put numbers on either of those functions, other than to say that Ridge would oversee a "significant" staff, and that his operating costs would come out of the White House's budget.
"We'll work with Congress if there's need for more money," said White House spokesman Ari Fleischer.
The lack of specifics about Ridge's position accompanied the gravity of his mandate and the fears that more deadly terror could unfold on American soil.
Friends and fellow governors said Ridge's wide range of experience would help him in marshaling resources. He is a Vietnam veteran and former congressman in addition to being a governor. When he calls with a need, the nation's governors may feel bound to respond with dispatch.
"I'll put it this way. I typically don't argue with Vietnam veteran Marines," said Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee. "That's not a battle I want to engage."
Congress responded Friday with support, and lawmakers wondered aloud whether they should move to provide Ridge with the maximum amount of enforcement power they can give.
"If you want to get a job done, there's no substitute for having an agency with a budget," said Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn. His Senate Governmental Affairs Committee held a hearing on the issue Friday.
But some lawmakers conceded that it's tough to know what to do without some semblance of a plan from the White House.
========
Gov. Tom Ridge
NAME - Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge
AGE - 56
EDUCATION - J.D., Dickinson, School of Law (1972); B.A., government studies Harvard (1967).
EXPERIENCE - Pennsylvania governor, 1995-present; U.S.. House of Representatives, 1983-95; assistant Erie County district attorney, 1979-82; staff sergeant, U.S. Army, 1968-70. Awarded Bronze Star for bravery in Vietnam War.
FAMILY - Wife, Michele, son Tommy; daughter Lesley.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - Gov. Tom Ridge

Load-Date: September 23, 2001


End of Document