Bush stands firm on Iraq strategy
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 3, 2006 Sunday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 568 words
Byline: By Andrew Taylor THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON President George W. Bush on Saturday kept up his pre-election offensive on Iraq despite a new Pentagon report describing a deteriorating security situation there.
In his radio address, Bush said, "Our commanders and diplomats on the ground believe that Iraq has not descended into a civil war. They report that only a small number of Iraqis are engaged in sectarian violence, while the overwhelming majority want peace and a normal life in a unified country."
The president acknowledged "a bloody campaign of sectarian violence" and the "difficult and dangerous" work of trying to end it.
On Friday, however, the Pentagon reported that death squads are increasingly targeting mainly Iraqi civilians, heightening the risk of civil war. The report, the latest in a series required by Congress, said the Sunni-led insurgency "remains potent and viable."
"Conditions that could lead to civil war exist in Iraq, specifically in and around Baghdad, and concern about civil war within the Iraqi civilian population has increased in recent months," the report said.
The quarterly report, based on new government figures, shows that the number of attacks in Iraq over the last four months increased 15 percent, and the number of Iraqi casualties grew by 51 percent.
In the last three months, the report says, the number of deaths increased by 1,000 people a month over the previous quarter, to more than 3,000 violent deaths each month.
The report said the violence in Iraq cannot be attributed to a unified or organized insurgency. Instead, violence is the result of a complex interplay among international terrorists, local insurgents, sectarian death squads, organized militias and criminal groups. The armed militias and other sectarian groups are contesting integrated neighborhoods in a bid to expand their area of influence, the report says.
With midterm elections for control of Congress looming, Bush is using a series of speeches to build support for the war in Iraq, casting Democratic opponents of the war as weak on national defense and battling terrorism.
"Here at home, some politicians say that our best option is to pull out of Iraq, regardless of the situation on the ground," Bush said Saturday. "They could not be more wrong."
Democrats are not backing down in their criticism of the handling of the war.
"The war in Iraq is the wrong war, a reality that no amount of White House rhetoric can distort," House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said Friday. "It has strained our military, has crippled our ability to prosecute the war on terrorism, and has dangerously limited our ability to respond to real challenges to our national security around the world."
The president's next speech is set for Tuesday, when the White House is bringing representatives from countries that have suffered terrorist attacks to hear the speech.
Bush often lists recent attacks to demonstrate that the world should be united against Islamic militants who share a purpose, if not a common network. He often says various groups of terrorists -- such as Sunnis who swear allegiance to al-Qaida, Shiites who support groups such as Hezbollah, and "homegrown" terrorists with local grievances -- belong under the same umbrella, even though many terrorism experts disagree.
The president plans to expand on this description before the Military Officers Association of America, said White House spokeswoman Dana Perino.

Load-Date: September 3, 2006


End of Document