BUSH'S BUDGET PROPOSAL: Defense increase targets terrorism;
Weapon systems marked for cuts
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 8, 2005 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 397 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- With a 5 percent increase, the Pentagon's proposed budget would continue the push to transform the military and keep the focus on the war on terror.
The requested $419.3 billion also would include a 3.1 percent pay raise for troops and additional money to recruit and retain them. It would cut spending for such high-ticket items as fighter jets and ships.
The budget would not cover the estimated $5 billion-a-month cost of ongoing operations in Iraq, which has been financed by supplemental spending requests submitted outside the annual budget. An $81 billion request that includes Iraq funding is expected to go to Congress as soon as next week.
It also does not include about $286 million needed to raise death benefits for military families who have lost relatives in Afghanistan or Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said the combined budget and supplemental requests would include funds for major changes in the Army, which has borne the brunt of fighting in Iraq.
The budget proposal would represent a 41 percent increase in defense spending over the budget in 2001, when President Bush first took office, said Pentagon comptroller Tina Jonas.
Rumsfeld said efforts to transform the military into a more agile, lethal expeditionary force do not necessarily mean fewer personnel. The Army is evaluating whether to make permanent 30,000 positions that are now temporary.
"It isn't the size of the force that was wrong, it's the shape of the force and the capability of the force," he said.
Special operations forces, used extensively in Iraq and Afghanistan, would receive $4.1 billion, including funds for 1,200 additional personnel. The amount for chemical and biological defenses would rise to $1.6 billion for 2006.
Perhaps the biggest and most controversial hits would be in major procurements including planes and ships. The cuts would end the F/A-22 stealth warplane program in 2008 and give the Air Force far fewer of the jets than it wants, and would trim the number of Navy submarines and ships, including an aircraft carrier.
Another contentious topic is base closings. Although previous closings have saved about $7 billion a year, there can be considerable upfront costs for items such as environmental cleanup.
Also reduced would be funds for the program to defend the country against ballistic missiles.
--- The Associated Press contributed to this article.

Load-Date: February 8, 2005


End of Document