Bush's solicitor general to resign;
He defended tactics in the administration's war on terrorism before the Supreme Court.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 25, 2004 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 313 words
Byline: Shannon McCaffrey INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Solicitor General Theodore Olson, who lost his wife in the Sept. 11 attacks and went on to defend the Bush administration's tactics in the war on terrorism before the Supreme Court, will resign Thursday, the Justice Department announced yesterday.
Olson said in a statement that he was returning to private practice.
Olson, 63, argued some of the highest-profile cases to come before the Supreme Court recently, including the campaign-finance overhaul and the detention of Taliban fighters at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base. He has won the large majority of the 26 cases he argued before the justices as solicitor general. But he also had some notable losses, such as the affirmative-action cases from the University of Michigan.
Before Olson was appointed to his job, he represented presidential candidate George W. Bush before the Supreme Court in arguments that went on to determine the outcome of the 2000 election.
Olson survived a 51-47 confirmation vote in the Senate in May 2001. Democrats had questioned his ties to the American Spectator, a conservative magazine that had run an investigation, called the "Arkansas Project," into alleged wrongdoing by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
But Olson became best known for his personal tragedy. His wife, Barbara, a former federal prosecutor and well-known conservative commentator, was on the hijacked flight that crashed into the Pentagon on Sept. 11.
"Ted is a dedicated patriot who brought unbridled energy and enthusiasm, along with brilliant legal acumen and peerless dedication, to his office and to Justice," Attorney General John Ashcroft said.
Olson worked for Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. He was assistant attorney general for the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel in the Reagan administration.
No successor to Olson was immediately named.
Contact reporter Shannon McCaffrey at 202-383-6164 or smccaffrey@krwashington.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Theodore Olson lost his wife in the Sept. 11 attacks.

Load-Date: August 26, 2005


End of Document