BUSH SAYS ACT OF TERRORISMWON'T CHANGE U.S. POLICIES
The New York Times
October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 798 words
Byline: By R. W. APPLE Jr.
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Oct. 26
Body


Vice President Bush flew to the Lebanese capital today and said the Reagan Administration was ''not going to let a bunch of insidious terrorist cowards shape the foreign policy of the United States.''
 Viewing the crumpled remains of the headquarters building where the soldiers were killed in the terrorist blast, the Vice President said he ''had not expected this much destruction,'' although he had seen films and photographs of the scene. He seemed awed by the power of the explosion, which twisted heavy steel reinforcing bars like pretzels.
The number of United States servicemen known dead in Sunday's bombing has risen to over 219, with 20 or 30 missing.
Vice Pres Bush visits bombed Marine headquarters in Beirut; is surprised by amount of destruction; rescue workers continue to claw at rubble in search of missing marines; photo of Bush with Gen Paul X Kelley, Marine Commandant, and Col Timothy Geraghty, commander of Marines in Lebanon (M)
Rescue workers continued to claw at the rubble of the four-story building during Mr. Bush's visit. By the end of the day, according to Maj. Robert Jordan, a Marine spokesman, more than 75 American servicemen were known to have been wounded in addition to the 219 killed. Major Jordan refused to speculate on how many bodies were still buried, but he said he thought that more than 300 soldiers had been in the building when the bomb went off.
 
Plans to Meet in Geneva A French military spokesman reported that 53 troops were confirmed dead in a second blast, a few seconds after the one at the American compound, that leveled a French barracks. Five Frenchman are still missing and 15 were wounded.
Despite the two terrorist explosions, the Government continued preparations for the national reconciliation talks scheduled to begin in Geneva on Monday. President Amin Gemayel tonight invited President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to take part in the conference - the first direct communication between the two in many weeks. The Syrian leader is expected to send a senior diplomat, perhaps Abdel Halim Khaddam, the Foreign Minister.
Eight Christian and Moslem faction leaders and politicians have already agreed to take part in the talks, which are intended to set up a government of national unity.
However, associates of the Druse leader, Walid Jumblat, were quoted as saying that he would reconsider his decision to take part if daily violations of the cease-fire agreed to last month were to continue. The associates said his threat had been passed on to Mr. Gemayel.
 
Visit Delayed by Fighting
Mr. Bush's arrival was delayed when Marine positions to the east of Beirut airport came under fire from mortars, small arms and bazookas in the village of Shuweifat, a Druse stronghold. The marines returned fire with 81-millimeter mortars, the shelling stopped and the Vice President's helicopter swept in from the amphibious assault ship Iwo Jima shortly before 9 A.M.
Dressed in gray trousers, a white open-necked shirt, a flak jacket and a green helmet with the chin straps hanging free, the Vice President splashed through mud to watch the rescue operations. He was heavily guarded by marines and Secret Service agents.
''We're not going to point the finger until we're absolutely certain,'' Mr. Bush told reporters who asked whether Washington had a clear idea of who had carried out the attacks, ''but I think the thing that does come through loud and clear is the insidious nature of international terrorism and the cowardly nature of international terrorism.''
The terrorists who drove trucks into the two compounds, he added, ''damn sure haven't shaken the courage of these men, and I wish every American from California to Texas to Minnesota to Maine to Washington, D.C., could see this.''
 
'No Slackening of Resolve'
Mr. Bush said he could not speak for the American public in its reaction to the explosion. But he and President Reagan, he said, were determined that ''there will be no slackening of the resolve to do what we intended to do and what these fine fellows are helping us to do.''
''We are not going to let our friends down because of terror,'' he said.
After about an hour at the bomb site, the Vice President called on President Gemayel at his palace in the hillside suburb of Baabda. Afterward, Mr. Gemayel said that Mr. Bush's visit, following that 48 hours ago by President Francois Mitterrand, had reassured the country.
The marines were on full alert during the Bush visit, which lasted a total of about three hours, and they improved security measures around their base near the airports. Access roads were blocked with school buses and piles of sand. Similar measures were taken by the Italian contingent, and in downtown Beirut several more streets leading past buildings that might be bomb targets were closed by the police.

Graphic

 
photo of Vice President Bush at bombed marine headquarters


End of Document