Bush Differs With Karzai On Iran's Role In Afghanistan
The New York Times
August 7, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 388 words
Byline: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG
Dateline: CAMP DAVID, Md., Aug. 6  
Body


President Bush and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, close allies in fighting terrorism, found much to agree on as they completed a two-day meeting here on Monday, with one major exception: the role of Iran in Afghanistan.
  Mr. Karzai characterized Iran as ''a helper'' in a CNN interview broadcast Sunday. But when the two men greeted reporters here on Monday, Mr. Bush pointedly disagreed, saying, ''I would be very cautious about whether the Iranian influence in Afghanistan is a positive force.''
  Iran has sent workers to Afghanistan to provide aid to villages, but American officials contend that Tehran is also funneling weapons into the country. Mr. Bush has long viewed Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism, and is deeply suspicious of its nuclear ambitions, a view he reiterated Monday even as he said he was ''willing to listen'' to Mr. Karzai's position. 
  ''The president knows best about what's taking place in his country, and of course, I'm willing to listen,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But from my perspective, the burden of proof is on the Iranian government to show us that they're a positive force.''
  It was a rare moment of daylight between the American and Afghan leaders. President Bush has been trying to shore up Mr. Karzai, who faces a host of challenges, including a resurgent Taliban, a booming opium trade, government corruption and the threat of Al Qaeda. A recent national intelligence estimate concluded that the Qaeda network had reconstituted itself in the mountainous territory along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
  The unsuccessful hunt for Al Qaeda's operatives, including Osama bin Laden, has disappointed Mr. Bush, and has created tension between Mr. Karzai and his Pakistani counterpart, Gen. Pervez Musharraf. Mr. Karzai and General Musharraf are expected to meet this week at a jirga, an assembly of leaders from their nations. 
  Mr. Karzai said the session would focus on ''how we can carry on the fight against terrorism in both countries.'' 
  Mr. Bush, meanwhile, declined to answer directly on Monday when asked about his strategy for hunting down Qaeda leaders, and whether he would consult General Musharraf before deploying the military to pursue ''actionable intelligence'' against them. ''I'm confident, with real actionable intelligence, we will get the job done,'' Mr. Bush said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan speaking at a news conference yesterday at Camp David, Md. (Photograph by Doug Mills/The New York Times)               

Load-Date: August 7, 2007


End of Document