Bush says terrorism derails Middle East peace; 'Freedom-haters': President sidesteps a question on whether al-Qaida has infiltrated the West Bank
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 5, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 455 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a grim update on terrorism's global reach, President Bush said Wednesday he believes Osama bin Laden's network was involved in last week's Kenya attacks, and he complained that terrorists have been able to "stop the peace process" in the Middle East.
Pledging anew to fight terrorism "wherever it exists," Bush sidestepped the question of whether bin Laden's al-Qaida organization has infiltrated the West Bank, but said terrorism in general has left its mark on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
"I am concerned that terrorists have disrupted the ability for peace-loving people to move a process forward," the president told reporters in a brief exchange about Iraq and the war on terrorism.
Bush said he understands both Israel's need to fight terrorism and the Palestinian people's desire to improve their living conditions. He pledged to continue working on both fronts.
"But the net effect of terrorism is to not only stop the peace process, but is to cause suffering amongst all the people of the region," Bush said. "And that's why our war against terror must remain steadfast and strong wherever terror exists."
His remarks Wednesday indicated he believes the Middle East peace process will be in jeopardy until terrorism is curbed.
The remarks were made in advance of a Dec. 20 conference in Washington to plot peace moves in the Middle East. Even as they prepare for the summit of U.S., Russian and European diplomats, administration officials concede there is little chance for headway in the talks amid violence and terror attacks in the region.
Bush was asked whether he is concerned that al-Qaida, feeding off the harsh plight of many Palestinians, might be gaining a foothold on the West Bank.
"I am concerned about al-Qaida anywhere," he said. "I believe that al-Qaida was involved in the African bombings in Kenya. I believe al-Qaida hates freedom."
Evidence continues to mount that al-Qaida was behind the Kenya attacks - a bombing at a hotel frequented by Israelis and the firing of missiles at an Israeli charter flight.
Experts said Monday the missiles had serial numbers similar to those on one involved in an attempted hit on a military plane in May, and al-Qaida has claimed responsibility for the hotel attack.
U.S. officials have suggested that an affiliated Islamic extremist network from Somalia, al-Itihaad al-Islamiya, may have played a role in the Kenya attacks.
"I believe al-Qaida will strike anywhere they can in order to disrupt a civil society," Bush said. "That's why we're on the hunt."
Questioned about world opinion, Bush said the United States is unfairly cast as waging war on Islam because "the propaganda machines are cranked up in the international community that paints our country in a bad light."

Graphic

 
mug: Bush

Load-Date: December 5, 2002


End of Document