Bush Says G.O.P. Rebels Are Putting Nation at Risk
The New York Times
September 16, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT
Length: 1122 words
Byline: By JIM RUTENBERG and SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Eric Lichtblau contributed reporting.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15 
Body


President Bush made an impassioned defense on Friday of his proposed rules for the interrogation and prosecution of terrorism suspects, warning that the nation's ability to defend itself would be undermined if rebellious Republicans in the Senate did not come around to his position.
  Speaking at a late-morning news conference in the Rose Garden, Mr. Bush said he would have no choice but to end a C.I.A. program for the interrogation of high-level terrorism suspects if Congress passed an alternate set of rules supported by a group of Senate Republicans.
Those alternate rules were adopted Thursday by the Senate Armed Services Committee in defiance of Mr. Bush. Setting out what he suggested could be dire consequences if that bill became law, Mr. Bush said intelligence officers -- he referred to them repeatedly as ''professionals'' -- would no longer be willing and able to conduct interrogations out of concern that the vague standard for acceptable techniques could leave them vulnerable to legal action.
  ''Were it not for this program, our intelligence community believes that Al Qaeda and its allies would have succeeded in launching another attack against the American homeland,'' he said. ''But the practical matter is if our professionals don't have clear standards in the law, the program is not going to go forward.''
  The administration has said the Central Intelligence Agency has no ''high value'' terrorism suspects in foreign detention centers, having transferred the last of them this month to military custody at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. But officials said they considered the program crucial to efforts to foil attacks.
  ''This enemy has struck us, and they want to strike us again,'' Mr. Bush said, ''and we'll give our folks the tools necessary to protect the country. It's a debate that, that really is going to define whether or not we can protect ourselves.''
  It was also a debate Mr. Bush had hoped to have this week exclusively with Democrats as he and his party's leadership set out to draw unflattering distinctions between Republicans and Democrats on fighting terrorism for the fall elections. 
  Instead, Mr. Bush spent Friday in a second day of heavy debate, casting some of the most respected voices on military matters in his own party as hindering the fight against terrorism. As of late Friday there seemed to be no break in the impasse, even as White House officials worked behind the scenes to build new support in the Senate for the legislation the president wants.
  Leading the efforts against him in the Senate are three key Republicans on the Armed Services Committee with their own military credentials: the chairman and a former secretary of the Navy, Senator John W. Warner of Virginia; Senator John McCain of Arizona, a prisoner of war in Vietnam; and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a military judge. And publicly taking their side is Mr. Bush's former secretary of state, Colin L. Powell.
  The dispute centers on whether to pass legislation reinterpreting a provision of the Geneva Conventions known as Common Article 3 that bars ''outrages upon personal dignity''; the Supreme Court ruled that the provision applies to terrorism suspects. Mr. Bush argued that the convention's language was too vague and is proposing legislation to clarify the provisions. ''What does that mean, 'outrages upon human dignity'?'' he said at one point.
  Mr. McCain and his allies on the committee say reinterpreting the Geneva Conventions would open the door to rogue governments to interpret them as they see fit.
  In a statement late Friday, Mr. McCain stuck to his position, saying that his proposed rules included legal protections for interrogators. ''Weakening the Geneva protections is not only unnecessary, but would set an example to other countries, with less respect for basic human rights, that they could issue their own legislative reinterpretations,'' he said.
  Mr. Bush rejected the crux of Mr. McCain's argument when a reporter asked him how he would react if nations like Iran or North Korea ''roughed up'' American soldiers under the guise of their own interpretations of Common Article 3.
  ''You can give a hypothetical about North Korea or any other country,'' Mr. Bush said, casting the question as steeped in moral relativism. ''The point is that the program is not going to go forward if our professionals do not have clarity in the law.''
  He also discounted an argument made in a letter from Mr. Powell that his plan would encourage the world to ''doubt the moral basis of our fight against terrorism.''
  Asked about that analysis, Mr. Bush said, ''If there's any comparison between the compassion and decency of the American people and the terrorist tactics of extremists, it's flawed logic.'' 
  Mr. Bush was alternately combative and comedic during the hourlong session with reporters. At one point, in describing how he thought the economy and Republican tax policies would help his party in November, he said: ''I've always felt the economy is a determinate issue, if not the determinate issue in campaigns. We've had a little history of that in our family, you might remember.'' 
  It was an off-hand reference to his father's losing presidential re-election campaign in 1992, when he was damaged by economic woes and the breaking of his ''read my lips'' vow not to raise taxes.
  Mr. Bush said it was ''urban myth'' that his administration had lost focus on capturing Osama bin Laden. The president said he was frustrated by the United Nations at times, especially when it came to addressing genocide in Darfur.
  Asked about a Senate report concluding that there was no working relationship between Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda in Iraq, Mr. Bush said forcefully, ''I never said there was an operational relationship.''
  The questioner had included a reference to Mr. Bush's Aug. 21 news conference at which he had said, ''Imagine a world in which you had Saddam Hussein who had the capacity to make a weapon of mass destruction, who was paying suiciders to kill innocent life, who would -- who had relations with Zarqawi,'' referring to the Qaeda mastermind in Iraq, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. 
  Democrats for the most part on Friday were content to allow Republicans to fight among themselves on the terrorism question. 
  ''When conservative military men like John McCain, John Warner, Lindsey Graham and Colin Powell stand up to the president, it shows how wrong and isolated the White House is,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
  But Republicans boasted that their top issue, terrorism, was dominating the political news for yet another day and overtaking Democratic criticisms of the war in Iraq.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: ''Comparing the Proposals''Differences between the proposed bills on detainee treatment and bringing suspected terrorists to trial.Classified evidenceLegislation proposed by President Bush: Accused cannot examine classified evidence.Proposal endorsed by Senate Armed Services Committee: Accused can examine all evidence presented to the jury.Statements obtained by torture or coercive interrogationLegislation proposed by President Bush: Excludes statements obtained by torture, and excludes those obtained by coercion if the judge finds that the circumstances under which they were made render them ''unreliable or lacking in probative value.''Proposal endorsed by Senate Armed Services Committee: Excludes statements obtained by torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Allows evidence from coerced interrogation if the judge determines that it is reliable and probative and that its admission serves the interest of justice.HearsayLegislation proposed by President Bush: Admissible, unless the judge finds that the circumstances under which the evidence was obtained were unreliable or that it is lacking in probative value.Proposal endorsed by Senate Armed Services Committee: Generally excluded, but may be admitted only if the judge finds that the circumstances render the evidence more probative than other evidence that can be obtained through reasonable efforts.Detainee treatmentLegislation proposed by President Bush: Would amend the War Crimes Act to prohibit only certain ''serious violations'' of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Does not address ''outrages upon personal dignity'' or ''humiliating and degrading treatment.''Proposal endorsed by Senate Armed Services Committee: Prohibits and defines ''grave breaches'' of Common Article 3. Does not address ''outrages upon personal dignity'' or ''humiliating and degrading treatment.''(Source by National Institute of Military Justice)

Load-Date: September 16, 2006


End of Document