BUSH AND PUTIN PLAY DOWN MISSILE DISPUTE;
 INSTEAD, THE TWO LEADERS EMPHASIZE FRIENDSHIP AND THE WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 16, 2001 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 656 words
Byline: Ron Fournier The Associated Press
Dateline: CRAWFORD, TEXAS
Body


President George W. Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin failed on Thursday to resolve their dispute over U.S. plans for a missile-defense system.
But they promised to fight terrorism together and deepen U.S.-Russian ties. Bush told hundreds of students and townspeople in a high school gym, "Our differences will not divide us." In a question-and-answer session with students, Bush said, "We have a difference of opinion." But he added: "Our relationship is strong enough to endure this difference of opinion."
Putin reaffirmed his opposition to missile defense tests, which would violate the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972. But he also said that no matter what Bush did, "Under no circumstances could it lead to any tension in the relations."
U.S. officials said they viewed that remark as a signal that Putin would not try to stand in the way of such tests. But that falls far short of a formal deal to let the treaty allow testing, as Bush had hoped.
Given the fight against terrorism, both leaders seemed to push the missile defense issue down the road. Putin said, "We shall continue our discussions." And Bush said he would visit Russia next year. Aides said the trip might offer a fit setting to resolve the ABM debate.
On Thursday, the leaders traded punch lines and back slaps. They joked about the weather, the students' questions (too tough, they said) and their favorite American state (Texas, of course).
Before ending his four-day American trip, Putin flew to New York to visit the site of the terrorist attack on Sept. 11.
His three days of meetings with Bush - both in Crawford and at the White House - focused on nuclear arms reductions, terrorism and the war in Afghanistan.
Aides to Bush insisted that in private, the leaders barely had discussed the ABM dispute.
Despite Putin's reservations, Bush "continues to believe he has got to move forward with the testing program," said Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. "We're soon going to run up against certain constraints of the treaty."
On Tuesday, Bush and Putin agreed to slash their nuclear arsenals by two-thirds. But each day after that brought disagreements on how to do so.
At the White House, Putin said he wanted the reduction goals in writing; Bush didn't. After their talks in Texas, Putin said the question of whether warheads should be disarmed or destroyed must be decided in negotiations - something Bush wants to avoid.
Some in Congress want Bush to negotiate a formal treaty. Said Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., "We do not need fly-by-night arms control."
The attacks of Sept. 11 brought Bush and Putin together as never before. Putin said his nation would not object if the U.S. armed forces operated in former Soviet republics around Afghanistan. The Russians have even provided intelligence on terrorist activity in the region.
In a gesture to Putin, the United States publicly stated that terrorists were among the Chechnyan forces fighting Russian troops.
On Afghanistan, Bush said he would press on until Osama bin Laden's terrorists are rounded up and their camps destroyed.
Both he and Putin condemned the Taliban's treatment of Afghan women, in keeping with a White House effort to spotlight Taliban abuses.
Putin said, "Women in Afghanistan are basically not treated as people."
Said Bush: "The Taliban is the most repressive, backward group of people we have seen on the face of the Earth in a long period of time."
The leaders agreed that a broad-based, multiethnic government must replace the Taliban. Bush said the new government must include Pashtun tribe - not just the northern alliance, which has the Taliban on the run.
The Pashtun are Afghanistan's dominant ethnic group. The northern alliance consists largely of minority Uzbeks and Tajiks.
Rice said Afghanistan had dominated the talks Wednesday night and Thursday. The men discussed how to open avenues for humanitarian relief and begin talks in Kabul about the new government.

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document