BUSH AVOIDS RECALL TALK, FOCUSES ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 15, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 383 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body


President George W. Bush declared Thursday that "we're winning" the war against terrorism as he carefully kept his distance from the California gubernatorial recall campaign that has overshadowed his own re-election bid.
Bush has called the effort to recall Democratic Gov. Gray Davis "a fascinating bit of political drama," but he ignored it after arriving in San Diego from his Texas ranch. Bush kept his emphasis on fighting terrorism and on his role as commander in chief - his political strong suits - on a day he also was raising $1 million for his campaign.
He stepped off Air Force One at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar into a column of fighter jets, military helicopters and Navy radar planes, saluting the "generations of Marines and sailors and pilots (who) trained and served here" and thanking veterans for serving.
Speaking to thousands of Marines, sailors and Coast Guard personnel, Bush said: "Each of you serves in a crucial time in our nation's history, and this nation is grateful for the sacrifice and service you make. Many of you have recently returned from Iraq and it seems like you're happy to be home." The audience roared in agreement.
"Our nation is waging a broad and unrelenting campaign against the global terror network, and we're winning," he declared.
Bush cited progress in Iraq and Afghanistan but did not mention setbacks.
"Afghanistan today is a friend of the United States of America," Bush said. "Roads are being built, medical clinics are opening, there are new schools in Afghanistan where many young girls are now going to school for the first time, thanks to the United States of America."
He did not speak of a surge of violence that has claimed 64 lives in Afghanistan in recent days. Nor did he mention that Osama bin Laden is still at large.
In Iraq, he said, "the former regime is gone, and our nation and the world is more secure."
Bush did not mention that Saddam Hussein, too, is at large or that 129 U.S. troops have died since May 1, when he declared major combat over.
The president is spending two days in Southern California to raise about $2 million for his campaign.
The closest Bush came to acknowledging the recall was when he recognized Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., at the top of his speech. Issa bankrolled the petition drive that forced the recall.

Notes

NATION

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Allison Sojourner gets a boost from her mother, Lori, as they wait for President George W. Bush Thursday at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego. Allison's father, Maj. Mark Sojourner, is still overseas.

Load-Date: August 15, 2003


End of Document