BUSH, CHIRAC AGREE TO STAND STRONG AGAINST TERRORISM;
 BUT FRENCH LEADER CHIDES U.S. ON STEEL TARIFFS, FARM SUBSIDIES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 27, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 550 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: PARIS
Body


President George W. Bush and French President Jacques Chirac agreed Sunday to press the war against terrorists on many fronts.
"They'd like to strike again. These are cold-blooded killers," Bush said at a news conference with Chirac at his side.
France was the third country in Bush's weeklong tour of Europe. Today, he will visit the beaches of Normandy for a Memorial Day ceremony honoring soldiers killed in the D-Day invasion during World War II.
"This Memorial Day is the first Memorial Day in a long time in which younger Americans know firsthand the price that was paid for their freedom," Bush said in a preview of today's speech.
Several thousand people marched through central Paris on Sunday to protest Bush's two-day visit to France. Some chanted, "Bush, you are the terrorist," and burned American flags.
"The fact that protesters show up, that's good. I mean, I'm in a democracy," Bush said when asked about the street protests here and during his visits last week to Germany and Russia.
At the news conference, Bush appeared tired and at one point lost track of a three-part question. "I'm jet-lagged," he said. "That's what happens when you're over 55," he added. Bush turns 56 in July.
Bush and Chirac said they discussed Bush's desire to expand the war on terrorism beyond Afghanistan. Most French citizens, shocked by the attacks of Sept. 11, expressed strong sympathy for the United States immediately afterward but have since begun to object to civilian casualties in the war on terrorism.
Bush praised France as a "decisive ally" in the anti-terror effort, taking the lead in hunting down suspected terrorists and sharing intelligence. "For that I'm very grateful, Mr. President," Bush told Chirac.
For his part, Chirac urged world leaders to "pay attention to this issue and be determined to eradicate terrorism."
The two presidents also discussed Bush's visit to Russia, which ended earlier Sunday; and warming ties between Russia and NATO that will be codified in a document to be signed this week in Italy.
While the two presidents exchanged praise, Chirac also chided Bush on two trade issues: U.S. tariffs on European steel and a newly enacted law that boosts subsidies to U.S. farmers - running afoul of World Trade Organization fair-trade rules. Europe also subsidizes its farmers.
"Real answers have to be given to these problems, after intense consultation and dialogue," Chirac said.
Asked about Russia's nuclear assistance to Iran, Bush repeated concerns he raised in his meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
He said Putin discussed having inspectors examine a nuclear plant in Iran that Russia is helping to build - to verify it would not be used to make weapons. "And we're thinking about what he told us," Bush said.
Bush also was asked about U.S. policy toward Iraq. He said it had not changed.
Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein remains "a serious threat," Bush said. "The stated position of my government is that we have a regime change. I have no war plans on my desk."
Earlier Sunday, Bush wrapped up a three-day visit to Russia by visiting both a Russian Orthodox church and a Jewish synagogue in St. Petersburg.
"One of my strong beliefs is that people should be free to worship, and I'm pleased that is taking place in Russia," Bush said outside Grand Choral Synagogue.

Load-Date: May 28, 2002


End of Document