BUSH, FOX DISCUSS BORDER, BUT TERRORISM IS TOP CONCERN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 5, 2001 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 415 words
Byline: JAMES GERSTENZANG AND JAMES F. SMITH, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush and Mexican President Vicente Fox yesterday stressed the need for continued cooperation on border security, but some immigration experts say they're pessimistic that the two can make any headway while the U.S. administration's attention is focused on terrorism.
 Fox made the brief, hastily scheduled visit to the White House to demonstrate support for the Bush administration's anti-terrorism campaign.
 Coming three weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks, however, the visit underscored how much the climate has changed since Fox was in Washington four weeks ago for a state visit that put the two nations' differences over immigration into sharp focus.
Guest-worker programs, legalization of undocumented immigrants, amnesty for immigrants and open borders have been pushed down significantly on the Bush administration's agenda, replaced by measures that include restricting terrorists' access to the United States.
 If any progress can be made on immigration issues now, said Cecilia Munoz, vice president for policy at the Latino advocacy group National Council of La Raza, it probably would deal with tightening restrictions on the visas that allow tourists and students to enter the United States. Questions about providing Mexican workers access to jobs in the United States are unlikely to be addressed, she said.
 Before Sept. 11, immigration had appeared to be moving to the top of the political and diplomatic agenda, driven by the confluence of pressure from Fox, Bush's own interest in the subject stemming from his six years as governor of a border state and growing concerns in Congress.
 But the White House is now focused almost exclusively on the many facets of the anti-terrorism campaign, and Congress has pared its agenda only to the most pressing issues, many of them tied to the economy.
 In their brief comments yesterday, Bush and Fox made an effort to keep immigration at the forefront -- even in the context of a diplomatic visit built around fighting terrorism. Suggesting that he won't be distracted, Bush said, "We need to cooperate on security matters along our border, which we are."
 Fox said his administration is working daily on border, customs and migration issues, "each of the subjects that have to do with security. We will be side by side in your efforts to defeat terrorism in the world."
 Mexican officials have emphasized that moving forward on immigration issues would contribute to improved border security by controlling the flow of migrants.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: October 6, 2001


End of Document