Bush's dilemma: Terrorism or oil?
USA TODAY
April 17, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 375 words
Body

Where is straight-talking Harry Truman when we need him?
The Bush administration seems more interested in supporting oil-rich Arab rulers than in eradicating terrorism ("No truce; Powell moves on," News, Monday).
Why is this administration treating Israel with such disdain? Israel is our only true friend in the Middle East and it does not engage in terrorism.
The Bush administration needs to decide if the United States is fighting a war on international terrorism or if the country is simply providing window-dressing to the public while protecting oil-rich Arabs.
I consider Yasser Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization terrorists hiding behind the veil of their religion by playing the role of victims.
Saudi Arabia was home to 15 of the 19 terrorists who attacked on Sept. 11, and it has offered reward money to the families of Palestinian suicide bombers just as Iraq has done. Still, there have been no consequences for the Saudis.
The Bush administration should not recognize or negotiate with terrorists or countries that support them.
What is it going to take for our leadership to realize that this game of "musical chairs foreign policy" in the Middle East is a complete failure?
President Truman, true to his style, probably would have called every Arab leader tied to terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks and told each one of them that all bets are off. That is exactly what America needs now.
Mark Holloway
Phoenix, Ariz.
Stop all aid to Israel
In 1974 I witnessed the poverty and hopelessness of the Palestinian refugees firsthand when visiting their camps in the Middle East. Life there surely has only gotten worse as the years have passed ("Difficult times, conditions inside Arafat's compound," Cover Story, News, Monday).
The orgy of violence on all sides will continue until we persuade our congressional leaders to permanently stop all U.S. military aid to Israel.
The blood is on our hands: We pay the taxes that buy the bombs and bullets that kill the people on both sides of the conflict. Israeli revenge begets Palestinian revenge, and so it goes. Israel continues to kill Palestinians by the hundreds and steal Palestinian lands. Israel should be partitioned and the land returned to the Palestinians.
Mark Lawson
San Jose, Calif.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Hussein Hussein, Palestinian Authority, via AP; 'Useful and constructive': That's how U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, right, described his long-awaited, once-canceled meeting Sunday with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, center.

Load-Date: April 17, 2002


End of Document