BUSH COMMITS TROOPS TO FIGHT TERRORISM IN PHILIPPINES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 20, 2003 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 434 words
Byline: AMY GOLDSTEIN AND VERNON LOEB, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush and Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo yesterday pledged expanded collaboration in their campaigns against terrorism, as the White House promised more than $95 million in military aid and a new deployment of U.S. forces to help defeat Muslim rebel groups in the Philippines.
 Under the agreement between the two governments, the United States will provide substantial training assistance to Philippine units engaged in combat operations against the Abu Sayyaf militant group, but does not plan to join those troops in the fighting.
 The commitment of U.S. trainers will represent what one senior defense official called "an evolution" of a training mission that began early last year, and at one point involved 1,200 members of the U.S. military on the southern Philippines island of Baslin.
An expanded, more aggressive operation that would have involved a combat role for U.S. forces was called off in February, a week after it had been disclosed by the Pentagon. Such a role would have violated the Philippines' constitution, which prohibits foreign military units from taking part in combat there. Yesterday, Bush chose his words carefully in describing the new deployment, saying it would "support Philippine-led anti-terror operations."
 Bush also announced that the administration has decided to designate Philippines as a major non-NATO ally, a status that will enable the country to conduct joint research and development with the Pentagon and to bid on certain U.S. military contracts. The status is conferred by the Pentagon and State Department on the closest security partners of the United States outside NATO, including Australia, Egypt and Israel.
 Bush also said he would visit the Philippines as part of a trip to Asia later in the year.
 The agreements were announced as the White House accorded Arroyo the pomp of a state visit, the third of Bush's presidency and the first involving an Asian head of state. Only the leaders of Mexico and Poland have been allowed such visits since he took office more than two years ago.
 Arroyo's visit is the most recent in a pattern in which the administration has been providing high-visibility thanks to countries supportive of the president's foreign policy.
 Arroyo was a staunch supporter of the war in Iraq, and is sending military police and medical staff to help in the reconstruction work that has started there. She also has been an advocate of the war on terror that has dominated Bush's agenda for the past 21 months, leveraging U.S. assistance in efforts by the Philippines' military to crack down on Islamic militants.

Load-Date: May 20, 2003


End of Document