Bush will seek 4.8% boost in Pentagon budget;
The request will be $419.3 billion. That does not include money for wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
FEBRUARY 5, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 497 words
Byline: Liz Sidoti ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush will ask Congress for $419.3 billion for the Pentagon for next year - 4.8 percent more than this year's spending - as the administration seeks to beef up and reshape the Army and Marine Corps for fighting terrorism.
The request will not include money for wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Congress has already appropriated $25 billion for those this year, and the White House is planning to request $80 billion more soon.
The President will roll out his military spending proposal Monday as part of a roughly $2.5 trillion overall federal budget. Documents obtained yesterday by the Associated Press show that he will request $19.2 billion more for the Defense Department than its $400.1 billion budget this year.
The proposal will include restructuring and expanding the Army and adding more combat and support units for the Marines. It reflects Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's efforts to transform the Cold War-style military into one more rapidly deployable to fight terrorist groups.
Under Bush's plan, defense spending would grow gradually, reaching $502.3 billion by 2011.
The proposal, according to one of the documents, supports the fight against terrorism by "strengthening U.S. defense capabilities and keeping U.S. forces combat ready."
The plan calls for special operations forces, which the documents described as "critical to the fight against terrorism," to add 1,200 troops; the forces also would get $50 million to keep them from leaving the services.
Bush also wants Congress to let him spend $750 million as he chooses to help Iraq, Afghanistan and U.S. allies opposing terrorism bolster their military and security forces.
Overall, the proposal calls for the Navy, Marines and Air Force to all receive extra funds next year, but the Army's budget would take a $300 million reduction, to $100 billion. The $80 billion Bush plans to request for Iraq and Afghanistan is expected to be tilted heavily toward the Army.
Bush plans to propose $1.6 billion to fight chemical and biological threats next year, and $9.9 billion over five years. He would allocate $9.5 billion for homeland security activities next year and $147.8 billion for training, maintenance and other "readiness" programs.
Despite the overall military increase, the Pentagon's account for buying new weapons would actually incur a $100 million cut next year, to $78 billion. The proposal underscores how huge federal deficits are affecting even the Pentagon, long one of Bush's top priorities.
More than half the total defense increase - $10.8 billion - would be for training, maintenance and other costs associated with keeping the military ready for action. Most of the rest would go for military salaries and construction of bases and housing.
The proposal calls for increasing military base salaries by 3.1 percent and civilian salaries by 2.3 percent. It also calls for giving troops more money for housing and giving reservists better health-care coverage and additional education benefits.

Load-Date: September 7, 2005


End of Document