Bush, Democrats trade jabs over terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 29, 2006 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 434 words
Byline: By Jennifer Loven THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BIRMINGHAM, ALA. 
Body


President George W. Bush suggested Thursday that Democrats don't have the stomach to fight the war on terrorism, battling back in the election-season clamor over administration intelligence showing terrorism spreading.
"Five years after 9/11, the worst attack on the American homeland in our history, Democrats offer nothing but criticism and obstruction and endless second-guessing," Bush said at a Republican fundraiser.
"The party of FDR and the party of Harry Truman has become the party of cut and run," Bush said. The event put $2.5 million in the campaign accounts of Alabama Gov. Bob Riley and the state GOP.
Democrats immediately disputed the charge that they would hold back in the anti-terrorism battle.
"On his watch, five years after 9/11, he not only has failed to capture Osama bin Laden, but as the (National Intelligence Estimate) indicates, his failed policies have made America less safe and spawned terrorism, not decreased it," said Karen Finney, spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee. "Democrats will be tough and smart, and will actually fight the terrorists, not leave them to plan future attacks."
The war of words continued a nearly weeklong tussle by both parties over the implications of a newly revealed estimate, an analysis of terrorism trends put together by the nation's top intelligence analysts.
The document concluded that Iraq has become a "cause celebre" for jihadists worldwide, whom it said have grown in number and geographic reach. The report said the factors, such as the Iraq war, that are fueling the jihadist movement's growth outweigh its vulnerabilities and that, if the current trend continues, risks to the U.S. interests at home and abroad will grow.
Portions of the report were leaked over the weekend, and Bush ordered the key judgments declassified Tuesday.
Democrats continued to point to the report to argue that the 2003 Iraq invasion, by fanning anti-U.S. sentiments and helping terrorists recruit, is one reason to change leadership in Congress.
On Thursday, Bush accused the opposition party of cherry-picking pieces of the report "for partisan political gain" and "to mislead the American people and justify their policy of withdrawal from Iraq."
"The greatest danger is not that America's presence in the war in Iraq is drawing new recruits to the terrorist cause," Bush said. "The greatest danger is that an American withdrawal from Iraq would embolden the terrorists and help them find new recruits to carry out even more destructive attacks."
---
STLtoday.com/current What do you think of Rumsfeld's comments? Talk about it in Current Affairs

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - At a GOP fundraiser, President George W. Bush accused Democrats of obstructionism.  

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document