Bush likens terrorism fight to struggles of post-WWII
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 3, 2004 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS
Length: 563 words
Byline: Amy Goldstein Washington Post
Dateline: COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo.
Body


President George W. Bush said Wednesday that the effort to defeat terrorists in the Middle East is the epicenter of a global "clash of political visions" that echoes World War II and other 20th-century struggles against totalitarianism in Europe.
In a commencement address at the U.S. Air Force Academy, Bush said, "We are denying the terrorists the ideological victories they seek by working for freedom and reform in the broader Middle East."
The speech was at once a plea for patience with the escalating violence and faltering reconstruction efforts in Iraq -- and a sober warning about the ongoing fight against terrorism. Bush did not lay out concrete new policies but essentially provided a framework for a U.S. foreign policy after the conflict subsides.
"Overcoming terrorism and bringing greater freedom to the nations of the Middle East is the work of decades," Bush said. During the past three years, he said, "we've seen terrorist violence in an arc from Morocco to Spain to Turkey to Russia to Uzbekistan to Pakistan to India to Thailand to Indonesia. Yet the center of the conflict, the platform for their global expansion, the region they seek to remake in their image is the broader Middle East."
At a time when support for Bush's handling of Iraq has eroded to an all-time low among U.S. voters and the administration is asking the United Nations to adopt a new resolution on Iraq, the president used Wednesday's speech to try to counteract criticism that his policies have fomented greater violence.
He contended that peace and democracy in Iraq are emerging at a satisfactory pace, by drawing parallels with the course of events in Europe following World War II. During the first four years of the Cold War in the 1940s, Bush said, communists threatened civil wars in Turkey and Greece, Berlin was blockaded, and the Soviet Union exploded a nuclear weapon. Yet ultimately, he said, freedom has prevailed. By comparison, he said, "We are now about three years into the war against terrorism. . . . This is no time for impatience and self-defeating pessimism."
The 47-minute address was the second in a series of what the White House is billing as major speeches on Iraq to build political support abroad and at home as the administration prepares to transfer limited sovereignty on June 30 to the country it has occupied for 15 months. Nine days earlier, Bush delivered a prime-time speech at the U.S. Army War College in Pennsylvania, in which he repackaged his objectives for Iraq into a five-point plan and called for the destruction of the Baghdad prison that has been the scene of torture of Iraqis by U.S. military guards.
Wednesday's address also previewed themes he will carry on a trip to Europe that begins today.
Bush told the 981 graduating cadets that future conflicts will require "the swift and able transformed military you will help to build and lead."
But he went further, trying to define what he views as the future of U.S. foreign policy in broad, philosophical terms. Bush said that, in the current generation of terrorists, "we hear the echoes of other enemies at other times -- that same swagger and demented logic of the fanatic." Yet he said today's enemies are dissimilar in other ways, because they have not taken over a major country or mounted standing armies, operating, instead, to "demoralize free nations with dramatic acts of murder."

Notes

PAGE 2

Graphic

 
photo

Load-Date: June 3, 2004


End of Document