Bush needs to take action in Israel
University Wire
August 2, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Michigan Journal via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 422 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Michigan Journal; SOURCE: U. Michigan-Dearborn
Dateline: DEARBORN, Mich. 
Body


According to the USA PATRIOT Act, terrorism is defined as acts that "appear to be intended to influence the policy of government by intimidation or coercion."
In an attempt to influence the Lebanese government, Israel has launched a campaign of terror against the citizens of Lebanon, decimating city and suburb, blocking every exit and slaughtering civilians.
The reign of terror began last week, following a raid by HizbAllah in which two Israeli soldiers were captured. Israel responded by decimating huge areas of Lebanon, including Beirut, destroying the international airport and later making the road to Damascus-essentially the last way out of Lebanon-nearly impassible.
While it can certainly be argued that HizbAllah's actions warranted an Israeli response, it could reasonably be assumed that the response should be proportional and directed at those who initiated the exchange. However, contrary to international law, good sense and common humanity, Israel responded by meting out collective punishment upon Lebanese civilians, as has long been their practice with Palestinian civilians in Gaza and the West Bank.
Although the government of Lebanon was not involved with the capture of the Israeli soldiers, Israel has stated repeatedly that they intend to hold the government responsible and to continue on their current course of terrorizing civilians in order to pressure the Lebanese government to destroy HizbAllah (see above for the United States' definition of terrorism).
Throughout this conflict, our own government has been shamefully complacent, with President George W. Bush saying ad nauseum that "Israel has a right to defend itself." Given Israel's violently overzealous "defense," what Bush is essentially saying is that the lives of two Israeli soldiers are more valuable than those of hundreds of Lebanese civilians.
We at the Michigan Journal feel that this is not an issue of concern not just for Lebanese-Americans, but for all Americans who believe in the humanitarian principles this country is supposed to represent. We commend the citizens, including many UM-D students, who are speaking their conscience, and we urge our government to do the same.
If our administration truly wishes us to believe that they want America to represent, as they so often tell us, a "culture of life," they must begin to show that they hold sacred all life, not just the lives of Israelis or Americans. Condemning state-sponsored, U.S.-funded Israeli terrorism is a good place to start.
(C) 2006 The Michigan Journal via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 2, 2006


End of Document