Bush: 'Good progress' made against terrorism;
AMERICA PREPARES
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 2, 2001 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 733 words
Byline: SCOTT SHEPARD
Body


Washington --- President Bush declared Monday that the United States is "slowly but surely" closing in on terrorists, and American allies warned Afghanistan's Taliban government that military strikes now appear inevitable.
The president's declaration came as he reported progress in the three weeks since Sept. 11, when terrorists hijacked commercial planes, crashed them in New York, Washington and rural Pennsylvania and killed more than 6,000 people.
During a visit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency headquarters in the nation's capital, Bush disclosed that some $6 million in 50 bank accounts "linked to terrorist activity" have been frozen since he announced such intentions a week ago.
Britain announced that it has frozen almost $90 million of assets belonging to the Taliban.
Cox Washington Bureau
"We're going to bring these people to justice," the president said. Bush is seeking to increase the pressure not only on Osama bin Laden, the prime suspect in the attacks, but also on the Taliban government of Afghanistan, which has sheltered the wealthy Islamic extremist since it came to power in 1996.
The United States has made "good progress" so far in its war on terrorism, Bush said. The terrorists had "aroused a mighty land," he said.
Having isolated the Taliban diplomatically since Sept. 11, Bush now has approved assistance to groups within Afghanistan that oppose the hard-line Taliban regime.
"The purpose of the mission is to eliminate those who harbor terrorists," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Monday. "We will work with a variety of people, all of whom have an interest in establishing an Afghanistan that is peaceful and does not practice terrorism."
The administration's emphasis on the Taliban instead of an exclusive focus on bin Laden appeared significant, especially in countries located near Afghanistan.
Pakistan's leader, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, for example, in an interview Monday with the British Broadcasting Corp., said U.S. military action now seems inevitable. "We have conveyed this to the Taliban," he said. Asked if the Taliban's days are numbered, Musharraf replied, "It appears so."
And British Prime Minister Tony Blair plans to tell the Taliban time has run out for handing over Osama bin Laden and British forces will join the United States in military strikes, his aides said Monday. Blair will issue the stark warning to the Taliban today in a speech to a Labor Party conference, according to an advance preview given Britain's major media outlets by Labor officials.
Meanwhile, the aircraft carrier USS Kitty Hawk left a U.S. base in Japan on Monday as part of the U.S. anti-terrorism campaign dubbed "Operation Enduring Freedom." The carrier is believed to be en route to the Indian Ocean to serve as a command post rather than as part of an assault. The carrier's combat aircraft remained in Japan. Since Sept. 11, the United States has been deploying military forces to the region surrounding Afghanistan. The Pentagon has declined to comment on the deployments. But Monday, the president provided the most comprehensive picture yet of the military front and suggested that retaliation could be at hand.
"We've deployed 29,000 military personnel in two carrier battle groups, as well as an amphibious-ready group and several hundred military aircraft," he said. "We've called about 17,000 members of the Reserve to active duty, as well as several thousand National Guard operating under state authority."
Bush is eyeing additional humanitarian aid, expected to top $100 million, to address the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and to help win support among anti-Taliban factions within the country.
An administration aide said the bulk of the aid package would be channeled through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It appealed last week for $268 million in emergency assistance to address that crisis in Afghanistan.
Bush on Monday emphasized the "long-term" nature of the campaign, as he has done repeatedly since declaring war on terrorism.
"The evildoers like to hit, and then they try to hide," the president said. "And slowly but surely, we're going to make sure they have no place to hide. Slowly but surely, we're going to move them out of their holes and what they think is safe havens and get them on the move. We're a patient nation."
--- Jena Heath and Bob Deans of the Washington Bureau contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo:
President Bush talks with employees of the Federal Emergency Management Agency during his visit Monday to FEMA's headquarters. Bush cited progress on several fronts in the war against terrorism as he toured FEMA in Washington. On Wednesday, he will make his second trip to New York since Sept. 11. / PAUL HOSEFROS / New York Times

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document