Bush talks education in visit to La Crosse;
He came to push "his number one domestic priority," but education took a back seat to the war on terrorism, which dominated his speech.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 9, 2002, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 771 words
Byline: Bob von Sternberg; Staff Writer
Dateline: La Crosse, Wis.
Body


The Leave No Child Behind Tour rolled into town Wednesday, with President Bush pushing his federal education plan before 2,000 enraptured local folks.
     But, as so often has been the case in the last eight months, that domestic issue was overshadowed by Sept. 11 and its aftermath.
     Consider the fact that in a 27-minute speech at La Crosse's Logan High School, Bush spent 11 minutes talking about education and 16 minutes talking about the war on terrorism and the need for Americans to embrace their fellow citizens.
     Bush, on terrorists: "They must have thought Americans were so self-absorbed, so materialistic, so selfish that we would cower in the face of challenge," doing nothing more about Sept. 11 than "file a few lawsuits."
   On education: "I believe every child can learn. We have raised the bar of expectations. If we have high expectations, you can." He mentioned "every child can learn," or its variant, "leave no child behind" seven times in his speech.
     The message was buttressed by five giant banners that flanked the stage in the school gymnasium, heralding the "No Child Left Behind Tour Across America" that Education Secretary Rodney Paige is staging to promote the education bill Bush signed in January.
     "The president is dealing with a lot of different issues, including terrorism and the economy, but his number one domestic priority is education," Paige said.
     Bush's speech was reminiscent of one he delivered on March 4 at Eden Prairie High School, which was a similar mix of education and terrorism topics. But his performance Wednesday was looser, with more of his occasional aw-shucks touches.
     Addressing 1,000 high school students, he referred to the mandatory testing that is part of the education bill: "I know you don't like to take tests. Too bad! "
     Regarding the provision that will give teachers more leeway to discipline students, he told them: "If you think you can disrupt the classroom, you're going to get booted out, and the teacher's not going to get sued."
Democrat complaints
     Even as Bush was speaking about a bill that enjoyed widespread bipartisan support, congressional Democrats were complaining that his budget falls well short of providing enough money to implement the mandated changes.
     "I am happy to see the president talking about education and reading to schoolchildren, but the fact is that his rhetoric is not matched by resources," said Rep. David Obey, D-Wis., ranking Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee. He said Bush's budget falls $7 billion short of what's needed.
     "That budget proposal does not put education first," Obey said.
     While praising the lack of partisanship surrounding the education bill, Bush detoured at one point to separate himself from Beltway denizens. "You've got a lot of people who like theorizing in Washington, D.C.," he said. "Philosopher types. I'm more of a roll-up-your-sleeves-and-get-the-job-done kind of guy."
     On a more serious note, Bush told the school's graduating seniors that they "are the first high school class to graduate with America under attack. You're graduating at a time of war."
    From a political standpoint, at least, it made sense for Bush to rhetorically lean so hard on terrorism, if conversations with 15 local residents Wednesday were any indication.
'Bush again in 2004'
    A reporter interviewed Republicans and Democrats who live in a county where Bush lost in 2000. The residents unanimously praised his handling of the war on terrorism. But quibbles are emerging about some of his domestic policies.
     "We've had other presidents who have risen to the occasion, and he's seemed to have catalyzed his situation in this crisis," said Bernard McGarty, a retired priest who said he normally votes Democratic. "Domestically, it's kind of mixed."
     Amy Resser, a human relations director for a local company who voted for Democrat Al Gore, was equally unstinting in her praise for the president's international performance, but said she is cooling to his domestic performance. "The education budget is the first thing that gets cut, and that's pretty shabby," she said. "He rises to the occasion on terrorism, which is a little surprising."
     More common was the opinion of Leah Wyland, a college student who sat outside the high school, hoping to catch a glimpse of Bush while holding a sign: "Bush Again in 2004."
      "What he's doing is right," Wyland said. "Bill Clinton let things go on too long. [Bush] is far exceeding my expectations, across the board, and he's doing a superior job."
    _ Bob von Sternberg is at vonste@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 9, 2002


End of Document