Bush calls for religious freedom
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
November 15, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 635 words
Byline: Roger Runningen and Bill Varner Bloomberg News
Body


 President George W. Bush told other world leaders and diplomats meeting at the United Nations that greater religious freedom and tolerance contain the seeds of peace and stability.   The U.S. is making religious freedom "a central element of our foreign policy," Bush said in a speech to a U.N. interfaith conference in New York. He said the U.S. had defended the rights of Muslims in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan.
"We believe God calls us to love our neighbors and to treat one another with compassion and respect," Bush said. "We believe God calls us to live in peace" and to "oppose all those who use his name to justify violence and murder."
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan were among the other speakers on the second and final day of the gathering, which was initiated by Saudi Arabian King Abdullah.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon praised the king for backing the conference, which the U.N. chief said sent a "message to the world" of the rejection of the "use of religion to justify the killing of innocent people" or terrorism.
"It may take time to see results, but I am convinced this meeting was an important step forward," Ban told reporters at the conclusion of the conference.
Israeli President Shimon Peres praised the Saudi monarch's speech at the U.N. yesterday in a rare exchange of such views between the countries, which have no formal relations due to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians. "I wish that your voice would become the prevailing voice of the region, of all people," Peres said. "It is right, it is needed, it is promising." Abdullah, in his remarks, said it was "high time" for leaders to learn from harsh lessons of the past, adding that "terrorism and criminality are the enemies of every religion and every civilization."
Iranian Ambassador Mohammad Khazaee departed from the harmony to attack Israel, saying the Jewish state "tried to abuse this meeting for its narrow political purpose." He referred to Peres as the head of a nation whose "short history is marked with crimes such as aggression, occupation, assassination, state terrorism and torture against the Palestinian people." The Saudi role in the conference itself provoked criticism from New York-based Human Rights Watch. It cited Saudi Arabia as an example of intolerance, because the kingdom forbids the practice of any religion other than Islam. And among Arab nations, only Egypt and Jordan recognize Israel. Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal suggested the conference and further such dialogue could lead to changes within his nation. "To say from the beginning you have to transform yourself into something you aren't now, or nothing else can be achieved, is carrying the argument too far," al-Faisal said. "If we allow the process to continue, this will allow us to change ourselves as much as needed to see each of us from the point of view of the other and work together in harmony and peace and not for confrontation." Bush made what is likely his last appearance at the U.N. as president. After his speech he met privately with Ban and the Saudi king. Zardari invoked his late wife, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, four times in a vigorous defense of Islam as a religion of peace and tolerance. She was assassinated in December. Bhutto "sacrificed her life for the cause of tolerance, dialogue and the avoidance of a clash of civilizations," Zardari said. "Let us unite to create the world of reconciliation for which she died." Erdogan addressed the threat of terrorism spawned by religious intolerance. "Either we are all secure or none of us is secure," Erdogan said while urging an end to "perceptions of good terrorists and bad terrorists." With reporting by Holly Rosenkrantz in Washington.

Load-Date: November 15, 2008


End of Document