Bush gets backing of Senate
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 18, 1991, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A
Length: 543 words
Byline: DAVID DAHL
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The U.S. Senate, after narrowly approving war just four days earlier, on Thursday resoundingly endorsed President Bush's leadership and the armed forces in the Persian Gulf.
 
    "Together we stand in our support for the men and women on the front line one president, one Senate, one nation, one destiny," said Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W. Va.
 
    The Senate resolution, approved 98-0, commends Bush "as commander-in-chief in the Persian Gulf hostilities" and says Congress supports the U.S. military for carrying out its mission with "professional excellence, dedicated patriotism and exemplary bravery."
   The resolution was approved after nearly a day of partisan squabbling over how far it should go in praising the president and endorsing his decision to take the country to war.
 
    The resolution, which the House is expected to consider today, was a compromise in which Democrats agreed to praise the president and Republicans dropped language that would have put Congress on record as supporting his decision to use military force against Iraq.
 
 
    Also Thursday, President Bush briefed congressional leaders about the assault. Later, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney briefed other lawmakers.
 
    Thursday's vote gave senators who opposed the use of force only four days ago a chance to reverse field and rally around what is, for now at least, a popular cause. The Senate on Saturday had voted 52-47 to authorize President Bush to use force.
 
    Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn, D-Ga., was one who wanted Bush to delay an attack in favor of relying on economic sanctions. But on Thursday, Nunn was fully supportive and predicting a quick victory.
 
    "It's not over, but it is going extremely well," Nunn said on CBS's This Morning.
 
    Florida's two senators, Democrat Bob Graham and Republican Connie Mack, both supported the resolution approved Thursday.  They both had voted Saturday to authorize Bush's use of military force.
 
    With the initial successes of U.S. forces, Graham and Mack are looking to the future of the Persian Gulf.
 
    Graham envisions the possibility of a NATO-like security arrangement to keep the peace in the region. Graham said he would like to see the participating countries include Egypt, Syria, Turkey and possibly Israel.
 
    Mack, meanwhile, said if Kuwait is liberated, he wants to see the new Kuwaiti government be one that is "constitutionally committed to freedom and democracy." The ousted Kuwaiti government was a monarchy.
 
    Mack, Graham and other lawmakers all cautioned against being too optimistic early in the war.
 
    Nunn cited "remaining dangers" chiefly, the remaining Iraqi artillery, ground forces and the possibility that missiles and aircraft are still hidden by the Iraqis.
 
    "The way to liberate Kuwait is to destroy the Iraqi offensive power," Nunn told a television interviewer. "We've done extremely well but there still is a very formidable Iraqi ground force out there."
 
    Nunn also warned about Iraq-sponsored terrorism in the United States. "This is the greatest threat of terrorism we've probably had .  . . " Nunn said. "We know that there are a lot of people out there that are sponsored by Iraq and others."
 Information from Washington Post was used in this report.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated Press; Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell listens as President Bush briefs congressional leaders on Thursday

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document