Bush has 7-point poll lead on Kerry
USA TODAY
September 7, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 395 words
Byline: Susan Page
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- President Bush widened his lead over John Kerry after a combative Republican National Convention reinforced questions about the Democratic candidate's leadership, especially on terrorism.
As the campaign enters its last eight weeks, a USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll taken Friday through Sunday shows Bush at 52%, Kerry at 45% and independent candidate Ralph Nader at 1% among likely voters. Before the convention, Bush led Kerry by 2 percentage points.
Among registered voters, Bush was at 48%, Kerry at 46% and Nader at 4% in the first nationwide post-convention poll.
Bush's lead remains within the survey's error margin at Labor Day, the traditional start of the campaign's homestretch.
By historical standards, the race is too close to call. But the New York convention altered the political landscape and attitudes toward the candidates in ways helpful to Republicans. Views of whether Bush has the personality and leadership qualities to be president improved by 6 points; those of Kerry declined by 14 points.
And the importance of terrorism -- the issue on which Bush has his biggest advantage -- surged. Voters now say terrorism is as important as the economy in determining their vote. Bush is preferred by 27 points over Kerry in handling terrorism, up from a 10-point edge last month.
Bush strategist Matthew Dowd says Bush is further ahead than the campaign expected. With the conventions over, he says Kerry "has lost any ability to have any one-way conversation" with voters.
Mark Mellman, Kerry's pollster, says there is "no doubt" that "ugly and inaccurate speeches" at the Republican convention had an effect. "Equally, there's no doubt they'll fade pretty quickly," he says.
The lessons of presidential races since World War II indicate that either candidate could prevail in November. Since World War II, three contests have been within the margin of error among registered voters at Labor Day. In those races, the leading candidate won in 1980; the trailing candidate won in 1960 and 2000.
Bush received a modest bounce from his party's convention, but Kerry's standing sagged in the USA TODAY poll after the Democratic convention in July.
The poll finds the president driving both sides of the ballot: Eight of 10 of his supporters say they will vote for Bush rather than against Kerry. But half of Kerry's supporters say they are voting against Bush.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, Color, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODA, Source: Poll Friday-Sunday of 778 adults. Margin of error: +/- 4 percentage points. (BAR GRAPH)

Load-Date: September 7, 2004


End of Document