Bush delivers Earth Day message for drivers
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 23, 2006 Sunday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 5A
Length: 415 words
Dateline: WEST SACRAMENTO, Calif.; NEW YORK; RIVERTON, Kan. 
Body


WEST SACRAMENTO, Calif. - President Bush had an Earth Day message for drivers worried about soaring gasoline prices: The nation must move more quickly toward widespread use of hydrogen-powered cars.
"I strongly believe hydrogen is the fuel of the future. That's what we're talking about," he said. "It has the potential - a vast potential to dramatically cut our dependence on foreign oil. Hydrogen is clean, hydrogen is domestically produced and hydrogen is the way of the future."
The president spoke on a visit to the California Fuel Cell Partnership, a collection of 31 organizations such as carmakers, energy providers, government agencies and fuel cell companies that promotes the commercialization of hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles.
Man in terrorism case appears in court
NEW YORK - A 19-year-old suspected of meeting with Islamic extremists to discuss possible U.S. targets for a terrorist attack sat silently in a courtroom Saturday during a brief hearing that followed his extradition from Bangladesh.
Ehsanul Islam Sadequee, a U.S. citizen who grew up near Atlanta, is accused of making materially false statements linked to an ongoing federal terrorism investigation.
An FBI agent's affidavit said Sadequee and Syed Haris Ahmed, a 21-year-old Georgia Tech student, met with at least three other targets of ongoing FBI terrorism investigations during a trip to Canada in March 2005.
According to the affidavit, the men discussed attacks against oil refineries and military bases and planned to travel to Pakistan to get military training at a terrorist camp.
Co-defendant Ahmed was indicted on suspicion of giving material support of terrorism, and was being held at an undisclosed location. He waived his right to arraignment and pleaded not guilty.
Students in school plot to stay in custody
RIVERTON, Kan. - Five teenagers suspected of plotting a shooting rampage at their high school will stay in custody through the weekend while prosecutors decide whether to file charges, a judge ruled Saturday.
The boys ages 16 to 18 were arrested Thursday, the anniversary of the Columbine massacre, after school officials learned that a threatening message had been posted on MySpace.com, authorities said.
District Judge Robert Fleming signed an affidavit Saturday that said there was probable cause to believe a crime was committed, said Kansas Attorney General Phill Kline. Under Kansas law, the students would have been released if Fleming had not signed the affidavit by Saturday morning, Kline said.

Load-Date: April 23, 2006


End of Document