Bush confronts revolt in GOP over terror bill
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 16, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A24
Length: 386 words
Byline: By Terence Hunt THE ASSOCIATED PRESS McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


President George W. Bush fought back Friday against a Republican revolt in the Senate over tough anti-terrorism legislation and rejected warnings that the United States had lost the high moral ground to adversaries.
"It's a dangerous world," Bush said as he prodded Congress to follow his lead in dealing with suspected terrorists. "I wish I could tell the American people, 'Don't worry about it, they're not coming again.' But they are coming again."
The strong admonitions came a day after the Senate Armed Services Committee, in a 15-9 vote, backed a bill extending Geneva Convention protections to detainees. 
But Bush urged lawmakers to quickly approve legislation authorizing military tribunals and harsh interrogations of terrorism suspects in order to shield U.S. personnel from being prosecuted for war crimes.
Tough interrogations have been instrumental in preventing attacks against the United States, Bush said. He confronted a rebellion led by Sens. John Warner, R-Va., John McCain, R-Ariz., Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., and Susan Collins, R-Maine.
"What is being billed as 'clarifying' our treaty obligations will be seen as withdrawing from the treaty obligations," said Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., a member of the Armed Services Committee. "It will set precedent which could come back to haunt us."
Even Colin Powell, Bush's former secretary of state, has joined with the lawmakers. McCain is a former Navy pilot who spent more than five years in enemy captivity during the Vietnam War. Warner, a former Navy secretary, is chairman of the Armed Services Committee. Graham is a former Air Force Reserve judge. Powell, a retired general, is a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Powell said Bush's plan to redefine the Geneva Conventions, which set international standards for the treatment of prisoners of war, would cause the world "to doubt the moral basis" of the fight against terrorism and "put our own troops at risk."
But the president bristled over the comment, saying, "If there's any comparison between the compassion and decency of the American people and the terrorist tactics of extremists, it's flawed logic."
The Pentagon has banned abusive interrogations in military detention centers, but the CIA, until recently, had more latitude in its efforts to pry information from terrorism suspects.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - President George W. Bush speaks at a news conference in the White House Rose Garden Friday. He urged passage of anti-terrorism legislation.  The Associated Press 

Load-Date: September 16, 2006


End of Document