Bush urges allies to stick to mission in Iraq; Ambassadors from 84 countries are invited to hear the president's speech as the war in Iraq turns 1 year old
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 20, 2004 Saturday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. d5
Length: 478 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Faced with wavering allies and a divided America, President Bush on Friday urged all to stand firm against terrorism in Iraq and around the globe. A visit to the bedsides of wounded soldiers underscored the one-year toll of 570 American deaths in Iraq.
The White House invited the ambassadors of 84 countries involved in the U.S.-led war on terror to the White House for Bush's call for resolve.
"We are the nations that have recognized the threat of terrorism, and we are the nations that will defeat that threat," the president said in a speech marking the one-year anniversary of his launch of the invasion of Iraq.
Hoping to emphasize unity over division, Bush recited six long lists in the 24-minute address of countries that have suffered terrorist attacks or been involved in the response to them. He allowed no room for hesitation, laying down what he called an inescapable choice between standing with or against the U.S.-led anti-terror battle.
"There is no neutral ground - no neutral ground - in the fight between civilization and terror," the president said. "There can be no separate peace with the terrorist enemy. Any sign of weakness or retreat simply validates terrorist violence and invites more violence for all nations."
Secretary of State Colin Powell reinforced Bush's warning from Baghdad, where he met with Iraqis, coalition leaders and U.S. troops.
"This is not the time to say, 'Let's stop what we're doing and pull back,"' he said. "It's time to redouble our efforts … and not run and hide and think it won't come and get us."
Much of Bush's speech was devoted to defending the war in Iraq. He said the toppling of Saddam Hussein removed a source of violence and instability in the Middle East, and he linked Iraq to the broader war on terror, including the ouster of the Taliban in Afghanistan.
"We've set out to encourage reform and democracy in the greater Middle East as the alternatives to fanaticism, resentment and terror," he said.
The past week has seen bombings, shootings and mortar attacks across Iraq, including a suicide bombing at Baghdad's Mount Lebanon Hotel that killed seven and an insurgent attack in western Iraq that killed two Marines.
The military said the death toll of American service members had reached 570.
After the speech, Bush and first lady Laura Bush went to Washington's Walter Reed Army Medical Center to visit with the "wounded who have made a decision to sacrifice for the nation's security." The hospital has treated scores of soldiers wounded in Iraq.
The French foreign minister, meanwhile, said the Iraq war made the world more dangerous, not less, by causing an upswing in terrorism. France and Germany had led the opposition to Bush's call for war.
"Terrorism didn't exist in Iraq before," Dominique de Villepin told Le Monde newspaper. "Today, it is one of the world's principal sources of world terrorism."

Graphic

 
photo

Load-Date: March 20, 2004


End of Document