Bush, Putin's meeting upbeat;
Despite fears of chilling ties, they discussed the Mideast, terrorism, N. Korea, Iran, and other issues.
Upbeat meeting for Bush, Putin
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 9, 2005 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 739 words
Byline: Ron Hutcheson INQUIRER FOREIGN STAFF
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


Russian President Vladimir V. Putin welcomed President Bush to his country home yesterday as the two leaders put aside their differences to focus on joint efforts to combat terrorism, stop the spread of nuclear weapons and bring peace to the Middle East.
"Russia's a great nation, and I'm looking forward to working together on big problems. And I want to thank you for your help on Iran and the Middle East, and there's a lot we can do together," Bush told Putin during a brief photo session at Putin's dacha, about 25 miles west of Moscow.
Relations between Bush and Putin have deteriorated because of White House concerns that Putin is backsliding on democracy and Putin's annoyance over what he views as outside interference. Bush's trip to Moscow for a ceremony today marking the 60th anniversary of the end of World War II in Europe also revived some lingering ill will from the Cold War.
Bush started his five-day trip in Latvia, where he met with Baltic leaders who want Putin to apologize for Soviet oppression in their countries after the war.
But those disputes seemed nearly forgotten when Bush's motorcade pulled into Putin's tranquil, tree-filled estate. In a variation of Bush's habit of squiring guests around his Texas ranch in a pickup truck, Putin let Bush take the wheel of a Russian-made Volga sedan.
"Be careful," Bush joked. "He's giving me a driving lesson."
Aides said Bush and Putin spent most of their meeting talking about the Middle East, but also touched on terrorism, the potential threat of nuclear weapons in North Korea and Iran, Russia's preparations to join the World Trade Organization and other issues.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said the two leaders paid particular attention to Israel's plan to withdraw Jewish settlements from the Gaza Strip. Bush and Putin pledged to work together to help Palestinian officials take control of areas vacated by the Israelis, she said.
Rice downplayed talk of tension between Bush and Putin, saying that they were "absolutely straightforward" with each other.
"They say what they think, they mean what they say, and then they act," she said.
"For the two presidents, there are no forbidden topics," added Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov.
The two presidents were joined for dinner by their wives, and Putin joked about Laura Bush's recent comedic remarks about her husband at the annual White House correspondents' dinner.
"I took a look at the coverage," Putin told Bush in front of reporters. "I could see how Laura attacked you sometimes, so at today's dinner we will have a chance to protect you."
Bush traveled to Russia after a side trip to the Netherlands, where he joined Dutch leaders in paying homage to American soldiers in World War II. Looking out over thousands of white marble crosses at the Netherlands American Cemetery in Margraten, Bush linked the sacrifices from that war to today's war on terrorism and his effort to spread democracy.
"The world's tyrants learned a lesson - there is no power like the power of freedom, and no soldier is as strong as the soldier that fights for that freedom," Bush told an audience sprinkled with white-haired World War II veterans. "The free and peaceful world that we hope to leave to our own children is inspired by their example."
Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende offered his nation's thanks to the Allied troops who drove the Germans out of the Netherlands. Although Bush is unpopular in the Netherlands because of the war in Iraq, Dutch sentiment toward Americans in general is more positive.
Townspeople from Margraten have adopted individual graves in the American cemetery, regularly placing flowers beneath the simple crosses. In some families, responsibility for a specific grave has passed from parents to children and grandchildren.
The cemetery, built during the war to handle mounting casualties from the final push into Germany, once held more than 17,000 slain soldiers, but most have been returned to the United States. The 8,300 remaining graves hold six Medal of Honor winners and at least 40 pairs of brothers, buried side by side. All states and the District of Columbia are represented.
"Our debt of gratitude is too great to express in words," Balkenende said of the American liberators. "They gave us the most precious gift - freedom."
Contact reporter Ron Hutcheson at 202-383-6101 or rhutcheson@krwashington.com.  
This article includes information from the Associated Press.

Load-Date: September 13, 2005


End of Document