BUSH, ISSUING TERROR REPORT, AFFIRMS CURRENT U.S. POLICIES
The New York Times
March 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 555 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 6
Body


Vice President Bush said today that the Government's policy on combating terrorism would remain one in which there was a willingness to retaliate, but not to ''wantonly destroy human life.''
His comments came as he made public an expurgated version of a report on terrorism that had been presented to President Reagan by an interagency task force of which the Vice President was chairman.
The full report, containing about two dozen recommendations, was given to Mr. Reagan in December. Mr. Bush said parts of it were now being made public to show what the Government was doing ''to come to grips with the insidious threat of terrorism.''
Among the recommendations are suggestions that Congress make the murder of an American citizen abroad a Federal crime punishable by the death penalty, the establishment of an intelligence unit specializing in terrorism, and increased efforts to infiltrate terrorist groups.
In the key recommendation, the task force said that a set of standards should be established to judge whether a military response was called for in retaliation against acts of terrorism. Among the criteria to be considered, it said, are the potential injury to innocent civilians and the ability to identify specific targets.
The report provided no clear answer to a dispute within the Government on the use of force.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz has favored a more liberal use of force while Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has been more cautious. The issue arose most recently in connection with the advisability of attacking targets in Libya after terrorist assaults on airports in Rome and Vienna.
Mr. Bush said today that the consensus of his task force was that retaliation was at times warranted, but only in specific cases.
''I think our consensus would be retaliation where it could be surgically done,'' he said.
He added that the panel ''would not approve of wanton destruction of human life in order to show some muscle and show some retaliaton.''
When asked whether he had answers to recent terrorist incidents in which Americans were killed, including the attacks at the airports in Rome and Vienna, Mr. Bush said:
''No, we haven't. There isn't any simple answer to that one. We haven't been able to get, you know, some four-point program that would apply to every terrorist situation. We haven't been able to do it.
''But I think we should reiterate the willingness of our Administration to retaliate and retaliate swiftly when we feel we can punish those who were directly responsible. But we haven't been able to solve that problem and I wish we could have.''
He said that the task-force study had found no major flaws in the current approach to combating terrorism and that the existing policies ''were sound.''
The executive director of the task force was Adm. James L. Holloway 3d, a former chief of Naval Operations. It urged the setting up of a National Security Council staff position to coordinate a program against terrorism, increased screening at ports of entry to terrorists, and reduced access to sensitive information regarding terrorists.
In a related development, a subcommitee of the House Judiciary Committee approved legislation sponsored by Representative George W. Gekas, a Pennsylvania Republican, calling for the death penalty in terrorist incidents in which Americans are killed.


End of Document