Bush Brings Terrorism Talk Friday To Port Of Tampa
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 16, 2006 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 1
Length: 311 words
Byline: MICHAEL FECHTER, , mfechter@tampatrib.com
Body


By MICHAEL FECHTER
mfechter@tampatrib.com
TAMPA - President Bush is scheduled to spend a few hours on Friday afternoon in Tampa talking terrorism.
He is to fly into MacDill Air Force Base and be briefed at U.S. Central Command. From there, he heads to the Port of Tampa for a speech and town-hall-style meeting.
While in Tampa, Bush is to present a volunteer service award to Joe MacDougald II of St. Petersburg for his dedication to the Special Operations Warrior Foundation. The nonprofit organization helps children of Special Ops personnel who have died in action or during training.
A speech by Bush on terrorism and the town hall meeting will be at the Tampa Port Authority's Terminal 3. It is sponsored by the St. Petersburg Area and Greater Tampa chambers of commerce.
The chambers have invited area business and civic leaders to attend, said John T. Long, president of the St. Petersburg chamber. About 500 people are expected. The Tampa chamber's e-mail invitation indicated it had 100 seats available, but the deadline to respond was at the close of business Wednesday.
Bush often speaks to prescreened audiences of supporters, but Long said the chambers are not inquiring about politics when accepting an R.S.V.P. "We want the audience to look like our community," he said.
Pinellas County Republican Chairman Tony Dimatteo said he was not aware of the Tampa speech. Last year, when the president was pushing Social Security reform, county chairmen were given tickets to distribute.
Bush is to go to Orlando later Friday for a Republican Party of Florida fundraiser. He won't fly out of Tampa International Airport, so Interstate 275 traffic likely won't be affected.
Reporter Michael Fechter can be reached at (813) 259-7621.
Photo: President George Bush
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO
TAMPA - President Bush is scheduled to spend a few hours on Friday afternoon in Tampa talking terrorism.

Load-Date: February 20, 2006


End of Document