Bush Cautions Against Letup in Terrorism Battle 
 The New York Times
August 25, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 549 words
Byline:  By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr. 
Dateline: LAS CRUCES, N.M., Aug. 24  
Body


President Bush finished three days of campaigning for Republican candidates in the West today by warning against complacency in the fight against terrorism -- and offering sharper criticism of Senate Democrats -- but he continued to be dogged by protests over his threats to wage war against Iraq.
     Mr. Bush began the day with a breakfast fund-raiser for Bill Simon Jr., the struggling candidate for governor in California whose family investment firm faces a $78 million civil court judgment for defrauding a partner. 
 In two days of events, Mr. Bush helped raise $2.6 million for Mr. Simon's race -- less than had been hoped. Mr. Bush offered support for Mr. Simon only during fund-raisers and not during public events.
Later, in New Mexico, which Mr. Bush lost in 2000 by 366 votes, he helped raise $300,000 for Steve Pearce, who is battling to win an open House seat held by a retiring Republican, and $200,000 for John Sanchez, who is running for governor against Bill Richardson, the former energy secretary and New Mexico congressman.
Throughout the day, Mr. Bush cautioned against easing up in the fight against terrorism, aiming criticism at Senate Democrats whom he accused of selfishly impeding efforts to create an effective domestic security department.
"There are senators who are more worried about the special interests in Washington than they are about protecting the people," Mr. Bush told a crowd of supporters at New Mexico State University this afternoon. "They're more interested in their turf than they are in homeland security. And they need to give me a good bill."
Senate Democrats, led by the majority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, support creation of a new domestic security department, but some contend that the specifics of the Bush plan would strip federal workers of important employee protections.
Mr. Bush began the day in Los Angeles at a fund-raiser for Mr. Simon -- whom Mr. Bush did not mention during his two public appearances in the state -- praising him as a "good man." 
Mr. Simon, who was once thought to have a reasonable chance of beating the Democratic incumbent, Gray Davis, but now is considered a long shot, criticized reports that Mr. Bush was keeping his distance.
"If keeping me at arm's length really means flying several thousand miles out here to campaign with us for two days, and now you've done five events with us, could you please keep me at arm's length for the balance of the campaign?" Mr. Simon said.
Before the Simon fund-raiser, Mr. Bush passed several hundred protesters with signs that said things like "No War for Oil," "George W. Hitler" and, in an apparent reference to Mr. Bush's daughters, "Send the Twins to Iraq." 
Another protester held a sign that said "Bush You Stink of Corporate Corruption."
Later, at an appearance before a cheering crowd at New Mexico State University, a lone protester in a top row shouted comments. He was swiftly escorted out by security officials, and he was punched on the shoulder by one Bush supporter in the crowd.
Mr. Bush was expected to return tonight to his ranch in Crawford, Tex., where he will meet on Tuesday with the Saudi Arabian ambassador to the United States, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, before leaving to raise money on Thursday for Republican candidates in Arkansas and Oklahoma.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush at a rally yesterday at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces at the end of a three-day campaign trip in the West. (Agence France-Presse) 

Load-Date: August 25, 2002


End of Document