Businesses Emerging as Major Targets of Terrorists' Attacks
The American Banker
November 16, 1979, Friday


Copyright 1979 American Banker, Inc.
Section: Pg. 2
Length: 807 words
Byline: By DANIEL COWLES
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Multinational companies, including banks, are among terrorists' most common victims, according to a Conference Board report, which predicts a continued increase in terrorist activities and a greater focus on business targets.
Corporations can protect themselves, the study found, by purchasing kidnap insurance for key executives, upgrading physical security of plants and offices, training executives and their families in precautionary measures, and retaining specialized firms to negotiate with kidnappers.
E. Patrick McGuire, author of the study, "International Terrorism and Business Security," says "there is no doubt that terrorism has begun to affect the corporate lifestyle overseas, including the way executives live and travel.  Ultimately, this trend may well influence many business investment decisions abroad."
Current forecasts now suggest that the number of terrorist incidents this year will double last year's total.  The study cites three reasons for the surge in activities: modern communications which give terrorists an opportunity to address a worldwide audience; greater possibilities for disruption of companies or nations because of increased international interdependece; and the availability to terrorists of sophisticated weaponry.
The Conference Board study is based on figures provided by Risks International, Inc., a Virginia-based consulting firm, the U.S. State Department, the Central Inteligence Agency, and Rand Corporation, all of which show a rapid escalation in terrorist incidents during the last five years.
Between 1970 and 1978, 55% of the Americans kidnapped overseas were business executives.  One reason business has become a favorite victim of the terrorists, Mr. McGuire says, is that while governments are more rigid in reaction to terrorist activities, businesses generally are "a softer target."
The report lists the three foreign countries with the greatest number of attacks against U.S. businesses as Argentina, Italy and Columbia.
Anyone kidnapped by terrorists has a good chance of survival, the study found.  Of 567 persons kidnapped in the first eight years of this decade, only 35 were killed, with about a quarter of the deaths occuring during the seizure attempt.
While victims have sometimes been held for more than six months, the study went on, most are released within a month.
Mr. McGuire estimates that three quarters of the top 200 multinational companies have ransom insurance.  The exact number is unknown since firms can lose their coverage if they admit to having such protection.
Some policies cover only upper-level executives, but they can also cover all employees in a particular country or a particular list of individuals.  Typically companies are self-insured for the first $500,000 to $1 million of the ransom loss, with total coverage in some cases of more than $20 million, Mr. McGuire says.
Because a company can in some cases be held liable for failing to protect its employees, the study recommends that in dealing with kidnappers local negotiators should be used "who are experienced in the country, speak its language, and have contacts with local government officials."
In addition, a crisis management plan should be established to provide guideance for company officials and negotiators.
The study includes 13 recomendations for reducing the risk of terrorist attack:
1. Make hotel, airline and restaurant reservations under pseudonyms.
2. remove company identifications on aircraft limousines, delivery trucks, etc.
3. Keep confidential the addresses overseas managers, as well as the hotels and rental apartments used to house visiting executives.
4. Removed all names and numbers from the residendes of overseas managers.
5. Make sure that the home phone numbers of executives, in both overseas and American locations, are unlisted.
6. Change t he types of cars and license plate identifications of overseas executives at irregular intervals.
7. Enclose or fence in the parking spaces for company personnel, provide guards for these spaces, and remove designations indicating reserved space for executives.
8. Shred unneeded business papers, including those that are deemed "nonconfidential."
9. Avoid unescorted travel in rural areas where the ease of abduction is greater.
10. Avoid ostentation.  Behavior patterns which unnecessarily call attention to a person's wealth or corporate rank increase their visibility.
11. Become less of a creature of habit.  Change schedules and routes taken to and from work, avoid daily jogging or other routines.
12. Be wary of invitations to visit with unknown business prospects or respond to family emergencies phoned in by unknown persons.
13. Get to know the high ranking police officials in your community, the security officer as well as the local U.S. diplomatic mission and any other contacts which might be useful in an emergency.


End of Document