Business leaders must lead the fight against nuclear terrorism
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 16, 2014 Tuesday


Copyright 2014 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: ZZSTYLING
Length: 827 words
Byline: Buford Scott
Body


At the end of the Cold War the United States and the USSR had more than 70,000 nuclear warheads between them. Many of these weapons have now been dismantled.
What is not generally known, however, is that in addition to the actual nuclear warheads both the United States and USSR produced a mind-boggling amount of additional nuclear bomb material that could, if stolen, be fashioned into a major nuclear terrorist weapon. We are talking about a device with the explosive capability of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
 Such a weapon would require approximately 100 pounds of highly enriched uranium (HEU). A nuclear device using plutonium, like the other nuclear bomb employed by the U.S. in 1945, would require little more than 10 pounds of that material.
 So how much excess HEU and plutonium did the two combatants have at the end of the Cold War? Well over 4 million pounds — enough to make tens of thousands of nuclear bombs.
 This dangerous material, stored in thousands of buildings around the world, has been the subject of a locking-up process largely funded and directed by the United States under the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. While significant progress has been made over the past 23 years since the collapse of the Cold War in securing such materials, the job is far from finished. Even now, for example, more than 100 research reactors and test facilities round the world use HEU; meanwhile, dangerous stocks of civil plutonium continue to grow. Many experts fear a catastrophe in the making.
 National security experts and business leaders from across the political spectrum say that nuclear terrorism poses a real risk. These experts include Bob Gallucci, who has spent a lifetime in national security work, including negotiating with the North Koreans on nuclear issues under Bill Clinton. In his keynote address to the recent international conference on nuclear terrorism in the Netherlands, Gallucci conjured up the loss of four cities around the globe, noting that terrorists frequently hit multiple targets at the same time. At the same conference, President Barack Obama shocked residents of New York City by referring to a major nuclear terrorist weapon going off in Manhattan.
 Another concerned expert is Graham Allison, founding dean of the Kennedy School at Harvard. Allison has said that on the current track the chances of a major nuclear terrorist attack is greater than 50 percent.
 His pessimism is echoed by Warren Buffett, who said in 2002, “We’re going to have something in the way of a major nuclear event in this country. It will happen.”
 The risk arises from the fact that a simple but effective major nuclear terrorist device can be made relatively easily if the fissile material is obtained by terrorists. The more complex plutonium design involves setting up shaped charges to implode on an inner core of the bomb material. However, a simple “gun type” HEU design requires just firing a certain amount of the fuel into a large quantity to achieve critical mass. This can literally be done in a large gun barrel. Such a weapon is reportedly within the capability of any group with access to a good machine tool shop.
 The good news is that terrorists cannot produce this sensitive nuclear material on their own. If we can secure the world’s supply of HEU and separated plutonium, the threat can be eliminated.
 This should have no impact on peaceful uses of the atom. Most nuclear fuel used in commercial reactors is low-enriched uranium, which is not useful for weapons. Highly enriched uranium is used for specialized reactors or facilities, typically research reactors, or for naval vessels. Some of these reactors produce medical isotopes used in diagnosis, treatment and research. These isotopes can be produced using LEU.
 The U.S. has been working to convert facilities from using HEU to LEU and to secure stocks of HEU and plutonium.
 The bad news is that after more than three decades we are still far from completing this task. And now the resources devoted to this effort, which never amounted to more than 1 percent of the Defense Department budget, are being slashed.
 Our nation must redouble its efforts and engage in a crash program to lock up the dangerous nuclear material as fast as practically possible. The U.S. must work much more energetically with other countries to have them increase their efforts. Increasing the U.S. budget will encourage an expansion of this critical campaign across the globe.
 We believe that the American business leadership can play a critical role in obtaining the needed resources and focus on this issue. That is why we are joining a newly formed organization called the Virginia Business Task Force on Nuclear Terrorism, the purpose of which is to educate executives and spotlight the issue. This nonpartisan group will press policymakers to increase the nation’s efforts in this essential enterprise.
 We urge business leaders to join this critical effort.

Load-Date: December 17, 2014


End of Document