BUST YANK IN COLE ATTACK Key suspect has close ties to terrorist Bin Laden
Daily News (New York)
December 5, 2000, Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 337 words
Byline: By LEO STANDORA DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER With News Wire Services
Body

A U.S. citizen with close links to Islamic militant Osama Bin Laden is under arrest as a prime suspect in the terror attack on the destroyer Cole, it was reported last night.
Jaed Hijazi, in custody in Jordan, "personally trained and supported" the Cole attack in Yemen, U.S. sources told NBC News. He also outlined plans to "attack U.S. military aircraft" in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere in the Middle East, they said.
Hijazi has "direct links" to Bin Laden, America's most wanted terrorist and the suspected moving force behind the Oct. 12 Cole bombing in the Yemeni port of Aden, they said.
No one has been charged in the Oct. 12 bombing of the Cole, which killed 17 sailors and wounded 39.
Details of Hijazi's background were unclear, except that he holds U.S. citizenship.
A U.S. diplomat has visited him in jail, and U.S. officials hope his citizenship will make it easier to extradite him for trial in the U.S. on any possible terrorism charges, NBC said.
Syria arrested Hijazi in September, before the Cole bombing. But NBC News said other suspects in custody have told investigators planning had been underway for 13 months before the Cole was bombed.
On another front, Yemeni Foreign Minister Abdulkader Bajammal said yesterday the U.S. is partly responsible for the Cole attack, because it helped train the terrorists who consider America their worst enemy.
"We have inherited the remnants of the Cold War," Bajammal said. This apparently was a reference to U.S. aid to Afghan guerrillas during the 1979 Soviet incursion.
After the Soviets withdrew in 1989, many so-called Afghan Arabs turned their anger against the U.S., which they see as a threat to Islam and Arab independence. Bin Laden continues to live in Afghanistan, where he periodically issues calls for violence against the United States.
Bajammal also said that Yemen wants to work closely with the U.S to combat terrorism. "The operation was not Yemeni, not pure Yemeni," Bajammal said. "It is a network involving so many countries. Terrorism has no nation."

Load-Date: December 5, 2000


End of Document