Bust the Sleeper Cells
The Sentinel
June 1, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 687 words
Body


It has come to light that the Union government has asked the Assam government to go deep into the existing network of sleeper cells of ULFA(I) in the wake of the May 15 grenade blast in front of a busy and posh shopping mall on RG Baruah Road, Guwahati. That no one was killed, even as 12 people were injured, is another matter. What is of serious concern is the reported attempt of the outfit, led by the fugitive Paresh Baruah allegedly hidden somewhere along the China-Myanmar border, to recuperate and gain ground via its sleeper cells, especially in Guwahati. This led to the imperative for the recently-held meeting in New Delhi chaired by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba, and top officials of the Assam government, including the Assam Police. As reported, the meeting discussed the security measures that ought to be taken to neutralize the sleeper cells set up by ULFA(I) in the State. The Centre wants the State government to go beyond the routine probe confined merely to the detention of the ULFA activists responsible for the blast. After the blast, three persons were immediately arrested - Pranomoy Rajguru, his accomplice Jahnabi Goswami (a small-time actress), and Bijoy Asom. The first two were apprehended from Guwahati.

But the fourth to be apprehended the other day from Baihata Chariali about 35 km from Guwahati, research scholar Sanjib Talukdar pursing MPhil in Botany and a faculty member at a coaching institute, has brought to the fore the ominous portent of the desperate ULFA(I)'s bid to create space for its terror designs in the State, especially the capital city, via sleeper cells monitored and guided by educated people. Educated people like the 26-year-old Talukdar can prove to be special assets for the outfit because they are far more capable of motivating and influencing the unemployed and unemployable youth to join the outfit as a career choice in the industry of insurgency-turned-terrorism. Yes, it is an industry, a roaring one with the flourish of a nexus among officials and businessmen (especially contractors) within the arc of an enterprise whose objective it is to extort money and terrorize people, nothing else. At this hour of transition of Assam from it being a militancy-infested State to the one that aspires for a solid national positioning in political and economic affairs within the ambit of the Indian Constitution, and even international positioning vis-a-vis the Act East Policy, it will be puerile to believe that educated people like Talukdar would back the ULFA(I) agenda of a sovereign Assam. The slogan of a sovereign Assam outside the ambit of the Indian Constitution as espoused by the recalcitrant Paresh Baruah brigade has absolutely no takers in the State. This, of course, Baruah is well aware of. But he has his business to take care of - against the State of Assam and its people within the Union of India.

The need of the hour, therefore, is a complete crackdown on the sleeper cells set up by the outfit with the sole purpose of derailing the State's new economic direction. This new economic course of development - even as it is merely a beginning of a long journey towards it being comparable to advanced States like Gujarat and those in the South - must be sustained, keeping in mind the fact that it is only peace and stability that can work out any miracle here. Against this trajectory of peace and stability stand evil forces like ULFA(I) bent on promoting and sustaining a parallel economy erected on an architecture of cowardly terrorism. This must be demolished absolutely. Let the security forces, therefore, go all out to bust the sleeper cells in question. And let it be also clear to the Paresh Baruah brigade that the people of Assam have come of age and now have the gumption to defeat its dastardly designs against them - designs that are in place just because there is this nefarious business of terrorism to cater to. Well, things have changed, and the writing on the wall is crystal clear. It is another matter that Baruah has chosen to be blind to it.

Load-Date: June 2, 2019


End of Document