But Why Blame Israel When Israel Is Right?;
Once a Terrorist?
The New York Times
August 15, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 367 words
Body


To the Editor:
''The Rewards of Terrorism'' by A. M. Rosenthal (column, July 21) is a perfect illustration of the combination of fear and anger and bigotry that makes the current Government of Israel and its blind supporters cling to the status quo even as it leads to disaster.
There is no question that Saleh Khalef of the Palestine Liberation Organization has committed deplorable acts of terrorism. However, if our goal is peace and security for Israel, we must ask whether that goal will be better advanced by terminating dialogue with him than by continuing it. And on that issue President Bush stated that the Helms amendment ''would interfere significantly with, if not destroy, the ability of the United States to promote a viable peace process in the Middle East'' (news story, July 21).
Mr. Rosenthal expresses horror at the prospect of having to deal with former terrorists as diplomatic representatives of a possible Palestinian state. While his feeling is understandable, it ignores that Yitzhak Shamir, the Prime Minister of Israel, was at one time chief of operations of the Stern Gang, a Jewish terrorist group known to be responsible during Britain's United Nations mandate over Palestine for killing not only many hundreds of Arab civilians, but also 300 British policemen and soldiers, one foreign minister and the United Nations mediator Folke Bernadotte.
If we can deal with one, why not the other?
More to the point, modern history contains many examples of nationalistic movements whose leaders engaged in terrorism at one stage and later became responsible statesmen, one memorable example being Jomo Kenyatta, leader of the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya.
If Israel wants peace and security, it will have to grant the Palestinians the same rights of self-determination that it cherishes for itself, and that includes the right to be represented by their chosen leaders. And since a majority of the P.L.O. has now openly declared its intention to negotiate peace, to rebuff that overture based on allegations of past misconduct will only cause the moderates to lose out to radicals who believe that the only solution lies in further violence.
 
WALTER V. HAYS
  Palo Alto, Calif., July 25, 1989


End of Document