BUT WHAT WILL CLINTON DO NEXT MONTH ABOUT TERRORISM?
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 23, 1998, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B3, TONY SNOW COLUMN
Length: 774 words
Byline: Tony Snow; Copyright Creators Syndicate Inc.
Body


It is indicative of Bill Clinton's political predicament that many Americans figured he bombed terrorist targets last week to divert public attention from L'Affaire Lewinsky. It is a tribute to the patriotism of the political classes that only one elected official - Sen. Dan Coats of Indiana - dared repeat the calumny.
Regardless of motives, the president was right to send munitions into Osama bin Laden's backyard. The strikes sent a message that in this instance, at least, the United States wouldn't play patsy to thugs who kill Americans for sport.
Still, the official account of Thursday's mission raised a few nagging questions.
Pentagon and White House briefers told the press, for instance, that Osama bin Laden and his Islamic Front for Holy War against Crusaders and Jews was planning some imminent attack against Americans.
If so, why didn't we hear about a parallel operation to intercept the terrorist team where it was attempting to commit mayhem? If we didn't nab the death squad, we either failed in our mission or cobbled together a thin excuse for firing the missiles.
The president mentioned a secondary consideration: A group of terrorist leaders were gathered at Osama's place, and we had to strike before they left. In other words, we wanted to kill a bunch of bad guys. That sounds fine to most of us, but it doesn't square with the administration's insistence that it follows the dictates of international law, which forbids such pre-emptive attacks.
Furthermore, if we were really serious about disabling the Islamic Front, why didn't we send in commandos rather than a few rockets? We learned in the 1992 Gulf War that you can't win a war from the air. You have to beat the enemy on the ground.
Finally comes the matter of certitude. The president and his aides assembled a plan to blast the sites in Afghanistan and the Sudan five days after the explosions outside our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Normally, a beat cop won't have enough evidence to convict a bad guy just five days after a crime. So did we simply seize a good excuse to go after the world's foremost underwriter of anti-American violence, or was this a once-in-a-lifetime instance of perfect evidence that materialized almost instantly?
These gaps in the narrative nudge us toward the most important question of all: How will we prosecute our new and overdue war against terror? The president rightly noted that "this will be a long, ongoing struggle between freedom and fanaticism, between the rule of law and terrorism. We must be prepared to do all that we can for as long as we must." So what precisely will we do - and what plans do we have for dealing with the aftermath?
This White House has a history of looking at events serially, never understanding that one act on the international stage will have repercussions elsewhere. But our strikes have changed the world. How will they affect the Middle East peace process? Will they help or hurt our relations with Russia and China? Are we prepared to beef up our military and revitalize our intelligence efforts? Will we stop applying finicky legal standards to terrorist groups - and simply target known malefactors when events seem to warrant doing so? Will our largely ineffectual strike reaffirm or destroy perceptions of American weakness? And what will we do if and when Osama pulls the pin again?
Make no mistake: The United States needs to mount a forceful war against terror. Unfortunately, we don't have the means to conduct such a campaign. Congress and the president have hollowed out the military, turned the CIA into a relatively sleepy think tank and given the world the distinct impression that we're so enamored of our affluence that we no longer will fight for our freedom.
To complicate matters, democracies are ill-equipped to combat enemies that operate in stealth and vow allegiance to no flag. One can root out such men only through means that offend our normal senses of legal propriety. One must fight dirty.
The battle also requires the sacrifice of small freedoms - such as entering a public conveyance without being frisked or run through a metal detector. Americans normally accept such inconveniences for a little while after a terrorist incident, but soon grow tired of the burden and demand relief.
Still, a president's first duty is to defend national security. Bill Clinton tried to fulfill that obligation last week. Yet the real test of his mettle will come next month, when Congress returns to work. If he's serious about disabling malevolent goons, he'll have to start beefing up defense and security - so that when Osama or others hit, we'll be able to hit back.

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document