Buyer, insurer puzzled by feds' reluctance to offer terrorism data
Business Insurance
October 31, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 721 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


CHARLOTTE, N.C.-The federal government is showing an odd aversion to terrorism risk management, even though it claims to be armed with plenty of information about the threat.
So said a risk manager and insurer who have a stake in the extension of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. They agreed during a session at the Self-Insurance Institute of America's annual conference in Charlotte, N.C., that even though the government's help in assessing and covering the terrorism threat is sorely needed, it is strangely reluctant to provide it.
Stan Smith, corporate director of risk management at Boyd Gaming Corp. in Las Vegas, said that he believes lawmakers will extend TRIA for two years. Beyond that temporary extension, Congress will have to decide whether to keep the law in place.
Even with the extension, though, indications are that ``the federal government does not want to be in the insurance business, writing terrorism,'' Mr. Smith said. That's puzzling, he added, because ``they understand the whole issue of terrorism'' yet remain uncomfortable with the risk.
``Something's telling me the public is not getting the true answer from the government as far as what's really going on with terrorism,'' said Mr. Smith. ``Is there a hidden agenda somewhere, where the government is not telling the whole story?''
The government should be making more information available on the threat, said Mark A. Wilhelm, executive vp at Safety National Casualty Corp., an excess workers compensation insurer in St. Louis.
He pointed out that the federal government forces workers compensation insurers under TRIA to provide terrorism coverage, ``yet the government has the best information for underwriting the risk and they don't provide it.''
In fact, ``you can make the argument that terrorism is an outgrowth of our defense and foreign policy, yet we are being forced to provide a coverage for that,'' said Mr. Wilhelm. ``So we think it makes only logical sense for the government to play some role.''
If the government ends its involvement in the terrorism market by not extending TRIA, Safety National will have to pare its book of business to ease the risk, Mr. Wilhelm said. For example, the company writes a lot of coverage in Las Vegas, a city that is seen as a prime terrorist target, he said.
``We would have to begin mitigating that exposure and do it soon,'' if the act expires, said Mr. Wilhelm. Individual risks would be analyzed to see which have security and loss control measures in place to reduce the chance that terrorists would hurt their operations, he said, because only the best terrorism risks would be written.
Liability insurers ``may say they are not going to offer'' terrorism insurance if the act is not extended, he said, ``and if they do, it may be priced in a way that you won't buy it.''
If TRIA is not extended, terrorism coverage may become ``like flood insurance,'' with many who should buy the insurance refusing to spend money on it ``because they figure the government will bail them out anyway,'' Mr. Wilhelm said. Some risk managers may be willing to ``roll the dice and put their companies at risk in the hope that the government will bail the company out,'' he said.
The terrorism risk is so huge, that insurers are simply unable to cover it without government help, Mr. Wilhelm said. While some scenarios, such as truck bombs, can be assessed and priced, those related to the nuclear, biological and chemical threat are too large to quantify, he argued.
The ``NBC threat'' could generate losses as high as $600 billion, well above what the insurance market could handle under current regulations that limit how insurers can reserve for future losses, Mr. Wilhelm said.
To illustrate the widespread impact a terrorist incident could have, Mr. Smith said that an attack on a Las Vegas casino, even a small one, would devastate the city and Nevada.
Apart from deaths and injuries, tourists would stop coming to the city, Mr. Smith said. That would result in ``massive layoffs,'' and the state would be in dire financial straits because so much of its revenue comes from Las Vegas.
``What we need from the government is a mega-event type of coverage,'' Mr. Wilhelm said. When considering loss scenarios of $600 billion or more, ``the only entity that can talk numbers like that is the government,'' he added.

Load-Date: November 2, 2005


End of Document