BYRD PUSHING TERRORISM PUNISHMENT AMENDMENT
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 30, 1995, Thursday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7A
Length: 474 words
Byline: Ken Ward Jr.
Body


STAFF WRITER
U.S. Sen. Robert C. Byrd is pushing for tougher penalties for anyone
caught sabotaging trains and trucks hauling nuclear waste.
Byrd, D-W.Va., on Tuesday night succeeded in adding language to an
Interstate Commerce Commission bill that would impose stiffer criminal
penalties for such offenses.
"We must act to deter terrorism and, in doing so, must think the
unthinkable - namely, that a terrorist could target a shipment of the
most lethal of all possible cargoes, high level nuclear waste," Byrd
said in a speech on the Senate floor.
Byrd pointed to the recent sabotage of the Sunset Limited train in
Arizona, calling it "the latest act of terrorism against the American
people." He also noted the bombings of the World Trade Center in New
York and the federal building in Oklahoma City.
Byrd said the opening of a proposed permanent nuclear waste storage site
in Yucca Mountain, Nev., or an interim site planned for the Nevada Test
Site, would spur a dramatic increase in the interstate shipment of high
level radioactive waste.
Between 1979 and 1994, commercial facilities shipped a ton of spent
nuclear fuel in the United States. Proposals to build an interim or
permanent nuclear waste facility envision shipments of thousands of tons
in a single year, Byrd said.
The watchdog group Public Citizen said a study by the state of Nevada
showed the plan would bring 1,080 truck casks and 269 railroad casks of
nuclear waste through West Virginia by the year 2030.
These shipments would run along Interstate 70 in the northern panhandle
and along CSX Transportation rail lines through Harpers Ferry and
Charleston.
A spokesman for Public Citizen said the group has not taken a position
on Byrd's amendment, but was glad the issue was getting more attention.
Under current law, a train or motor vehicle saboteur could be sentenced
to a maximum of 20 years or, in the event of a fatality, to a minimum of
life imprisonment or the death penalty.
Under Byrd's amendment, a person who sabotaged a train or motor vehicle
hauling spent nuclear fuel or high-level nuclear waste would receive a
minimum penalty of 30 years to life. The current penalties for
fatalities would remain in effect.
"We are currently shipping the most toxic substance known on our
nation's highways and railroads, and we may dramatically increase those
shipments in the future," Byrd said. "The very least that we can do is
to increase the penalty for sabotage against such shipments, in an
effort to deter acts of terrorism from occurring.
"High level nuclear waste is not simply lethal, but also long lasting.
It can take up to a quarter of a million years for this waste to fully
decay and lose its lethal radioactive character."
Byrd's amendment was approved by a 97-0 Senate vote. The full bill
passed the Senate and House and now goes to a House-Senate conference
committee, Byrd spokeswoman Ann Adler said.

Load-Date: November 30, 1995


End of Document