C.I.A. SEEKS LAW FOR SURPRISE SEARCHES OF NEWSROOMS
The New York Times
May 9, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 653 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 8
Body


William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, has asked Congress to pass legislation that would permit the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct surprise searches of newspaper and broadcasting newsrooms in cases involving the publication of the names of covert agents of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The measure would amend legislation enacted into law last year that requires law-enforcement agencies to obtain subpoenas for notes, film, tapes or other documentary materials used by those engaged in publishing or broadcasting.
Unlike the procedure for search warrants, the subpoena procedure eliminates the element of surprise, narrows the focus of the search and permits news organizations to contest the request in court.
CIA seeks law for surprise searches of newsrooms
However, the search law contains an exception that permits surprise searches in espionage cases, and, in a recent letter to the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Mr. Casey suggested that the exception be extended to cover cases that arise under a bill to make it a crime to publish the names of intelligence agents, even if the information was derived from analysis of publicly available information.
 
Bills Are in Both Houses
The legislation, sometimes called agent identities legislation, is being considered in both houses of Congress in different forms.  Journalists and civil libertarians have protested that it might be unconstitutional and would discourage the legitimate reporting of illegal or dubious practices by intelligence agencies.
Although Mr. Casey's letter was addressed to the House committee chairman, Representative Edward P. Boland, Democrat of Massachusetts, several Senators and private organizations have copies of it.
Spokesmen for the American Civil Liberties Union expressed a belief that Mr. Casey's suggestion would add to what they saw as the chilling effect of the agent identities bill. In the view of these spokesmen, Morton H. Halperin and Jerry J. Berman, it would permit the F.B.I. to search newsrooms for such items as private memorandums from reporters to editors.
This might be true, the A.C.L.U. spokesmen said, because the Government, under the pending agent identities bill, would be seeking to prove that the publication of agents' names was done with ''reason to believe'' or with ''intent'' to cause an impairment of United States intelligence activities.
Under the pending bills, covert agents include not only salaried, professional American officers of intelligence agencies but also ''sources of operational assistance.'' This, critics contend, is broad enough to include foreign political figures and some domestic businessmen.
 
Senate Panel Has Hearings
Agent identities legislation was the subject of hearings today in the Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism. When the witnesses called the A.C.L.U. nonpartisan, the subcommittee chairman, Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, said he ''couldn't hear any titter'' in the hearing room but would have heard laughter ''out in the hinterland'' of the nation.
Senator Denton and Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the ranking Democrat on the subcommittee, nearly clashed over Senator Denton's answering questions that Senator Biden was directing to witnesses. At one point Senator Biden suggested that time could be saved if he asked his questions of Senator Denton.
In an opening statement, Senator Denton said he was ''disappointed, to say the least,'' with some news coverage of his subcommittee's hearings April 24 on terrorism. He said the articles ''tended to focus on an apparent lack of evidence of Soviet masterminding of international terrorism, a point of view to which no one connected with this hearing has ever subscribed.''
He said that to suggest that he was disappointed by a lack of evidence of ''Soviet masterminding of this pernicious activity is to misrepresent my views.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of William J. Casey


End of Document