C.I.A. Used a British Island to Transport Terrorism Suspects
The New York Times
February 22, 2008 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 758 words
Byline: By JOHN F. BURNS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


In tones freighted with frustration, Britain's foreign secretary, David Miliband, told the House of Commons on Thursday that, ''contrary to earlier explicit assurances,'' the Central Intelligence Agency had confirmed using an American-operated airfield on a British island in the Indian Ocean for refueling two ''rendition'' flights carrying terrorism suspects in 2002.
  The American acknowledgment contradicted previous assurances by the United States to Britain's government that no such flights had landed on British territory or passed through British airspace. Each flight carried a single detainee and stopped on the island of Diego Garcia. 
  Although the C.I.A. attributed its earlier denials to a ''flawed records search,'' the admission could add to the animosity the government here has aroused over its alliance with the United States in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
  Mr. Miliband's statement prompted protests from members of Parliament of various parties and from British-based human rights groups that have contended for years that Britain was a knowing or unknowing partner in the American use of rendition flights. The term gained much of its notoriety from the American practice after Sept. 11, 2001, of transporting terrorism suspects secretly to other countries for interrogation.
  The director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, informed British officials of the 2002 flights last week during a visit to London. He issued a statement on Thursday to the agency's staff in Washington saying that a fresh review of agency records had shown that the C.I.A. had erred in assuring Britain previously that ''there had been no rendition flights involving their soil or airspace'' since the Sept. 11 attacks. 
  Mr. Miliband said that he had received a personal apology from Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and that she had told him she shared his ''deep regret'' about the earlier false denials.
  General Hayden said in his statement, ''That information, supplied in good faith, turned out to be wrong.'' 
  He added: ''That we found this mistake ourselves, and that we brought it to the attention of the British government, in no way changes or excuses the reality that we were in the wrong. An important part of intelligence work, inherently urgent, complex and uncertain, is to take responsibility for errors and to learn from them.''
  Mr. Miliband told the House of Commons he was ''very sorry indeed'' to have to revise the Labor government's repeated assurances  that it knew of no American rendition flights involving British airspace or airfields. The British assurances,  in 2005, 2006 and 2007, were given, among others, by Tony Blair, who said in 2005 as prime minister that he was ''not prepared to believe'' that the Americans had broken faith with Britain over the issue.
  ''The House and its members will be deeply disappointed at this news, and about its late emergence,'' Mr. Miliband said.
  Prime Minister Gordon Brown, visiting Brussels, spoke in similar terms. ''It is unfortunate that this was not known, and it was unfortunate it happened without us knowing that it had happened,'' he said.
  The prime minister has been struggling with low poll ratings driven in part by government mishaps. Mr. Brown has also been working to replace the close relationship Mr. Blair had with President Bush with a more wary stance and moving rapidly to draw down Britain's remaining 4,200 troops in Iraq.
  In his account, General Hayden, the C.I.A. director, said that neither of the detainees aboard the rendition flights that refueled at Diego Garcia ''was ever part of the C.I.A.'s high-value terrorist interrogation program.'' 
  This appeared to be his way of saying what Mr. Miliband, in his Commons statement, made explicit: that the suspects were not taken to any of the C.I.A.'s network of secret prisons, and that they were not subjected to stress techniques that critics of the C.I.A. program have described as tantamount to torture. 
  General Hayden said one of the detainees ''was ultimately transferred to Guantanamo,'' the American military prison in  Cuba, while the other ''was returned to his home country,'' identified as Morocco by State Department officials in Washington on Thursday. 
  General Hayden also used the statement to refute accusations by human rights groups that the C.I.A. ''had a holding facility'' for terrorist suspects on Diego Garcia, a 40-mile-long island leased by Britain about 1,000 miles southwest of the southern tip of India. ''That is false,'' he said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Foreign Secretary David Miliband telling Parliament that the C.I.A. had used British territory to refuel ''rendition'' flights. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PARBUL TV, VIA REUTERS)               

Load-Date: February 22, 2008


End of Document