Cairo Journal;
Battling the Religious Right: The Celluloid Front
The New York Times
April 18, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 910 words
Byline: By CHRIS HEDGES, 

By CHRIS HEDGES,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: CAIRO, April 17
Body


A tourist bus is raked with automatic fire. A video shop is firebombed. A Christian jewelry store is robbed, and a police official assassinated.
These episodes, rather than a litany of the latest attacks by Islamic militants, are taken from the opening scene of the "The Terrorist," Egypt's first feature film to tackle the rise of Islamic fundamentalism.
The three-hour production, along with a recent television serial, heralds a campaign by Egypt's movie industry, the world's third largest, to counter the huge incursions by militant Islam into Arab society. The campaign pits a secular cultural elite against a mass movement that forbids men and women to act on the same stage and that brands Western culture as decadent.
"This movie reveals, in a dramatic manner, the internal contradictions within the terrorist movement," said the Minister of Information, Safwat al-Sherif. "It illustrates that whenever anyone is allowed to see society clearly they give up extremism."
But critics contend that the refusal by Egypt's governing party to share power for more than four decades has forced it to depend on a crude scare campaign for survival. And many worry that the simple stereotyping of the militants by the state-controlled film industry, coupled with the portrayal of Government officials as honest and efficient, could backfire.
"It is a ridiculous movie that fails to examine the underlying problems that create the militant movement and fails to offer any real solution," said Girgis Anton, a 54-year-old businessman, as he left Al-Tahrir cinema.  "The portrayal of the security forces is absurd. It is a piece of propaganda that most people will quickly forget."
The battle between the Government and Islamic militants, who have a wide following in many poor villages and slums, has taken more than 350 lives and left 735 people injured during the last two years.
The movie has infuriated underground militant groups and was banned in Jordan after protests by Islamic organizations. The leading actor, the Arab world's most famous comic actor, Adel Imam, has received death threats and is now protected by a large security detail. Vehicles are not allowed to park in front of cinemas where the film is playing for fear of car bombs. Moviegoers pass through metal detectors and are searched at the door, and once patrons enter they are not allowed to leave until the film ends.
The Islamic Group, the principal fundamentalist organization, opened fire on a crowd of moviegoers at a foreign film festival in December, killing a police officer. The group had condemned the event as "a festival of nudity."
Many Egyptians have stayed away from "The Terrorist" out of fear of similar attacks, and theaters are only half full. Several actors and actresses refused to appear in the movie.
"The main aim of the fanatics is the destruction of our culture," said Mr. Imam, seated in his spacious apartment. "And this is the first time we have grappled with this theme. Unfortunately, I am one of the few fighting the fanatic current. I often feel alone. The people with the bombs and weapons have frightened many away."
The film was released after a monthlong soap opera called "The Family" was shown on television. The serial depicted cynical militant leaders manipulating poor Egyptians in a bid to take power.
Egyptian officials have high hopes for their newest battlefront.
"The belated entry of cinema and television into the turmoil of opposition to terrorism will give millions of silent and confused viewers something beyond the official cliches to understand the phenomenon," wrote a columnist, Salama Ahmed Salama, in the pro-Government daily Al Ahram.
What the film lacks in subtlety, it more than makes up for in bravado. Mr. Imam is seen at the start as a ruthless, sexually frustrated man named Ali who is ordered about by cowardly and rapacious militant leaders.
A sour grimace stamped on his bearded face, Ali carries out a series of terrorist attacks in which the suffering of widows and children loom large.
But Ali, now a fugitive, is struck by a car and taken in by a family whose affluence is in stark contrast to the impoverished existence of most Egyptians. They are kind, patriotic and tolerant to the point of incredulity, and he finds love -- platonic -- with their daughter.
Ali repents, befriends a Christian neighbor and leaves the Islamic movement.
In the final scene he staggers down a street, crying out to the family, as militants pump enough lead in his back to drop a water buffalo. They rush outside to cradle the dying man in their arms.
The film often appears to be little more than a vehicle for a series of long-winded speeches about accepting sacrifices for Egypt and how Islam is supposed to be a peaceful faith. It ignores issues like unemployment, political repression and housing shortages that many say contribute to the rise of Islamic fundamentalism.
The speeches are usually delivered by a character who -- with a fictitious last name -- portrays the writer Farag Foda, who was gunned down by Islamic militants in June 1992. Mr. Foda's calls for an open democratic system and an end to endemic Government corruption are omitted from the film. His gruesome assassination is not.
But to Mr. Imam, the film has a broader message. "The film is not just about the terrorism carried out by those with weapons," he said, "but the intellectual terrorism carried out by those who try to control our religion, our literature and our thought."

Graphic

 
Photo: Egypt's state-controlled movie industry has produced a feature-length film, "The Terrorist," to try to counter the Islamic fundamentalists. A poster outside a theater in Cairo last week advertised the film. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: April 18, 1994


End of Document