CALCULATION TERRORISM; ISU professor's model identifies likely targets
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
April 20, 2003, Sunday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: News; Pg. A1
Length: 749 words
Byline: Scott Richardson
Body


NORMAL - A psychologist from Illinois State University and a physicist from Florida have used mathematics to identify potential terrorist targets in the United States.
They can't tell the public what they found - for obvious reasons - but their work has been sent to the Department of Homeland Security.
Thomas Schori, who teaches marketing at ISU, said the United States has hundreds of thousands of possible targets, but too few resources to protect them all.
As a result, Schori - along with friend and former co-worker George Stungis - devised equations that first appeared in the March edition of the Journal of Homeland Security, a publication of ANSER, a not-for-profit, public-sector research institute. It can be viewed at www.homelandsecurity.org/journal. 
Schori, who has a doctorate in psychology, and Stungis, who uses his doctorate in physics working on the staff at Medical Technology Corp. in Fort Charlotte, Fla., hope national security advisers will use their theory to rank targets in the same way terrorists may view them.
Countermeasures then can be applied where they are likely to do the most good, Schori said.
"You are always confronted with too much information and must whittle that down to determine what they (terrorists) are likely to do," Schori said. He said publicly disclosing what he and Stungis think are terrorists' primary targets would be counterproductive.
"We want to be sure we don't help the bad guys," he said.
"You can come up with thousands of possible targets. All are not going to occur," he said. "Which ones can you protect? Which ones should you protect? Where should you spend your resources?"
He said counterterrorism efforts are like playing a chess game on a global scale. "You are trying to go some steps ahead of someone else," he said.
Schori and Stungis say their work has practical applications, and they have no doubt terrorists will try to stage more attacks in the United States or abroad.
The equation, with some modification, has value in the business world, too, where corporate leaders try to anticipate what competitors might do next, Schori said.
Put to the test at the request of one company, Schori said he predicted a competitor would do several things, including some he considered "bizarre."
"Ninety percent have come true," he said.
Whether used in politics or commerce, the process is the same: The presumed goals of the other side are listed and applied to various possible scenarios. Each scenario is ranked on how they fulfill those goals, he said.
With regard to terrorists, the equations - much too complex to reprint here - factor in what Schori and Stungis think are primary goals of terrorism: high body counts, high visibility and harm to America's economy.
In their article, Schori and Stungis point out those were the main results obtained by the al-Qaida network working for Osama bin Laden, the mastermind behind the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that killed about 3,000 people in New York, Washington, D.C. and Pennsylvania.
Sources cited in their article say the attacks caused an estimated $60 billion in direct losses to the U.S. economy and $600 billion in losses to the stock market. Schori and Stungis think actual figures were much higher.
Schori said the equation can be adapted to more subtle forms of attack, such as the spread of anthrax or smallpox.
The procedure is better when applied to major, well-organized terrorist efforts rather than the spontaneous "hit-and-run" attacks carried out by smaller cells, such as those working in Israel. But with some changes, the process can be adapted to those cases, he said.
The equation also can be applied by each city, town or county to focus limited security resources where they may be needed most, Schori said.
At first glance, Americans in smaller towns may feel safer than in larger cities. But not every objective is as important as every other, he said. A place like McLean County, an insurance hub with high agricultural production, could rank higher than most people might expect.
"It well could be a target here could be attractive as well," he said. "There are a lot of things you could consider. We haven't thought of all of them."
Besides declining to list possible terrorist targets, Schori declined to say what other goals terrorists may consider important.
Instead, details of the research were sent to the White House, where spokesmen told Schori it was forwarded to the Department of Homeland Security.
Contact Scott Richardson at srichardson@pantagraph.com  

Graphic

 
George Stungis Illinois State University's Thomas Schori stood Thursday outside Williams Hall, holding a paper containing equations he co-created to determine the process terrorists may use in selecting targets for an attack.

Load-Date: April 22, 2003


End of Document