Caleb Carr tackles terrorism, and the lessons learned
USA TODAY
January 28, 2002, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 523 words
Byline: Bob Minzesheimer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body

NEW YORK -- Caleb Carr is best known for his novels The Alienist and The Angel of Darkness, spooky blends of fiction and century-old facts.
But his training is as a military and diplomatic historian. He considered attending West Point until he found it was less interested in "philosopher-soldiers," as he puts it, than "military bureaucrats."
Carr's response to Sept. 11 was to write not a novel, but a 256-page essay, a provocative history lesson that includes American forms of terrorism.
The Lessons of Terror (Random House, $ 19.95), out Tuesday, describes the terrorists of Sept. 11 not as insane criminals, but as soldiers "in the most primal sense." As he sees it, they were engaged in an age-old tradition: "Deliberate warfare against civilians with the purpose of destroying their will."
Such behavior, he says, "has always been with us," and the "atrocities" of Sept. 11 "cannot be truly understood out of context."
At 46, Carr says he has "a hard time with contemporary fiction." The prospect of writing a novel about Sept. 11 is "too awful to even fathom. I had a hard enough time doing this book."
It grew out of an article he published in 1996 in the World Policy Journal criticizing the Clinton administration for treating terrorism as a crime rather than a form of warfare.
Experts, "even people I like," he says, called it "alarmist and extremist."
Now, he says, "I feel horribly vindicated.  . . .  Three thousand people died who didn't have to die."
He blames both the CIA's "inept intelligence" and airport security, which, he says, won't dramatically improve until there are fewer flights. "We fly too capriciously," he adds.
His book traces warfare aimed at civilians from the days of the Roman Empire. It's a strategy that has never succeeded, at least in the long run. Carr warns, "Warfare against civilians must never be answered in kind.  . . .  Terror must never be answered with terror."
He lists "great historical figures" who fit his definition of terrorist. He equates the PLO's Yasser Arafat with Ireland's Michael Collins. He includes Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger for targeting civilians in Vietnam and Cambodia, and World War II hero Jimmy Doolittle for his 1942 bombing raid on Tokyo.
Doolittle a terrorist? "What else would you call it when you drop clusters of incendiary bombs over residential areas?" he replies. "People will say, 'Well, that's war.' Well, no. That's a kind of war. It doesn't have to be that way. We make it that way."
A "radical centrist" in his politics, Carr mostly approves of the Bush administration's conduct of the war in Afghanistan, but he worries that if Osama bin Laden isn't found, "we'll become frustrated and resort to just bombing it into rubble."
He moonlights as a "script doctor" for Hollywood directors (his current project: a prequel to The Exorcist) but says he'd welcome working for the National Security Council as a psychological profiler, a job he hasn't been offered.
Carr shrugs and recalls when he was a student at a Quaker high school in New York during the Vietnam War and expressed interest in studying military history. "The headmaster told me I was disgusting."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Todd Plitt, USA TODAY; Putting terror in context: Warfare against civilians must never be answered in kind," says Caleb Carr, author of The Lessons of Terror, shown here in New York.

Load-Date: January 28, 2002


End of Document