California lawmakers seek federal funds to fight terrorism
University Wire
April 25, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The California Aggie via U-Wire
Length: 874 words
Byline: By Sean Gill, The California Aggie
Dateline: Davis, Calif.
Body


Senior members of the California State Assembly traveled to Washington, D.C., last week with two messages for members of Congress: California's state and local governments will play a vital role in the event of a terrorist attack at home, and the state needs federal funds to prepare California's agencies for the fight on terrorism.
Led by Assembly Speaker Herb J. Wesson Jr. (D-Culver City) and Assembly Minority Leader Dave Cox (R-Sacramento), the delegation said California needs more than $ 5.5 billion in federal funding, with the largest chunk going to upgrade California's communications systems so that emergency response agencies can communicate with each other more effectively.
The efforts come at a time when the state is facing a budget shortfall and follows congressional and California legislative hearings addressing how so-called "first responders" - the police, fire, paramedic and public health agencies first on the scene in an emergency -- should be equipped, outfitted and trained to respond to terrorist attacks.
U. California-Davis
"We've done the homework; we know the needs," Wesson said. "We went to Washington to make the case for California's share of federal funds."
In a letter dated Apr. 16 and sent to key congress members, Wesson and Cox wrote that the state had formed a special task force to determine the effects of terrorism on California and the steps needed to prepare the state for future attacks.
Specifically, the letter wrote that the state needed $ 180 million to train and equip special firefighter units to deal with terrorist acts, $ 175 million for local law enforcement, $ 1.33 billion for emergency healthcare supplies, specialized equipment and training, and $ 3.5 billion for new communications equipment.
The letter was sent to both of California's Democratic senators, Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer, as well as Sen. Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia), chair of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and Sen. Joseph Lieberman (D-Connecticut). Feinstein is the chair of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Technology and Terrorism. Representatives Sam Farr (D-Carmel), Jerry Lewis (D-Redlands) and Jane Harman (D-Redondo Beach) also received the letter.
The House of Representatives and the Senate have yet to agree on a budget for fiscal year 2003, but increased homeland security funds were a major component in President George Bush's budget proposal. California lawmakers believe a substantial amount of that money should go to the states.
"A top priority for the $ 38 million in federal homeland security funds should be to train and equip local police, fire and health personnel who would be first to respond to any attack," said state Rep. Jenny Oropeza (D-Long Beach).
The assembly members said that their budget requests come from consultations with various organizations representing California's first responders. The requests highlight the state's desire to be able to respond to any number or type of terrorist attack.
Working with the Metropolitan Fire Chiefs Association, for example, the delegation said that firefighters need personal protection equipment from weapons of mass destruction, equipment for 75 hazardous materials emergency response teams located strategically throughout the state, decontamination units and training for all of California's firefighters. Cities and counties had helped to determine the needs of law enforcement agencies.
The delegation said the California Hospital Association had helped them determine that California hospitals need money to increase their readiness in disease surveillance, reporting and identification. California hospitals also need training, personal protective equipment and dedicated decontamination facilities as well as mental health resources.
The state representatives said California's greatest vulnerabilities include its aging public agency communications systems. They cited the lack of compatibility between different agencies, channel congestion, and the lack of data and video transmitting capabilities as some of the major problems.
"From upgraded communications technology to new training protocols, the anti-terrorism needs of California's first responders are great, and the role of the federal government in meeting those needs has never been clearer," said Dan Terry, president of the California Professional Firefighters.
These organizations said federal funding was vital to meet their needs and that it was important for the federal government to recognize their role as the first line of defense.
"We hope that they will recognize and appreciate that, as first responders, we have the close knowledge of where the problems are and where those resources can best be utilized," said Riverside County Sheriff Larry Smith.
While California is better prepared than many states, the delegation said the state believes it is a high-profile potential target.
"The federal government should recognize that we have unique vulnerabilities - our border, our ports, our airports, our nuclear facilities and our tourist destinations -- that could make us an inviting target," said Clancy Faria, president of the Peace Officers Research Association of California.
(C) 2002 The California Aggie via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 25, 2002


End of Document