Call it what it is: White supremacy in Charlottesville, Virginia
The Technician: North Carolina State University
August 14, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 561 words
Body


The events that took place last weekend in Charlottesville, Virginia, must be called out for what they were: on Friday, a demonstration by white supremacists and neo-Nazis, and on Saturday, domestic terrorism.
Technician's editorial board condemns the rally and violence that occurred for what they were and stands in solidarity with people of color and other marginalized groups on the University of Virginia's campus, on our own campus and across the nation.
Those under direct attack in our country today must know that they have the full support of NC State, and today, they do not. Support isn't given by vaguely condemning violence and hate "on many sides" as President Trump did, only after being criticized for his silence.
Support is given by using words that mark the severity of what is unfolding in our nation today. Neo-Nazis and white supremacists participated in demonstrations of violence and intimidation at a college campus not unlike our own. Not only is Virginia just one state away, but it, like NC State, is a predominantly white institution.
While domestic terrorism has not occurred from these groups here yet, we know from signs left around campus and markings on the Free Expression Tunnel that white supremacists are interested in furthering their ideology in Raleigh and on our very own campus.
What's to say that the escalation of violence couldn't happen here?
We as an editorial board are disappointed with the lack of severity displayed from our administration at NC State. Chancellor Woodson merely released a one-sentence statement on Sunday - a day after the death of three people and injuries to at least 35 - condemning acts of hate. He made no mention of the group behind the domestic terrorism and he did not specifically label their ideology for what it is: white supremacy.
"NC State stands in solidarity with our colleagues at UVA and citizens of Charlottesville against acts of hate, bigotry and racism," Chancellor Woodson said in the statement.
At Technician, we understand the power of words. The lack of words, and later, the lack of accurate words, from our national administration and the administration of the University of Virginia is unacceptable. President Teresa A. Sullivan from UVA labeled the demonstrators as "alt-right protesters ... attempting to intimidate." This is not enough.
In contrast, our student body president, Jacqueline Gonzalez, released an official statement on the matter beginning with, "What began as a march of white supremacy ... ended with the loss of life..." and ending with campus resources available to all students. She signed, "In solidarity."
We will not ignore the type of hate speech that occurred at UVA this weekend - not here, not on our campus. Instead, we will bring to light discriminatory and racially charged speech at our university. Our newspaper exists as a platform for the diverse opinions at NC State.
We are committed to calling it like it is, and that means refusing to mask white supremacy with an easy-to-digest term such as "alt-right." What started as hate speech evolved into an act of terrorism, and this is the kind of power we refuse to give to those seeking to harm students of color and other marginalized groups on our campus.
The unsigned editorial is the opinion of the majority of Technician's editorial board, and is the responsibility of the editor-in-chief.

Load-Date: August 14, 2017


End of Document