Call it what you will, but L.A. attack was 'terrorism'
USA TODAY
July 9, 2002, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 448 words
Body

Clearly the attack Thursday on innocent civilians by an Egyptian at the El Al Airlines ticket counter was a terrorist attack, and the only thing that needs to be established is whether it was state-sponsored or an individual effort. Either way it was terrorism ("Airport slayings intensify debate: 3 die in L.A. incident outside checkpoints," News, Friday).
The question is what can be done to prevent similar attacks by Arabs against both Jewish and Israeli interests in the United States as well as U.S. interests abroad and at home?
The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service must make an extra effort in detaining and deporting any illegal person from the Middle East, including those who have remained here after their visas expired.
The bottom line is that we would be safer if there were no people in this country who wished to harm us through acts of terrorism.
Mike Adler
Coral Springs, Fla.
After warnings, we need truth
Israel calls the incident at the Los Angeles airport a "terrorist" attack. Any attack by an Arab on El Al Airlines and/or passengers in a terminal is "terrorism," according to Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres. Our government prefers to call it an "isolated," but "non-terrorist" incident.
We were told to beware of a possible attack during the Fourth of July holiday. Now that we've had one, it is being downplayed. We do not need to be panicked, but we are adults and need to know the truth. Smaller attacks such as these and others directed at Israel may be the wave of the future against America and American interests abroad.
In trying to prevent the big, left hook, we may find ourselves "jabbed" to death by small punches. Thursday's incident may be a harbinger.
Larry Grossberg
Oklahoma City
El Al acts with decisiveness
I praise El Al Airlines. It took quick and decisive action that prevented more loss of innocent life ("Plug holes in air security," Editorial, Monday).
And Israel properly labeled the murderer a terrorist, whether or not the 41-year-old gunman, an Egyptian immigrant, was working with others.
Since he was shot dead by an El Al security agent, it is certain the gunman will terrorize no one else, and we won't have to spend millions in court and imprisonment costs.
Charlie Hollomon
McDonough, Ga.
'Worldwide' war on West
The FBI is not fooling anybody by denying that the murders of Americans or Jews by Muslims are acts of terrorism ("Senator wants airport security changes" News, Monday).
Many Islamic leaders have called on Muslims to embrace jihad, or holy war. So we should consider these atrocious acts to be part of the worldwide war that Islam is waging on the West.
And we should retaliate ferociously.
Jack Crawford
Silver Spring, Md.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Hector Mata, AFP; On guard: A police officer on top of a parking structure surveys the international terminal at Los Angeles International Airport. Three people died, including the attacker, in a shooting incident on Independence Day near the El Al Israel Airlines ticket counter.

Load-Date: July 9, 2002


End of Document