Calls From Man With Terror Links Prompted German Alert, Official Says
The New York Times
November 29, 2010 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 863 words
Byline: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Stefan Pauly contributed reporting.
Body


BERLIN -- Germany's recent decision to declare a terrorism alert and dispatch heavily armed police around the nation was set off by phone calls from a man who said he wanted to quit working with terrorists and warned of a pending Mumbai-style attack, according to a law enforcement official with firsthand knowledge of the alert.
The man's calls to the German Federal Criminal Police earlier this month prompted a quick turnaround by the interior minister,Thomas de Maiziere, who had tried to preserve a public appearance of calm even while law enforcement and intelligence forces had stepped up behind-the-scenes efforts to safeguard the nation from the growing threat of radical Islamic terrorists.
''Whoever knows the personality of Minister for the Interior de Maiziere knows that he is not a man of quick conclusions,'' said Rolf Tophoven, director of the Institute for Terrorism Research and Security Policy in Essen.
But the caller, who claimed to have been a jihadist working with terrorists in the Pakistan-Afghanistan region, phoned the federal police three times providing what law enforcement officials said was concrete information: plans for a team of armed terrorists to rampage through the Reichstag, the popular tourist site that also serves as the home for Germany's Parliament.
Even more alarming, the man said that there were already two members of the group in or near Berlin, and that four others would soon be trying to join them, according to the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of his work in intelligence and security matters.
The existence of the caller, who was not identified, was first reported in the German magazine Der Spiegel.
At the moment, the official said, security agencies were focused on four or five possible terrorist plots aimed at different locations around the country. The official said the authorities were uncertain if the plots were linked in one grand scheme or if they were completely separate.
In the nearly two weeks since the interior minister issued his warning, Germany appears have settled down from its early jitters, with streets and shops and markets busy in spite of a cold snap. Christmas lights have been hung along busy streets, and the familiar booths for Christmas markets have also gone up, selling crepes and warm mulled wine, candy, sausages and other treats.
Reports of suspicious packages appear to have slowed down. Commuters hurry past bomb-sniffing dogs and travelers ask heavily armed police officers for directions at the main train station in Berlin.
The lawn in front of the Reichstag, which has since been closed to tourists, is quiet. The familiar long line out front is gone. Heavy security surrounds the Chancellery, police officers patrol airports and hop into trains when they cross into Germany, and there is an intense effort to monitor the border.
Security forces are still on the lookout for two men, believed to be in the Berlin area and part of the plot on the Reichstag, and federal and intelligence forces have been watching German citizens known to have traveled to the Pakistan-Afghanistan region. Two German citizens believed to be connected with terrorist training camps are being held in a Turkish prison, awaiting return to Germany, officials said.
When Der Spiegel first reported the existence of the caller and the Reichstag as a target, police and security officials said that talk of a specific target was speculation. But the law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said the report was correct, though the official lamented the leak, saying it may have endangered the life of the informer and tipped off terrorists that German officials knew of their plans.
The law enforcement official also said the report may have prompted them to choose an alternate target. The official also warned that there was no way to know if the caller was providing accurate information or was sincere in his desire to switch sides, or whether the calls were part of a ruse to trick German law enforcement, like the Jordanian double agent who gained the trust of American officials in Afghanistan before bombing a base there, killing seven C.I.A. officials.
The man asked German officials to help him return to his family, presumably in Germany. If German forces are able to locate the caller and bring him in, the official said, they will initially treat him as potentially hostile.
Since the terrorism alert, German officials have tried to convince the public that regardless of the veracity of the caller's information, Germany faces the threat of an attack from radical Islamists, not only from the Pakistan region, but from home as well. Increasingly, security officials have acknowledged their growing concern that German citizens are becoming radicalized and perhaps plotting strikes.
Shortly after the government raised its terrorism alert and closed the Reichstag to tourists, the chancellor, Angela Merkel, called for calm and then in her weekly video podcast, said this was a concern not just for German law enforcement, but for all of NATO: ''terrorism, failed states -- these are the future challenges against which we have to prepare ourselves.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Germany has deployed heavily armed officers around the nation, including at tourist sites like the Brandenburg Gate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ODD ANDERSEN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)         

Load-Date: November 29, 2010


End of Document