Calling Sudan names not likely to curb its support for terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 19, 1993, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 870 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Now it's official. The U.S. government, which does these things with great  reluctance, has finally declared that the government of Sudan supports  terrorism.
The formal notification came Wednesday when U.S. diplomats told their  counterparts at the foreign ministry in Khartoum, the Sudanese capital.
Those of you who follow these things won't exactly be falling over in  shock at the news. You probably suspected it all along and wondered why the  Clinton administration took so long to acknowledge the obvious. Or why, for  that matter, the Bush administration before it never did.
WSHSUDAN2
Those of you who don't follow these things very closely may be wondering  about a few things too - like where in the world is Sudan anyway, and why  would it be doing those awful things our government says it's doing.
That's why we begin with the basics: Sudan - some like to call it "the  Sudan" - is an extremely poor African nation just south of Egypt that was  known in ancient times as Nubia. These days, about 70 percent of its  27-million people are Muslims, 18 percent or so follow traditional African  religions and about 5 percent are Christians.
In the 16 years leading up to 1985, the country was relatively stable under  the iron rule of President Jaafar Numiery. When Numiery got kicked out in a  military coup, things became relatively unstable. After another military coup  in 1989, things got even worse.
The new military government came under the influence of an Islamic mystic  named Hassan Turabi, whose ideas were similar in many ways to those of the  late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in Iran. Both, for instance, believed that  nations with Muslim majorities had to have Muslim governments that strictly  enforce Islamic laws on Muslim and non-Muslim alike.
Predictably, when the government put Turabi's ideas into practice, it  triggered a civil war between Sudan's Muslims and non-Muslims. And just as  predictably, the resulting breakdown in order led to famine and starvation  that killed tens of thousands of people - more than the actual fighting did.
In addition to these disastrous policies, the Sudanese government also  follows Iran's lead when it comes to the idea of spreading militant Islam to  other countries and punishing those it sees as its enemies.
Among other things, that means supporting and giving shelter to the  following unsavory outfits: Hezbollah, the fundamentalist extremists who blew  up the U.S. Embassy and the Marine barracks and took American hostages in  Beirut during the 1980s; the Islamic Group, which has been killing foreign  tourists in Egypt and trying to overthrow the government of President Hosni  Mubarak; and the Abu Nidal organization, probably the most notorious terror  gang of the past decade.
Some of you may recognize the Islamic Group of Egypt. It's the outfit led  by Sheikh Omar Abdel-Rahman, the blind Muslim cleric whose followers are  charged with bombing the World Trade Center in New York and plotting to  destroy other landmarks in the city.
You may also recall that five of the 11 suspects arrested in the New York  investigation were from Sudan. And that two Sudanese diplomats assigned to the  United Nations are suspected of helping the terrorists. ABC news reports that  U.S. intelligence specialists believe the top levels of the Sudanese  government are directing some of the terrorist operations.
The Sudanese, you won't be surprised to hear, deny all these accusations.  In Khartoum, a government spokesman angrily challenged the U.S. government  Wednesday "to come up with a single case of a Sudanese national involved in a  terrorist act." Apparently he doesn't count the five awaiting trial in New  York.
As it turned out, the Clinton administration's move against Sudan came  during a busy week for the Islamic extremists who look to people like Turabi  and Abdel-Rahman for inspiration.
Even as U.S. diplomats were delivering their bad news in Khartoum, Islamic  militants in Cairo were trying to kill the Egyptian interior minister, Hassan  el-Alfy (Story, 9A). Earlier in the week, also in Egypt, militants fired on a  boatload of foreign tourists sailing on the Nile. And in Jordan, security  forces announced they had broken up an Islamic fundamentalist plot to  assassinate King Hussein.
So what does it mean, in practical terms, for a country to be officially  designated a supporter of terrorism?
In Sudan's case, not much.
Ordinarily, the United States cuts off all economic and military aid and  most trade as soon as the designation is made. But Washington had eliminated  aid programs and most trade with Sudan already. The designation doesn't affect  humanitarian aid, so a $ 50-million U.S. aid package for starving Sudanese in  the south of the country will go ahead as planned.
Mainly, the idea is for the State Department to be able to use the  designation as a diplomatic lever, a tool to bring about what Washington hopes  will be better behavior.
So far, this hasn't worked out so well. The other countries on the State  Department's terrorism list are Iran, Iraq, Libya, Syria, North Korea and  Cuba.
Not one of them - as far as anyone I know can tell - has changed its  behavior because somebody in Washington called it a name.

Load-Date: August 20, 1993


End of Document