Call for TRIA extension grows louder in Congress; House panels weigh impact of federal backstop
Business Insurance
May 3, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 907 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Support may be growing in Congress for extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act beyond its current Dec. 31, 2005, sunset date.
As was evident in last week's joint meeting of the House Financial Services Committee's Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises and the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, lawmakers fear that the private insurance market is not yet able to guarantee that terrorism insurance it will be available once TRIA expires.
TRIA, which became law in late 2002, provided for a 37-month federal backstop to help private property/casualty insurers offer coverage for losses from future terrorist events. The act was designed to give private insurers enough time to build up the capital and expertise to underwrite the terrorism risk on their own.
Many lawmakers say insurers need more time-though not an indefinite extension.
''It would seem highly advisable to me'' that TRIA should be extended for one or possibly two years, said Rep. Richard Baker, R-La., the chairman of the Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises Subcommittee. Rep. Baker cautioned, though, that any extension should be a one-time event and that the federal government should not become permanently involved in the terrorism insurance market.
''Given the state of the insurance marketplace and the continued war against terror, there is compelling reason to continue a federal backstop for terrorism insurance until we have a viable marketplace that enables businesses to receive coverage,'' said Rep. Sue Kelly, R-N.Y., chairman of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee.
The ranking minority member of Rep Baker's panel-Rep. Paul Kanjorksi, D-Pa.-also called for extension of the program and joined several other lawmakers in advocating the extension of TRIA protections to the group life insurance market as well.
The lawmakers spoke as Richard J. Hillman, director-financial markets and community investment for the General Accounting Office, unveiled a new report on TRIA. Although TRIA has ensured that commercial terrorism insurance coverage is available, ''insurance market participants have made no progress to date toward the development of reliable methods for pricing terrorism risks and little movement toward any mechanism that would enable insurers to provide terrorism insurance to businesses without government involvement,'' Mr. Hillman said.
''It's important to look at alternatives as soon as possible,'' because ''viable alternatives'' to TRIA-backed insurance are not arising in the private marketplace, he said.
New York Insurance Superintendent Gregory V. Serio also called for swift action on TRIA, which he said ''has been a success by any measure.''
Swift deliberation on TRIA's future ''is in everyone's best interest,'' he said, stressing the need to avoid uncertainty in the marketplace.
Mr. Serio, like most of the lawmakers at the hearing, also called for the Treasury Department to move as quickly as possible to extend TRIA's so-called ''make available'' provision. This provision, which expires at the end of this year, requires insurers that offer terrorism coverage to do so with substantially the same terms and conditions as they do other property/ casualty coverages.
But while Wayne A. Abernathy, assistant secretary of the Treasury for financial institutions, agreed that the make-available question needs to be answered quickly, he said that Treasury wants to make sure that its recommendations were based on detailed data rather than on anecdotal information. To this end, he told lawmakers that the Treasury would soon publish a request for comment in the Federal Register in order to make a recommendation by Sept. 1.
''Make available needs to be decided sooner rather than later,'' said Mr. Serio.
''The sooner the Treasury acts, the better,'' agreed Mr. Hillman.
Insurers welcomed the lawmakers' sentiment that the TRIA should be extended.
''We were pleased that there was a bipartisan consensus that came out so clearly,'' said Melissa Shelk, vp-federal affairs for the American Insurance Assn. in Washington.
The Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America ''urges Treasury to proceed in the bipartisan spirit shown by the subcommittees. We will continue to work closely with Congress and the administration to assure certainty is provided to both insurers and their customers,'' said Ken Schloman, counsel-federal government affairs in the PCI's Washington office.
The AIA and PCI joined other insurance industry groups in submitting a statement to the subcommittees urging ''prompt and positive action on TRIA reauthorization.'' The other proponents were the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers, the Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of America, the National Assn. of Professional Insurance Agents, the Reinsurance Assn. of America, the Surety Assn. of America and UWC-Strategic Services on Unemployment & Workers Compensation.
The Consumer Federation of America, though, on the eve of the hearing called on Congress to let the act expire. According to the CFA's analysis, insurers could cover terrorism losses in all but nine U.S. cities by the end of 2005 without federal help. If Congress should extend the federal government's role in backing up terrorism insurance, that role should be limited to ensuring coverage in the nine cities considered to be at high or moderate risk for terrorist attack, according to the CFA.

Graphic

 
Reps. Richard Baker and Sue Kelly agree on the need for an extension of TRIA.

Load-Date: May 5, 2004


End of Document