CALL THE COPS, PETE
Daily News (New York)
March 13, 2011 Sunday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 36
Length: 641 words
Body


There was too much heat and too little light at Rep. Peter King's hearing into the phenomenon of radicalization among Muslim Americans. He will have to do better in his future testimony-taking.
While several of King's testifiers offered valuable insights, the session revealed nothing so much as that Republicans and Democrats approach even terrorism as an ideological battleground.
Starting with the chairman, they fell short of dispassionate fact-finding, lapsing instead into arguments over political correctness (which the GOP claims) versus McCarthyite witch-hunting (which the Democrats suggest).
King is right that Islamist radicalization in the United States is an issue well worth congressional ventilation. To inquire about causes, prevalence and prevention is not, by itself, an attack on Islam or Muslims in this country.
His witnesses were reasonable as far as they went, and the tenor of the questioning defeated the accusation that the hearing was going to be an unfair inquisition. Of particular interest were the stories told by Marvin Bledsoe and Abdirizak Bihi, father and uncle of radicalized young men.
Bledsoe's son, a former Tennessee State University student, converted to Islam, began to act erratically, traveled to Yemen and, after returning to the U.S., shot and killed one soldier and wounded another at an Arkansas military recruiting center.
Bihi's nephew was among a number of Minnesota young men who fell under the sway of religious extremists and traveled to Somalia to engage in armed conflict. He is believed to have been killed.
Challenged by Democratic committee members who charged unfairly that the hearings were an exercise in Muslim-bashing, Bledsoe responded smartly:
"This is a big elephant in the room. Our society continues not to see it. This word called political correctness; you can call it political fear; fear of stepping on a special minority population's toes even as a segment of that population wants to stamp out America and everything we stand for."
Los Angeles Sheriff Lee Baca, testifying at the invitation of Democrats, said most Muslim Americans in his community cooperate with counter-terrorism efforts and that he would have been more comfortable had the hearings focused on radicalization across the broader swath of American society.
After listening to Bledsoe and Bihi, the sheriff also said:
"What I want to know, as soon as possible, is that when you're experiencing these unusual behaviors within mosques or within individuals - within your family - the time to notify authorities is now. And I believe that that's part of the reason why these hearings are very, very important."
Agreed - but King's stated goals are much more sweeping than to provide parents and religious leaders with the warning signs of radicalization and advice on where to turn for help.
According to the title of his investigation, King hopes, as Homeland Security Committee chairman, to document "The Extent of Radicalization in the American Muslim Community and that Community's Response."
With the country well aware that homegrown radicalization is a major threat, King will not beneficially advance the state of knowledge by presenting only anecdotes to support his oft-stated charge that much of the American Muslim community has failed to combat the growth of radicalization in its midst.
Already, King has undercut the credibility of his probe by declining to call FBI terrorism experts. He has asserted that agents are not worth talking to because, in his view, they would shy away from criticizing Muslim cooperation in order to remain in sync with the Obama administration's philosophy.
Is that the truth? Or is King simply turning his back on information that conflicts with his own beliefs? Either way, King needs to take the chip off his shoulder and start calling experts. Has he never heard of the NYPD?

Load-Date: March 15, 2011


End of Document