Campaigns, in N.M., focus on energy, terror;
For the Democrat, oil issues are domestic and foreign.
The President, meanwhile, jumped on a "nuisance" comment.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 12, 2004 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A06
Length: 799 words
Byline: James Kuhnhenn and William Douglas INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: SANTA FE, N.M.
Body


Sen. John Kerry and President Bush yesterday took their campaigns to New Mexico, a state with five precious electoral votes and an electorate so divided that Al Gore won it by a mere 366 votes four years ago.
Kerry pushed his energy policy, comparing the ambition of his plan for energy independence to Franklin Delano Roosevelt's Manhattan Project, a scientific undertaking that gave birth to the atomic bomb.
Bush, in the oil-patch town of Hobbs just across the Texas border, kept up his criticism of Kerry as soft on terrorism and ridiculed Kerry's recently stated goal of reducing terrorism to "a nuisance."
The New Mexico contretemps underscored the significance of this Southwestern state but also highlighted what each candidate considers his main strength.
For Kerry, the message of energy independence is a crossover issue that addresses such domestic policies as conservation, environmental protection, and rising oil prices while also serving as a way for the United States to extricate itself from turmoil in the Persian Gulf.
For Bush, attacking Kerry's stance on terrorism plays to his strengths with the electorate. Polls indicate Americans prefer Bush to Kerry in leading the war against terrorists.
Kerry offered no new proposals yesterday, but he described his plan to develop clean fuels, produce more fuel-efficient cars, expand exploration of natural gas, and reduce energy costs for Americans as a visionary idea that rivaled not only FDR's efforts to harness atomic power but also John F. Kennedy's goal of putting a man on the moon.
"When it comes to developing a real energy policy, George Bush has run out of gas," Kerry told several hundred supporters in Santa Fe.
"As usual with their plans," Kerry said, "they are plans that warm the hearts of their powerful friends and leave you out and leave the American people out in the cold."
Kerry says his plan would make certain that by 2020, 20 percent of American electricity would come from renewable sources such as ethanol and biodiesel fuels.
The Bush campaign accused Kerry of obstructing energy legislation in the Senate that contained provisions for renewable energy.
"John Kerry's obstruction of a national energy policy makes his current political opportunism completely hypocritical," Bush campaign spokesman Steve Schmidt said. "John Kerry will tell people whatever he thinks they want to hear, and his multiple positions are destroying his credibility with the American people."
Kerry, like other Democrats, said he objected to the energy bill because he said it contained too many provisions that would benefit oil corporations.
In Hobbs, Bush appeared at a morning rally designed to appeal to the state's large number of Hispanic voters. He said he would be tougher than Kerry in the fight against terrorism and repeated accusations that Kerry's plan to repeal tax cuts for wealthy Americans would not produce enough money to finance the programs he has promised.
Bush, continuing a line of attack the campaign opened Sunday, quoted a New York Times Magazine piece in which Kerry said: "We have to get to the place we were, where terrorists are not the focus of our lives, but they're a nuisance.
"As a former law-enforcement person, I know we're never going to end prostitution," Kerry told the magazine. "We're never going to end illegal gambling. But we're going to reduce it, organized crime, to a level where it isn't on the rise. It isn't threatening people's lives every day, and fundamentally, it's something that you continue to fight, but it's not threatening the fabric of your life."
Bush said Kerry's comment displayed a fundamental misunderstanding of the war against terrorism.
"Earlier he questioned whether it is really a war at all, describing it primarily as a law-enforcement and intelligence-gathering operation instead of a threat that demands full use of American power," Bush said in Hobbs.
"Now just this weekend, Sen. Kerry talked of reducing terrorism to 'nuisance' and compared it to prostitution and illegal gambling. See, I couldn't disagree more. Our goal is not to reduce terror to some acceptable level of nuisance. Our goal is to defeat terror by staying on the offensive."
Later in the day, Kerry's campaign circulated two-year-old remarks by retired Gen. Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser to Presidents Gerald Ford and George H.W. Bush.
On Oct. 5, 2002, Scowcroft told the U.S. Institute of Peace's PeaceWatch that the war on terrorism could be won, in the same way the war on organized crime could be won.
"There will not be a treaty signed aboard the battleship Missouri," Scowcroft said, "but we can break its back so that it is only a horrible nuisance and not a paralyzing influence on our societies."
Contact reporter James Kuhnhenn at 202-383-6018 or jkuhnhenn@krwashington.com.  

Notes

CAMPAIGN 2004

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
JACK DEMPSEY, Associated Press
President Bush salutes Air Force and Air National Guard members in Aurora, Colo. Bush, who also campaigned in New Mexico yesterday, assailed Kerry's remark on reducing terrorism to "a nuisance."
GERALD HERBERT, Associated Press
Sen. John Kerry greets supporters in Santa Fe, N.M. The Democrat said his energy plan would ensure that by 2020, 20 percent of U.S. electricity would come from renewable sources such as ethanol.

Load-Date: September 1, 2005


End of Document