CAMPUS LIFE: Maryland Institute;
Students' Deaths Inspire Art Show on Terrorism
The New York Times
February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Part 2; Page 43; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Part 2;; Column 1;
Length: 668 words
Dateline: BALTIMORE
Body


At the heart of the exhibit at the Maryland Institute College of Art is "T/ERROR," a jumble of clothing, suitcases, shoes, toys, newspapers and bits of twisted metal scattered about the floor and hanging from the ceiling. As visitors watch images of terrorism on a television screen, a voice drones overhead: "Passport please. Were you traveling alone? Are these your suitcases? Did your bags ever leave your sight?"
The exhibit is a vivid reminder of the wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988, a result of a terrorist bomb. It is also the Maryland Institute's poignant expression of collective grief over the deaths of two of its students -- Gretchen Dater and Louise Ann Rogers -- who were on Flight 103.
"We will never forget that time," said Fred Lazarus, president of the institute, which has about 1,000 students from 46 countries. "Too little attention is given to the victims," he said, which is why the exhibit, "Beyond Glory: Re-Presenting Terrorism," is dedicated to Ms. Dater and Ms. Rogers and to all victims of political violence.
David J. Brown, director of exhibitions, who with an independent curator, Nina Felshin, is co-curator of "Beyond Glory," said he had been considering a terrorism exhibit for nearly a decade. After the Pan Am bombing he proposed the show as a way "to try to talk about it."
 
Response Is Emotional
 The result was a collection of paintings, sculptures, photographs and videos by 36 American and international artists addressing all forms of terrorism, from random bombings to state-sponsored terror.
"A person coming in here can't help but respond emotionally," said Ms. Dater's mother, Joan, who traveled from her home in Ramsey, N.J., to attend the Jan. 24 opening and found herself recalling the horror, shock, guilt and rage she and her family felt after the bombing.
Mrs. Dater has been active with the Victims of Pan Am 103, a group working for increased airline security and changes in government policy toward terrorism.
The artwork in the exhibit, she said, might help make terrorism and its repercussions "more personal, more real." Scott G. Kelly, an admissions counselor at the institute, who was a graduate student when Ms. Dater and Ms. Rogers were students, said the exhibit left him with a feeling of "complete anger."
"These students were 20 years old," Mr. Kelly said. "They gave up an incredible future for someone to make a statement."
 
Cherubs into Helicopters
 Mr. Brown said that what began as an expression of grief evolved into a search for a definition of terrorism.
Terry Berkowitz, an associate professor at Baruch College and the creator of "T/ERROR," said, for example, that she used to think of terrorism as random violence.
"But terrorists act because they feel they have no other recourse," she said. She emphasized that she does not support terrorism, but now believes that "we need to fight the causes of terrorism."
Other artwork in the exhibit, which runs through March 15, addresses the ambiguity of terrorism. As Greg Barsamian's "Putti," a mobile, spins, winged cherubs turn into helicopters and back again to cherubs. The piece can represent an "angel of death, angel of mercy" dichotomy in a world where many think of only death and destruction at the sight or sound of a helicopter, Mr. Barsamian said.
And Paul Graham's photograph, "Graffiti," shows a Northern Ireland town, the peaceful scene scarred only by the word "BEWARE" scrawled in bright orange across a concrete wall.
As an outgrowth of the exhibit, the Maryland Institute last weekend held a symposium, "The Politics and Imagery of Terrorism."
Looking over the art before his keynote speech, Ramsey Clark, Attorney General of the United States during the Johnson Administration, offered his own definition of terrorism -- "the use of fear to control or affect others" -- and emphasized the need to recognize all of its forms. "We call acts of powerlessness terror," Mr. Clark said, "but we ignore the terror of the nuclear threat."

Graphic

 
Photo: The Maryland Institute College of Art's expression of collective grief over the deaths of two of its students on Pan Am Flight 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988, was included in an exhibit dealing with terrorism called "T/ERROR." (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

Load-Date: February 2, 1992


End of Document