CAMPAIGNS PAUSE IN RESPONSE TO SHOOTING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
July 20, 2012 Friday
PITTSBURGH PRESS EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 278 words
Byline: KEN THOMAS, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


FORT MYERS, Fla. -- The deadly shooting spree in Colorado consumed the presidential campaign today, sidetracking a bitter political contest with a tragedy that at least temporarily brought the candidates together in common purpose. "There are going to be other days for politics," a somber President Barack Obama said.
The president and Republican challenger Mitt Romney rushed not only to respond to the killings, but to distance themselves from a campaign that has become increasingly petty and bitter. Mr. Obama limited his campaign appearance in Fort Myers to remarks of less than eight minutes, devoted exclusively to the tragedy.
"It reminds us of all the ways that we are united as one American family," he said. He paused at one point to ask for a moment of prayer that lasted 20 seconds. A baby could be heard crying during it.
Mr. Romney embraced the same sentiment of unity in Bow, N.H., where he had been scheduled to campaign.
"We'll all spend a little less time thinking about the worries of our day and more time wondering about how to help those who are in need of compassion most," he said in brief remarks to a subdued audience. "The answer is that we can come together. We will show our fellow citizens the good heart of the America we know and love.
Mr. Obama canceled a second appearance scheduled near Orlando, Fla., and was returning to Washington. Romney, too, canceled some media interviews. And both candidates moved to pull ads against each other airing in Colorado.
Obama was notified at dawn at his hotel near West Palm Beach, Fla., by his counterterrorism adviser, John Brennan. The White House said there was no apparent connection to terrorism.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Susan Walsh/Associated Press: People observe a moment of silence with President Barack Obama for the victims of the Aurora, Colo., shooting at an event at the Harborside Event Center in Fort Myers, Fla., today.

Load-Date: July 24, 2012


End of Document