Can Bolton shift from lightning rod to diplomat?
USA TODAY
August 2, 2005, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; Debate
Length: 459 words
Body

In March, when President Bush nominated John Bolton to be U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, we saw it as a curious choice, given Bolton's history of anti-U.N. rhetoric and undiplomatic behavior. Why select an autocrat -- whatever his other abilities -- for a job building consensus among allies?
Since then, our internal discussions of the nomination have been much like those in the Senate: lots of argument, little result. No group on our ideologically diverse editorial board, which forms the opinions you read in this space, has been able to muster enough support to prompt either an endorsement or a rejection of Bolton.
Some believe Bolton's hard-line attitude and antipathy to the U.N. are suited to reforming an institution ridden with inefficiency and scandal. Others think Bolton's history of threatening intelligence analysts and offending allies while working to weaken or scuttle international treaties should disqualify him. Still others feel that, despite Bolton's shortcomings, Bush is entitled to wide latitude in picking subordinates.
As Congress adjourned for August, Bush abruptly ended the debate Monday with a recess appointment that allows Bolton to serve in the U.N. post without Senate confirmation until January 2007.
With the matter settled, we can agree on this much: It's unfortunate that Bush could not find a nominee who excels as both a diplomat and reformer. John Negroponte, who held the post in Bush's first term, filled that bill. Bolton is further weakened in that both the U.N. bureaucracy and its members recognize that he lacks the broad support that Senate confirmation would have provided, a vulnerability as the U.N. wrestles with the oil-for-food scandal, nuclear proliferation and terrorism.
A subtle but potentially important shift in the administration's approach to terrorism since Bolton was nominated may also pose a challenge for him.
With the Iraq war looking more and more like a quagmire, the White House has been talking less about pre-emptive military strikes as its primary tool for defeating terrorism. There's more discussion of diplomacy and intelligence. Both require international cooperation -- the kind that has produced so many key arrests of terror conspirators in Pakistan and Europe.
Bolton's history in government is that of an ambassador for the faction of the Republican Party that has long been distrustful of internationalism. From his position in the State Department, he delivered loud and controversial speeches that cheered conservatives but infuriated other nations.
For Bolton to represent the United States successfully requires a change of tune. Hard-line rhetoric about reforming the U.N. is fine. Needlessly alienating allies vital to the struggle against extremists is not.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Pool photo by Dennis Brack

Load-Date: August 2, 2005


End of Document