CAN SCI-FI KEEP US SAFE?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 1, 2007 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LIFESTYLE; Pg. A-2
Length: 735 words
Byline: TONY NORMAN
Body


Last year, Rush Limbaugh hosted a forum on the politics of "24" and what Homeland Security can learn from Kiefer Sutherland about unearthing terror plots.
The panel discussion was dubbed " '24' and America's Image in Fighting Terrorism: Fact, Fiction or Does it Matter?"
During a lull in homeland security, Homeland Security secretary Michael Chertoff found time to say a few words to the Hollywood warriors who bring a wealth of insight that only a hit series in its declining years can impart.
Invited terrorism experts included "24" co-creators Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran. Fictional CTU agents Chloe O'Brian (Mary Lynn Rajskub) and Tony Almeida (Carlos Bernard) were recruited to add credibility to the Heritage Foundation-sponsored event.
While the notion that Hollywood has anything to teach Homeland Security about terrorism sounds bizarre outside the Beltway, Mr. Chertoff praised rogue CTU agent Jack Bauer, a man who splatters the brains of America's enemies all over the Constitution between commercial breaks.
Now that "24" has finished its most morally abhorrent and illogically plotted season yet, the bloom is off that particular rose.
Even the Pentagon has asked the producers of "24" to cut back on the show's gratuitous use of torture because impressionable enlisted folks are developing too dim a view of the Geneva Conventions.
With "24" colossally discredited, where is the Department of Homeland Security to turn for inspired "outside thinking" about terrorism? The best practices of countries that have dealt with terrorists for decades? Nah, too foreign. How about thoughtful citizens and academics who may not be on board with current policies? Nah, too unpatriotic. The Constitution? Nah, too musty.
How about giving established American science fiction writers a shot at preventing the next terrorist attack? Too farfetched? Think again.
Homeland Security's Science and Technology Division has already approached acclaimed science fiction writers Greg Bear, Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle among others to think about ways to prevent the next "unthinkable scenario."
Because the 9/11 Commission faulted the government for its "failure of imagination" in dealing with the terrorist threat, Homeland Security is determined to avoid the terrestrial thinking that led to one of the most traumatic days in our history -- even if it means crossing the boundaries of time and space.
The authors call what they do "Science Fiction in the National Interest," which sounds catchy in a "there's no need to fear, Underdog is here" sort of way.
Perhaps I sound suspicious about the project because of my sense that the best science fiction writers tend to draw their most compelling narratives from a dystopic vision of the world.
I also think the public expects a science fiction writers supergroup devoted to fighting terrorism to have at least one super genius of the caliber of the late Isaac Asimov or the equally brilliant, but elderly Arthur C. Clarke on board. Judging by the breadth of their fiction, those writers have already thought of everything.
With Ray Bradbury out of the picture because of his advanced age, there should be room for younger prophetic voices like William Gibson and Samuel R. Delany. If the sci-fi writers group is smart, it is already reaching out to them.
More than anyone alive, Gibson, the author of "Neuromancer" is likely to figure out the next odd shift in terrorist logic while maintaining his cool, anti-geeky persona in the process. Having someone like Gibson in the group would alleviate a lot of my skepticism.
The absence of the combative, but prolific Harlan Ellison, arguably the most influential science fiction writer of his generation, is a bad sign. Starting a literary supergroup without Ellison is like activating the Justice League without Batman.
To be fair, Homeland Security may finally be on to something that could pay interesting dividends one day. The science fiction writers recruited so far are among the best and the brightest in the business today. They'll approach their mission with more moral seriousness than the producers of "24."
My paranoia has everything to do with the Bush administration's penchant for policies with spiritual roots in classic science fiction: Bradbury's "Fahrenheit 451," George Orwell's "1984" and Phillip K. Dick's "The Minority Report." I'm the sort of guy who judges an administration by the books it steals from.

Notes

Tony Norman can be reached at tnorman@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1631.

Load-Date: June 1, 2007


End of Document