CAN WE WIND DOWN THE 'WAR ON TERROR'?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 10, 2012 Thursday
PITTSBURGH PRESS EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 666 words
Byline: MARTIN SCHRAM
Body


It is late April, and as America's president you are about to be reacquainted with the buck-stopping burden of working at the narrow end of the vast global funnel that dumps all that is known and menacing about terrorism threats in your inbox.
You are planning your secret trip to Afghanistan, where you will announce America's historic commitment to pull all combat troops by 2014 -- but still keep the United States very involved in the Afghan war. You will keep military trainers and advisers on the ground and provide unspecified big-time funding until at least 2024. It's a necessary step, you plan to say, to prevent terrorists from establishing safe havens in Afghanistan from which to attack America's homeland.
Then comes alarming new intelligence about a terror plot -- and it has nothing to do with Afghanistan.
Terrorists from al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), operating in havens in Yemen that have seemed far too safe for far too long, are said to have perfected a hard-to-detect nonmetallic bomb. They want to blast a jetliner out of the sky.
The same Yemen-based bomb-maker who designed the so-called Underwear Bomber's device, AQAP's Ibrahim Hassan al-Asiri, reportedly designed this device. He is still at large. Intelligence agents are keeping the bomb under surveillance in the Middle East country (not Yemen) where it has been assembled. They want to learn as much as possible about the terrorists' potential plans.
But, President Barack Obama, you have one more bit of information that is far more reassuring than even many officials working on the case may realize: The AQAP agent who is carrying the bomb is really ours -- a double agent working with Saudi Arabian intelligence and the CIA. Yemeni intelligence is also involved.
As you prepare to secretly fly to Afghanistan to announce a new stage in the only real war we are still waging, you will be speaking about steps to keep us safer at home. But you also will be watchful of the Yemen plot. Because while this one bomb seems to be securely under the control of the CIA and Saudi intelligence, there could be others. And it is always possible that there could be other agents who have been compromised and may be working for the other side.
On April 30, just a day before you fly to Afghanistan, The Washington Post reports on Page 1 that CIA drones hit targets inside Pakistan -- reportedly killing four terrorists tied to al-Qaida who had taken over a girls' school in the tribal lands of North Waziristan.
The next day, your administration follows that disclosure by taking a major step toward openness of the sort we haven't much seen in this age of terrorism. Your administration formally breaks with the policy of making drone strikes a widely known but officially unspoken secret.
Meanwhile, in Afghanistan, you meet with President Hamid Karzai, greet enthusiastic U.S. troops, speak to Americans back home -- and fly home. Of course, you never mention what you knew about the Yemen plot.
But on May 6, a U.S. drone strike in Yemen kills Fahd al-Quso, who was believed to have succeeded American-born Anwar al-Awlaki as AQAP's external planning chief. The next day, U.S. officials announce that the CIA and unspecified intelligence partners had disrupted the AQAP plot to blow up an airliner.
Now here's where the big-picture world terror threat stands: The Afghan war is winding down, but your intelligence officials increasingly say al-Qaida in Yemen represents the greatest threat to America's homeland. Its talented bomb-maker is still at large. Threats of al-Qaida-affiliated terrorists in Pakistan, Somalia and elsewhere remain menacing.
That intelligence pouring from your global terror funnel raises a question of wartime truth in labeling: Much has changed since 2009, when your administration stopped using the George W. Bush-era term "war on terror." Now it seems that's about to become the only war we are really waging.
Do you want to rethink -- and maybe re-commission -- the phrase "war on terror"?

Notes

Martin Schram writes political analysis for Scripps Howard News Service.

Load-Date: May 12, 2012


End of Document