CANADA WONDERS IF CULTURE OF TOLERANCE MAKES IT TARGET;
 WAR ON TERRORISM PUTS STRAINS ON SOME OF ITS IDEALS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 21, 2003 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 1221 words
Byline: DENEEN L. BROWN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: TORONTO
Body


Hassan Almrei, a Syrian who immigrated to Canada on a fake passport, sat in a glass cage in a courtroom, watching lawyers in flowing black robes argue his case.
 A tall man thinned by a hunger strike, Almrei, 29, listened intently as prosecutors accused him of having links to terrorists and demanded that he be deported to Syria, where he was born. His attorney, Barbara Jackman, argued that it would be inhumane to send the man to a country known for torture.
 Jackman occasionally leaned through the window of the cage to talk with her client. Almrei, who had failed as a small restaurant owner in Toronto, admitted in an affidavit that he had lied to government agents about his activities, but denied being a terrorist.
The cases of Almrei and other Canadian immigrants of Arab descent underscore the tensions in Canada's larger debate about how to deal with immigrants accused of involvement in terrorism. Canadians pride themselves on ideals of tolerance, inclusion and the belief that immigrants should have the same rights as Canadian citizens. But the country is also wrestling with how to protect national security and answer critics who contend that its liberal immigration policies make it easy prey for terrorists.
 "Two years after September 11, there is a failure to come up with a policy on terrorism here, at home, and globally," said Wesley Wark, a professor of international relations at the Munk Center for International Studies at the University of Toronto. "There is a great deal of divisiveness in Canada about how Canada wants to pursue the war on global terrorism."
 In the past few months, Canada has dealt with a series of cases, including that of Maher Arar, a Canadian Syrian arrested in the United States, accused of having links to terrorists, then taken by U.S. agents to Syria, where he says he was tortured. Arar's secret deportation to Syria incensed many Canadians, who said the United States had not respected Arar's Canadian citizenship.
 Jean Chretien, then the prime minister, angrily criticized the United States for deporting Arar, and critics demanded details about Canada's intelligence relationship with the Bush administration.
 Many Canadians were also angry that U.S. officials appeared unapologetic about the Arar case. Arar, who denies the accusations, has filed suit against Jordan and Syria for torture and plans to sue the United States for violating his rights.
 "The response in Canada was 'How dare they?' " said John Thompson, director of the MacKenzie Institute, which studies organized violence and political instability.
 The Arar case cast a shadow over other recent, similar cases. Soon after Syrian authorities freed Arar, Canadian citizen Abdul Rahman Khadr said U.S. authorities sent him against his will to Afghanistan after he was freed from the U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Khadr, 20, who had been detained for alleged links to the al-Qaida terror network, said he had told U.S. authorities that he wanted to return to Canada.
 Canada's Foreign Ministry said Khadr had asked to be sent to Afghanistan, where he had been captured in November 2001. Khadr's brother, Omar, 17, accused of killing a U.S. soldier with a grenade during a shootout in Afghanistan, remains at Guantanamo Bay. Their Egyptian-born Canadian father, Ahmed Khadr, is alleged to be an al-Qaida leader wanted by the United States.
 Martin Rudner, director of the Canadian Center for Intelligence and Security Studies at Carleton University in Ottawa, said attorneys in each of the cases accuse the Canadian government of failing to protect its citizens.
 "In the case of Khadr and Almrei, the legal representation uses the Arar case to say there is a huge problem with how the Canadian government is operating," Rudner said. "In the Khadr case, once again the Canadian government seemed unable or unwilling to assist Khadr, and the United States simply plopped him back in Afghanistan and left him to his own devices to find his way back to Canada. I don't think that is the case. But questions were raised about Canada's ability to protect its citizens."
 Another Syrian-born Canadian, Abdullah Almalki, is being held in a Syrian prison. His relatives have demanded that Canada push harder for his release.
 And Canadian Muslims are urging Canadian authorities to seek the release of Ahmad Abou El-Maati, an Egyptian Canadian arrested in Syria soon after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the United States and accused of ties to terror groups. Syria turned El-Maati over to Egyptian authorities two months after he was arrested.
 Canada portrays itself as a socially liberal society. It is nation of immigrants, legal and illegal, who are seen as essential to its growth. Immigrants and those who work to legalize their status play a major role in shaping Canadian politics. Since the 1960s, when then-Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau opened Canada's doors to more immigrants of color, millions have immigrated to Canada, changing the face of its society.
 Recent government statistics show that immigrants from West and Central Asia and the Middle East grew from 13,360 in 1961 to 162,220 in 2001, while the number of immigrants from Southeast Asia grew from 14,095 to 185,665.
 Unlike the United States, where many immigrants feel pressure to assimilate, Canada encourages people to maintain their cultural identities. "It gives us great strength but also exposes several vulnerabilities," said Rudner, who said terrorist groups have exploited Canada's tolerance.
 Critics of Canada's immigration policies cite a 1985 Canadian Supreme Court decision that they say allows criminals to exploit the system. The court "said that anybody who reaches Canada is entitled to all the same rights and legal protection of Canadian citizens regardless of their status. That was a flare that went up that told people around the world we are an easy mark, and we have had an uncontrollable refugee problem ever since," said Thompson, of the MacKenzie Institute.
 As Canada grows more diverse and more cosmopolitan, Thompson says, it has imported more of the world's conflicts. The 1985 bombing of an Air India flight that killed 329 people was one of the most notorious acts of alleged international terrorism before the Sept. 11 attacks. The Air India bombing was allegedly planned in Canada by militant Sikh separatists who wanted to retaliate for an Indian government raid on the Golden Temple of Amritsar, the Sikh faith's holiest shrine.
 Still, Thompson said, there is a certain naive belief among some Canadians outside intelligence and police circles that terrorism could never occur in Canada. "There has always beenillusions about security in Canada, that Canada is always deemed to be safe from the world's troubles, that violence could never occur here," he said. "The feeling is we are peacekeepers, we are doing this out of altruism, and the world loves us for it."
 There is a sentiment that even if accused terrorists are guilty, they deserve the same rights as any other Canadian until they are convicted. The argument is similar to one in the United States, where civil libertarians express concern that homeland security measures and the Patriot Act will erode the constitutional presumption of innocence. And there is pride here in trying to avoid stereotyping people based on their background.

Load-Date: January 8, 2004


End of Document