Canada's Fate Following Terrorist Attacks
The Daily Campus: University of Connecticut
November 2, 2014 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 669 words
Byline: Kathleen McWilliams
Body


By: Vinay Maliakal, Staff Columnist
The morning of Oct. 22, 2014, began as any other at Parliament Hill in Ottawa, Ontario. People gathered along the sprawling green fields in front of the majestic Centre Block. There they relaxed, played soccer in the grass and enjoyed the pristine weather of the day. Inside the regal building, members of Canada's parliament convened to attend caucuses. There was no totalitarian military force guarding the gates, separating politicians from the people. This was the land of peace and freedom. And I'm afraid that is about to change.
As the morning went on, a man entered Parliament Hill with the intent to destroy that peace. The cracking of gunshots broke the quiet calm as Corporal Nathan Cirillo was fatally shot, murdered in cold blood at the Canadian National War Memorial, where he was standing guard. His killer then proceeded to enter the Centre Block building but was gunned down before he could cause any more harm.
This was a wake-up call to Canada's government. Here, a dangerous man was able to gain entry into a government building where politicians were gathered, without even being questioned. Normally, this transparency and relaxed security would not be a cause for alarm, as it demonstrates Canada's characteristic peaceful mentality and generally pacifist nature. Now, it places Canada in the spotlight as the world realizes that even the serenity of nonviolent nations can be violently disturbed by senseless acts of terrorism.
So what will be Canada's response? Will they proceed to militarize the police and ramp up the security at government agencies and gatherings, placing guards armed to the teeth to block the doors from innocent citizens? To do this would be a tacit admission of defeat in the face of terrorism. This would fly in the face of a long and proud history marked by pacifism and openness. On the contrary, will Canada accept this tragedy and stand by its ideals of transparency and being a national of its people? This would be a brave choice, honoring the sacrifice of Cirillo and taking a stand against the cowardice of terrorism.
It goes without question that Canada should boost its security measures in order to prevent future attacks such as this. Prime Minister Stephen Harper believes the country's "laws and police powers need to be strengthened in the area of surveillance, detention and arrest." The extent of this strengthening remains to be seen.
Such measures should not threaten the integrity of Canada's ideals. The increased security should be concealed from the public in order to preserve a façade of peace. Canada should learn from the responses to terrorist attacks from other nations, such as its neighbor, the United States, especially its reactions following the harrowing events of 9/11. Such responses should serve as both role models to follow as well as cautionary tales.
For example, who can ignore the monstrosity that the United States' TSA has become? For perhaps the small number of attacks that may have been prevented, how many people have been inconvenienced or even ridiculed as their privacy and, in some cases rights, have been infringed upon. This is a relatively tame example compared to the privileges that the nation's government security has been granted. Following the Patriot Act, the government has been granted greater authoritative powers in the name of national security. This has resulted in an invasion of privacy through phone tapping and an archival of people's private information among other acts, as was exposed by Edward Snowden, who acted as a whistleblower.
The question remains: what will become of Canada? Will they follow a similar trajectory and forsake the freedom of their people? Or, will they learn from the mistakes and shortcomings of others? I, for one, hope that Canada remains true to its pacifist roots in its responses to the attacks, remaining a beacon of peace like the Peace Tower that rises above Centre Block on Parliament Hill, a symbol of hope in trying times.

Load-Date: February 6, 2015


End of Document