CANADA'S HIGH COURT LIMITS GOVERNMENT'S POWER TO HOLD TERROR SUSPECTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 24, 2007 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 475 words
Byline: BETH DUFF-BROWN, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


One of Canada's most contentious anti-terrorism measures was struck down yesterday by its Supreme Court, which declared unconstitutional a process that can detain foreign terror suspects indefinitely while the courts review their deportation orders.
The 9-0 ruling dealt a blow to the government's anti-terrorism regulations. Five Arab Muslim men have been held for years under the "security certificate" program, which the Justice Department had insisted is a key tool in the fight against global terrorism and essential to Canada's security.
The court found that the system violates the Charter of Rights and Freedom, Canada's bill of rights. It suspended the judgment from taking effect for a year, to give Parliament time to rewrite the part of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act that covers the certificates.
The security certificates were challenged on constitutional grounds by three men from Morocco, Syria and Algeria -- all alleged by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service to have ties to al-Qaida and other terrorist networks.
The law now allows sensitive intelligence to be heard behind closed doors by a federal judge, with only sketchy summaries given to defense attorneys.
The men have spent years in jail while fighting deportation orders. They risk being labeled terrorists and sent back to their native countries, where they face possible torture. The court called this a fundamental violation of their human rights.
"The overarching principle of fundamental justice that applies here is this: Before the state can detain people for significant periods of time, it must accord them a fair judicial process," Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin wrote in a ruling for all nine justices.
"The secrecy required by the scheme denies the person named in a certificate the opportunity to know the case put against him or her, and hence to challenge the governments case," she said.
The court said the men and their lawyers should have a right to respond to the evidence used against them by intelligence agents. It noted that a British law allows special advocates to review sensitive intelligence material.
Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day noted that since the ruling does not take effect for a year, the certificates would remain in place. He said in a statement that the government would address the court's ruling "in a timely and decisive fashion."
Two of the men are out on bail and remain under house arrest. Three others are being held in an Ontario federal facility dubbed the "Guantanamo Bay of the North," a reference to the military prison at the U.S. naval base in Cuba.
Although the security certificates have been around for decades, their use became more contentious after 9/11, and more suspect since Ottawa used faulty intelligence in a case that led to a $9 million apology to another former terror suspect, Maher Arar.

Load-Date: February 27, 2007


End of Document