Canada to criminalize public terror threats Recent attack prompts action to quell ‘great evil' of violent jihadism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 31, 2015 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 585 words
Byline:  By ROB GILLIES Associated Press   
Body


TORONTO • Canada announced on Friday a new anti-terrorism law that will make it a crime for people to call for a terrorist attack, even if they don't make a specific threat.
The law will also allow anyone suspected of being involved in a terrorist plot to be detained without charge for up to seven days, and empower Canada's spy agency to thwart attacks directly in a significant expansion of their powers.
Work on the law began in October after a gunman killed a soldier at Canada's national war memorial and then stormed Parliament. The attack in Ottawa came two days after a man, said to be inspired by the Islamic State group, ran over two soldiers in a parking lot in Quebec, killing one and injuring the other before being shot to death.
The new law still has to be passed in Parliament, but Prime Minister Stephen Harper's Conservative government has a majority of the seats so passage is all but ensured.
Under current law it is a crime to make a specific threat. The new law will make it a crime for a person to call for terrorist attacks on Canada generally or to promote or advocate others to carry out terrorism elsewhere.
"We cannot tolerate this any more than we tolerate people that make jokes about bomb threats at airports," Harper said. "Anyone engaging in that kind of activity is going to face the full force of the law in the future."
The penalty will be a maximum of five years in prison. Authorities will also be able to remove terrorist-related material from any Canadian website.
Harper said jihadists had declared war on Canada and it would be a grave mistake to ignore their threats. "Over the last few years a great evil has been descending upon our world, an evil that has been growing more and more powerful, violent jihadism," Harper said.
Under the current law those suspected of being involved in a terrorist plot can be detained for up to three days. The new law extends that to seven days provided police get a judge's permission.
The new law will also allow the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, the country's spy service, to directly approach terrorism suspects in order to disrupt their plans. CSIS is currently permitted only to collect intelligence and pass the information on to police.
The spy agency will now be able to cancel plane or other travel reservations made by Canadians suspected of being involved in terrorism. The new activities by CSIS will require approval by a judge. Police already have many of these powers that CSIS will acquire, but the government wanted the spy agency to be able to act quickly if they see a threat.
Kent Roach, a law professor at the University of Toronto, said the law that made it a crime to encourage terrorism would probably not hold up in court. He called it too vague.
"There is a potential that it will chill expression," Roach said. "It could be seen as disproportionately targeting the Muslim community and expressions of general support for terrorism in some parts of the world."
Justice Minister Peter MacKay said it targeted those who advocated terrorism with intent and didn't deal with glorification. MacKay said his government wanted to work with other countries to remove terrorist material coming from websites outside Canada.
"We need to work toward a system that will allow for the removal or at least the blocking of information that is provocative and that is aimed at promoting terrorism," MacKay said. "That will require international protocols and a greater level of cooperation with our international partners."

Graphic

 
 Prime Minister Stephen Harper makes an announcement in Richmond Hill, Canada on Friday, Jan. 30, 2015. (AP Photo/The Canadian Press, Frank Gunn) 

Load-Date: January 31, 2015


End of Document