Canadian sues U.S. over Syria interrogation
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 17, 2006 Sunday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 290 words
Byline: THE Associated Press
Dateline: TORONTO 
Body


A Canadian engineer who is suing the United States for sending him to Syria for interrogation on links to terrorism remains a threat and will continue to be on a security watch list, the U.S. ambassador said Friday.
The engineer, Maher Arar, who was recently cleared by the Canadian government of any ties to terrorism, has become the best-known case of extraordinary rendition, a practice in which the U.S. government sends foreign terror suspects to third countries for interrogation.
Arar was detained at New York's John F. Kennedy Airport in 2002 on his way home to Canada from a vacation in Tunisia. The United States turned him over to Syria, where he says he was tortured and kept in a dark cell for almost a year.
After his release, Syria did not charge him with any crime, and Arar made detailed allegations about torture that Canadian authorities determined were credible.
In September, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper called on the United States to "come clean with its version of events" and demanded that the White House apologize for Arar's rendition.
But U.S. Ambassador David Wilkins said American officials had other sources of information about Arar and continued to regard him as a potential threat. He did not elaborate on that information, citing the lawsuit.
Maria LaHood, one of Arar's attorneys, said Wilkins' comments were part of the United States' continued refusal to own up to its errors. "I think that's typical of the way the U.S. has treated many of its mistakes in the so-called war on terror, so it's not surprising," she said.
Canada's national police force has come under intense criticism over its handling of the case, culminating earlier this month in the resignation of Commissioner Giuliano Zaccardelli.

Notes

WORLD

Load-Date: December 17, 2006


End of Document