Canadian provinces leery of effort to restrict catastrophe coverage; Insurer group seeks policy exclusions on fire following cover
Business Insurance
May 19, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 21
Length: 794 words
Byline: GLORIA GONZALEZ
Body


CALGARY, Alberta and VANCOUVER, British Columbia-Insurers in Alberta and British Columbia advocate allowing exclusions for fire following earthquake and terrorism, but risk managers are prevailing in the debate over proposed revisions to insurance laws in the provinces.
A lobbying effort by the Insurance Bureau of Canada to allow insurers the option to exclude these risks fell short: The proposed legislation did not include language permitting the exclusions. Both provincial governments still have to develop accompanying regulations, but have shown no inclination to allow the risks to become permitted exclusions.
Risk managers in the provinces are expected to experience some benefits from the efforts to harmonize and update the insurance legislation if the proposed bills were passed. The proposals include provisions to standardize certain clauses in insurance policies and recognize the importance of electronic communication (see story).
The provinces embarked on a review of their insurance laws following two Supreme Court of Canada decisions in 2003 that found their laws to be out of date with modern insurance practices.
During the review, the IBC-the trade association for property/casualty insurers in Canada-promoted a proposal to give insurers the ability to package all elements of earthquake coverage under one endorsement by allowing fire following earthquake and fire following terrorism to be permitted exclusions in fire policies.
The British Columbia Risk & Insurance Management Assn.-the British Columbia chapter of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.-and the RIMS Canada Council rejected the proposal to add the risks to the list of permitted exclusions.
It is critical for fire insurance policies to cover fire resulting from an earthquake because fires after an earthquake can cause significant losses on the scale of the losses caused by the shaking, said Lance Kayfish, risk manager for the city of Kelowna, British Columbia, and a member of the RCC's communication and external affairs committee.
The insurance industry has argued that buyers should not have the benefit of fire-following earthquake coverage if they have not purchased an earthquake policy, he said. The IBC proposed the coverage be unbundled, which would allow insurers to issue separate policies for general fire, earthquake and fire following an earthquake, Mr. Kayfish said.
``From a risk management perspective, that would end up being very confusing,'' he said.
In addition, fire following terrorism should not be a permitted exclusion because risk managers need ``reasonable availability of insurance to cover risks associated with terrorist attacks,'' according to a discussion paper by BCRIMA and the RCC.
There is a limited market for reinsurance for fire following terrorism, which is a ``very serious concern for insurers,'' said Lindsay Olson, vp, British Columbia, Saskatchewan and Manitoba, for the IBC, whose members account for nearly 95% of the property/casualty market in Canada.
For fire following earthquake, there is reinsurance available and it appears to be relatively easy to acquire, Ms. Olson said. ``It's not a matter of insurers being exposed, rather it's more of a concern for the consumer...that there should be clarity and consistency in their coverage.''
In drafting the legislation, government officials decided the exclusion list should be determined by regulation rather than legislation, to allow flexibility to address local concerns. Earthquake risk, for example, is a major concern in British Columbia, while Alberta has ongoing concerns about terrorism or large-scale fires due to its oil sands, according to the Alberta Ministry of Finance. Additionally, British Columbia is hosting the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver.
The British Columbia government is unconvinced that fire following earthquake or terrorist attacks should be listed as permitted exclusions, according to the province's Ministry of Finance.
``We will have to wait for what the regulations say,'' said Larry Munn, a partner with Clark Wilson L.L.P. in Vancouver. ``When you're allowed to exclude it, it clarifies the fact that you have to buy some additional insurance and some additional earthquake coverage.''
For the IBC, it is worrisome that the government chose to leave the exclusions issue to regulations because of the ease of changing regulation vs. amending legislation, Ms. Olson said. For example, even if the current government of British Columbia chose to permit the exclusion, the decision could be quickly reversed by a new government as an election is scheduled for British Columbia next year, she said.
``Unless legislatures provide that certainty, I don't think insurers would feel comfortable making these changes,'' Ms. Olson said.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: The government of British Columbia, which is hosting the 2010 Olympic Games, is unconvinced that insurers should be allowed to exclude from coverage fires that follow earthquakes or terrorist attacks.
Art Credit: Reuters

Load-Date: May 23, 2008


End of Document