Canadian anti-terrorism bills spark opposition
University Wire
January 8, 2002


Copyright 2002 The Peak via U-Wire
Length: 743 words
Byline: By Stephen Hui, The Peak
Dateline: Burnaby, British Columbia
Body


The recent succession of anti-terrorism bills introduced by the Liberals is generating alarm, leading several groups to take action to protect Canadian civil liberties. Though Bill C-36 has passed, Bills C-35 and 42 are still pending.
According to Connie Fogal, a lawyer with the Defense of Canadian Liberty Committee, a legal challenge will be launched once Bill C-36 takes effect. The bill received royal assent on Dec. 18, but will not enter into force until a date determined by the government. The challenge will concentrate on sections of the act providing for investigative hearings and preventative arrests, she disclosed.
Simon Fraser U.
"These investigative hearings are an aid to the police to force citizens to answer questions. They can go directly to a court, get the court to order a hearing and command that person to attend. The police ask the questions -- totally unheard of, unprecedented in our criminal justice system -- it just does not happen. The police never go in a court proceeding and cross-examine a witness."
Fogal asserts that the changes to our justice system are undemocratic. "The language is so shockingly an attack on all sections of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms," she said.
"Always in our criminal law when the police want to lay a charge they have to swear on oath that they have reasonable and probable grounds that an offense has been committed. Under Bill C-36 they don't even have to have probable grounds -- they only need reasonable. It doesn't have to be that an offense has been committed, just [that there is] something that they anticipate might happen."
In protest of the anti-terrorism legislation, a diverse group of concerned citizens began an occupation of the Vancouver office of MP Stephen Owen, the parliamentary secretary to justice minister Anne McLellan, on Dec. 12.
"We were in there from Wednesday morning until Friday evening, and at that point we started to get concessions from Stephen Owen and he agreed to meet us the next morning without preconditions," said Dave Havard, spokesperson for the Teddy Bear Brigade.
"What we wound up with was essentially a public press conference. It must have been at least two hours that we were throwing really hard questions at him in front of the cameras and he was really struggling to answer some of them."
Havard notes that Owen has agreed to participate in more public forums and to pass on their request to McLellan that charges be dropped against the activists who occupied her office in Edmonton. "We have on tape some commitments that none of this legislation will be used against protestors and that there will be space for protestors in Kananaskis [at the Group of Eight summit] both lawful and unlawful."
A forum-planning group has been formed to organize the public meetings.
"He's already said that he is planning to bring amendments to the next two bills and so obviously the public can have an input into that and hopefully influence him to make more amendments."
Law students at the University of British Columbia are also organizing in opposition to Bills C-35, 36, and 42.
"This is a very smart group of students who have watched what's happened since September and decided that they feel compelled as citizens to say something about it," said Wes Pue, a law professor at UBC.
According to the UBC law students' press release, "Bill C-35 expands the number of foreign officials who can receive diplomatic immunity. This could be used to grant immunity to known criminals or terrorists or to shield foreign dignitaries from Canadian protestors."
"Nobody likes 42," said Pue. "In any number of areas it gives absolute power to ministers without even a cabinet meeting to do all kinds of very strange things. It's a very, very strange piece of legislation."
Fogal maintains that it is outrageous for the justice minister and some MPs and senators, to say our constitutional rights are not affected. Apparently some people have even compared the latest "anti-terrorism" legislation in Canada, the United States, England and Australia with similar laws in Nazi Germany, she said.
"The level of their ignorance is shocking. These are people who are in positions of power over our lives, our social order, our democracy."
"It's been said before that when fascism emerges another time, it will come with a smiling face -- and that's exactly what's happened to us. It's here."
(C) 2002 The Peak via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 8, 2002


End of Document