Canada plans 'targeted interventions' to stop Canadians from joining Islamic jihad abroad
Brock Press: Brock University
September 9, 2014 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 690 words
Byline: Stephen Chartrand
Body


On Aug. 29, just before the Labour Day weekend and with scant coverage from national media oddly enough, the public safety department released its 2014 Public Report on the Terrorist Threat to Canada. According to Steven Blaney, the minister in charge who announced its release, the threat of terrorism in Canada is disturbingly high.
The report documents the domestic and international threat of terrorism both from within and from abroad, particularly from Canadians who have travelled abroad to fight in foreign conflicts such as in Syria, Mali, Iraq and East Africa.
"The Government was aware of more than 130 individuals with Canadian connections who were abroad and who were suspected of terrorism-related activities," the report noted.
Those activities, the report says, ranged from terrorist training abroad, especially in Pakistan and Afghanistan to fundraising and the promotion of extremism at home. The report also said that the radicalization of Canadian youth, young men specifically, is a deeply concerning problem that needs to be addressed by government officials, community leaders and other parties.
Of those individuals who have gone to fight in the Syrian civil war or for the Islamic State in northern Iraq and elsewhere, the report said intelligence officials are aware that some of these people have returned to Canada.
"The Government is aware of about 80 individuals who have returned to Canada after [extremist] travel abroad," it said.
"Canada has seen a small but notable number of extremist travellers, but the large majority of extremist travellers originate from non-Western countries, particularly countries in North Africa and the Middle East," the report added.
The report identified Syria as the primary destination of those travelling with 'Canadian connections' to commit terrorist acts abroad or to fight in Islamic jihad.
"They may return to Canada or other countries imbued with knowledge, skills and experience gained in terrorist operations and training camps," said the report, adding "it is possible some returnees could plan and carry out terrorist attacks in Canada" as well.
"Syria is now a major theatre of operations for terrorists [and] it is drawing extremist travellers from around the world. Most are young men coming from regions of North Africa and the Middle East, but a significant minority are travelling from Europe, Australia and North America."
"The number of extremist travellers participating in the conflict [in Syria] is believed to be greater than the number that travelled to the conflicts in Afghanistan or Iraq," the report said.
Although the exact number of foreigners going to Syria and other countries to fight in Islamic jihad is difficult to determine, intelligence estimates place the number as high as 6,000 in Syria alone.
"It is of particular concern that parts of Syria are serving as a safe haven or training ground for terrorists. This may enhance their ability to attack neighbouring countries or Western interests," the report added.
The report said it was aware of approximately 30 Canadians who have gone to Syria to fight with militant Islamic groups, like Jabhat al-Nusra, Ahrar al-Sham or The Islamic State.
One question that was poorly addressed was why some of these young men feel compelled to leave the country to go and fight in foreign wars.
These Canadians "are generally motivated by a belief that a conflict is justified on moral or religious grounds. In some cases, these individuals may have a family or ethnic tie to a conflict zone. In other instances, individuals are attracted to a violent cause by the rhetoric of charismatic leaders," it said.
To stop radicalized young men from going abroad to fight with Islamic jihad, the report said the government has created an 'intervention strategy' in which RCMP officers who have been trained to identify signs of extremism will intervene before a suspected individual leaves for Syria or elsewhere.
According to the report, "candidates for intervention are paired with community-based mentors and other resources for advice, support and counseling aimed at limiting the impact of violent extremist ideology."

Load-Date: September 10, 2014


End of Document