CANADA LEADS THE WAY
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 6, 2007 Tuesday
All Editions


Copyright 2007 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A8
Length: 465 words
Body


Two Canadian actions have restored traditional civil liberties that had been restricted in traumatic reaction to global terrorism.
Canada's Parliament voted on Feb. 27 against extending two measures that were part of a package of antiterrorism laws enacted weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States. One allowed police to hold terrorism suspects for 72 hours without charges. The other enabled courts to compel witnesses to testify at special hearings.
And three days earlier, the Canadian Supreme Court struck down an immigration regulation that allowed government lawyers to present evidence against detainees in secret hearings without letting them see the evidence or be represented by defense counsel. While noting that legislators face a precarious task in protecting national security while respecting civil liberties, it ruled unanimously to give Parliament one year to rewrite the regulation.
The Canadian actions contrast with the slow and hesitant moves by the United States to reverse the harsh post-9/11 actions by the Bush administration. These include the arbitrary designation as "enemy combatants" of all the detainees at the Guantanamo Bay prison, the establishment of a chain of secret detention centers in other countries, the kidnapping (euphemistically called "extraordinary rendition") of suspects on foreign soil, the creation of special tribunals that bypass normal defendant rights, new regulations that continue to permit interrogation methods like "waterboarding" or simulated drowning, and arbitrary imprisonment of terrorism suspects without time limit and without traditional rights of defense.
The fundamental historic right of habeas corpus - a prisoner's right to be brought before a judge to determine whether the detention is legally justified -  remains under attack. The Military Commissions Act of 2006, which reinstated the denial of habeas corpus for the Guantanamo prisoners, was passed by the Senate last September with only one Republican, then Sen. Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island, voting against it and one more, Maine's Sen. Olympia Snowe, not voting.
The controversial law was an attempt to answer a Supreme Court decision throwing the special military tribunals into doubt and upholding the habeas corpus rights. Now a divided federal appeals court has upheld the constitutionality of the new law. The issue now is making its way toward a likely third test by the Supreme Court.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., has introduced legislation to restore the habeas corpus for the detainees. The measure needs additional Republican support if it is to pass. Republican senators will face a crucial decision whether to help the United States return to an historic constitutional guarantee or whether to bow once again to the pressure of the White House.

Load-Date: March 6, 2007


End of Document