Canada steps up terrorism security
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 22, 1999, Wednesday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 686 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


MONTREAL -- Under pressure from the United States and critics at home, Canada has increased security against terrorism following last week's arrest of an Algerian man charged with trying to smuggle explosives into America.
The subsequent arrest Sunday of another Algerian also using false documents to try to enter the United States focused further attention on security along the U.S.-Canada border as celebrations of the new millennium approach.
Customs Canada announced more agents will check bags and passengers at Canadian airports, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police said it was increasing security outside the U.S. Embassy in Ottawa.
The Canadian steps appeared to be in coordination with U.S. authorities, who also increased security at airports Tuesday and warned of possible terrorist attacks around the world.
Canadian officials previously said they already had in place sufficient measures against possible terrorist attacks at home or against the United States. But after opposition politicians and a U.S. member of Congress complained this week about the border arrests, Canada announced its new measures.
Customs Canada official Martin Bolduc said Canada believed the main security threat would be from overseas countries, prompting the beefed-up airport security.
"That doesn't mean that in the near future we couldn't have the same measures for border checkpoints," Bolduc said. "But for now, it is more aimed at people from overseas who are coming to Canada to commit acts or to use Canada to get into the United States."
No details of how many additional customs agents had been added were immediately available. Bolduc warned travelers to expect long lines when entering Canada by air from abroad.
Tougher U.S. security already was causing delays, with southbound traffic backed up more than three miles Tuesday night at the Lacolle, Quebec, border crossing into New York state, Quebec police reported.
U.S. officials increased border patrols and tightened security following the Dec. 14 arrest of Ahmed Ressam at Port Angeles, Wash., and the Sunday arrests of an Algerian man and a Canadian woman at a U.S.-Canada border post in Vermont.
In addition, U.S. law enforcement officials told The Associated Press they were searching for as many as three people who may have been accomplices to Ressam, who allegedly had a form of nitroglycerine and other bombmaking materials in his car. Police dogs also detected traces of what could be explosive material in the vehicle of the couple arrested at the Vermont border post.
The arrests raised fears in the United States that an Algerian Islamic fundamentalist group might be involved in planning terrorist attacks during new millennium celebrations.
U.S. Representative Lamar Smith, the Republican who heads a House subcommittee on immigration, this week criticized Canada for lax border security and promised hearings on the issue next year.
Opposition members of Parliament also criticized the government Tuesday for what they called inadequate border security.
Also Tuesday, Royal Canadian Mounted Police investigators searched a Montreal home for explosives, but found none. An Algerian man at the duplex was detained for questioning, and police seized magazines and books, papers and at least one computer disc.
RCMP official Leo Monbourquette said there was no information linking Ressam to the house raid. He described the Algerian man detained for questioning as a potential witness rather than any kind of suspect.
The Globe and Mail newspaper reported Tuesday that Ressam had a Canadian passport issued under the name Benni Noris, based on a false baptism certificate obtained in Quebec province. Baptism certificates serve as a primary source of identification in Quebec.
According to the report, Ressam told Canadian authorities when he first came to the country in 1994 he was escaping political persecution in Algeria after being falsely accused of belonging to an Islamic terrorist group there.
The newspaper said Ressam later evaded deportation orders for failing to appear at hearings on his claim for refugee status, then obtained the passport in 1998.

Load-Date: December 22, 1999


End of Document