CANDIDATES EMERGE FOR FBI POST
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 20, 2011 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. B-4
Length: 807 words
Byline: Jerry Markon, The Washington Post
Body


WASHINGTON -- The jockeying over who will replace FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III has begun, with FBI agents urging that President Barack Obama select the former head of the bureau's Washington field office for the critical position.
Mr. Mueller, 66, is facing a mandatory 10-year retirement in September after a tumultuous tenure in which he oversaw the crackdown on terrorism after Sept. 11, 2001, and the bureau's ongoing transformation into an intelligence agency focused on preventing attacks.
In a letter sent Monday to Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., the FBI Agents Association recommended Michael Mason, a longtime FBI agent and supervisor who is now security chief for Verizon Communications. Mr. Mason, a former assistant director in charge of the Washington Field Office, would be the FBI's first African American director.
Law enforcement sources said other possible candidates include Patrick Fitzgerald, the U.S. attorney in Chicago who investigated the leak of the identity of former CIA officer Valerie Plame Wilson; New York Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly and John Pistole, administrator for the Transportation Security Administration and Mr. Mueller's former deputy. All three declined to comment Monday, as did Mr. Mason.
The sources, who declined to be identified because the search is not public, said that contenders also include James B. Comey, who was deputy attorney general in the George W. Bush administration, and Frances Fragos Townsend, a top Bush terror adviser who was a confidante of then-Attorney General Janet Reno in the Clinton administration. Ms. Townsend declined to comment; Mr. Comey did not return e-mails seeking comment.
White House officials declined to comment, but law enforcement sources said the search for Mr. Mueller's successor is being led by Vice President Joe Biden, who chaired the Judiciary Committee in the Senate. Among those advising Mr. Biden are Mr. Holder and Louis J. Freeh, who was FBI director in the Clinton administration, the sources said. President Obama will make the decision.
It is unclear if any front-runner has emerged or precisely what qualities the administration is seeking in a nominee, though sources said counterterrorism experience is considered especially important.
Experts said that Mr. Mueller, a low-profile former Marine and federal prosecutor with a no-nonsense style, will be difficult to replace. Mr. Mueller started a week before Sept. 11, and his agency has successfully led the government's efforts to prevent another terror attack on U.S. soil. It has also been criticized by some civil liberties advocates and Muslim leaders for tough anti-terrorism tactics.
"Mueller was there on the ground when we went through all this, when we had the Sept. 11 attacks, when we had the response and when he had to change the agency," said Stephen A. Saltzburg, a law professor at George Washington University and former Justice Department official.
The agents association, which represents more than 12,000 active and retired FBI agents, is arguing that Mr. Mason fits the profile. A native of Mr. Obama's home town of Chicago, Mr. Mason spent nearly 23 years with the FBI, rising to become executive assistant director for the Criminal Investigative Division before leaving in 2007.
His nomination would be a symbol of how far the agency has come from the days of longtime director J. Edgar Hoover, when African American agents faced difficulties and Martin Luther King Jr. was hounded by government investigations.
In an interview with The Washington Post in 2006, Mr. Mason said he was struck as a child by the heroism and intelligence of the bureau's fabled G-men and that by seventh grade he was faithfully watching the weekly television show "The F.B.I."
Konrad Motyka, president of the FBI agents association, said there was a "groundswell" of support for Mr. Mason's candidacy among agents. "They said that throughout his entire career, he put agents first, had tremendous integrity and was very frank with everyone," Mr. Motyka said.
Mr. Mason would be a somewhat unusual pick, however, in that he was an FBI lifer before moving to the private sector. FBI directors in recent decades have tended to come from outside the agency. Of the four directors since 1978, only Mr. Freeh worked as an FBI agent, and that was for just six years.
A possible outsider choice is Mr. Kelly, who has the back ing of Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y. Mr. Schumer said at a news conference Monday that he would press Kelly's nomination with the administration.
"He understands terrorism, which obviously is at the forefront of the FBI's mission these days," Mr. Schumer said. "He has great community relations, he's been known for outreach, and how to deal with all the disparate communities here in New York. ... I think there could be nobody better than Commissioner Kelly."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Michael Mason -- Recommended by FBI Agents Association.

Load-Date: March 22, 2011


End of Document