Candidates bash each other on Iraq, terrorism
USA TODAY
October 19, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 763 words
Byline: Richard Benedetto and Jill Lawrence
Body

President Bush and Sen. John Kerry faced off over terrorism and national security Monday in scathing back-to-back speeches. Each painted his opponent as unfit to lead the military abroad and protect Americans at home.
Speaking to 3,000 supporters in Marlton, N.J., Bush charged that Kerry has "flip-flopped" his way during the campaign toward a policy of abandoning Iraq, appeasing terrorists and insulting allies.
He said Kerry suffers from a "fundamental misunderstanding on the war on terror" that would leave the United States in the dangerous position of waiting until an attack is imminent before acting.
Kerry, who crisscrossed Florida on Monday, portrayed Bush as an unfit commander in chief who has betrayed the military by not providing troops with the gear they need and has lied to Americans about the progress of the war in Iraq. He cited a Washington Post report that the top U.S. commander in Iraq last winter informed the Pentagon that his troops were so low on supplies that they could barely maintain "relatively low readiness rates."
Kerry said the Dec. 4, 2003, memo from Army Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez was a fresh example of Bush's incompetence.
Despite Bush's "arrogant boasting" that he's done everything right in Iraq, "the truth is beginning to catch up with him," Kerry told supporters in West Palm Beach, Fla.
The candidates' sharp attacks, and the states they visited Monday, reflect how close the race is two weeks before voters go to the polls.
Bush chose New Jersey for a tough-on-terrorism speech to try to capitalize on some polls showing the race there tightening. It's a state he lost to Democrat Al Gore by 16 percentage points in 2000.
In an interview with the Associated Press, Bush said "we have a shot" at winning New Jersey, which has voted for the Democrat in the past three presidential elections.
But Bush won't win the vote of New Jerseyite Kristin Breitweiser, a 9/11 widow who is campaigning for Kerry. She said the war in Iraq had made the nation more vulnerable to terrorism because "it has increased animosity and hatred toward Americans" worldwide.
Kerry chose to campaign in Florida, one of the most important states still in contention, on the day that early voting began.
The main focus of his day was supposed to be health care. But his counterattacks to Bush on terrorism and security were unusually strong and emotional, and they came during appearances in West Palm Beach, Tampa and Orlando. Invoking his military service as a young man, Kerry said, "Let me tell you something I learned when I fought in Vietnam: Listen to the troops and give the troops the equipment that they need. Stand up for the troops. Fight for the troops. Lead the troops. And we deserve new leadership that stands up and fights for the troops."
Kerry also released a new TV ad Monday quoting Bush responding to a question about Osama bin Laden by saying, "I am not truly concerned about him." The ad does not include more of the statement, in which Bush said, "Once we set out the policy and started executing the plan . . .  we shoved him out more and more on the margins."
Kerry aides said he'll release another security-related ad today and will give a speech on terrorism and security on Wednesday in Iowa.
Both men made it clear they believe the election will turn on which candidate voters trust to lead the war on terror. Speaking in a state that lost hundreds of people in the 9/11 attacks, Bush made only passing reference to three key domestic issues -- job creation, health care and education. He called the presidency "an office of great responsibility and consequence" and said a Kerry presidency would "make America less secure and the world more dangerous."
In the AP interview, Bush said the government remains concerned about a terrorist attack aimed at the election. "We have no specific threat information," he said. "Otherwise we would have let everybody know. On the other hand, we're on alert."
He also said:
 * He will be disappointed if the Iraqi people vote for an Islamic fundamentalist government, but "democracy is democracy" and "if that's what the people choose, that's what the people choose."
 * He will not bring back the military draft, even if another crisis develops, such as with North Korea or Iran. "I believe we've got the assets and manpower necessary to be able to deal with another theater should one arise," he said.
 * His strategy toward North Korea and Iran "makes them less likely to take action that would make the world more dangerous."
Benedetto reported from New Jersey, Lawrence from Florida. Contributing: Mimi Hall.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, b/w, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll Thursday-Sunday of 815 registered Colorado voters and 666 Colorado likely voters: Margin of error: +/-4 percentage points(Bar graph); PHOTO, b/w, Gerald Herbert, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Pablo Martinez Monsivais, AP; Bush's arrogant boasting": John Kerry laughs as Michael Benson, 7, gives him campaign money at a rally Monday in West Palm Beach, Fla. <>Kerry "flip-flopped": President Bush greets supporters Monday at McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey.

Load-Date: October 19, 2004


End of Document