Candidates continue fingerpointing on Iraq
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 25, 2004 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 06
Length: 572 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body


* Kerry says the president hurt the anti-terrorism fight by diverting attention from al-Qaida. Bush assails the senator's criticism of the Iraqi premier.
Sen. John Kerry said Friday that President George W. Bush's policies made the war against terrorism harder to win and "let Osama bin Laden slip away." Bush in turn chastised his Democratic rival for questioning the motives of Iraq's interim prime minister.
"The invasion of Iraq was a profound diversion from the battle against our greatest enemy, al-Qaida," said Kerry, who argued that Bush's mistakes have raised the ante for the United States in combating terrorism.
Taking issue with Kerry's criticism a day earlier of the upbeat assessment from Iraq's Ayad Allawi, Bush said at a campaign rally in Wisconsin: "You can't lead this country if your ally in Iraq feels like you question his credibility. The message ought to be to the Iraqi people: 'We support you.' The message ought to be loud and clear."
The fingerpointing capped a week of acrimony and negativism from both campaigns as Kerry, lagging in polls, tries to make an issue of Iraq and the president's credibility. On Thursday, Kerry accused Bush and Allawi of painting a falsely optimistic portrait of life in Iraq amid continuing violence, kidnappings and beheadings. Kerry said the Iraqi leader had contradicted his earlier assessments.
Bush ordered the invasion of Iraq in the spring of last year after saying Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction, ties to terrorists and a history of defying the international community. Saddam was toppled within weeks, but more than 1,000 Americans have been killed and more than 7,000 injured in fighting with insurgents.
"Every week, too many American families grieve for loved ones killed in Iraq by terrorist forces that weren't even there before the invasion," Kerry said in a speech at Temple University.
Bush, who calls Iraq the front line in the war on terrorism, has said he would have made the same decision had he known no weapons of mass destruction would be found. His re-election strategy is to cast himself as a steady leader while questioning Kerry's decisiveness. "It's very important for us not to send mixed signals to the world, not embolden these people," Bush said in Wisconsin.
Kerry said Bush has hurt the war on terrorism by making bad decisions, starting with diverting attention from capturing bin Laden in Afghanistan to invade Iraq.
"Yet, in the face of all these judgments, all these misjudgments, all the miscalculations and all the mistakes, the president still says he wouldn't do anything different," he said.
Kerry paused throughout his speech to cough and take sips of water as he nurses a cold, but otherwise his speech was a carefully scripted event to showcase the senator as the stronger enemy of terrorism than Bush.
Outlining his plan for fighting terrorism worldwide, Kerry said the United States must:
- Secure chemical and nuclear weapons left throughout the former Soviet Union.
- Stop nuclear weapon development in Iran and North Korea.
- Shut down terrorist financing systems in Saudi Arabia.
- Become independent of Mideast oil.
- Broker peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
- Fight poverty and disease around the world.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan said Kerry "was copying the very proposals the president is pursuing on the war on terrorism."
=== Get the latest political news online at STLtoday.com/election2004.

Load-Date: September 25, 2004


End of Document