Candidates discuss tollway, terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
October 22, 2002, Tuesday L2,L5


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBOR;
Length: 615 words
Byline: Kate Grusich Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


State Sen. Adeline Geo-Karis, a Zion Republican, will face off Nov. 5 against Glenn Ryback, a Wadsworth Democrat, for the position of representative for the 31st District.  
The Daily Herald asked each candidate a series of questions regarding the issues pertaining to the districts in which they hope to represent.  
Listed below are two of the questions and the candidates' responses.  
Q. To what extent, if any, should the state assume tighter control or oversight of the Toll Highway Authority? And, if the state was to assume greater responsibility, how, specifically, would it ultimately meet any new financial responsibilities that would entail?  
Geo-Karis: I cannot agree to the state assuming total control of the Authority. The tollway has an immense amount of bonded indebtedness ($700 million), unfunded capital needs on its current system ($6 billion) and no means to fund, what some believe to be, much needed new roads ($4 billion.) Because the state is experiencing one of the worst budget years in memory, it is unrealistic to expect it to assume an additional financial burden. It is evident that the tollway has been negligent in planning for the future and in light of its scandal-ridden history, is in need of true reform. This past session, I supported a resolution empowering the Illinois auditor general to conduct an audit, a prelude to rooting out mismanagement. Prior to any toll increase, I believe the Authority needs to develop a long-range, comprehensive, strategic plan that spells out, in great detail, its plan to adequately address its capital needs.  
Ryback: The state assembly should demand greater accountability of tollway resources and in the day-to-day management of the agency. Given our state's budget crisis, I am not looking for a state takeover of the tollway system, just a more accountable, responsive and open tollway board. Last year's attempt by the tollway board to push a large toll increase demonstrated just how out of touch the Tollway Authority is with users.  
Q: What, if anything, does the legislature need to do to strengthen state and local government preparedness for a terrorist attack?  
Geo-Karis: The federal government has been very helpful in providing funds for emergency preparedness after 9-11. The General Assembly also passed almost $20 million worth of appropriations for homeland security measures such as developing a cache of pharmaceuticals to respond to bio-terrorism, posting state police patrols at nuclear facilities, training for fire departments and other preparatory activities. The Senate Republican caucus took the lead this year in including $30 million in the state budget for assistance to hospitals to help them become better prepared for responding to emergencies and mass casualties. Along with our police and fire departments, hospitals and their medical staff make up a large portion of what would be our first-responders to any terrorist attack. They are the backbone of our medical system and they must be adequately prepared to respond to mass casualties, widespread outbreaks of disease and other terrible scenarios.  
Ryback: As a member of a local governing board, I know the burden our nation's response to terrorism has placed on local police and fire department budgets. In Springfield, I would work to develop sound homeland security strategies that increase communication and cooperation within various units of government. I would like to see a coordinated effort at securing supplemental funding for police and fire departments' training and personnel budgets. Illinois government must ensure that it is playing a constructive role between local units of government and federal agencies.

Load-Date: October 29, 2002


End of Document