Candidates' terrorism policies differ very little
USA TODAY
November 1, 2004, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1637 words
Byline: Steven Komarow
Body

ISSUES 2004
Does it matter who is president when it comes to...fighting global terrorism?
Last of a series
***
One of the hardest battles of this presidential campaign has been for public trust on the issue of terrorism, which polls say still preoccupies many voters more than three years after the 9/11 attacks.
President Bush and Sen. John Kerry portray each other as dangerous. Bush calls Kerry a weak waffler who won't stand up to terrorists, while Kerry accuses Bush of making things worse by creating more terrorists with the war in Iraq while relegating al-Qaeda to a lesser priority.
But hard fought as it has been, with frequent references to nuclear weapons and mass death, the actual policy differences between the two men are less deep. Kerry proposes refinement rather than any radical change in the course Bush has taken. And Bush's attacks on Kerry are often aimed at his character rather than any specific Kerry proposal for fighting terrorism.
"It's really hard to draw those lines" between the candidates purely on policy distinctions, says James Phillips, terrorism scholar at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank in Washington. "A lot of times, they use shorthand or symbols," leaving voters to guess about the details of their policies.
The most common example: the connection between Iraq and terrorism. Bush calls Iraq central to the fight against global terrorism. Kerry calls it a distraction. Yet Kerry is not calling for a withdrawal from Iraq. He just says he would do that job better.
Iraq aside, both men call the war on terrorism a long, worldwide effort that won't end anytime soon.
Each has smacked the other for at times acknowledging that terrorism will always be with us. Bush slammed Kerry when the senator suggested in a newspaper interview that he would settle for reducing it to the level of a "nuisance." Kerry hit back when the president told a TV interviewer that it was "up in the air" whether terrorism could ever be eliminated.
Fighting terrorism abroad
Central to President Bush's campaign is the assertion that he's aggressively fighting terrorists abroad so that they won't come to the USA. He boasts that three-fourths of al-Qaeda's leaders have been killed or captured, a figure that cannot be verified but appears to refer to those known at the time of the 9/11 attacks.
Bush ordered the military operation that ousted the Taliban regime that hosted Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan. He points to progress toward democracy there, exemplified by elections held last month. Much of the success against al-Qaeda has been with the help of Pakistan, a nation that cooperated little with the United States before 9/11 but is now a key ally.
Kerry, however, is trying to convince voters that Afghanistan is not an unqualified success. After Friday's new videotape from bin Laden, Kerry renewed his assertion that the administration's reliance on Afghan fighters contributed to bin Laden's escape from Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan in late 2001. Kerry also cites new intelligence reports that warn of al-Qaeda's growing worldwide strength, due in large part to Arab outrage over the invasion of Iraq.
Kerry promises less unilateral action and more work with allies in anti-terrorism efforts. That would spread the burden and diffuse some of the anti-U.S. hatred in the Muslim world, he says.
Bush has seized on Kerry's reference to an international credibility "test" as evidence that Kerry is too ready to bow to other countries before taking action to defend the United States.
But critics say Bush has made concessions to foreign countries as a price of the war on terrorism. For example, with Russia now a key ally against terrorism, Bush has restrained his criticism of the growing authoritarianism of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Fighting terrorism at home
To appear stronger than Bush on homeland defense, Kerry has embraced much of what's already been done by the Bush administration and promised improvements.
The president signed bills creating a Department of Homeland Security and pumping billions into the security of airports, ports and rail systems. Kerry, who backed those efforts in the Senate, says Bush still hasn't done enough. For example, he charges that a terrorist could still too easily slip a bomb into shipboard cargo, most of which isn't screened at ports.
But Bush followed Kerry's lead after the Democrat immediately embraced all the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission. Those include a major but controversial revamp of U.S. intelligence, which failed to put together the evidence, such as Islamic radicals attending U.S. flight schools, that might have prevented the 9/11 attacks. Bush, who at first opposed the creation of the commission as unnecessary, now says he supports almost all of its work and has put some of the proposals into force by executive action.
However, the administration has been split over how much budget authority to give to a national intelligence director, and how much to leave in the hands of the Pentagon. The Republican-controlled Congress has failed to pass legislation writing the recommendations into law -- provoking Kerry to blast Bush last week for failing to pressure his fellow Republicans to act.
Bush's other signature act was to propose and pass the USA Patriot Act, which cuts through red tape to help police and prosecutors get to terrorists. Civil libertarians say it goes too far and threatens personal privacy because it opens up previously private records. The White House dismisses those complaints as unsubstantiated and touts benefits, including the ability of different agencies to share data. Kerry voted for the Patriot Act when it overwhelmingly passed the Senate in late 2001. But he says it can be revised to better guard privacy and protect "our people and our liberties at the same time."
But the two sides are close enough on the nuts and bolts of security policy that when Kerry announced his 33-point plan for homeland security, the White House boasted that it already had implemented 32 of 33 proposals. The only exception was Kerry's plan to hire 100,000 firefighters with federal dollars.
Future challenges
While the two candidates' determination to battle the terror threat to the USA seems similar, they view the problem differently.
Ted Galen Carpenter of the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank, says Bush's "neo-conservative" analysis sees state-sponsored terrorism as key. Accordingly, Bush's policy is aimed at reforming or overturning governments and installing democratic, U.S.-friendly regimes, Carpenter says, with Iraq being the current example.
Kerry, however, appears to view terrorism as disconnected from individual nations, and therefore not so controllable by individual governments, Carpenter says. That makes Kerry less interested in "regime change" than in rallying the community of nations to wage joint war on terrorism.
Even so, both agree on the need for sufficient force. For example, Bush and Kerry both support major increases in the U.S. military's special operations forces, to give the military the ability to move highly trained troops quickly into hot spots.
And it's unclear how much difference Kerry's internationalist posture would make in the anti-terrorism policies of allies who've had chilly relations with Bush.
France and Germany are not backing the mission in Iraq. And Kerry or no, they're unlikely to get involved there because of strong public opposition at home. But each has indicated it will stay involved in attacking terrorism elsewhere, including maintaining troops in Afghanistan and cooperating with U.S. intelligence and police networks to fight terrorism around the world.
On the issues
Issue
Positions
Hunt for al-Qaeda
President Bush approved the invasion of Afghanistan to crush al-Qaeda and says 75% of its leaders have been killed or captured. Sen. John Kerry supported that war but says the president mishandled an operation that let top leader Osama bin Laden escape.
Invasion of Iraq
Bush went to war to destroy weapons of mass destruction and end Iraqi-terrorist ties; no such weapons stockpiles were found. He says the war toppled a dangerous regime and made the USA safer. Kerry voted to give Bush authority to invade but says Bush went to war too soon. Kerry says the war made the USA less safe by distracting from other threats and creating more terrorists.
Patriot Act
Bush supports the law and wants Congress to make it permanent. Kerry, like virtually the entire Senate, voted for the bill, but he now supports repealing provisions that civil libertarians say invade privacy.
Loose nukes
Kerry and Bush agree that keeping nuclear materials out of the hands of terrorists is the most pressing terrorism issue. Kerry says he would make it a higher priority to finish the cleanup of old Soviet nuclear weapons stocks in four years instead of 13.
9/11 Commission findings
Kerry says he would institute all of the panel's recommendations. Bush opposed creation of the commission but now is implementing many of its proposals.
In their own words
Bush (from the Sept. 30 debate): "The best way to defeat (terrorists) is to never waver, to be strong, to use every asset at our disposal . . . to constantly stay on the offensive and at the same time spread liberty. . . . We're facing a group of folks who have such hatred in their heart, they'll strike anywhere, with any means. And that's why it's essential that we have strong alliances, and we do."
Kerry (from the Sept. 30 debate): "We can't leave a failed Iraq. But that doesn't mean it wasn't a mistake of judgment to go there and take the focus off of Osama bin Laden. . . . I'll never give a veto to any country over our security. But I also know how to lead those alliances. The president has left them in tatters across the globe."
---
Source: Reported by Steve Komarow, USA TODAY

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, 2001 photo by Ron Edmonds, AP; GRAPHIC, B/W, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll… (BAR GRAPH and LINE GRAPH); Pentagon damage: More than three years after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the issue of terrorism is one of the biggest in the presidential campaign.<>Terrorism is top voter issue (graphic)

Load-Date: November 1, 2004


End of Document