Cannot separate terrorism, religion
Chicago Daily Herald
October 6, 2011 Thursday
MC3 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 16
Length: 555 words
Body


Cannot separate terrorism, religion
I am writing this in response to a letter by Aabeda Masra (Fence Post, Sept. 24) regarding the term "radical Islam." Masra claims that the term vilifies Islam and is "inaccurate." Masra also claims the acts of terrorists are motivated only by political reasons, not religious.
I have to disagree. What Masra does not acknowledge is the fact that in many countries in the Middle East, religion and politics/government are one and the same. Iran's own name, in Arabic, is the Islamic Republic of Iran. Iran is a theocracy, meaning a government ruled by religion.
Many other Middle East countries abide by Sharia (Islamic law), such as the former government of Afghanistan, the Taliban. One of the largest countries, Saudi Arabia, also strictly abides by Sharia. The motto on its state flag proclaims, "There is no god but God: Muhammad is the Messenger of God." Religion is a massive part of the region and the driving force behind terrorists. That is made obvious as terrorists cry "Allahu akbar" ("God is great") when executing "infidels" (non-Muslims) or those who help them.
I, as well as most Americans, am fully aware that there are millions of peaceful Muslims who live here and around the world. I am not writing this to condemn Islam as a whole. I am not saying that all, or even most, Muslims are violent or radical. I do not believe that Islam is a violent religion. However, you cannot simply cover your eyes and ignore what you don't wish to see. Masra is right, that many Muslims around the world condemned the 9/11 attacks, but she is remiss to deny that many Muslims also boisterously celebrated in the streets at the news of innocent Americans being slaughtered.
Dan Woodall
Palatine
Right the wrongs that hurt post office
My husband was a mail carrier for 32 years, retiring in 2000. He passed away June 27. He used to tell me every so often of the postal funds being raided for other branches of government. They never were paid back, so postage rates had to increase.
I still receive mailings from the National Association of Letter Carriers, and the one I received today is important enough to be shared. There is talk in the papers and on the news of closing offices and going to a five-day week. The talk of the five-day workweek has been around for maybe 15 years. It hasn't happened yet, but then again these times are different.
In the letter I received today, it states that in 2006, the Bush Congress passed legislation requiring the post office to "prefund" 75 years of retiree health benefits in a 10-year period. Had this legislation not passed, the Postal Service would not have lost $20 billion from 2007 to 2010. It would have actually made a profit of over $700 million dollars! It goes on to state that no company or governmental agency in the world is required to prefund 75 years of health benefits.
Also, in the past 30 years, due to miscalculations in payments to the retirement system, the Postal Service overpaid by nearly $75 billion and has demanded these overpayments back. If these monies were returned, the post office would not be facing some of the challenges it has today. Congress needs to act and support HR 1351, the USPS Pension Obligation Recalculation and Restoration Act of 2011. Contact your representative to support this act.
Linda Kimsey
Streamwood

Load-Date: October 6, 2011


End of Document