CAPT. PANIC FREE JetBlue pilot in terrifying meltdown on flight just loses wings
Daily News (New York)
November 10, 2012 Saturday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 258 words
Byline: Bill Hutchinson
Body


A JETBLUE PILOT who ran screaming from the cockpit in mid-flight about terrorists "going to take us down" was set free Friday by a Texas judge.
Capt. Clayton Osbon was stripped of his wings and ordered to stay out of the sky and away from the passengers he scared the bejesus out of as part of his conditional release, ordered by U.S. District Judge Mary Lou Robinson at a hearing in Amarillo, Texas.
The judge's decision stunned Paul Babakitis, the former NYPD sergeant who courageously helped tackle the deranged pilot and ended the mile-high meltdown.
"He put over 100 passengers in danger. It was truly a horrific event," said Babakitis.Babakitis bristled that neither he nor any passengers on JetBlue Flight 191 were consulted by the judge or the prosecutors on Osbon's release.
Robinson appeared to lean heavily on the testimony of a forensic neuropsychologist's conclusion that Osbon suffered a "brief psychotic disorder" because of a lack of sleep.
"This is a bad situation for you and your family, but you are fortunate to have the type of immediate support that you have," Robinson told Osbon during the terrifying March 27 flight from Kennedy Airport to Las Vegas, Osbon, 49, who lived part-time in Queens, stormed from the cockpit, shouting, "Iraq, Al Qaeda, terrorism; we're all going down!"
Babakitis and other passengers tackled Osbon, and an off-duty pilot on the flight assisted in safely landing the plane in Amarillo.
JetBlue spokeswoman Sharon Jones said that while Osbon was still employed by the airline, he is listed on "inactive duty."

Graphic

 
JetBlue pilot Clayton Frederick Osbon, who melted down midflight, got a conditional discharge Friday. Photo by Michael Schumacher/Amarillo Globe-News

Load-Date: November 29, 2012


End of Document