Capture is not a victory in war on terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
December 16, 2003, Tuesday All


Copyright 2003 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; An Arab perspective;
Length: 579 words
Byline: Ray Hanania
Body


They finally captured Saddam Hussein. It certainly will bring a sigh of relief to President George W. Bush and his re-election campaign team.  
It will even make the new, American-handpicked Iraqi Governing Council leaders confident that they can remold Iraq from a dictatorship of someone else's choosing into one they can control.  
And it will even bring a smile to former President George H.W. Bush, on whose behalf his son, President George W. Bush, launched an unprovoked, illegal war against another sovereign nation.  
I just don't see it doing anything to achieve a victory in the war on terrorism that began after Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida launched massive terrorist strikes against the United States on Sept. 11, 2001. Bin Laden is in Afghanistan someplace where American forces have "some" troops; nothing compared to the enormous contingent we dedicated to Iraq, which, if I remember my world geography correctly, is nowhere near Afghanistan, where the Sept. 11 strikes originated.  
But again, President Bush never misses an opportunity to exaggerate both the reasons why we attacked Iraq or the so-called links between Hussein and bin Laden. They don't exist, except in the president's mind, in his dedication to avenge his father's honor and in outlandish claims made by his administration, many of which have since been exposed as false.  
Bush said we went to war in Iraq to fight the war on terrorism. He rejected the cautious words of the international community that asked all the questions that Americans angry with having lost more than 3,000 fellow citizens on Sept. 11 demanded in their justified hysteria and frustration. Can't find Osama bin Laden? Just attack Iraq! It made sense on March 19 - to everyone except most other nations.  
But who cares? There is no one in the world who can stop an American administration gone wild with vengeance and misdirected anger. All the reasons to invade Iraq were reasons we always had, but no one in America thought they were worth fighting for before. Why now? Thousands of Iraqi civilians had been killed in the late 1980s by Hussein's regime in a crackdown on what he believed was a Kurdish rebellion during and after his war with Iran. And where did Hussein get his weapons and support during that war with Iran? From the United States. The administrations of President Ronald Reagan and from Reagan's vice president, George H.W. Bush. Those Iraqis died then, and we didn't lift a finger. Maybe we were afraid of the obvious questions that might surface, like, who gave Hussein the weapons?  
Iraq invaded a neighboring Arab country, Kuwait, and we fought a war to push him out. But we didn't feel strongly about fighting a war to liberate his people back then. We decided instead to isolate Hussein, pushing through a harsh economic embargo against Iraq that resulted in punishing the people of Iraq more than Hussein's regime.  
And then came the election of President George H.W. Bush's son. And then came Sept. 11. Why not just throw it all together and take two birds out with one stone? Attack Afghanistan and Iraq, even though the two had nothing to do with each other? Who would be crazy enough to challenge the administration's exaggerations in the weeks and months after the worst terrorist attack against the United States. Well, we caught Hussein. Too bad we haven't been as successful in capturing bin Laden. But in these days of lies, exaggerations and hate, one renegade Arab is as good as any.

Load-Date: December 17, 2003


End of Document