Captive insurance companies covered by TRIA regulations; Captive Insurance Companies Assn. 2003 International Conference
Business Insurance
March 24, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 4
Length: 682 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


ORLANDO, Fla.-Captive insurers that have only a remote chance of a terrorism claim still must comply with all the provisions in the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, an attorney familiar with the legislation points out.
''Why should you, as captive managers and owners, want to know about this legislation?'' asked Robert H. Myers Jr., an attorney with the Washington firm of Morris, Manning & Martin L.L.P. ''The real reason you should be interested,'' he explained, is that any domestic captive chartered in the United States or its territories is included in the legislation. ''That includes risk retention groups as well.''
Mr. Myers, speaking as a panelist during a presentation at the Captive Insurance Companies Assn.'s 2003 International Conference in Orlando, Fla. earlier this month, pointed out that the law excludes alien insurers and offshore companies-unless those companies are on the National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners' list of eligible surplus lines insurers.
The act, signed into law last November, establishes a program through which the U.S. government will share in losses from terrorist attacks. Insurers must offer mandatory terrorism coverage under the law, which expires at the end of 2005. The law applies only to losses arising from certified acts of terrorism when those losses exceed $5 million on an aggregate basis from a single event.
Insurers must accept deductible and coinsurance requirements, and TRIA caps the amount of losses applicable to the act at $100 billion in any calendar year. The government can recover a portion of its losses through premium surcharges that are passed on to policyholders.
Some captives are asking why they should worry about the law when the chances of their policyholders filing a terrorism claim are slim, Mr. Myers said. ''If you're offering, say, attorneys malpractice or accountants malpractice, your chances of getting a terrorism claim are extremely remote,'' he acknowledged.
But, Mr. Myers explained, ''even though your chances of getting a bona fide terrorism claim are remote, you're still caught up in the statute and have to do everything that is required of an insurer.''
Insurers must, among other things, offer terrorism coverage to policyholders, who have the option of rejecting it, he remarked.
Suzanne Douglass, executive vp and managing director with Willis North America Inc. in New York, pointed out that while there had been some concern about what lines of coverage would be subject to TRIA, the Treasury Department has made it clear that it applies only to commercial property/casualty coverages. The department will make a determination as to whether life/health coverages should be a part of the law, she noted.
What TRIA did not do, she noted, was establish rates for terrorism coverage, and that has led to inconsistencies in what insurers are charging.
She also pointed out that TRIA does not mandate that insurers cover losses from nuclear, biological or chemical attacks, risks that Mr. Myers said ''many experts think are the most likely.''
Richard D. Minier, vp with Towers Perrin in Boston, said there is some concern that captives could be asked to pay a disproportionate share of a loss even if their policyholders do not buy terrorism coverage. He said the government's surcharge is applicable even if an insurer doesn't suffer a loss.
''The argument is,'' Mr. Minier remarked, that if a captive hasn't insured a terrorist event and its ''exposure doesn't pose any risk, is that fair?''
Even if a captive does provide the coverage, there still could be cases of ''inequitable results,'' arising out of the mandatory recoupment provisions, Mr. Minier noted, particularly in cases where a captive's policyholders are unlikely to experience a terrorism loss.
Ms. Douglass said captives also face questions about claims processing and payment, concerns that regulators have yet to address.  ''No one knows if the insurer must pay the loss first and then seek recovery from the government,'' she said.
''That's a very key issue,'' Ms. Douglass explained, that could lead to a liquidity crunch for an insurer.

Graphic

 
Orlando, Fla., was the site of this year's CICA conference.

Load-Date: March 26, 2003


End of Document