CAR BARRELS INTO MELBOURNE INTERSECTION 
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 22, 2017 Friday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2017 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 468 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


SYDNEY - A sport utility vehicle driven by an Australian man of Afghan descent with a history of mental illness plowed into pedestrians in the city of Melbourne on Thursday, injuring at least 19 people, four critically, officials said.
Victoria state police Acting Chief Commissioner Shane Patton said on Thursday night that early indications were the driver of the car, a 32-year-old Australian citizen of Afghan descent with a history of drug abuse and mental health issues was not motivated by terrorism. He said the ramming was being treated as a "singular" incident.
On Friday morning, however, Chief Patton said the man had made several utterances while under police guard in a hospital on Thursday night, including mentioning poor treatment of Muslims, and that police were still exploring terrorism as a possible motive.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull also reiterated that "no terrorism link has been identified" but that "nothing should be ruled out."
"This was a despicable and cowardly act," Mr. Turnbull said. "But I want to reassure Australians that this is an isolated incident. We should continue to go about our daily lives the way we always do."
Chief Patton said the man, who ran a red light and drove an SUV into pedestrians crossing central Melbourne's busy Flinders Street before crashing into a traffic barrier at 4:45 p.m. Thursday, was not known to intelligence agencies.
Pope prays for cardinal
VATICAN CITY - Pope Francis prayed Thursday for a merciful final judgment for Cardinal Bernard Law, presiding over the funeral rites for a man who epitomized the Catholic Church's failure to protect children from pedophile priests and its arrogance in safeguarding its own reputation at all costs.
In a final blessing at Cardinal Law's funeral Mass at the back altar of St. Peter's Basilica, Francis blessed his coffin with incense and holy water and recited the ritual prayer commending his soul to God.
The dean of the college of cardinals, Cardinal Angelo Sodano, celebrated the funeral Mass and eulogized Cardinal Law without making any mention of the scandal or the fact that he resigned in disgrace as Boston archbishop. Revising history, Cardinal Sodano said Cardinal Law had been "called to Rome" to serve as archpriest of the Vatican's St. Mary Major basilica - a post he took up two years after his 2002 fall from grace in Boston.
J.P. Morgan under inquiry
GENEVA - The Swiss division of J.P. Morgan "seriously breached" anti-money laundering rules relating to the Malaysian sovereign wealth fund 1MDB, Switzerland's financial market regulator said Thursday.
The agency, FINMA, said the Wall Street bank's local unit had "failed to adequately identify" increased money laundering risks linked to the "allegedly corrupt" sovereign wealth fund at the center of a massive embezzlement scandal.

Load-Date: December 22, 2017


End of Document