Car mows down Times Square pedestrians for blocks, killing 1
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 19, 2017 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 700 words
Byline:  By COLLEEN LONG and TOM HAYS Associated Press  
Body


NEW YORK - A man steered his car onto a sidewalk running through the heart of Times Square and mowed down pedestrians for three blocks Thursday, killing a teenager, and then emerged from his wrecked vehicle wild-eyed and waving his arms before he was subdued by police and bystanders.
The driver, a Navy veteran, 26, told officers he was hearing voices and expected to die, two law enforcement officials said.
Helpless pedestrians had little time to react as the car barreled down the sidewalk and through intersections before smashing into a row of steel security barriers installed in recent years to prevent vehicle attacks on the square where massive crowds gather every New Year's Eve. The car came to rest with its two right wheels in the air.
"He didn't stop," said Asa Lowe, of Brooklyn, who was standing outside a store when he heard screaming as people scattered. "He just kept going."
Police said 23 people were struck by the car, including an 18-year-old tourist from Michigan who died. The woman's sister, 13, was among the injured.
A fire department chief, Mark Foris, was at an unrelated elevator rescue when he saw the car whiz by and called in emergency crews.
"This is more than just a car accident," he recalled thinking as he walked among bleeding pedestrians, doing triage on the spot. "This is a mass casualty incident."
The carnage raised immediate fear of a terrorist attack, but investigators quickly turned their focus to the sobriety and mental health of the driver, identified as Bronx resident Richard Rojas.
"There is no indication that this was an act of terrorism," Mayor Bill de Blasio said.
Photographers snapped pictures of Rojas after he climbed from the wrecked car and ran through the street before he was tackled by a group that included a ticket seller and a muscular door supervisor at a nearby Planet Hollywood restaurant.
Rojas initially tested negative for alcohol, but more detailed testing was being done to determine if he was high, according to two law enforcement officials who were not authorized to speak publicly and spoke to The Associated Press on the condition of anonymity.
The officials said Rojas had told officers he had been hearing voices.
A week ago, Rojas was arrested and charged with pointing a knife at a notary, whom he accused of stealing his identity. He pleaded guilty to a harassment violation and was given a conditional discharge.
He was arrested on charges of driving while intoxicated in 2008 and 2015, police Commissioner James O'Neill said. He pleaded guilty to an infraction in 2015 and was ordered to complete a drunken-driving program and lost his license for 90 days.
In previous arrests, he told authorities he believed he was being harassed and followed, one of the law enforcement officials said.
Police identified the woman killed by the car as Alyssa Elsman, of Portage, Mich.
Elsman graduated last year from Portage Northern High School.
In the Bronx, neighborhood acquaintances said Rojas was a friendly man who had been having problems. Harrison Ramos said Rojas wasn't the same when he came back from active duty in 2014.
"He's been going through a real tough time," he said.
Thursday's mayhem began at noon on a hot, clear day that brought large crowds of people into the streets to enjoy the good weather.
Police said Rojas had been driving south on Seventh Avenue when he made a quick U-turn at 42nd Street and drove up the sidewalk for three blocks, passing tourist draws such as the Hard Rock Cafe and the Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. restaurant.
Bruno Carvalho, a student at SUNY Albany, said the car approached quickly and passed him on the sidewalk.
"People just got stunned," he said. "I don't think there was actually time for screaming."
Victims had no time to react and scramble for safety in crowded Times Square, said Alpha Balde, a sightseeing-ticket seller.
"This place?" Balde said. "Anything happens here. There's no time for people to get out."
As Rojas ran from his wrecked vehicle, Ken Bradix, a door host supervisor at Planet Hollywood, struck him to get him to stop, Balde said.
He and Bradix jumped on top of Rojas, lifted his shirt to make sure he had no weapons and held him until police arrived moments later, Balde said.

Graphic

 
 A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after driving through a crowd of pedestrians Thursday, May 18, 2017. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  A car rests on a security barrier in New York's Times Square after driving through a crowd of pedestrians, injuring at least a dozen people, Thursday, May 18, 2017. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer)  In this image made from video provided by Oscar Navarro Reyes, Richard Rojas is arrested after a fatal automobile accident on New York City's Times Square, Thursday, May 18, 2017. Authorities and witnesses said Rojas drove his car the wrong way up a Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk. (Oscar Navarro Reyes via AP)  In this image made from video provided by Oscar Navarro Reyes, Richard Rojas is arrested after a fatal automobile accident on New York City's Times Square, Thursday, May 18, 2017. Authorities and witnesses said Rojas drove his car the wrong way up a Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk. (Oscar Navarro Reyes via AP)  A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  In this image taken from video provided by WABC Eyewitness News, New York City Police officers escort Richard Rojas from the Midtown South Precinct station house in New York, Thursday, May 18, 2017. Rojas steered his car onto a sidewalk running through the heart of Times Square on Thursday and mowed down pedestrians for three blocks, killing a teenager and injuring 22 others, before he was tackled by bystanders, authorities said. (WABC Eyewitness News via AP)  A car rests on a security barrier in New York's Times Square after driving through a crowd of pedestrians, injuring at least a dozen people, Thursday, May 18, 2017. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer)  A car rests on a security barrier in New York's Times Square after driving through a crowd of pedestrians, injuring at least a dozen people, Thursday, May 18, 2017. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer)  A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  Investigators look under a smashed car that sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  Emergency personnel treat a victim after a car ploughed through a crowd of pedestrians during lunchtime at New York's Times Square, Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  A smashed car, lower right, sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  Pedestrians try to get a look at a car crash while police officers push them back in Times Square in New York, Thursday, May 18, 2017. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  First responders assist one of the victims of a car crash, Thursday, May 18, 2017 in New York. A man who appeared intoxicated drove his car the wrong way up a Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk injuring dozens authorities and witnesses said. (AP Photo/Jacob Pearson)  New York's Times Square is closed off by police vehicles following a car crash, lower right, Thursday, May 18, 2017. A man who appeared intoxicated drove his car the wrong way up the Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk injuring dozens authorities and witnesses said. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan)  Investigators works at the scene of a car crash, Thursday, May 18, 2017, in New York's Times Square. A man who appeared intoxicated drove his car the wrong way up the Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk injuring dozens authorities and witnesses said. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer)  A smashed car sits on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square after ploughing through a crowd of pedestrians at lunchtime on Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)  A police officer inspects a car crash, Thursday, May 18, 2017, in New York's Times Square. A man who appeared intoxicated drove his car the wrong way up the Times Square street and plowed into pedestrians on the sidewalk injuring dozens authorities and witnesses said. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan)  A woman is escorted from the scene of car crash on the corner of Broadway and 45th Street in New York's Times Square, Thursday, May 18, 2017. Police do not suspect a link to terrorism and the driver was taken into custody to be tested for alcohol. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer) 

Load-Date: May 19, 2017


End of Document