CAR BOMBING HAS BECOME FAVORED TACTIC OF TERRORISTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
The New York Times
September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 897 words
Byline: By ERIC PACE
Body


Explosives concealed in cars and trucks have repeatedly been used by terrorists in the Middle East since April 18, 1983, when an unidentified driver gunned an explosives-laden Chevrolet pickup truck into the front driveway of the main United States Embassy compound in West Beirut.
 The truck blew up, wrecking the Embassy building and leaving 63 dead, including 17 United States citizens.
The worst of the vehicle-bombings came on Oct. 23, 1983, when a grinning driver detonated another explosives-laden truck at the United States Marine garrison at Beirut airport on Oct. 23, 1983, killing 241 American servicemen.
Later that month, the United States Marine contingent in Beirut was put on the highest alert because it had received a report from the the Lebanese Army that the Marines might be hit by another car-bomb attack, but none occurred.
Islamic Holy War
Anonymous telephone calls to journalists in Beirut have said a group called Islamic Holy War was responsible for the suicide attack on the Marine garrison; for the deaths of 58 French citizens, killed by a similar suicide truck bombing of a French garrison in Beirut on the same day; and for the bombing of the United States Embassy in West Beirut in April of that year.
In addition, a telephone caller told Agence France-Press in Beirut that Islamic Holy War had caused caused a series of explosions on Dec. 12, 1983 in Kuwait: an explosives-laden truck rammed into the U.S. Embassy compound there; and car bombs, detonated by remote control, went off at the French Embassy, a residential complex, the airport, an industrial site, and a power station. The casualty toll was seven persons killed - including an attacker and a victim who died Jan. 30 - and dozens of wounded. The State Department said no Americans were among the casualties.
Earlier this month, an anonymous telephone caller said that Islamic Holy War would soon hit at a ''vital U.S. interest in the Middle East.'' But security officials in Lebanon have said no such terorist organization exists.
A special Defense Department commission declared, in a report on the Marine garrison bombing which was made public Dec. 28, 1983, that the ''most important message'' of the attack on the garrison had been that terrorist activity was now ''tantamount to an act of war'' - what it called ''warfare on the cheap.'' The commission also concluded that the Marines should have taken more effective precautions against terrorist attacks.
 
Weinberger Blames Syria
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger charged that the assault on the Marine compound was executed with the ''sponsorship, knowledge and authority of the Syrian government.''
And by the end of last year, Arab and Israeli security experts were saying that the United States and its allies had become the objects of what the experts called terrorism carried out under the aegis of governments.
By then, the general view among security officials and diplomats in the Middle East had come to be that the Iranian and Syrian regimes were involved. High-ranking officials of those two Governments, however, have denied that Damascus and Teheran were linked in anyway with the recent major bombings.
And Arab and Israeli experts on terrorism said the signs were that no single group had mounted these bomb assaults. By some accounts, questioning of suspects in the April, 1983 attack on the embassy in West Beirut indicated that it was planned and organized by Palestinians, and that specially-recruited Beirut Lebanese performed lesser functions. The driver of the truck was said to have been from outside Beirut. No trace of his body was found, and it remained unclear whether he escaped with his life.
 
Iranian 'Operatives' in Lebanon
Details about who was responsible for the attacks on the French and the American Marine garrisons in Beirut are even hazier, but some weeks before, one Middle Eastern intelligence agency was reported to have learned that 50 Iranian ''operatives'' arrived in Damascus by air from Teheran and later proceeded to Beirut, where they were suspected of having played a role in the two bombings.
By some accounts, Israeli experts later concluced that these Iranians were also involved in another major suicide truck-bomb attack that was mounted Nov. 4, 1983, on the Israeli military headquarters in the port of Tyre, in southern Lebanon, that killed 60 people, including 29 Israeli soldiers.
At dawn, what an Israeli Army communique called ''a huge explosion'' hit two buildings in a compound which had earlier housed a school for Palestinian refugees run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency. It was taken over by the Israeli Army after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
After the Tyre attack, the Israeli Air Force mounted two air raids on barracks housing Iranians in the area of Baalbek, Lebanon.
In December, an Israeli Army report said that inadequate security precautions had been partly to blame for the bombing. The report concluded that the authorities at the installation had neglected to take the necessary precautions although intelligence units had given sufficient warnings that a car- bomb attack might be mounted on it.
Somewhat similarly, Kuwaiti security officials, after the bombings in Kuwait, arrested more than a dozen persons suspected of having had a hand in them. The Kuwaitis have also indicated that there was a connection to Iranian intelligence.


End of Document