Carlos the Terrorist Arrested and Taken to France
The New York Times
August 16, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk ; Column 1; ; Biography
Length: 1238 words
Byline: Ilich Ramirez Sanchez (Carlos)

By ALAN RIDING, 

By ALAN RIDING,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 15
Body


The international terrorist known as Carlos, an almost-mythical figure blamed for a string of bombings and killings across Western Europe in the 1970's and 1980's, was arrested in Sudan on Sunday and flown secretly to France today.
France's Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, said Carlos, 44, a native of Venezuela whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, would go on trial here for crimes committed in France.
"He is one of the most well-known and most dangerous criminals in the world," Mr. Pasqua said with evident satisfaction.
The last known case of terrorism involving Carlos occurred in 1983, yet his arrest was a coup for the French security services, which along with other Western intelligence agencies have been on his trail for 20 years.
Carlos's most daring act involved the kidnapping of 11 oil ministers at an OPEC meeting in Vienna in December 1975. Three people died in the incident, but Carlos and his group were flown to Algeria and released.
At different times, his name was linked to urban guerrilla bands in Japan, Germany, Spain and Ireland, but he was most closely associated with Arab terrorist groups. He was also reportedly protected at various times by East Germany, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
Indeed, such was the mystery surrounding Carlos that he was often assigned the blame for actions that he did not commit, like the killing of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich. Carlos, with his frequent disguises, seemed to take pride in the fact that he repeatedly outsmarted the Western police.
Most recently, though, he was said to be living in semi-retirement in Damascus, Syria, with his wife, Magdalena Kopp, a former member of the German Baader-Meinhoff gang who spent three years in prison in France in the early 1980's on charges of possessing explosives.
Mr. Pasqua said French intelligence officers were tipped off early this year that Carlos had entered Sudan under a false name with a false diplomatic passport and informed Sudanese authorities.
"Several times we hoped Carlos would be handed over," he said. "Several times we were disappointed. Yesterday morning, the Sudanese authorities told us that they had identified Carlos beyond all doubt and were ready to respond immediately to the arrest warrants issued by French judicial authorities."
Mr. Pasqua said that Carlos arrived at the Villacoublay military airport near Paris at 10 A.M. today.
After two hours of interrogation in the headquarters of the Direction of Surveillance of the Territory, France's counterintelligence agency, Carlos was taken to La Sante prison in Paris. He is expected to appear before France's main antiterrorist investigating judge, Jean-Louis Bruguiere, on Tuesday.
 
Plan for Attacks in Sudan
 In Khartoum, Sudan's Interior Minister, Al-Tayeb Ibrahim Mohammed Khier, said in a statement that Carlos, carrying a passport from an Arab country, was among a group suspected of planning attacks on foreign institutions in the Sudanese capital.
Mr. Khier said the group wanted Sudan to be blamed for supporting terrorism. Egypt and the United States have accused Sudan of supporting Islamic extremists, a charge denied by Lieut. Gen. Omar Hassan el-Bashir, the leader of Sudan's Islamic fundamentalist Government.
[The Sudanese Government spokesman, Abubaker al-Shingieti, told The Associated Press that Carlos was arrested "in the last few days" along with several others, but he refused to provide details.]
Mr. Shingieti said the group had first stayed in a leading Khartoum hotel and then rented an apartment, where its members were kept under surveillance because "they were not conducting any kind of activity to justify their presence in Sudan." He said some members of the group had moved in and out of Sudan, but not the man with the diplomatic passport.
"He made some international calls which were monitored by the security group," the Sudanese official said, "and that confirmed the suspicion over his intentions." He added that France had subsequently informed Sudan that it suspected Carlos had entered the country, while Interpol formally requested his arrest.
 
Sudan 'Fighting Terrorism'
 Mr. Shingieti said Sudan's decision to extradite him was evidence that it did not support terrorism.
"In doing this, the Government of Sudan is fulfilling its obligations to the international community in fighting terrorism and fighting against terrorists," he said.
France's counterintelligence service has long had a special interest in capturing Carlos because he is accused of killing two of its agents as they were about to arrest him in Paris in June 1975. For this crime, which he admitted in an interview with a Paris-based Arabic-language magazine in 1979, Carlos was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment in 1992.
A warrant was also issued for his involvement in a car bombing in Paris in April 1982 in which one person was killed and 70 wounded. He has been blamed for other attacks in France at that time, including the bombing of a train in March 1982 that killed five people and the bombing of Saint-Charles railroad station in Marseilles in December 1983 in which 6 people were killed and 80 wounded.
Mr. Pasqua said terrorist actions organized or carried out by Carlos had killed 15 people and wounded 200 others in France alone.
"Around the world, Carlos himself claims responsibility for the deaths of 83 people," he said, adding that several other countries might want to bring charges against him.
 
Speculation Over Motives
 With Mr. Pasqua reticent about details, there was speculation here as to why Sudan had agreed to hand over Carlos and whether France had made any secret deal with Khartoum.
Some experts suggested that Carlos was handed over because he had outlived his usefulness. "He was an historical anachronism whose ideology does not fit into any present-day form of state-sponsored terrorism," said Vincent Cannistraro, formerly chief of counterterrorism at the Central Intelligence Agency. "He was of use to no one. He was expendable."
Mr. Cannistraro said Carlos was "a guest" of Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, until about nine months ago, when France, which had discovered his whereabouts, began pressing for his arrest.
 
'Embarrassment for Assad'
 "He was even too much of an embarrassment for Assad," the former C.I.A. official said. "When Assad expels you, you're gone." Carlos reportedly went briefly to Yemen before moving to Sudan, he added.
Some American officials said that for Sudan, which is on the State Department's list of countries sponsoring terrorism, Carlos's extradition was an easy way to earn goodwill abroad.
"What they did today is a significant development," a State Department counterterrorism expert said. "We hope it will be the first of many similar steps. For example, we would hope they would close down the offices of groups that engage in terrorism."
The arrest of Carlos is nonetheless a significant coup for France's hard-line Interior Minister, who over the last two weeks has been leading a much-publicized campaign to round up Algerians living in France who support Algeria's outlawed Islamic Salvation Front. He began the offensive after Islamic extremists killed five French citizens in Algeria.
French security services have been hunting Carlos since he took part in the kidnapping of the French Ambassador to the Netherlands in September 1974.
"This hunt was never abandoned, even if at times Carlos's trail was lost," Mr. Pasqua said.

Graphic

 
Photos: Three faces of the Jackal. The terrorist Carlos is shown in two old police file photos from 20 years on the run and last week in Sudan. (Reuters)

Load-Date: August 16, 1994


End of Document