Carlo Meth
The Bismarck Tribune
January 23, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 478 words
Body


Sgt. 1st Class Carlo Joaquin Meth, 35, formerly of Carrington, died Jan. 16, 2008, during a military training exercise at Laurinberg-Maxton Airfield, N.C. Services will be held at 2 p.m. Friday, Jan. 25, at Calvary Baptist Church, Carrington. Interment will be in Carrington Cemetery.
Visitation will be held from noon to 8:30 p.m. Thursday and 9 a.m. to noon Friday at Evans Funeral Home, Carrington.
Carlo Joaquin Meth was born in Colombia on June 1, 1972. He came to the United States when he was 5. He is the son of Curt and Linda Meth, and he was raised in Carrington. Carlo was baptized at, and was a member of, Calvary Baptist Church, Carrington. He attended Carrington School and graduated in 1990. His activities while in school included football and basketball. After graduation, he enlisted in the Army as an infantryman in October 1990. He earned the coveted Green Beret in 2005. He was assigned to Company C, 2nd Battalion, 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne) at Fort Bragg, N.C. He served in Afghanistan in 2003, and had also been deployed to the Horn of Africa, Bosnia and Egypt.
Carlo married Lorrianne Halladay and they later divorced. They have a daughter, Nikole Meth, 11, who resides with her grandparents, Curt and Linda Meth, in Oklahoma.
Carlo's awards and decorations he received while in the military include six Army Commendation Medals, six Army Achievement Medals, five Army Good Conduct Medals, two National Defense Service Medals, two Armed Forces Expeditionary Medals, Kosovo Campaign Medal with Bronze Service Star, Afghanistan Campaign Humanitarian Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Humanitarian Service Medal, Armed Forces Service Medal, two Noncommissioned Officer Professional Development Ribbons, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon, United Nations Medal, Multinational Force and Observers Medal, NATO Medal, Combat Infantryman Badge, Expert Infantryman Badge, Parachutist Badge, Air Assault Badge, Range Tab and Special Forces Tab.
Carlo is survived by his parents, Curt and Linda Meth, Kingfisher, Okla.; one daughter, Nikole Meth, Kingfisher; two brothers, David (Lisa) Meth, Fargo, and Shawn (Chantelle) Meth, Eagle Grove, Iowa; five sisters, Diane (Howard) Donner, Denison, Texas, Jody (Ross) Kirtley, Kingfisher, Jamie (Wes) Heinley, Carrington, Dori (Darren) Smiddy, San Jose, Calif., and Jill (Dennis) Urune, Wylie, Texas; his grandparents, Arnold and Marion Berg, Carrington; and many nieces and nephews.
He was preceded in death by his grandparents, Albert and Lydia Meth.
The family requests memorials to Victory Missions of America, the sponsor of the orphanage where Carlo resided before coming to America. Memorials may be sent in care of Curt Meth Family to Evans Funeral Home, 90 Poplar Ave., Carrington, 58421.
Visit the guest book at
bismarcktribune.com

Load-Date: January 23, 2008


End of Document