CARNAHAN ADDRESSES VFW POST ON NATIONAL ISSUES, TERRORISM RESPONSE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 25, 2001 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: JEFFERSON COUNTY POST; Pg. 1
Length: 657 words
Byline: Tim Rowden Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


* Carnahan, 67, of Rolla, was in Jefferson County Monday taping an interview with state Sen. Steve Stoll, D-Festus, for a Jefferson College cable-access program.
Sen. Jean Carnahan, D-Mo., says she isn't ready to talk about politics.
Carnahan spoke to a group of about 50 veterans and auxiliary members at VFW Post 3777 in Festus this week about legislative and budgetary priorities and America's war on terrorism.
Carnahan ended her speech without taking questions from the audience and declined to say afterward whether she planned to seek re-election next year.
"I've thought about it," Carnahan told a reporter after the speech. "I'm just not ready to announce it yet."
Carnahan was appointed last year to serve two years after the posthumous victory of her husband, Gov. Mel Carnahan, over Sen. John Ashcroft, a Republican. Gov. Carnahan, his son and top aide died in a plane crash on Oct. 16, 2000, near Hillsboro.
Jim Talent, 44, of Chesterfield, said earlier this month that he would run for the Republican nomination for Carnahan's Senate seat.
Talent was the GOP candidate for governor last year and narrowly lost to Democrat Bob Holden. He served six years in the Legislature and eight years as a congressman before leaving the U.S. House to run for governor.
"People don't want to see politicians out running for office right now," Carnahan said. "They want us in Washington right now taking care of business. That's what I intend to do, take care of the business that the people sent me to Washington to do."
Carnahan, 67, of Rolla, was in Jefferson County Monday taping an interview with state Sen. Steve Stoll, D-Festus, for the Jefferson College cable-access program, "Eye on 2001 with Senator Stoll." The program is scheduled to air early next month.
Addressing the fallout from the terrorist attacks, Carnahan told veterans that she wanted to establish a Center for Excellence, for homeland security training at Fort Leonard Wood.
The base currently provides civil-defense training for the Army's chemical-defense soldiers and military police.
Carnahan spokesman Tony Wyche said the senator had proposed designating the base as a central training ground for National Guard troops, to prepare for biological, chemical and nuclear threats.
Carnahan introduced a bill last week to create one government Web site where everyone from children and teachers to farmers, health-care workers and scientists could find timely and accurate information about the threats of biological and chemical terrorism.
The Bioterrorism Awareness Act would provide $3 million in initial funding to establish a Web site under the auspices of the Centers for Disease Control, and $1 million in annual funding in subsequent years to keep the site updated and relevant.
The bill calls for the site to be operating within 180 days of the measure's approval.
"In this new war on terrorism, the best weapon we have is information," Carnahan said.
Carnahan told veterans that she had won Senate adoption of an amendment to the 2002 Defense Authorization Bill, to extend health-care benefits for reservists returning from active duty in the current deployment and approval from a House-Senate conference committee of nearly $20 million to improve housing and other facilities at Missouri military bases.
"We need to make a new commitment to our armed forces," Carnahan said. "The task of defending freedom has not lessened in our time; it has become more complex."
Carnahan's support for the military was welcome news to Post Commander Jeff Bibb, 33, of Hillsboro.
"I was glad to hear her talk about the strengthening of the military budget," said Bibb, a Marine Corps veteran who fought in Desert Storm.
Bob Koester, 76, of Herculaneum, a Navy veteran who served in the South Pacific in World War II, said Carnahan had "touched on some good things" in her speech.
"I wish I was young enough to go back in the service," Koester said of America's war on terrorism. "I'd be there."

Notes

Reporter Tim Rowden:; E-mail: trowden@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 636-931-1017  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color photo by SAM LEONE/POST-DISPATCH - Lloyd West talks to Sen. Jean Carnahan after her talk to VFW Post 3777 in Crystal City. He said that he supported her and was pleased with the job she is doing in Washington, D.C. West lives in Hillsboro.

Load-Date: October 26, 2001


End of Document