Carters view of Mideast far from reality
USA TODAY
May 23, 2006 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 451 words
Body


Jimmy Carters vision for an Israeli-Palestinian negotiated peace is far removed from the realities on the ground.
Bilateral negotiations are on hold, not because of Israels actions, but because the Palestinians elected a leadership that has done nothing to further Israeli security and refuses to reject terrorism and accept a peaceful path (Israels new plan: A land grab, The Forum, May 16).
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has stated that he is giving the Palestinians time to come to the negotiating table themselves, but they must first combat terrorism and guarantee border security, and Hamas itself must repudiate terrorism and recognize Israels right to exist.
In the meantime, Israel needs to go forth with policies that will ensure its own security. Thus, Prime Minister Olmert is considering unilateral measures, specifically its retrenchment from the West Bank, which will include the uprooting of Israeli settlements similar to Israels unilateral disengagement from Gaza. Such a move also aims to improve the quality of life for Palestinians  who will be fully governed by Palestinians and have the ability to build up an independent
state with limited contact with Israeli civilians and military.
Carter should abandon his unrealistic call for immediate bilateral negotiations and instead support creative solutions
that aim to improve the situation of the combustible realities on the ground.
Abraham H. Foxman
National director
Anti-Defamation League, New York
Carters opinion welcome
Former president Jimmy Carters criticism of Israels policies is welcome, but hardly goes far enough.
Carter objects to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmerts move toward unilateral confiscation and colonization of much of
the West Bank, policies that would violate the Oslo Accords of 1993 and United Nations resolutions.
But Israel has violated Oslo since it was signed, and U.N. resolutions since Israels birth in May 1948.
More important than Oslo is Israels systematic violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which governs Israels conduct
in the Palestinian lands Israel occupied in 1967.
U.S. and Israeli human rights groups, such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and BTselem, have documented those violations, some of which are war crimes. Among those responsible for such crimes were Prime Ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, both praised by Jimmy Carter.
Americans need to know that Israels policies of confiscation and colonization have been going on since 1948 if they are
to understand Arab and Muslim anger at the USA, and if they are to support a U.S. policy that works for a just peace.
Edmund R. Hanauer
Executive director
Search for Justice and Equality in Palestine/Israel
Framingham, Mass.

Load-Date: May 23, 2006


End of Document