Case hinges on fatwas urging attack;
 Judge in terrorism trial weighs admitting Web site evidence against UI grad student Al-Hussayen;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 23, 2004 Friday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 1073 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE<
Body


Four fatwas, or Muslim religious treatises, justifying suicide attacks form
 the heart of the case against Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, lawyers on both sides
 agreed in court Thursday.
 The four, each written by a different Muslim cleric, were posted on an
 Internet site with ties to Al-Hussayen, and prosecutors sought Thursday to
 admit them as evidence against him.
 ''Your honor, this is the core of the case," David Deitch, an attorney
 with the counterterrorism section of the U.S. Department of Justice, told the
 court.
 Among other topics, one of the fatwas includes a reference to ''bringing
 down an airplane on an important location that will cause the enemy great
 losses." The four treatises, which each argue a different perspective on
 religious justification for suicide attacks, were posted in the spring of
 2001, several months before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Defense attorneys objected.
 ''This is an article written by someone else other than Mr. Al-Hussayen,"
 defense attorney David Nevin told the court. ''It's not his writing, it's not
 his opinion."
 U.S. District Judge Edward Lodge excused the jury after Nevin's comment,
 and listened to arguments from both sides about whether to admit the evidence.
 He said he'll consider the evidence issue over the weekend before ruling on
 Monday.
 The dispute came at the end of an eventful day in Al-Hussayen's trial on
 terrorism charges. The 34-year-old University of Idaho graduate student is
 accused of providing material support to terrorism by operating Web sites for
 - and funneling money to - suspect Islamic charities, including the
 Michigan-based Islamic Assembly of North America. He's also charged with visa
 fraud for certifying repeatedly that he was in the United States solely to
 study.
 The day in court started with heated arguments over Al-Hussayen's role in a
 Yahoo e-mail group about Chechnya that drew ''explosive" postings. That was
 followed by the revelation that the prosecution's expert witness on Islam
 advocates a philosophy that rejects the central tenets of every branch of the
 faith, and got him ejected from the prominent Egyptian university where he had
 both studied and taught for years.
 The day also included the start of testimony from Rita Katz, author of the
 book ''Terrorist Hunter," which details how the Iraqi-born Jewish woman went
 undercover to expose various Muslim groups as fronts for terrorists. Katz
 revealed that she is a paid consultant for the FBI and U.S. Attorney's office
 and played a central role in their investigation of Al-Hussayen.
 The question of the four fatwas focused the day's proceedings on the heart
 of the charges against Al-Hussayen. His case is unique, as the first to charge
 material support to terrorists for operating Web sites, and the first to
 prosecute a student for visa fraud for being involved in non-study activities.
 While the prosecution contends the Saudi Arabian computer science student
 used his student status as a cover for support of terrorism, the defense says
 he's an innocent, peaceful student who's being prosecuted for exercising his
 rights to freedom of speech and religion.
 Said Nevin, ''I certainly agree with the court about this going to the core
 of the case, but that's the problem. Just because he's connected with a Web
 site, that doesn't mean he agrees with it."
 Deitch argued, ''It doesn't matter what the defendant's beliefs were."
 The question, he said, is whether AlHussayen knowingly disseminated the
 four fatwas as part of an Internet-based recruitment and fund-raising campaign
 for terrorism.
 ''He provided material support, knowing that it was going to be
 published," Deitch said.
 The four fatwas were posted on the Islamic Web site Alasr.ws, which is in
 Arabic. Katz, who is fluent in Arabic and who said she helped the FBI examine
 computer hard drives and study Internet sites, testified that Alasr.ws is an
 electronic magazine and also a ''dawah," or religious outreach, site.
 Katz is the director of the SITE Institute, which stands for Search for
 International Terrorist Entities. The nonprofit institute, founded in July of
 2002, seeks to expose terrorist front groups through everything from
 monitoring the Internet and scouring documents to going undercover and
 infiltrating the groups.
 ''We attend events, go to mosques," Katz told the court. ''We dress like
 them, look like them. We try also to be wired when we do that."
 Earlier on Thursday, Sheikh Ahmed Subhy Mansour, the prosecution's expert
 witness on Islam, finished his testimony explaining the history of the
 religion and its modern versions. He said some Muslims twist the teachings of
 the Quran, the holy book of Islam, to justify terrorism, but the Quran forbids
 suicide.
 On cross-examination, Mansour acknowledged that he started his own
 ''Quranist" philosophy 25 years ago, rejecting the other two major sources of
 Muslim teachings, the Hadith and the Sunna. None of the major branches of the
 religion - Sunni, Shiite or Sufi - takes his approach, he acknowledged.
 Al Azhar, the university in Egypt where Mansour earned his Ph.D. and
 taught, ejected him after a trial in which Mansour unsuccessfully presented
 150 verses from the Quran in his defense.
 Thursday's proceedings opened with arguments, outside the jury's presence,
 about the relevance of the postings to a Yahoo e-mail group on Chechnya. The
 government wants to submit all 3,579 postings, including one posted just hours
 before Al-Hussayen's arrest that sought information from Muslims in the
 military about possible U.S. military targets for attack in Iraq.
 Defense attorneys argued that Al-Hussayen posted only 74 of the group's
 messages, and his last posting was in 2000. They said Al-Hussayen likely never
 even saw most of the postings, which he received in a periodic digest.
 Lodge will rule later on whether to allow the postings.
 Al-Hussayen was one of an undetermined number of moderators for the group,
 who had the ability to delete postings, but he only deleted one.
 ''He was a moderator, that was clear," Deitch told the court. ''It's true
 that he took limited action. The government's view of that is that he chose"
 not to delete more of the messages posted to the list, he said.
 Nevin responded that under the First Amendment, ''People don't have an
 obligation to go out and find messages they disagree with and make some effort
 to delete them and destroy them."
 He added, ''There is absolutely no showing that Mr. Al-Hussayen read
 them."

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854, or by e-mail at bzrussell@rmci.net.  

Load-Date: April 24, 2004


End of Document