Castro terrorized his nation
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 12, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 4
Length: 401 words
Byline: karl williams Central Alternative High School
Body


Editor's note: Students at Central Alternative High School are conducting in-depth research on the impact and significance of global terrorism.
Over the last several weeks, the Telegraph Herald has published essays written by the students as part of their project that will culminate in a public seminar on global terrorism to be held at 7 p.m. Wednesday, April 23, at the Midway Hotel in Dubuque.
The topic I chose is Fidel Castro because of the terror he has brought our nation during his reign as the Cuban president. Primarily during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, he struck fear in the hearts of millions.
Castro has terrorized not only our nation but his own as well, when he forced himself into power and struggled to stay there over 40 years. He was a leader who used fear as a primary tactic to gain power and support.
Growing up in Cuba, Castro realized his country was in an economic struggle caused by an unethical leader, Fulgencio Batista, who created a government controlled by crime in order to make money. Castro despised Batista and sought to overthrow him. Castro studied law in Havana; he then got involved with a revolutionary group at his university.
On July 26, 1953, Castro tried but failed to bring down Batista. He was sentenced to 15 years in jail. After being released on May 15, 1955, under amnesty, Fidel fled Cuba to live in Mexico and America. During this time he planned a second attack. In 1956, Castro returned to Cuba with a small group of followers. In late 1958, Fidel set a full-scale attack on Batista.
On Jan. 1, 1959, Batista fled to the Dominican Republic and Castro took over Cuba, making it the first Communist nation in the Western Hemisphere.
During his presidency, Castro used numerous terror-like tactics. He ordered his soldiers to eliminate his political competition. He also formed the Committee for the Defense of the Revolution, which basically spied on and punished anyone who would consider creating a rebellion to overthrow him.
This topic is very important to history. Castro in many ways has taught our government to be more careful about the decisions it makes. If the U.S. government had not tried and failed to assassinate Castro in 1959, he might not have responded with missiles he got from Russia, our deadly enemy at the time.
We were on the brink of destruction and nearly 80 million Americans were being terrorized by Fidel Castro and his missiles.

Load-Date: April 12, 2008


End of Document