Castle Shannon store's new flag has anti-terror, inclusive message
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
December 18, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 424 words
Byline: by ERIC HEYL
Body


It's much too large to be a stocking stuffer. 
But if you're looking for an appropriate Christmas gift for someone appalled and horrified by terrorist violence this holiday season, you might want to visit The Flag Factory in Castle Shannon. 
There you'll find Cliff Ruderer, who co-owns the flag emporium with his wife, Carole. He'll show you the latest item in his inventory: a distinctive, 3-foot-by-5-foot flag emblazoned with an anti-terrorist message. 
Ruderer, 74, of McCandless believes that message of a unified effort to fight ISIS and its supporters sorely needs to be delivered. He concluded that after last month's Paris attacks that left at least 130 people dead and the Dec. 2 methodical massacre of 14 people attending a training event in San Bernardino, Calif. 
So he designed the flag, which isn't the usual offering available at a store featuring a host of American, international, state and military flags, among others. But Ruderer believes it might interest those who, like he, experienced a visceral reaction to the recent terror attacks. 
"Violent extremists are the common enemy of us all, and derive strength from dividing those who oppose them," he said. "We hope these flags will be flown as symbols of unified resolve to stand together to defeat terrorism." 
Rather than echo the divisive dialogue that has dominated discussion on how best to combat terrorism, the flag calls for unity by linking the Christian cross, Jewish Star of David and Islamic crescent. 
"It's really an attempt to say that, regardless of your faith, if you have any religion in you at all you're going to be opposed to these sort of atrocities, the killing of innocent people," Ruderer said. 
This isn't the first terrorism-related flag Ruderer has designed. For the 10th anniversary of 9/11 in 2011, he came up with a commemorative flag that still sells. 
"For every one of those sold, we give $9.11 to the (Flight 93 National Memorial) in Shanksville," he said. "So far, we've donated about $5,000." 
Ruderer doesn't expect anti-terrorism flag sales to rival those of the 9/11 flags; he isn't sure how popular they might be.  
"They might have some appeal to some religious groups or individuals," he said. "But they aren't really directed at anyone in particular." 
On that, Ruderer is mistaken. They're directed at anyone opposed to ISIS and its ugly ideology. 
Given that vast demographic, expect more than a few people to find a flag under their yule trees. 
Eric Heyl is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7857 or eheyl@tribweb.com 

Load-Date: December 20, 2015


End of Document