Casualty of war: school field trips;
As fear of terrorism escalates, local superintendents share a common concern: Should they let students travel? Some are. Some aren't.
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
March 31, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 1118 words
Byline: Susan Baldrige
Body


Bombs may be dropping half a world away, but school kids in Lancaster County are feeling the aftershocks.
Kids may have to forget that school trip to Hersheypark Physics Day, the Baltimore Aquarium or a Broadway musical.
Since the war began, several local school districts have canceled field trips, fearing a higher threat of terrorism on American soil.
Several other trips still are being evaluated and may be canceled in the future.
#TRIPS.BALBROken#
But in some districts, out-of-the area trips are a go, for now.
"You don't have to blow up buildings to change the way people live," said Solanco Superintendent Jon Rednak, whose district recently canceled student trips to New York City and Philadelphia.
Rednak said the fear of some sort of terrorism in reaction to the war has school officials mulling over whether field trips are a good thing right now.
"It's tough," Rednak said. "In some cases, groups have raised a good deal of money and can't get their money back. You don't want to overreact, because then the terrorists win."
The district has made decisions on all trips scheduled up to May 1. A May 21 trip to Six Flags Great Adventure park in New Jersey is still on the schedule, but that could change, Rednak said.
A group of German students recently canceled a visit to Solanco because of terrorism fears.
"We're trying to be proactive and timely and continue to look at them (field trips) as they come up," Rednak said.
The Manheim Township School District has canceled all out-of-the-county field trips, citing the need for buses to be available in case an evacuation becomes necessary.
A notice sent home to parents last week also mentions the fact that parents who chaperone trips might need to be at home for other children in the event of a terrorist incident.
"It's really hard," said Manheim Township District Superintendent Sharron Nelson. "People are going to be disappointed, there's going to be extra work getting deposits back, and so forth.
"This is an attempt on my part to be cautious rather than waiting until after something occurred and wishing I'd make the decision.
"You don't know whether you're being overly cautious or not cautious enough," she said.
At Hempfield, no trips have been canceled.
"My guess is that we're trying to keep living as normal as possible," said district Community Relations Director Jessie Long.
She said that two days before the war started, Hempfield students took a bus trip to Washington, D.C.
"We're not going to do anything that risked the kids," Long said.  "If there was an imminent danger or a warning, of course, that would be different."
Lititz Elementary children will not go on a planned trip to Baltimore this month.
Instead, they will go to Mt. Gretna and have an "outdoor experience where they will learn about plants and trees," said one school official.
"We do not have a district-wide moratorium on field trips," said Warwick Superintendent Stephen Iovino.
"Our approach has been if there are a lot of concerns from teachers, parents or students, the building principal may reconsider something that has been scheduled," Iovino said.
He said a district position may be taken in the future about field trips, such as when trips to Washington, D.C., were canceled while sniper shootings were terrorizing that area.
Lampeter-Strasburg has restricted all field trips to sites within the boundary of Lancaster-Lebanon Intermediate Unit 13.
"We're on level orange on the alert scale," said L-S Superintendent Robert Frick. "We just want to stay away from metropolitan areas right now. We hope and pray nothing will happen, but the potentiality of something is still there."
Frick said the district needs at least an hour to get buses and bus drivers to school during an emergency, so he's hoping to limit student travel to that time frame.
"We had a group headed to Philadelphia last week, to the encampments in Valley Forge," said Frick. "At this point in time, we had to cancel."
A trip to Sano, Japan, by School District of Lancaster students is hanging in the balance right now.
District spokesperson Kelly Herr said officials were evaluating whether the trip -- including 16 students and three chaperones -- still should be considered safe. Other district field trips, she said, were on schedule.
In the Ephrata School District, field trips are on schedule. In fact, the school band just returned from a trip to Disney World in Florida.
Manheim Central is allowing field trips at this point, according to Superintendent Carol Saylor, but some have been canceled anyway.
"What I've said is: If teachers or parents are uncomfortable going," said Saylor, "they can go next year."
Saylor said she is more nervous about trips to major metropolitan areas or trips that take students more than an hour from the district.
"We have cell phones that teachers take with them so we can be in touch with them in an instant," Saylor said. "As much as we can, we're trying to keep the year as normal as we can for these students; at the same time, we don't want to put them in danger."
Penn Manor has not taken any official action on field trips.
"We're trying to balance student safety against student excitement," said Penn Manor Superintendent Don Stewart.
"Do you want to take a year's worth of hard work away from students?" asked Stewart, referring to a state-wide student technology competition scheduled for Seven Springs next month.
"We don't have any trips scheduled out of the country right now, and that's a blessing," said Stewart. "I have no inclination to cancel anything local right now."
At Garden Spot High School, officials are taking a look at each scheduled field trip. They have decided to allow students to go to the technology competition.
"My thought would be: If there's going to be a terrorist target, Seven Springs would probably not be too high on the list," said Garden Spot High School Principal Don Reed. "There's probably a greater danger here, with the location of all the utilities.
"We're trying to run things as close to normal as possible," said Reed. "There are lots of other things that kids can't control, like what they see in the news."
Donegal school officials are eying a student band trip to Toronto, scheduled for April 10, but have not yet decided if students will go.
"The educational benefit of the trip is one casualty," said Donegal Superintendent Linda Abele, "and quite possibly much money will be lost.
"But as administrators, there's not any one of us that are willing to trade deposit money for the risk of a child.
"We'll be glad if there's any such thing as returning to normal," she said. "This takes its toll on everyone emotionally, and it takes its toll on the kids."
(Staff writer Cindy Stauffer contributed to this report.)

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTOS, (1)Saylor (2)Iovino

Load-Date: April 1, 2003


End of Document