Catastrophe Insurance 2020: Snow, floods and acts of terrorism
Idaho Business Review
December 23, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 920 words
Byline: Sharon Fisher
Body


Editor’s note: This is the second in a four-part series on business preparedness for the 2020s.
Back in the day, insurance was simple. You had car, house, life and business and you called it good.
But increasingly, insurance is getting more specialized. As more situations arise, insurance companies come up with more insurance to cover them. And new catastrophes are coming up all the time.
“Businesses in Idaho face a variety of risks and hazards and they come in all shapes and sizes,” said Jon Hanian, public-private partnerships program manager for the Idaho Office of Emergency Management, in an email message. “Those include natural events, like flooding, earthquakes, winter storms, and wildfire, to manmade disasters like cyber attacks and active shooter events. Any one of these potential tragedies has the ability to seriously impact business. That impact is either magnified or lessened to the degree a business, the owner, and his or her employees prepare and work together to mitigate these threats. ”
Ironically, one of Idaho’s problems is that it doesn’t have disasters often enough to get people thinking about them, Hanian said. “The challenge in Idaho is that we don’t have the kind of ‘battle rhythm’ that states in Tornado Alley, or people who live along the Gulf or East Coasts experience during periods of violent weather andhurricane season,” he said. “That is both a blessing and a curse because it creates a sense of complacency here when it comes to preparing for the worst. The challenge is to get businesses to start thinking about not just worst-case scenarios, but the kinds of events that can happen elsewhere that can create serious problems here we might not think about until it happens. ”
Terrorism insurance
Until 2017, for example, people might not have thought of making sure that their business insurance covered situations like roofs of onion sheds and grocery stores collapsing due to snow.
Similarly, before 9/11/2001, companies might not have thought of having terrorism insurance. But it now exists, as does TRIA, which helps make sure it continues to be available at an affordable price.
“The [Terrorism Risk Insurance Act] was created after 9/11 to prevent potential acts of terrorism from causing massive, longterm disruption to a city or state’s economy, and has served as an unseen factor in keeping our economy stable and provided necessary coverage for businesses, especially developers and large construction operations,” said Emily Baker, executive director of the Idaho Coalition for Action on TRIA, in an email message.
“Private insurers still provide terrorism insurance coverage,” Baker said. TRIAprovides shared public and private compensation forinsured losses resulting fromacts of terrorism, she said. It kicks in after a certain point, based on yearly increases  for example, after $200 million as of 2020, she said.
TRIA alsoallows for a transitional period for private markets to stabilize, resume pricing of suchinsurance and build capacity to absorb any future losses, while preserving state insuranceregulation and consumer protections, Baker added.
WithoutTRIA, insurers could decline to offer terrorism coverage, Baker said. And without private insurers, the federal government would be pressured to cover uninsured losses in case of an act of terrorism, she added.
The coalition was launched in November to encourage extension of TRIA for the next seven years. Otherwise, it will expire on Dec. 31, 2020. Some 30 Idaho businesses and business organizations, including Idaho Power, St. Luke’s Health System and Boise State University are members.
The bill to extend TRIA passed in the House and Senate earlier this year. It was included in the 2020 omnibus spending bill, which passed both the House and Senate during the week of Dec. 16 and was expected to be signed by President Donald Trump to avoid a government shutdown, Baker said.
“Many of the events we all enjoy and love like the Snake River Stampede, the McCall Winter Carnival and the Lionel Hampton Jazz Festival in Moscow benefit fromTRIAand the availability of affordable priced insurance policies,” Baker said.
Flood insurance
On a more mundane level, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is encouraging Idaho businesses to think about flood insurance before the spring thaw.
“In the past, we had commercials on late-night TV that nobody saw,” said Scott Van Hoff, regional flood insurance liaison for FEMA Region X, based in Bothell, Washington. Now, the organization is using targeted marketing related to flood risk at the time, such as after a forest fire or as snowpack builds up, he said.
It’s an odd thing to say about a desert, but parts of Idaho are subject to floods, and the long-term trend is toward less snowpack and more rain, Van Hoff said, who previously worked for the Department of Water Resources as state floodplain coordinator.
“I spent seven years in Idaho trying to convince people that’s a bad place to build your house or subdivision or Walmart or your new hospital,” Van Hoff said. “Water is attractive. People consider it an amenity, particularly in a desert environment. ”
But governments are limited in how much they can prohibit development in a particular area, Van Hoff said. Moreover, “in much of the state, building codes are still a foreign concept,” he said. And in a lot of areas, restricting development is unpopular, he said. “Saying ‘no’ to development is something they just don’t do very often. ”
Copyright © 2019 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: April 27, 2020


End of Document