Catching Up On The News; Tire Terrorism Sunshine Showdown Gaga Gone? Attend Rallies Jobless Rate Down Sunnyside's New Town Child Farm Labor Ok Charged In Death Burn Ban Lifted
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
May 6, 2012 Sunday


Copyright 2012 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 1
Length: 353 words
Byline: Catching Up On The News
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


The following is a look at local news events during the week of April 29.
Tires on about 50 cars parked along streets in the city's northwest and eastern sectors were slashed in the past two weekends, it was reported Wednesday. On Friday police released the image of a suspect from a surveillance camera on Burrowes Avenue.
Conestoga Township Supervisors accused former Southern Regional Police Commission Chairwoman Diane Janney Schall, of Pequea Township, of violating the Sunshine Act by deleting public comments from the commission's March meeting minutes.
The relationship between pop music sensation Lady Gaga and actor Taylor Kinney, a Lancaster Mennonite High School graduate, is "on a break," Us Weekly reported.
Several dozen members of the Industrial Workers of the World, Occupy Lancaster and Lancaster Coalition for Peace and Justice demonstrated for unions and workers' rights and against capitalism Tuesday, May Day, in Lancaster Square.
nSome 15,000 people gathered Thursday at Lancaster Bible College to hear radio preacher and author David Jeremiah on the National Day of Prayer.
The county jobless rate dipped to 6 percent in March, the lowest in more than three years, it was reported Tuesday.
Redrawn plans for Lancaster's Sunnyside peninsula were unveiled at a planning commission meeting Wednesday, showing 300 housing units priced at $125,000 to $350,000. The two-phase, $50 million to $70 million New Town project by nonprofit developer Community Basics Inc. is set to break ground next spring and be completed in eight years.
Local farmers and agriculture teachers hailed the Obama administration's decision to drop its Department of Labor proposal to prevent children from doing dangerous work on nonfamily farms. Child labor opponents warned that more children would die as a result.
Police on Wednesday charged Svetlana Filipshina, 39, of East Earl, with killing 18-year-old bicyclist Leon Hoover in a hit-and-run accident on Saw Mill Road in the township Nov. 25. She was freed on $50,000 unsecured bail.
In light of recent rains, county commissioners lifted the April 13 ban on open burning Tuesday.

Load-Date: May 7, 2012


End of Document