CAUGHT
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 20, 1999, Saturday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 404 words
Body


Turkey long sought to arrest Abdullah Ocalan on charges of terrorism. Around the time Britain detained Chile's Augusto Pinochet, Italy let Ocalan flee. Britain won considerable applause (as did the Spanish prosecutor determined to put Pinochet in the dock); only Turkey raised serious objections to Italy's scorn for justice. Pinochet went to Britain for medical treatment. Ocalan went to Italy (and subsequently left) to avoid Turkish law enforcement officials. The other day Turkey - finally - got its man. Ocalan faces a trial - and execution.
Although he professes to represent Turkey's Kurdish minority, Ocalan is nothing more than a goon. The Kurds' cause is not without merit, but Ocalan is more interested in Marxist-Leninism. He represents not liberation but betrayal. In The Wall Street Journal, David Pryce- Jones describes the circumstances:
At the core is a dispute of very long standing in Turkey. The Kurdish minority has legitimately demanded human and civil rights. Most Kurds are reasonably well inte grated or refuse to adopt violence as a tactic to obtain their rights. But some, led by Ocalan, have instead taken to ter rorism. Ocalan and his extremists have been fighting for outright secession and independence. According to Turkish sources, Ocalan is responsible for 37,000 deaths. In the face of his demands, successive Turkish governments have cracked down on all Kurds, unjustly and indiscriminately.
If there are few heroes in the dispute between Turkey and the Kurds, then Ocalan ranks as the leading villain. Moreover, his victims reportedly far outnumber Pinochet's. The innocent suffer that he may become a pseudo Che.
Turkey has not covered itself in honor, but it has a legitimate national interest in combatting terrorism in general and prosecuting Ocalan in particular. When Italy and other European countries refused to help the Turks hunt him down, they implicitly helped Ocalan pursue his mischievous ends. The timid Euros don't even have the excuse of acting out of conscience. They let him go because his terror network makes them yellow. After his arrest, Germany went out of its way to say it had nothing to do with the proceedings. Germany, too, fears the terror more than it cherishes international law. Targeting Pinochet is easy. Chile isn't going to retaliate by putting bombs on airplanes.
Regarding human rights, terrorism, and the rule of law, the double standard is alive and well.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: February 23, 1999


End of Document