CAUSE OF DEATH CAN BE LISTED AS TERRORISM;
NEW CODES CLASSIFY THOSE KILLED 9/11
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 10, 2002 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-2; U.S. FOCUS; Understanding Homicide rate
Length: 743 words
Byline: A.J. Hostetler, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact A.J. Hostetler at (804) 649-6355 or ahostetler@timesdispatch.com  
Body


Health officials are adding terrorism to the nation's system of classifying death and disease to more accurately assess the impact of such attacks on public health.
Those killed - and those who killed - in last September's attacks were the first deaths identified as homicide or suicide associated with terrorism under the changed system.
This allows officials to differentiate between the overall homicide toll and terrorism's victims.
In a report this week to the nation's public health workers, the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention unveiled an additional set of
subcategories for deaths and injuries specifically from terrorism.    It
includes such subcategories as "terrorism involving destruction of aircraft" and "terrorism involving other explosions and fragments." Medical examiners determine cause of death according to an elaborate international system that has almost 10,000 classifications. Public health officials track those causes, which are distinct from the mode of dying, such as cardiac arrest or shock.
"What we hope is that these codes never get used again," said Dr. Robert Anderson, lead statistician in the mortality statistics branch of the National Center for Health Statistics, part of the CDC.
Initially, all the victims from the attacks in New York, Pennsylvania and the Pentagon were listed as homicide victims, and the terrorists' deaths were counted as suicides. In the aftermath, the CDC received requests from state health officials for a uniform method of categorizing the deaths and injuries resulting from the attacks.
The victims, including those who jumped to their deaths from the World Trade Center towers, will still be considered homicide victims, but the CDC decided to add a layer of detail to provide a more accurate picture.
The change adds more than two dozen subcategories, each of which has a code.
The new codes are being used to classify those killed last Sept. 11 and will be used for any future deaths associated with terrorist acts, as determined by the FBI, Anderson said. A similar classification system will be used beginning next month for those injured in future terrorist attacks.
"It's important that we know the circumstances of the homicides, particularly in the case where we've been seeing this decline in homicides over time," Anderson said.
"Now we're going to have this blip, with 2001, this jump in the homicide rate. Well, we know that it's because of the 9/11 events."
The CDC wants to be able to understand what is happening to the homicide rate, which has been dropping nationwide -- if the 9/11 deaths are excluded.
For example, the homicide toll at the Pentagon, where 184 people were killed, was nearly half of Virginia's annual homicide tally in recent years.
If the 9/11 toll is considered part of the state's homicides for 2001, the overall total would be higher than any year since 1990, when 577 homicides were recorded.
The reclassification of victims was possible because medical examiners in New York and at the Pentagon noted the attacks on the death certificates, Anderson said.
The United States joins Israel in recognizing terrorism as a cause of death, but the subcategories are not recognized by the World Health Organization's system, he said.
The subcategories were developed by the health statistics center, along with the FBI and the Department of Justice, Anderson said. They are modeled on the Operations of War category used in the WHO system.
The international system was pioneered in the late 19th century. Almost all countries that have a death registration system in place follow the system, which has the force of an international treaty, he said.
New classification
Here are subcategories the United States will now list as causes of deaths related to terrorism:
Assault (homicide)
Terrorism
Terrorism involving explosion of marine weapons
Terrorism involving destruction of aircraft
Terrorism involving other explosions and fragments
Terrorism involving fires, conflagration and hot substances
Terrorism involving firearms
Terrorism involving nuclear weapons
Terrorism involving biological weapons
Terrorism involving chemical weapons
Terrorism, other specified
Terrorism, unspecified
Sequelae (aftereffects) of terrorism
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
Terrorism
Terrorism involving explosions and fragments
Terrorism by other and unspecified means
Source: National Center for Health Statistics
INFO
CLICK ON -  http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/otheract/icd9/terrorism_code.htmwere 

Load-Date: September 12, 2002


End of Document