CBS should be ashamed to air movie based on terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 20, 2002 Sunday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. b14
Length: 567 words
Byline: JOHN MARTIN
Body


Open Letter to CBS Entertainment:
I have been writing about television long enough that nothing should surprise me. But now comes "The President's Man: A Line in the Sand" at 8. What are you thinking? Do you really believe America is hungry for a Chuck Norris TV movie about a Taliban plot to explode a nuclear device in a major U.S. city?
You call this entertainment?
In the past 15 years I have reviewed an estimated 2,500 TV movies. This is the most offensive, ill-conceived and insulting piece of junk I have ever watched. Someone needs to say it without being witty or cute: You should be ashamed to have it on your network.
For the benefit of readers, a description:
Norris stars as super-secret special agent Joshua McCord. Known only to the President of the United States, he heads an elite counter-terrorism unit consisting of his daughter Que (Jennifer Tung) and muscle man Deke Slater (Judson Mills).
The plot involves an Osama bin Laden-like, bunker-dwelling terrorist linked to the Taliban whose operatives successfully smuggle components for a nuclear device into the United States. In a ridiculous sequence, Slater single-handedly parachutes into Afghanistan, disarms a squad of hapless bodyguards and kidnaps the terrorist leader. He straps on a rocket pack (seriously, folks) to evade pursuers and lift the drugged terrorist to a rendezvous with a U.S. Navy submarine.
Advisors convince the president (Robert Urich) to allow the terrorist to address the nation on television. Not surprisingly, his speech contains secret instructions to his followers, ordering them to detonate the nuclear weapon. In "a race against time," McCord and his cohorts must find the device and save the day.
This pitiful movie, riddled with plot holes and packed with action scenes that may remind you of cheesy series such as "The A-Team" and "Matt Houston," would be unintentionally funny if it was not so intensely tasteless.
The war against terrorism is real. It is costing real Americans their lives; it is bringing real, horrible sadness to their families. The economic fallout is costing many others their jobs. And we all wait for terror to strike again.
Our very way of life is under attack. This is not a subject of topical entertainment. Maybe you approved this project - maybe even filmed it - before Sept. 11.
Save your excuses or rationalizations. This is not a big-budget production.
Far from it. You should have written off the loss and burned the negative. But this is America, where we enjoy our freedom. In your case, that includes the freedom to peddle pure crap.
We viewers are drawing a line in the sand. It's the line of responsibility and decency. You need to choose a side.
"Golden Globe Awards," NBC at 8: The Hollywood Foreign Press Association salutes the best television and movies have to offer. The 59th awards ceremony will include the presentation of a lifetime achievement award to Harrison Ford. An hour-long "arrival" special airs on NBC at 7.
"The American Experience," PBS at 8 (check local listings): "Mount Rushmore" chronicles the life of Gutzon Borglum, the sculptor who created the national monument. An amazing collection of home movies and interviews make this documentary come to life.
"Gossip: Tabloid Tales," A&E at 7 and 11: The two-hour documentary focuses on tabloid journalism. The current shenanigans are too familiar, but the history of the genre is a fascinating story.

Load-Date: January 22, 2002


End of Document