Central Asia's role against terrorism explored
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 17, 2001, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: CITY & STATE; BRIEFLY; Pg. 3B; DIGEST
Length: 306 words
Dateline: TAMPA
Body


The role of Central Asia in the war against terrorism will be the focus of an Oct. 30 panel discussion at the University of South Florida-St. Petersburg.
The panel includes Thomas Smith, an assistant professor of government and international relations, and Daanish Mustafa, an assistant professor of geography and a native of Pakistan.
It does not include Sami Al-Arian, a computer engineering professor who was scheduled to speak earlier this month at a USF panel discussion on terrorism and the Middle East.
4* BRIEFS
That event was postponed after Al-Arian, who once ran a USF think tank linked to suspected terrorists, was put on paid leave. University officials said his appearance on a network TV show had generated threats that raised concerns about campus safety.
The panel on Central Asia will examine Pakistan's support for the Taliban and its chances of being dominated by a fundamentalist ideology. It also will look at whether law and ethics should apply in the current campaign against terrorism. The event begins at 6:30 p.m. in the Campus Activities Center at Second Street and Sixth Avenue S.
Two more settle TECO
discrimination suit
TAMPA - Two plaintiffs who filed a discrimination suit against Tampa Electric Co. in 1998 have settled before going to trial.
Rebecca Freeman, whose trial was to begin this week, and Lionel Ballard had alleged that they were denied advancement in the company because they are African-American. They were two of nine black employees who sued for damages for emotional distress, punitive damages, back pay and attorneys' fees. Terms of the settlements were not released.
Six of the plaintiffs had already settled. Last week, a federal judge dismissed the case of another TECO employee who went to trial. The judge said the evidence did not meet minimum legal requirements for the trial to continue.

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document