Center tracking terrorism grows
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 11, 2002 Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Metro News;
Length: 517 words
Byline: DON PLUMMER
Body


A terrorism intelligence center has been quietly operating in metro Atlanta since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The bunker, staffed by five GBI agents and officers from the state's sheriff and police associations, is connected to the FBI's anti-terrorism center in Atlanta and similar state centers around the nation.
But the Georgia Intelligence Sharing and Tracking Center is only the beginning of a coordinated statewide anti-terror program, according to Georgia Homeland Security Coordinator Bob Hightower.
AJC
"We still have a ways to go, but working together during the [1996 Atlanta] Olympics, the evacuation for Hurricane Floyd and preparations for Y2K has made us better off than a lot of other states," Hightower said. The state intelligence center, which will soon grow to 18 GBI agents, may soon move into the FBI's center, he said.
Hightower, who is the state's public safety commissioner, was named by Gov. Roy Barnes in October to chair a group of six state agencies charged with responding to terrorism. Other groups in the State Terrorism Task Force are the state's sheriffs' and police chiefs' associations and state agencies in charge of public health, transportation, emergency management, defense and natural resources.
"I'm not the boss," Hightower said. "The whole goal is to increase the ability of each agency to function by communicating better with each other."
Communicating, Hightower said, also includes informing businesses about security threats and encouraging the involvement of ordinary citizens.
"They've got to have the resolve and the fortitude if they see something they're really suspicious of to notify their local police and sheriff's office," Hightower said. "For example, you would think that even prior to Sept. 11 that someone who wanted to learn to take off and fly but not how to land would have raised some question out there somewhere."
But gathering and evaluating tips on possible terrorist threats is only the first part of the security puzzle, Hightower said. Coming next: a detailed list of likely targets now being assembled by sheriffs' offices and police forces in each of the state's 159 counties.
This survey of "critical infrastructure" will be meshed with existing catalogs created by the terror task force, the state defense force and federal authorities. The resulting list will then be used to develop coordinated response plans.
Another way the state responded to Sept. 11 was to assign 12 veteran State Patrol officers to keep an eye out for potential attackers on Georgia's interstates. The new Criminal Interdiction Unit operates three squads of officers. Their primary job is to inspect trucks and cars for explosives, terrorists or drugs.
And with this week's announcement that some of the $38 billion in federal money President Bush has proposed for homeland security in the next fiscal year will come to Georgia, Hightower said the state will add to its preparations for terrorism. He won't talk about specific plans but said that "everything we do will be focused on improving the ability of local communities to respond to possible threats."

Graphic

 
Photo:
Sandbags protect the Georgia State Patrol headquarters, where Sgt. Paul Carter heads a new anti-terror unit. / LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff

Load-Date: February 11, 2002


End of Document