Center in Kansas to evaluate terrorism intelligence
University Wire
February 18, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Kansas State Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 307 words
Byline: By Alex Peak, Kansas State Collegian; SOURCE: Kansas State U.
Dateline: MANHATTAN, Kan. 
Body


A new Threat Integration Center has been developed to obstruct any terrorist acts or coercions from occurring in the state.
The Kansas Threat Integration Center (KSTIC) is a three-person team that works together to review and evaluate all of the intelligence information sent through the state of Kansas. The group sorts and filters the information based on relevance.
According to an article published on the Adjutant General's Department's Web site, the new system helps "to see that information vital to community safety and security interests reaches the officer in the street."
Kyle Smith, a spokesperson for the Kansas Bureau of Investigation, said the team, which is supported by the Kansas National Guard, consists of a senior Kansas Army National Guard member, a highway patrol trooper and a senior specialist for the KBI.
The team is designed to sift through information, categorize it by relevance and administer the reports to the appropriate areas of security.
"There was a lot of criticism after 9/11," Smith said, referring to homeland security. "We're trying to do a better job of analyzing all of the information that we get."
According to the Web site, one of the team's main objectives is to see that all areas and levels of security and law enforcement are notified of vital information on criminal and terrorist threats.
Smith said he would be surprised if Kansas was attacked.
"Terrorists are looking for media outlets and large population centers," he said.
He did mention that the biggest risk in Kansas would be of bioterrorism or agri-terrorism, such as a feedlot or field being infiltrated with a disease or virus.
States are encouraged to develop some sort of threat investigating team, Smith said. He said Kansas is one of the first states to have an official Threat Integration Center.
(C) 2005 Kansas State Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 18, 2005


End of Document