Central's terrorism project culminates Wednesday night
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 19, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 6
Length: 399 words
Byline: stacey becker TH staff , writer/sbecker@wcinet.com
Body


News You can use Central Alternative High School students will present a global terrorism seminar at 7 p.m. Wednesday, April 23, at the Midway Hotel in Dubuque. Admission for the seminar is $5 for the general public; $1 for students with school ID; and $2 for students without school ID.
These students say they are tired of being referred to as the bad students of Dubuque.
"Central (Alternative High School) opens doors instead of shutting them," said student Ronnie Sanders.
Sanders, along with his classmates at Central, will open the doors to the world of global terrorism when they welcome three guest speakers to Dubuque for a seminar.
The students' project will culminate in the seminar that will begin at 7 p.m. Wednesday, April 23, at the Best Western Midway Hotel in Dubuque.
Randall Laughead, an FBI intelligence analyst; Werner Hellmer, an attorney; and Todd Sharkey, a recruiter for the 133rd Iowa Army National Guard, will discuss global terrorism during the seminar.
The students in teacher John Adelmann's history class have worked together and researched specific issues on the sometimes-controversial topic of global terrorism.
"In a sense, they become experts in the area," Adelmann said. "This has almost become part of who they are."
The students have spent countless hours of research and have conducted numerous interviews about their global-terrorism topic. They will combine their individual work to create a book that will be sold during the seminar.
"They're using their text, and we're writing them," said student Jacob Ginter about the difference between other history classes and Central's class.
Throughout the process, Adelmann has teamed up with teacher Tim Ebeling and paraprofessional Carol Cross.
"I waited my whole life for a school like Central," said student Tonya Davis-Goesse. "The staff here at Central think the way they wish they could be."
Davis-Goesse partnered with Sanders to give presentations about their global terrorism topic at local clubs and organizations. The speeches helped Davis-Goesse prepare for Wednesday night, when she will be the master of ceremonies.
The process of researching, interviewing, drafting and compiling a book about global terrorism for one of their classes has instilled a sense of pride in these students.
"It proves that Central is not a school for bad students," said student Shanethra Stephenson. "It gives students a chance."

Load-Date: April 19, 2008


End of Document