CERT focuses on safety and preparedness
The Record: Buffalo State University
October 24, 2012 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2012 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 509 words
Byline: Britney Nowak
Body


Campus safety and disaster preparedness is a chief concern for students, staff and faculty alike. TheCampus Emergency Response Team is one of the programs on campus designed with those concerns inmind.According to a presentation given by CERT last week, it is a program that trains civilians to becomeauxiliary responders. Bystanders, or sometimes the victims themselves, are the first responders in 95percent of emergencies. 
In training, team members learn about disaster preparedness, fire safety,disaster, medical operations, light search and rescue, disaster psychology and terrorism. All of these arein the training curriculum in the Federal Emergency Management Agency program.In the event of an emergency, first responders may not be able to come to students aid as quickly asthey would like. In situations like this it is important for people to have some emergency aid training.Thats where CERT comes in.Molly Prell, the co-commander of CERT, said, Its really more geared towards faculty and staff, but wedo train with students.Training is done in two and a half to four hour sessions one to two times a week over a five to sevenweek period.Were trained in basic first aid and basic awareness from terrorism to fire prevention. Prell said.One of the best things about CERT, according to Prell, is that what is learned during training can beapplied to everyday life. What is learned in fire safety training, for example, can be used in the home inregards to the safe use of candles and how to use fire extinguishers. Skills learned can also be used forgeneral hazards in the home and workplace, he said.What we learn in first aid, if ever used, will actually most likely be used in your own home or on yourown family member, Prell said.Disaster preparedness is another area CERT is trained in. In the event of a big storm or power outageCERT has the ability to help campus members prepare so that food, water and other important materialsare on hand in the event of an emergency.What we learn in Disaster Preparedness is priceless in everyday life, Prell said.CERT is not just for large disasters. Something as simple as a power outage can mean no 911 service.A few years ago, when the college lost power, CERT members went from building to building, lookingfor potential hazards, Prell said. Not really major, but very helpful to the campus community.CERT also partners with the Weigel Health Center for CPR and Automatic Electronic Defibrillator (AED)training. There are emergency AED kits on campus which are vital in the event of a heart attack.Paul Murphy, who used to work as a firefighter, is now a part of CERT. Preparedness is the key, he said.You never know when disaster is going to strike, he said. People will have to rely on each other.Students interested in participating in CERT are encouraged to check out their website, whereinformation can be found about upcoming drills and events, training and important safety alerts.There really are no qualifications, Prell said.Britney Nowak can be reached by email at nowak.record@live.com

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document