Challenge for Ridge: Get agencies to work together against terrorism
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 22, 2001 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 629 words
Byline: Lenny Savino INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The biggest challenge for Gov. Ridge as the new director of homeland security will be knitting together federal, state and local law enforcement agencies to effectively track the activities of thousands of visitors and immigrants with possible terrorist connections.
The investigation into last week's attacks has shown the ease with which most of the terrorists and their alleged facilitators entered the United States legally as tourists, businessmen and students wanting to hone their skills in aviation and the martial arts.
It was easy in part because the agencies involved usually do not share information. The tips they do pass along may be given a low priority.
Seasoned FBI agents say the present warning and tracking systems are flawed. Agencies that deal with foreigners have computer systems that cannot share information. There is no way to immediately update "watch lists" of dangerous people between agencies. Often, agents say, warnings about terrorism suspects from other agencies, including foreign intelligence agencies, do not have specific details or threats.
There are no set rules on how agents must react to such warning bulletins, said one senior agent who asked not to be identified. Most try to locate suspects through public records and by what visitors list on immigration forms as their U.S. destinations. The completed forms are often unreliable or vague, agents say.
And, they add, there are not enough agents to act quickly on every intelligence or immigration tip.
"You don't just drop looking for Chinese spies and bank robbers when you get a warning from the CIA or the State Department that there might be a person headed your way who may have connections to a terrorist organization," said a senior FBI agent who is working on the terrorism case.
Such criticism is not new.
Numerous reports, including one presented on Capitol Hill yesterday, have called for a single White House office to develop and implement a national counter-terrorism strategy. The report from the General Accounting Office, the investigative agency for Congress, recommended that the federal government figure out how its counter-terrorism agencies could work with state and local governments in assessing terrorist risks and threats.
"The number of federal agencies involved . . . led to confusion on the part of state and local officials," the report said.
On Thursday, President Bush named Ridge as chief of the new Office of Homeland Security. Yesterday, two senators introduced legislation that would make the position permanent and give it budget authority over an intelligence program that has not yet been spelled out.
The bill introduced by Sens. Bob Graham (D., Fla.) and Dianne Feinstein (D., Calif.) would require about 40 different agencies to do a better job of sharing information, coordinating their efforts and spending about $12 billion a year in counter-terrorism.
Although Graham said he believed the FBI, CIA and other agencies were ready to give up some of their authority to an antiterrorism czar, skeptics say turf wars are inevitable. Most agents seem to have a "wait and see" attitude.
"If he can't hire and fire people from various agencies, if he can't direct resources and absorb counter-terrorist functions, if all he can say is 'Please' and 'Thank you,' " said the senior FBI agent, "it'll be a joke."
Just keeping up with foreign visitors is an enormous task. About 30 million people enter on non-immigrant visas each year.
"How do we track them?" said Immigration and Naturalization Service spokeswoman Elaine Komis. "We don't track them."
Inquirer Washington Bureau reporters Sumana Chatterjee and Frank Davies and Knight Ridder correspondent Nancy San Martin contributed to this article.
Lenny Savino's e-mail address is lsavino@krwashington.com.  

Notes

America in the Aftermath

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document