Chambliss presses sharing terrorism data
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 16, 2003 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 427 words
Byline: MELANIE EVERSLEY
Body


Washington --- Sen. Saxby Chambliss and other members of the Senate immigration subcommittee admonished federal officials Tuesday for not moving fast enough to ensure that terrorists don't get into the country.
In a hearing, Chambliss, the Georgia Republican who chairs the subcommittee, addressed representatives from the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, the Department of Homeland Security and the State Department. Chambliss said it didn't make sense that nearly two years after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, they still are not fully sharing information with local and state law enforcement agencies.
AJC
"Folks, I know you all are working hard and we're doing a better job than we were on Sept. 10 [2001]," Chambliss told the three officials sitting silently before him. "But there is a mechanism to share that information, and when I hear that we are not sharing information with respect to suspected terrorists who we know were in the United States . . . I don't mind telling you, it infuriates me."
Chambliss' tirade was sparked by comments from Michael Dougherty, an immigration and customs official with the Department of Homeland Security, that his agency is "in discussions " with state and local law enforcement about information sharing.
In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks, when he was serving in the House, Chambliss co-chaired a panel on homeland security. His biggest emphasis during that time was on sharing information between law enforcement agencies at the federal, state and local levels.
"For us to not be doing that today is for us to not be giving the best protection to the citizens of the United States," Chambliss said.
The hearing focused on whether other federal agencies are receiving notice when the State Department revokes visas for suspected terrorists. At the center of the discussion was a report released last month by the General Accounting Office showing communication between agencies is less than ideal.
Of 240 visas revoked by the State Department between Sept. 11, 2001, and Dec. 31, 2002, the old Immigration and Naturalization Service did not receive word in 43 of those cases, Jess Ford of the GAO testified. In another 47 cases, notice of visa revocation took an average of 12 days to reach an INS terrorist lookout unit, Ford said. One case took as long as a month.
Chambliss said he wants America to be protected. "I have a personal goal of making sure that when somebody walks up to a Delta airline counter . . . that information automatically flashes up if there's any question about that individual," he said.

Graphic

 
Photo: Sen. Saxby Chambless (R-Ga.) says protection of Americans is his personal goal.

Load-Date: July 16, 2003


End of Document