Channel Surfer;
PBS' 'Frontline' looks at bio-terrorism threat
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 13, 1998, Tuesday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FEATURES; Pg. 04F
Length: 434 words
Byline: BOB LONGINO
Series: Home
Body


PBS' "Frontline," as it always seems to do, is proving once again that what you don't know eventually could hurt you.
"Plague War" (10 tonight on WGTV (56481)) and 10 p.m. Wednesday on WBPA (66153)) is a piercing bell toll about the potential threat of world biological terrorism.
You may be watching "Felicity" tonight and worrying whether that pretty little Felicity Porter will indeed buck up and ask Ben to go to her first college party with her. But out there in the real world, somewhere in the dark, somebody you don't even know is working diligently to perfect anthrax, smallpox and plague bombs with the intent of erasing the kind of life you're living right now.
Biological terrorism is "not a matter of if. It's only a matter of when," one expert says on tonight's unsettling "Frontline."
Whether they think about it much or not, Americans know that the threat is real.
Domestic terrorism has struck Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center in New York. And deadly sarin gas was used to kill 12 and injure thousands during one terrorist group's assault on Tokyo's subway.
The killer viruses themselves aren't at all pretty. Photos showing victims of anthrax and smallpox are displayed briefly in this hour in an ugly, ugly testament to the viruses' extraordinary power to maim, torture and kill.
One expert says a biological terrorist attack "would be as close to a living hell as we've ever known." And it appears easy enough to pull off.
The knowledge is pretty much all on the Internet, experts say. And one unnamed American --- he's called "Uncle Fester" on this show --- demonstrates mixing a toxin in his own kitchen. The result: enough stuff in the bottom of his test-tube, he says, to kill 1,000.
"Plague War" ventures well beyond the terrorist movement to document years of research in the former Soviet Union for biological weapons that could have been delivered via strategic missiles.
An extensive interview with Ken Alibeck, the defector and top official in the Soviet program, reveals an intricate, secret system of research in Siberia, what is now St. Petersburg and other places, resulting in new --- and ever more virulent --- weapons.
Anthrax was "grown by the ton," one expert says, adding the Soviets had "thousands of scientists and engineers" devoted to the project. It was "so massive and had such capacity it was unimaginable," he says. "They had really thought about using these weapons and how to use them and their effects."
His comrades, Alibeck says, never developed biological weapons for the battlefield. It was "for use against civilians. New York. Los Angeles. Chicago. . . . "

Load-Date: October 14, 1998


End of Document