Change or End Urged for Terror Insurance Law
The New York Times
July 1, 2005 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 378 words
Byline: By TERRY PRISTIN
Body


A three-year-old federal law that provided a backstop to insurance companies in the event of a terrorist attack should not be extended in its current form, Bush administration officials said yesterday.
  The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act was approved in the wake of the attacks of 2001, when many insurers stopped providing terrorism coverage or made it extremely costly. Scheduled to expire at the end of this year, it requires the federal government to cover 90 percent of combined damages in excess of $15 billion and up to $100 billion.
In a letter delivered yesterday to Congressional leaders, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow said the law had achieved its ''temporary objectives'' of stabilizing the private insurance market during a period of economic uncertainty. Now that the economy has improved, Mr. Snow said, the administration will not support a backstop unless the insurance industry is willing to shoulder more of the risk.
  In an assessment of the law, also released yesterday, the Treasury acknowledged that eliminating the backstop was likely to result in ''less terrorism insurance written by insurers, higher prices and lower policyholder take-up.'' But in time, it said, the industry could increase its capacity to insure terrorism risk.
  Martin L. DePoy, a spokesman for the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism, made up of trade associations, corporations and nonprofit groups, called this reasoning ''flawed.'' No one, he said, could predict the losses and other economic repercussions from an attack. 
  Kevin J. Madden, managing director of the real estate practice for Aon, the global insurance brokerage company, said that without the government backstop, insurance premiums for owners of big office buildings in high-risk cities like New York, Washington and Chicago could double or triple. ''The insurance companies are already concerned that they may be overextended in those areas as it is,'' he said.
  But J. Robert Hunter, director of insurance for the Consumer Federation of America, agreed with the administration that the existing program is too generous. ''We're concerned about taxpayers not getting compensated for taking on huge amounts of risk that the insurance companies could afford to take on for themselves,'' Mr. Hunter said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 1, 2005


End of Document