Change of gender cost job, suit says
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 5, 2005 Sunday
THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 320 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


As a man, David Schroer was an Army colonel and terrorism expert. As a woman, Diane Schroer was out of a job. What happened in between is the subject of a civil rights lawsuit against the Librarian of Congress.
According to the case filed Thursday in federal court, David Schroer had accepted a position as a terrorism research analyst at the Congressional Research Service when he informed his future boss he was about to change his name to Diane and to begin dressing as a woman. It was part of a medical transition Schroer had decided to make from being a man to being a woman.
The next day, the suit alleges, Schroer's future boss called to say that after a "long, restless night" she had decided that for the good of the service and given the circumstances, he would not be a "good fit" at the Library of Congress, of which the research service is a part.
David Schroer was an Army Ranger with two master's degrees who directed a 120-person classified organization in the war on terrorism. Schroer presented intelligence reports to Vice President Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Schroer decided to transition from being a man to being a woman after leaving the military, applying to the Library of Congress as a man.
Schroer and medical professionals working with her determined that the gender designation assigned to her at birth does not conform with her gender identity, a person's internal psychological identification as a man or a woman.
Sex reassignment often involves hormone therapy, living full-time in the gender corresponding with the person's gender identity and a sex change.
"The government was perfectly happy to let Schroer risk life and limb to fight terrorism, yet now that she's female, Schroer has been told that she's unfit even to research terrorism," said Art Spitzer, legal director of the ACLU in the Washington area.

Load-Date: June 5, 2005


End of Document