Changing conventions is the wrong way to deal with terrorism
University Wire
September 18, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 497 words
Byline: By Jimmy Blue, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


President George W. Bush is attempting to redefine a key provision of the Geneva Conventions, Common Article 3, which forbids the inhumane treatment of combatants seized in wartime. Bush's changes could thus undermine important protections for detainees.
According to a Sept. 15 article in The New York Times, the White House's plan would include decreased protections for prisoners of war in the form of trial and interrogation techniques. The Bush administration and some top Republicans claim such measures are needed to effectively interrogate suspected terrorists and protect covert operatives.
On the other side are Democrats and a group of four Republican senators, including John McCain of Arizona, John W. Warner of Virginia, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Susan Collins of Maine. According to the same article, the senators, all veterans of the armed services, say the White House's plan would send "a dark signal to the rest of the world."
It seems clear that President Bush and the White House are on the wrong track. It is true the U.S. must deal with suspected terrorists in some way, but changing the nearly 60-year-old precedent set by the Geneva Conventions is not the correct approach.
The U.S. often sets the standard for the actions of other nations around the globe, and if we allow changes in the ways we treat prisoners of war, we are doing so in a very negative way.
In another Sept. 15 article from The New York Times, three of the senators opposing Bush's legislative action said, "The Bush proposal would send a signal that the United States has abandoned its commitment to human rights, and invite other nations to reinterpret the Geneva Conventions as they see fit, eliminating protections for American troops seized in future conflicts."
If the White House's legislation passes, there could be lasting effects not only on how the U.S. treats suspected terrorists, but on how other countries treat their prisoners of war. This is important because U.S. soldiers are heavily involved in military conflicts not only in Iraq, but in many other nations around the world - and surely will be well into the future.
The outcome of this issue is especially significant here at WSU, where we have the visible presence of an ROTC program. Many students involved with the armed forces could eventually be affected if this legislation makes it through the House of Representatives and the Senate.
In any form, a reinterpretation of the Geneva Conventions could pose a threat to our nation, our troops and any person taken as a prisoner of war. This current legislation poses a serious hazard to international law, which prohibits inhumane treatment and torture in the interrogation of prisoners of war.
If the U.S. decides to allow increased flexibility in interrogation tactics, it is likely other countries will, as well. Such changes could possibly open the flood gates to changes of the Geneva Conventions by any nation that sees fit.
(C) 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 18, 2006


End of Document