CHAOS ERUPTS ACROSS LONDON; Prime Minister May says incidents being treated as ‘potential acts of terrorism’
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 4, 2017 Sunday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2017 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: USA TODAY; Pg. Z1
Length: 429 words
Byline: Andrea Mandell @andreamandell USA TODAY ; and Kim Hjelmgaard @khjelmgaard USA TODAY
Body


LONDON British police responded to reports Saturday of multiple security incidents across London as a van plowed into pedestrians on London Bridge, killing at least one person. There were also reports of a stabbing attack and gunshots in nearby Borough Market, and in the Vauxhall area of the capital.
Prime Minister Theresa May said the incidents were being treated as “potential acts of terrorism.” 
However, it was not clear if the incidents were related and the situation did not appear to be fully in control. Police urged Londoners to be calm and vigilant and circulated a message that read: “Run,” “Hide,” “Tell.” 
On London Bridge, witnesses described seeing a white van mounting the sidewalk and injuring at least six people at about 10:30 p.m. A BBC reporter who was on the bridge at the time said the van was being driven at around 50 mph by a male. Metropolitan police confirmed an incident but released few details. 
“We are dealing with an incident on #LondonBridge, when we have more information we will update this twitter feed,” they tweeted. 
The BBC said one person was confirmed dead. British Transport Police said they have received reports of multiple casualties. 
London Bridge was closed in both directions, British Transport Police said. Twitter users began uploading footage of police on the scene. 
In the incident at Borough Market, an area that houses many food stalls and pubs and is popular with tourists, Metropolitan police said armed officers had been sent to the area after reports of stabbings, possibly at a restaurant. 
Police said shots were fired and urged people to flee the area. However, it was not clear if the shots were fired by police or assailants. 
There were also reports of a third incident, in the Vauxhall area of London. Eyewitnesses reported seeing as many as three potential suspects. 
The British Prime Minister’s office said May is being regularly updated on the situation, and the White House said President Trump has been briefed. 
“Whatever the United States can do to help out in London and the U. K., we will be there - WE ARE WITH YOU. GOD BLESS!” Trump tweeted. 
Reports of the incident reflected fear that the incident could be terrorism. Britain has weathered two terrorism attacks in recent months. 
In March, four people were killed in London after Khalid Masood rammed his car into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge before fatally stabbing a policeman outside the Houses of Parliament. 
On May 22, a British-born suicide bomber killed 22 people and injured 59 others at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester, England.

Graphic

 
AP">An policeman stands on Borough High Street after an incident on London Bridge in London on Saturday.

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document