Charity Probed For Links To Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 10, 2001, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 1066 words
Byline: MICHAEL FECHTER , mfechter@tampatrib.com; Reporter Michael Fechter can be reached at (813) 259-7621.  
Body


HOLY LAND FOUNDATION UNDER INVESTIGATION
The coin boxes often stand adjacent to cash registers at local convenience stores and gas stations.
A placard shows a crying, impoverished child. "Your change can stop the tears," it reads.
The solicitation comes from the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development, the largest Muslim charity in the United States.
The foundation offers a variety of support to refugees and orphans in Israeli-occupied territories and elsewhere. It also has been under federal investigation to determine if it should be a "specially designated terrorist" organization that serves as a front for the militant Palestinian group Hamas.
Holy Land, based in Richardson, Texas, is not among the dozens of organizations whose assets have been frozen by the Bush administration because of the events of Sept. 11. And the administration hasn't said whether it might be added to the list.
But the Los Angeles Times reported Sunday that the foundation is among eight Islamic charities named in a confidential Treasury Department letter seeking records from state charity officials.
President Bush has said the financial assault on terrorism extends beyond Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group and the United States "will freeze the assets of others as we find that they aid and abet terrorist organizations around the world."
Because of Holy Land's high profile, a move against it would bring political risks, terrorism experts acknowledge. But they say the United States needs to act if the funding is in any way supporting terrorist groups.
Although Holy Land is registered to solicit with Florida's Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, it isn't known how much money the coin boxes and other donations generate here. Nationally, however, the foundation received $13 million in contributions in 2000, tax returns show.
"Specially Designated Terrorist?"
Federal scrutiny of the charity dates back at least five years. The U.S. State Department has considered declaring Holy Land a "specially designated terrorist" organization, said a 1999 court document filed in Washington, D.C.
The document, from State Department Information, Programs and Services Director Margaret Grafeld, was filed in an attempt to deny a Freedom of Information Act request from terrorism researcher Steven Emerson.
"Because this is an ongoing law enforcement investigation, release of this material would reveal the nature and strength of the evidence so far collected and what additional evidence is still being sought," Grafeld wrote.
In particular, Grafeld opposed releasing a six-page telegram between the State Department and the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv, Israel, from September 1997 because "the exchanges covered what evidence existed regarding the link between the Holy Land Foundation and Hamas."
Holy Land attorney Mark MacDougall declined to be interviewed. He issued a statement emphasizing the foundation never has been charged with a crime, never has been searched by law enforcement and is run by American citizens.
"The members and leadership of the foundation, like most Americans, reject terrorism, terrorist acts and the use of violence in any form to achieve political goals," the statement said.
But the group has acknowledged some children it aids with monthly stipends lost fathers to Hamas suicide bombing attacks. It insists it helps anyone in need and doesn't seek out Hamas activists or their families.
That support was among the reasons Israel banned the foundation in 1997.
"You're part of the problem" if the charity supports widows and orphans of dead terrorists, said Larry Johnson, who served as both a CIA officer and deputy director of the U.S. State Department Office of Counterterrorism.
"One of the motivations for people who do what they do is a guarantee that their families will be taken care of," Johnson said. "It's like an insurance policy for terrorists."
Curbing Financial Support
The U.S. Agency for International Development pulled Holy Land from a registry of authorized private organizations last year, saying the State Department had determined its listing was "contrary to the national defense and foreign policy interests of the United States."
A Holy Land attorney called that move part of "a political attack growing from unfounded fear in some quarters of the rapid growth in the United States of a large and well-funded Islamic foundation that is able to provide relief to hard-hit areas of the Islamic world."
A National Commission on Terrorism report to Congress last year recommended aggressive action against people and organizations that support terrorism, even if the donor is unaware of the money's use.
"Anyone providing funds to terrorist organizations or activities should be investigated with the full vigor of the law and, where possible, prosecuted under relevant statutes, including those covering money laundering, conspiracy, tax or fraud violations," the commission recommended. "In such cases, assets may also be made subject to civil and criminal forfeiture."
Is such a hard line necessary?
"We can't tolerate a lot of hairsplitting," said L. Paul Bremer, commission chairman and former State Department Ambassador-at-Large for counterterrorism. "Even if they're doing good works out the other door, everything they do is tainted if they do any terrorism."
If an organization is found providing either direct or indirect support to terrorists, Bremer said, its assets should be frozen. Those groups can reconstitute themselves free of the tainted element.
The administration needs to pursue terrorist funding aggressively regardless of its ilk to maintain credibility, Johnson said.
"It's got to be zero tolerance," Johnson said. "I don't care what religion you espouse."
But Magnus Ranstorp, deputy director of the Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at St. Andrews University in Scotland, cautions curbing financial support for terrorism only goes so far.
It might be useful when coupled with law enforcement and military operations, as the United States is doing, Ranstorp said.
But it won't stop terrorism, he said, because terrorist acts are relatively cheap. Moreover, some cells finance themselves through identity theft and bank or credit card fraud instead of any state or private sponsor.
The lesson in European counterterrorism, Ranstorp said, is "you can't win the war by starving the oxygen of terrorist financial support."

Graphic

 
PHOTO (C)
(C) The Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development is suspected of supporting Palestinian Hamas.

Load-Date: November 10, 2001


End of Document