Charges in Bhutto case test clout of Pakistan military Ex-army chief indicted in assassination.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 2013 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A19
Length: 439 words
Byline:  Associated Press 
Body


RAWALPINDI, Pakistan • In an unprecedented ruling that tests the military's aura of inviolability, a court indicted former president and army chief Pervez Musharraf Tuesday on murder charges stemming from the 2007 assassination of ex-Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
Musharraf, who became a key U.S. ally in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, pleaded not guilty.
The decision by the court in Rawalpindi marked the first time a current or former army chief has been charged with a crime in the country.
Musharraf, 70, a former commando who took power in a 1999 coup and stepped down from office in disgrace nearly a decade later, now faces a string of legal problems that in many ways challenge the military's sacrosanct status in Pakistani society.
The retired general was charged with murder, conspiracy to commit murder and facilitation for murder, said prosecutor Chaudhry Muhammed Azhar.
He did not detail the accusations against Musharraf, but prosecutors have alleged he failed to provide enough protection to Bhutto as she led her Pakistan People's Party in a parliamentary election that might have given her a third term as prime minister. She was killed in a gun and bomb attack at a rally in Rawalpindi, near the capital, Islamabad.
The charges also include clearing the scene of a crime and destroying evidence, Azhar said.
Bhutto was respected by many Pakistanis for her condemnation of militancy and support for the poor. But her premiership was marred by accusations of widespread corruption.
Her assassination set off protests across the country and helped propel her party to power in parliament and her husband to the presidency.
Bhutto's supporters say Musharraf ignored requests for additional security, and a 2010 U.N. report on her death said he failed to make serious efforts to ensure Bhutto's safety.
The court also harshly criticized investigators for hosing down the crime scene, failing to perform an autopsy and quickly blaming a Taliban commander for the assassination.
The prosecutor said he has a list of 148 witnesses and documents including a note Bhutto sent to a close friend complaining that Musharraf was not providing her with proper security.
The judge set Tuesday as the next court date to present evidence. But Pakistan court cases can drag on for years, and convictions are often overturned on appeal.
But analysts questioned whether the evidence would be sufficient.
"To me, it would be very difficult to prove unless they can show an order by him," said Hasan Askari Rizvi, an independent political analyst. "You can't really get hold of a president simply because security was not adequate."

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this April 20, 2013, file photo, Pakistan's former President and military ruler Pervez Musharraf arrives at an anti-terrorism court in Islamabad, Pakistan. A Pakistani court Tuesday indicted Musharraf on murder charges in connection with the 2007 assassination of iconic Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, deepening the fall of a once-powerful figure who returned to the country this year in an effort to take part in elections. (AP Photo/Anjum Naveed, File)  A Pakistani police commando stands guard as a vehicle carrying former President and army chief Pervez Musharraf arrives to appear at an anti terrorism court in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2013. A Pakistani court Tuesday indicted Musharraf on murder charges in connection with the 2007 assassination of iconic Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, deepening the fall of a once-powerful figure who returned to the country this year in an effort to take part in elections. (AP Photo/Anjum Naveed)  Pakistani paramilitary soldier stands alert outside an anti terrorism court where former President and army chief Pervez Musharraf appeared in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2013. A Pakistani court Tuesday indicted Musharraf on murder charges in connection with the 2007 assassination of iconic Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, deepening the fall of a once-powerful figure who returned to the country this year in an effort to take part in elections. (AP Photo/Anjum Naveed)  Pakistani paramilitary soldiers leave an anti terrorism court after the court appearance of former president and army chief Pervez Musharraf in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2013. The Pakistani court Tuesday indicted Musharraf on murder charges in connection with the 2007 assassination of iconic Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, deepening the fall of a once-powerful figure who returned to the country this year in an effort to take part in elections. (AP Photo/Anjum Naveed)  Afsha Adil, center, lawyer of former president and army chief Pervez Musharraf speaks to media outside an anti terrorism court in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2013. A Pakistani court Tuesday indicted Musharraf on murder charges in connection with the 2007 assassination of iconic Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, deepening the fall of a once-powerful figure who returned to the country this year in an effort to take part in elections. (AP Photo/Anjum Naveed) 

Load-Date: August 21, 2013


End of Document