Characters weak, but thriller a pleasant read
The Bismarck Tribune
December 5, 2010 Sunday


Copyright 2010 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1C
Length: 493 words
Byline: JUNE REMMICH-WILEN Citizen Reviewer
Body


How does a terrorist kill 4 million people? He stops them form being born.
With great expectation and excitement, I read Mike Hogan's "The Ovary Wars," his first novel and a medical thriller. After all, with terrorism rampant in our world, and medical advances and breakthroughs at an all-time peak, keeping 4 million women from getting pregnant is certainly possible.
While the plot is intriguing and ingenious, the plan execution also is flawless. Is it bio-terrorism, just a new virus or a quirk of nature when the women in the United States are sterile and the economy is collapsing? No one knows, nor can they determine what it is or if it spreads.
From the U.S. president, chief of homeland security, surgeon general, secretary of defense, National Institute of Health, to the experts in fertility and bio-terrorism, all are baffled.
Meanwhile, the infertility is creating a generation of depressed, suicidal women, unemployed obstetricians, pediatricians and gynecologists, manufacturing losses of infant and children's necessities and mass confusion.
Psychiatrists are overworked and unemployment is high. Schools are closed and the next generation of technical workers doesn't exist. Baby selling and egg selling becomes the new black market hit. What chaos and who can possibly be responsible!
All the while the reader is aware of who has created this huge pandemonium yet we don't know how it was carried out until very late in the book.
I enjoy reading medical thrillers after having worked in the medical field for 40 years.
"The Ovary Wars" was pleasant reading, even though I felt the characters are weak and not quite believable. It begins with the devious visionary, Dr. Wadsworth, and ends with the FBI agents who find the truth in what generated the greatest and deadliest depression in the United States.
The same first names are used for more than one character so the reader must be certain of which "Joan" the author is referring to, so some confusion reigns throughout part of the book. He also includes too many frivolous insignificant characters and most conversations between characters are feeble at best.
Hogan's plot and execution were brilliant outside of those unnecessary characters.
The retaliation that is directed at the instigators of this loss of a generation of Americans is even more bizarre than the original plot which comes to shine at the very end of the book. It was surprising.
I expected this novel to be similar to those written by author Dr. Robin Cook, who has been writing medical thrillers for more than three decades.
While "The Ovary Wars" comes up a bit short on that expectation, I foresee Hogan writing more thrillers of the Cook level in the future. Hogan is a practicing radiologist who has had many medical articles published as well as several cartoons before writing "The Ovary Wars."
(June Remmich-Wilen is retired from 40 years of health care administration and spends her free time reading only what she enjoys.)

Load-Date: December 5, 2010


End of Document