Charity aids schools in Central Asia;
Greg Mortenson will speak in Portland to explain how he fights terrorism 'with pencils and pennies.'
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
February 4, 2003 Tuesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 2B
Length: 398 words
Byline: JOSHUA L. WEINSTEIN Staff Writer
Dateline: Portland
Body


In the most literal way, Greg Mortenson failed.
He set out to climb a mountain - the second-highest in the world - to honor his sister, Christa, who died in 1992 at 21 years old.
In 1993, Mortenson headed to the mountain, K2, in Pakistan. He spent 78 days on the mountain, and although his two partners made it to the top, he did not.
But in that failure, Mortenson found a mission. A passion, even.
At 7 tonight at the Portland Museum of Art, he will give a slide presentation and discussion about how he has spent the past decade building schools and promoting education in tribal regions of northern Pakistan and Afghanistan.
In the days after he tried to climb the mountain, he spent time in the remote village of Korphe.
"I was very touched by their hospitality," he said in an interview Monday. "I asked about a school. They reluctantly took me up to this dusty field, behind the village, where I saw 84 children sharing seven slate boards, but most of them were writing in the dirt, with sticks. I looked around, there was no teacher. They shared the teacher, whose name was Hussein, with another village, because they couldn't afford his daily $1 salary. I knew that's why I had come here. I could honor my sister's memory by building a school."
Since then, he and his organization, Central Asia Institute, have built 28 schools.
Mortenson's organization is based in Bozeman, Mont. From there - and from Pakistan and Afghanistan, where Mortenson often travels - he works, in a way, to fight terror.
He said that U.S. aid to Afghanistan dropped from $850 million to $174 million after Soviet forces withdrew from that country. "Hundreds of formal schools were shut down because of lack of funding."
At the same time, he said, "Saudi money funded $1 billion a year, which opened up thousands of . . . Islamic fundamentalist schools. These became the fertile recruiting grounds for terrorists."
He said 80,000 young men who attended such schools "were recruited into the Taliban and other terrorist groups."
"I fight terrorism with pencils and pennies," said Mortenson, who hopes to raise money during his visit to Portland and to the University of New Hampshire.
Admission to his discussion is free, but he asks for a voluntary donation of between $5 and $10 at the door.
There will be a reception an hour before his talk. For online information about the Central Asia Institute, go to www.ikat.org. 

Load-Date: February 4, 2003


End of Document