Charities Held Liable for Cash to Terror Group's Social Service Arm
The Forward
December 24, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 7
Length: 599 words
Body


In a landmark ruling likely to influence  a series of ongoing terrorism  financing legal battles, a Chicago  federal appeals court upheld a judgment  against three American-based  Muslim charities accused of bankrolling  Hamas.
The Seventh Circuit Court of  Appeals ruled on December 3  that these American charities can  be held liable if they gave money  to groups that engage in terrorist  acts, even if the funds were  earmarked for humanitarian purposes.  The defendants in the case  directed their support exclusively  to Hamas' social welfare services.  The three groups are the American  Muslim Society, the Islamic Association  for Palestine-National and the  Quranic Literacy Institute.
A lower federal judge ordered  to groups to pay $156 million in  damages to the family of a teenager,  David Boim, who was killed  by Hamas, despite the fact that the  money given to Hamas did not go  for explicitly violent ends. A federal  appeals court overturned that  motion, and said that an explicit  link had to be shown. But the  newest ruling sided with the lower  court and said that it was not necessary  to prove such a link.
This is a very significant ruling  because it means you don't need to  show that a dollar buys a bullet,  said Matthew Levitt, a former FBI  and treasury department anti-terrorist  official who was a government  expert witness in the case.  Money is fungible so you can't  argue that you just wanted to give  for orphans when you are giving to  a terrorist-related entity.
The ruling is the highest federal  precedent on the issue and is likely  to affect a number of ongoing  terrorism financing cases, such as  the one in which the Arab Bank  is accused in United States' courts  by American and Israeli victims of  terrorism acts for facilitating the  transfer of money to Hamas in the  Palestinian territories.
The ruling comes on the heels  of the criminal conviction of officials  from the Holy Land Foundation,  which was the largest Muslim  charity in the United States until it  was shut down by the government  in December 2001 because of its  alleged ties to Hamas. In November  of this year, a jury in Dallas found  five of the charity's leaders guilty  on charges of providing material  support to Hamas officers.
The new decision could create  further headaches for the Holy  Land Foundation. The foundation  was initially included among  the defendants in the Boim case.  The ruling in the Seventh Circuit  Court reinstated the plaintiffs' civil  allegations against the Holy  Land Foundation and asked the  district court to rule on whether  it should have to pay part of the  $156 million awarded to the family.
The case being heard by the Seventh  circuit court was brought by  the parents of Boim, who was killed  in a 1996 drive-by shooting at a bus  stop in the West Bank.
In December 2004 a federal jury  ordered a $52 million judgment  against the three charities and an  employee of the Quranic Institute.  The judge tripled the judgment.
A year ago, a smaller three-judge  panel from the Seventh circuit  court ruled that the plaintiffs needed  to demonstrate a direct linkage  between the activities of the group  and Boim's slaying, but the new  decision rejected that ruling.
Anyone who knowingly contributes  to the nonviolent wing of  an organization that he knows to  engage in terrorism is knowingly  contributing to the organization's  terrorist activities, Judge Richard  Posner wrote for the 8-2 majority  Giving money to Hamas, like giving  a loaded gun to a child (which  also is not a violent act), is an 'act  dangerous to human life.'

Load-Date: December 24, 2008


End of Document