Charities decry new guidelines, Government recommendations aimed at fighting terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 19, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 310 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - The government is advising charities how to ensure that their money doesn't end up financing foreign terrorists, but many nonprofit groups say the guidelines are more of a headache than a help.
The charities say they already track their overseas aid and aren't equipped for the kinds of investigations the Treasury Department recommends, such as being sure a foreign grant recipient avoids banking with institutions "licensed in a jurisdiction that lacks adequate anti-money-laundering controls."
"In many situations where the need is greatest, for example, there is no banking system," said Peter Shiras, a senior vice president of Independent Sector. "Oftentimes you have to provide assistance in cash."
Some of the government's advice is "either impossible, impractical or so costly to comply with that it would have a very serious negative impact on humanitarian relief and social and economic development work overseas," said Shiras. His coalition represents more than 700 charities.
United Way International spent $ 40,000 over three months to comply with the guidelines as nearly as it could. Vice President Ana Maria Moran-Loubriel found some of the suggestions vague or unrealistic but called the overhaul a worthwhile reminder that terrorists could lurk among grantees.
Although compliance is voluntary, many nonprofit groups - careful to protect their reputations and tax-exempt statuses - are nervous about disregarding government guidelines they can't afford to meet.
At a time when the Internal Revenue Service is considering strengthened rules for tax-exempt groups that make foreign donations, some charities worry the voluntary measures are a first step toward burdensome new regulations.
The Treasury Department's general counsel, David Aufhauser, said there are no plans for absorbing the guidelines into IRS rules or other regulations.

Load-Date: July 21, 2003


End of Document