Charge Dropped Against Artist In Terror Case
The New York Times
April 22, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 318 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BUFFALO 
Body


A judge on Monday dismissed terrorism-linked charges against a college professor accused of illegally obtaining biological materials for an art exhibit protesting United States government food policies.
  The judge, Richard J. Arcara of Federal District Court, ruled that a mail and wire fraud indictment brought nearly four years ago against the University at Buffalo professor, Steven J. Kurtz, was ''insufficient on its face.''
  Professor Kurtz is a founding member of the Critical Art Ensemble, which has used DNA and other biological materials in works meant to draw attention to political and social issues. His arrest drew international attention, with artists in several countries protesting the charges as an intrusion on artistic freedom.
  He became the target of a terrorism investigation in May 2004 when firefighters found the materials -- two kinds of bacteria -- and equipment they deemed suspicious after a 911 call to his home. Professor Kurtz had called to report that his wife was dead, apparently from a heart attack.
  Although investigators determined that lab equipment used for DNA extraction and amplification equipment were part of his artwork and that his wife, Hope Kurtz, died of natural  causes, he was indicted a month later on charges that carried a maximum of 20 years in prison.
  Professor Kurtz was accused of plotting with Robert E. Ferrell, the former chairman of the University of Pittsburgh's human genetics department, to obtain potentially harmful organisms improperly. Prosecutors said Dr. Ferrell used his university account to order bacteria for Professor Kurtz from a lab that does not do business with individuals.
  In February, Dr. Ferrell was fined $500 but avoided prison after pleading guilty to a misdemeanor count of mailing an injurious article to Professor Kurtz. Under sentencing guidelines, he could have received up to six months in jail and a $5,000 fine.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 22, 2008


End of Document