Chechen ex-official given U.S. asylum;
Russia has objected, calling Ilyas Akhmadov a terrorist.
A Homeland Security probe found no such evidence.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 8, 2004 Sunday BULLDOG EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 387 words
Byline: Tim McCahill ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MONTPELIER, Vt.
Body


A former Chechen official accused by Russian authorities of having terrorist ties has been granted asylum in the United States despite Moscow's protests.
Ilyas Akhmadov was appointed foreign minister by separatist leader Aslan Maskhadov, now denounced by Russian authorities as a terrorist.
"We cannot consider the decision to grant Ilyas Akhmadov political asylum in the United States as anything other than a clear manifestation of double standards in issues relating to the fight against terrorism," the Russian Foreign Ministry said Friday.
"Such acts do not correspond to the friendly spirit of Russian-American relations and do not help the joint fight against international terrorism," the Foreign Ministry statement said.
"We appealed several times to the Americans with reasonable requests to hand over this accomplice of international terrorists. Unfortunately, in the end it turned out that these requests were ignored."
In an interview Friday, Akhmadov, 43, said he came to the United States in 2002, and he was granted asylum this spring. The Department of Homeland Security appealed the decision in June on the ground that Russia accuses Akhmadov of involvement in terrorism.
An investigation determined that Akhmadov had no connection to terrorism, and Homeland Security withdrew its appeal, said Russ Knocke, a spokesman for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Akhmadov's asylum request was officially granted Monday. He is temporarily living in Vermont.
Russian forces pulled out of Chechnya in 1996 after a devastating 20-month war, leaving the region in separatist control. A year later, Maskhadov was elected president of Chechnya.
Russian forces returned in 1999 following rebel attacks in a neighboring province, beginning an ongoing conflict in the region. Soon after the war began Maskhadov sent Akhmadov, along with other members of the presidential cabinet, abroad to work with foreign leaders promoting the Chechen cause.
Daniel Pellathy, program director for the Washington-based American Committee for Peace in Chechnya, said granting Akhmadov refuge in the U.S. would "dispel the myth" that he was a terrorist.
Akhmadov has repeatedly criticized suicide bombings and hostage-takings by Chechen extremists. He campaigns for peace talks to end the war.
This article includes information from Reuters.

Load-Date: August 30, 2005


End of Document