CHECHNYA REBELS THREATEN NEW TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
August 11, 1995, FRIDAY,
VALLEY EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 296 words
Body


GROZNY, Russia (AP) - A days-old peace accord in Chechnya appeared in jeopardy Thursday after Chechen rebels temporarily suspended talks and their leader threatened terrorist attacks against Russia.
Chechnya's chief negotiator, Khozh-Akhmed Yarikhanov, suspended talks with the Russians in the Chechen capital, Grozny, for several hours, accusing Russia of reneging on a military peace accord clinched July 30, the ITAR-Tass news agency said.
Negotiations on other questions - including Chechnya's political future - resumed in the afternoon. But each side accused the other of stalling on planned prisoner exchanges.
Yarikhanov also said his delegation was harassed at Russian military checkpoints Thursday and that Russia continued artillery shelling of Chechen settlements.
Moscow promised to assure Chechen negotiators easier passage to the talks, but denied shelling villages and accused rebel fighters of sneaking into Grozny under the pretense of being the negotiators' guards, ITAR-Tass said.
Adding fuel to the fire, Chechen rebel leader Dzhokhar Dudayev made repeated threats to use terrorism against Russian cities during a meeting with Russian lawmaker Anatoly Shabad.
The lawmaker, a member of the leading reform party Russia's Choice, told the Interfax news agency he met the rebel leader in a bombed-out village in southwestern Chechnya.
Shabad said it would be ''unrealistic'' to imagine that the Kremlin can keep the breakaway republic within the Russian Federation. No agreement has been reached on Chechnya's future.
In a meeting with Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic to discuss the Balkan war, Russian President Boris Yeltsin boasted that a recent agreement to cease hostilities in Chechnya meant his own house was back in order.
But gunfire rocks the republic nightly.

Load-Date: August 12, 1995


End of Document