Chechen Rebel Leader Claims Moscow Subway Bombing
RTT News (United States)
March 31, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 421 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A Chechen rebel leader on Wednesday claimed that his group was responsible for Monday&apos;s double suicide bombings on the Moscow subway that killed 39 people and left more than 60 others injured.
In a video posted on a rebel site, Chechen rebel leader Dokku Umarov claimed he personally ordered the suicide attacks on the Moscow Metro. The message was posted on the Kavkaz Center web site that regularly carries messages from the Chechen rebels.
In his video message, Umarov said the Metro bombings were carried out to avenge the "massacre conducted by the Russian occupants against the poorest residents of Chechnya and Ingushetia" during a special operation in February.
Umarov said that those killed in an anti-militant operation by Russian forces near the town of Arshty on 11th February were poor Chechen and Ingush civilians gathering wild garlic to make a living. He also pledged to carry out "new acts of vengeance" in Russia.
"The war will come to your street and you will feel it for yourselves and with your own lives," he warned Russian citizens in the video, which according to the web site was recorded just hours after Monday&apos;s twin suicide bombing.
Monday&apos;s suicide bombings targeted the Lubyanka and Park Kultury stations in central Moscow and were carried out within 40 minutes of each other. Russian investigators have released the photographs of two women, who they suspect were the suicide bombers.
Doku Umarov, a Chechen, leads an Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus region. He claims that his rebel group is fighting the Russian forces to free the mainly Muslim North Caucasus from Moscow&apos;s rule and to turn it into an Islamic emirate.
The Islamist separatist groups in the North Caucasus region have carried out several such attacks in the recent past, specially after the end of the second Chechen war. The operation was aimed at crushing Chechnya&apos;s post-Soviet independence movement, and the active phase of the anti-terrorism campaign that began in September 1999 officially and ended in 2001.
Though Russia ended its counter-terrorism operation in Chechnya, periodic bombings and clashes between militants and federal troops still disrupt the southern republic and nearby regions, particularly Daghestan and Ingushetia. Experts say that the insurgency in Russian North Caucasus region is fueled by Islamic extremism, separatism and poor economic conditions.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document