Cheney focuses on terrorism in fund-raising speech, Vice president tells attendees Capito is a friend of Bush
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 16, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1C
Length: 537 words
Byline: JOSH HAFENBRACK, DAILY MAIL CAPITOL REPORTER
Body


At a $ 500-a-plate luncheon for Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, Vice President Dick Cheney defended the war in Iraq and said President Bush remains vigilant in tracking down terrorists.
As protesters lined up behind orange police barricades outside, Cheney gave a boost to Capito at the fund-raiser at the Charleston Marriott Monday, raising at least $ 125,000 for her upcoming bid for a third term.
Cheney called Capito a friend of Bush and said he "wants to make absolutely certain" she's re-elected.
Then the vice president turned his attention to the war in Iraq and national issues, including tax cuts, energy policy and the judicial confirmation process.
Striking somber tones in his 15-minute speech to a partisan crowd of about 200, Cheney quietly reminded Capito's supporters of the moment when Bush took a megaphone atop the rubble at the World Trade Center and promised that terrorists would hear from America.
"The president has been a man of his word," Cheney said.
Cheney defended the invasion of Iraq. He said after 9/11, America can't wait until terrorists strike first.
"We need a strategy that allows us to go after the states that pose a threat to the United States," he said. "We cannot wait to act until another day like 9/11."
He said the war on terrorism - in Iraq and elsewhere - will continue "perhaps as long as we're in office, perhaps even longer."
"This war is not without sacrifice," Cheney said, adding that nearly 400 troops have died and "there will surely be more casualties."
Outside, the band of protesters swelled to about 80 as Cheney took the lectern shortly after noon. They shouted admonitions such as "Liar, liar pants on fire" to the vice president and unfurled white banners that listed the casualties in the war on Iraq.
Eva Knapp of Charleston held up a sign that said, "Cheney We Are Not Fooled."
"They want to make the world safe for Halliburton," Knapp said, referring to Cheney's former oil company. "It's a terrible time. Our freedoms are being eroded and comprised."
Kathy Burmingham drove two hours from Elkins to hold up a sign that read, "Cronyism, Doubletalk, Bush and Cheney Take a Walk."
"I'm angry," she said. "I'm angry with all the lies."
Inside, Capito's supporters nibbled on salad and chicken while Cheney was whisked in and out of Charleston before he could mingle with the crowd.
This is Cheney's second trip to Charleston to raise funds for Capito. In 2001, Cheney raised $ 250,000 for Capito in her closely contested re-election battle against Democrat Jim Humphreys.
In the 2004 election, Capito doesn't yet have an opponent.
"It's getting to be a routine, every two years," Cheney said of the Charleston visits. "But increasingly it looks like she doesn't need my help."
Cheney spoke briefly but glowingly about Capito, before turning to his standard stump speech.
Cheney said the president inherited an economy that was sliding into recession and maintained that tax cuts are the perfect tonic to get things turned around. He also said it's time for Congress to act on a coal-friendly energy bill, and he said Senate Democrats are "disgraceful" for holding up Bush's judicial nominees.
Writer Josh Hafenbrack can be reached at 348-4810 or by e-mail at jhafenbrack@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: September 17, 2003


End of Document