Cheney: Remember national security issues; The vice president defends Bush administration's war on terrorism and points finger at Democrats
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 26, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: WISCONSIN; Pg. c7
Length: 285 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MILWAUKEE 
Body


Vice President Dick Cheney on Monday singled out Democratic leaders for not doing enough to fight terrorism and said Americans must "reject any strategy of resignation and defeatism in the face of enemies."
Cheney, speaking at a Republican fundraiser, echoed comments he has made in recent days and said Republicans must keep national security on the minds of voters heading into the November midterm election.
Cheney used his 20-minute address in this battleground state to defend the Bush administration's war on terrorism and point fingers at Democrats.
"We have to stay on the offensive until the danger to civilization is removed," Cheney told about 110 people at the Pfister Hotel in downtown Milwaukee.
He took Democratic Party chairman Howard Dean to task for saying the capture of Saddam Hussein has not made America safer and accused Dean and Rep. John Murtha, D-Pa., of advocating what Cheney called a failed policy of retreat in the war against terrorism.
Cheney disagreed with Murtha's characterization that the U.S. successfully withdrew troops from Beirut in 1983 and Somalia in 1993. Cheney said pulling out in those instances sent the wrong message that killing Americans was the reason for the withdrawal.
The vice president chided Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid of Nevada for opposing the Patriot Act and suggesting the U.S. should not have invaded Iraq, even if it meant leaving Saddam in power.
Reid responded Monday by saying the White House has lost all credibility on matters of national security.
"With Iraq in a civil war, Afghanistan moving backwards and our own borders unsecured, it's clear George Bush and Dick Cheney are desperate to hide their record and distort the truth," Reid said.

Graphic

 
AP Photo

Load-Date: September 26, 2006


End of Document