Cheney's fiery remarks draw stinging response
Chicago Daily Herald
January 4, 2010 Monday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 350 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON — Dick Cheney's withering criticism of the Obama White House's terrorism-fighting policies came under an equally harsh response Sunday, with the former vice president accused of being ignorant or intentionally misleading.
John Brennan, who is President Barack Obama's counterterrorism adviser, said he has worked for five administrations and that Obama is as determined as anyone to keep the nation safe.
Cheney said last week that Obama is "trying to pretend" that the U.S. is not at war with terrorists. The result, the Republican Cheney said, is that Americans are less safe.
"I'm very disappointed in the vice president's comments," Brennan said, described himself as neither a Democrat or Republican. "Either the vice president is willfully mischaracterizing this president's position both in terms of the language he uses and the actions he's taken, he's ignorant of the facts.
"And in either case it doesn't speak well of what the vice president is doing. The clear evidence is that this president has been very, very strong. In his inaugural address he said we're at war with this international network of terrorists. We continue to say that we're at war with al-Qaida."
Brennan added that "partisan politics should be put aside when something as important to national security as the threat of terrorism . ... It continues to haunt us. And we have to make sure that we stay focused on al-Qaida. And so that's what I'm going to do in this job. I don't care what Republicans or Democrats say out there. We need to continue to prosecute this war because al-Qaida the organization needs to be destroyed."
In his recent comments, Cheney said Obama "seems to think if he closes Guantanamo and releases the hard-core al-Qaida-trained terrorists still there, we won't be at war. He seems to think if he gets rid of the words, ‘war on terror,' we won't be at war."
Even some Republicans have noted that the Bush administration released some Guantanamo detainees who later joined violent anti-American groups in Yemen.
Brennan spoke during interviews on "Fox News Sunday" and NBC's "Meet the Press."

Graphic

 
ASSOCIATED PRESS A Yemeni soldier stands guard at the main entrance of the U.S. Embassy while two workers repair the gate in 2008. The embassy was locked up Sunday due to the threat of attack.

Load-Date: January 4, 2010


End of Document