CHENEY: WE MUST STAY THE COURSE;
Town hall meeting discussed economy and terrorism
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 10, 2004 Friday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 1B
Length: 606 words
Byline: Lynn Hulsey lhulsey@DaytonDailyNews.com  
Body


CINCINNATI - Vice President Dick Cheney made clear Thursday that he believes President Bush can more effectively fight terror than his opponent, Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass.
But Cheney did not repeat controversial remarks he made Tuesday when he warned that if Kerry is elected, the danger is 'we'll get hit again and we'll be hit in a way that will be devastating from the standpoint of the United States.'
In a conference call responding to Cheney's appearance in Cincinnati, Sen. Joe Biden, D-Delaware, and Cincinnati Mayor Charlie Luken demanded Cheney apologize for those remarks he made in Des Moines.
'What he said was essentially 'vote for us or you will die," Luken said. 'It's a scare campaign. It's beneath the dignity of that office.'
Cheney offered no apologies Thursday during his 45-minute town hall forum before about 400 people in Cincinnati's Cinergy Convention Center.
And though he didn't mention Kerry by name, Cheney denounced those who he said won't aggressively attack terrorists and the countries that harbor them.
He said if the United States doesn't pursue Bush's policies, the choice is to have 'a lot more terrorist attacks in the world and obviously here in the United States.
'We've got to have the will, the commitment to stay the course,' Cheney said.
He also repeated his contention that Saddam Hussein harbored al-Qaida terrorists, despite a bipartisan commission's finding that prior to 9/11 there was no collaboration between the Iraqi dictator and the terrorist group responsible for the 9/11 attacks.
Several of those interviewed after the town hall meeting said they support the administration's approach on terrorism.
'What Bush/Cheney is doing with the war is great and keeping us safe,' said Wanda Daniels, 51, vice chair of the Bush/Cheney 04 Ethnic Coalition of Southern Ohio.
The forum was designed to focus on the economy, although most of Cheney's remarks and several questions from the audience addressed the war rather than the economy.
Cheney acknowledged that some areas are still struggling economically, but said the economy is improving and 'we believe we are on the right track.'
Cheney said it is important to make Bush's tax cuts permanent as well as simplify the tax code. Asked if Bush would support a flat tax and a national sales tax, Cheney said the details of tax code simplification have not been worked out.
Cheney claimed Kerry wants to increase spending by $2 trillion and raise taxes. Cheney also said Kerry voted to raise taxes 98 times during his Senate career.
'Once again, Dick Cheney is resorting to negative attacks and a distortion of Sen. Kerry's plans for America,' said Brendon Cull, spokesman for the Ohio Democratic Coordinated Campaign.
Kerry's plan would cut taxes for 98 percent of Americans, lower health care costs and create new jobs, Cull said.
Cull said the non-partisan Annenberg Public Policy Center's Web site factcheck.org accurately debunks the argument that Kerry voted to raise taxes 98 times. According to the Web site, the 98 votes include votes on budget measures that did not legislate tax increases, it counts various procedural votes on single bills as individual votes for taxes and includes votes for things like ending debate on a subject.
About 60 protesters gathered outside the convention center, banging on plastic buckets and shouting slogans into bullhorns.
Barbara Holt, 67, was holding a 'war mongerer' sign in one hand and her 12-year-old blind Yorkie in the other. She said it was the first time she's ever attended a protest.
'I feel strongly the country is going in the wrong direction,' said Holt of New Richmond.
Contact Lynn Hulsey at 225-7455.

Load-Date: September 14, 2004


End of Document