Cheney: Iraq pullout would invite terrorism
USA TODAY
November 22, 2005, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 536 words
Byline: Susan Page
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Vice President Cheney continued a White House offensive Monday against critics of the Iraq war, saying that senators who accuse the administration of distorting prewar intelligence were guilty of "corrupt and shameless" revisionism.
As the administration intensified its defense of the decision to invade Iraq and the case for maintaining troop levels there, Cheney argued in an address to a conservative think tank that calls to pull out U.S. forces would invite terrorism against Americans.
"A precipitous withdrawal from Iraq would be a victory for the terrorists, an invitation to further violence against free nations and a terrible blow to the future security of the United States of America," he said.
The administration's critics did not back down.
"Vice President Cheney claims it's dishonest and reprehensible for critics to suggest the president misled the nation into war," said Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass. "In fact, the only thing dishonest and reprehensible is the way the administration distorted, misrepresented and manipulated the intelligence to justify a war America never should have fought."
An hour after Cheney finished speaking, Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid of Nevada distributed a document that compared statements made by President Bush, Cheney and other top administration officials before the war with less categorical analyses from intelligence reports that have since been declassified.
For instance, Cheney said repeatedly that Mohamed Atta, one of the Sept. 11 hijackers, "apparently" had met with an Iraqi intelligence agent in Prague in 2000. A CIA report from 2002 said reporting on that issue was "contradictory" and "not verified."
Disputes over prewar intelligence have contributed to eroding support for the war and declining assessments of Bush's credibility. In a USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll taken Oct. 28-30, 53% of Americans said they believed the administration had deliberately misled the public about whether Iraq had weapons of mass destruction. The survey of 800 adults had a margin of error of +/-4 percentage points.
Cheney opened his 19-minute speech to a small, friendly audience at the American Enterprise Institute with conciliatory words toward Rep. John Murtha of Pennsylvania, a hawkish Democrat who sparked a fierce debate last week when he called for the quick withdrawal of U.S. troops.
The vice president called Murtha "my friend" and "a good man, a Marine, a patriot." He was echoing Bush's words Sunday on Murtha after an initial White House statement labeled the congressman an ultra-liberal.
But Cheney went on to ratchet up criticism of the administration's adversaries in the Senate. He didn't name any names.
In a speech Monday night in Chicago, Republican National Chairman Ken Mehlman ridiculed congressional Democrats who voted for the war and now are calling for an investigation into prewar intelligence.
"Maybe this investigation will reveal that they were brainwashed," he said in prepared remarks.
In Johnstown, Pa., Murtha, a Vietnam veteran, told reporters that he had listened to phone calls and e-mails from constituents before he called for withdrawing U.S. troops.
"The public turned against this war before I said it," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, J. Scott Applewhite, AP

Load-Date: November 22, 2005


End of Document