Chicago man who supported terrorists sentenced to 14 years
Chicago Daily Herald
January 18, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 17
Length: 584 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


A Chicago businessman was sentenced to 14 years in prison Thursday for providing material support to overseas terrorism, including a Pakistani group whose 2008 attacks in Mumbai, India, left more than 160 people dead.
Tahawwur Rana did not address the court before U.S. District Judge Harry Leinenweber imposed the sentence and did not react afterward. But his defense attorneys said the judge was right to reject prosecutors' arguments that Rana deserved a stiffer sentence because the charges were related to terrorism.
Jurors in 2011 convicted Rana of providing support for the Pakistani group, Lashkar-e-Taiba, and for supporting a never-carried-out plot to attack a Danish newspaper that printed cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad in 2005. The cartoons angered many Muslims because pictures of the prophet are prohibited in Islam.
But jurors cleared Rana of the third and most serious charge of involvement in the three-day rampage in Mumbai, India's largest city, which has often been called India's 9/11.
"We think the judge made the right ruling," defense attorney Patrick Blegen said, adding that he intends to appeal Rana's conviction because the judge refused to separate the Denmark and Mumbai charges. "I had always been our belief that it would be very difficult to get a fair trial if he had to face charges for two separate plots at once."
Prosecutors, who had sought a sentence of up to 30 years, issued a written statement in which acting U.S. Attorney Gary S. Shapiro called the 14-year term a "serious" sentence "that should go a long way toward convincing would-be terrorists that they can't hide behind the scenes, lend support to the violent aims of terrorist organizations and escape detection and punishment."
The government's star witness at Rana's trial was admitted terrorist David Coleman Headley, who had pleaded guilty to laying the groundwork for the Mumbai attacks. The American Pakistani testified against his school friend Rana to avoid the death penalty and extradition and spent five days on the stand detailing how he allegedly worked for both the Pakistani intelligence agency known as the ISI and Lashkar.
Rana was accused of allowing Headley to open a branch of his Chicago-based immigration law business in Mumbai as a cover story and travel as a representative of the company in Denmark. During trial, a travel agent showed how Rana booked travel for Headley and prosecutors presented Rana's videotaped arrest statement to the FBI, during which he said he knew Headley had trained with Lashkar. They also played a September 2009 recorded phone conversation between the men.
Defense attorneys portrayed Headley as a manipulator and habitual liar who duped his friend. Jurors' decision not to convict Rana on all counts could suggest they weren't fully convinced by Headley, who is scheduled to be sentenced in Chicago next week.
Prosecutor Daniel Collins on Thursday argued for a tough punishment for Rana that would deter others who would take part in similar plots and reflect the seriousness of the offense.
"There's not much worse than mass murder of this scale," he said of the plot, which was not ultimately carried out.
The judge responded that he doubted any sentence he imposed would deter anyone bent on committing a terrorist attack.
"Seems to me that people determined to carry out terrorism really don't care what happens to them," Leinenweber said. He added, however, that a long sentence would help prevent Rana from taking part in any future terrorist activity.

Graphic

 
Associated Press file photo Depicted here in a courtroom sketch, Chicago businessman Tahawwur Rana, 50, is accused in the 2008 Mumbai rampage that left more than 160 people dead and planning an attack that was never carried out on a Danish newspaper. Associated Press 
 In this Dec. 2, 2009, courtroom sketch, Tahawwur Rana appears before federal Magistrate Judge Nan Nolan in Chicago. Rana was convicted in 2011 of providing material support to overseas terrorism.

Load-Date: January 18, 2013


End of Document