CHILDREN TELL OF TERRORISM IN HBO'S DISTURBING 'BESLAN'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 1, 2005 Thursday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT,
Length: 703 words
Byline: Rob Owen Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


A year ago today, terrorists attacked a Russian school, taking hostages for three days and ultimately killing 171 children and more than 200 adults, many of them parents and teachers. HBO's "Children of Beslan" recounts the horror of that day in a way news reports couldn't capture: through the words of children who survived.
 The hour begins innocuously enough as 7-year-old Alex gives a tour of the bombed-out school ruins. His demeanor is not sad; instead, it's almost like he's recounting a grand adventure. That tone doesn't last. When he gets to the room where his father was killed, he suddenly sounds less like an excited guide and more like a boy who's lost a parent and been forced to grow up way too soon.
Alex is not the only one. A dozen children recount the ordeal, subtitled in English, and it's not easy to hear. It's especially distressing to listen to their descriptions of what they witnessed. A bullet struck a grenade hanging from a terrorist's belt, killing him.
 "He blew up and his brains hit me in the face," says a sweet-looking boy. "It was horrible. It was all fatty and slippery."
 One boy tried to give one of the terrorists five rubles to release his mother. Another girl, after she escaped, returned to the school to try to find her "mum." A boy describes seeing a man shot in the temple. A girl describes another student he saw consumed in a fire that followed bombs exploding.
 "I was hoping that Harry Potter would come," one boy said. "I remember he had a cloak that makes him invisible and he'd wrap me in it and we'd escape."
 As devastating as the hostage crisis was, the aftermath proved just as disturbing. Children say they're no longer happy, that they've been forced to grow up quickly. One child leaves toys at his best friend's grave and then pours soda on top to give his dead friend a drink.
 "I don't want to do anything," says a girl. "If I die, I die. I don't care."
 Another child wants to go to Chechnya and kill terrorists to avenge his father's death.
 Producers/directors Ewa Ewart and Leslie Woodhead make only one misstep: They attempt to give the hour a happy ending by showing children playing in scenes underscored by upbeat music. No doubt, life goes on for these kids, but as the interviews show, their lives have been changed.
 Clearly, "Children of Beslan" is not entertainment. But it is an important piece in the patchwork quilt of documentaries about terrorism, particularly for Americans who might be tempted to say, "Well, that was in Russia." The images of these children prove how unimportant national borders are; wherever hate, terror and killings strike, we continue to lose bits of our collective humanity one conflict at a time.
 'The Hobart ShakespeareanS'
 A more upbeat look at school children is on display in the "P.O.V." documentary "The Hobart Shakespeareans" (10 p.m. Tuesday, WQED), a one-hour look at 9-to-11-year-olds in Los Angeles, mostly disadvantaged Latino and Asian children, who perform Shakespeare through an ambitious inner-city school program.
 Fifth-grade English teacher Rafe Esquith imbues his students with an appreciation for Shakespeare and, more importantly, an understanding of the language.
 Although I have every reason to believe Esquith is sincere about his goals and is indeed an excellent teacher, he comes off as a little too aware of how adored he is and a little too self-impressed.
 "Oh, my gosh, boys and girls, it's Michael York!" he exclaims without much sincerity when the actor walks through the door.
 "Questions for Ian?" he asks his class when Sir Ian McKellan shows up to observe the classes' play preparation.
 Esquith has become, if there is such a creature, a celebrity teacher, feted on "The Oprah Winfrey Show," and friend to the stars. I'm sure he deserves the success he's achieved, but director Mel Stuart's documentary comes off as a little too adoring in tone. It would be like making a fawning documentary on Bill Gates as a scrappy entrepreneur in 2005. At some point, successful people outgrow such a wide-eyed depiction.
 Maybe if "P.O.V." had gotten to Esquith pre-"Oprah," "The Hobart Shakespeareans" would feel less manufactured, more authentic and, frankly, more deserving of fawning appreciation.

Notes

TV editor Rob Owen can be reached at rowen@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2582. Ask TV questions at  www.post-gazette.com/tv under TV Q&A.

Graphic

 
Leslie Woodhead 
One of the "Children of Beslan" visits the grave of a friend killed in a terrorist attack on their school a year ago today.

Load-Date: September 2, 2005


End of Document