Chile terror lawyer predicts case will be dropped
The Bismarck Tribune
May 15, 2010 Saturday


Copyright 2010 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: WIRE; Pg. 2A
Length: 365 words
Byline: MICHAEL WARREN Associated Press Writer
Body


SANTIAGO, Chile - Chilean prosecutors will have to show a judge today what evidence they have against a Pakistani detained after the U.S. Embassy said it found traces of an explosives substance on his documents and cell phone.
The evidence hearing was ordered moved up from Sunday after a magistrate held a closed session Friday during which the public defender for Mohammed Saif ur Rehman Khan accused the government of violating his legal rights by interrogating him without a lawyer in a language he didn't fully understand.
Speaking with journalists after the hearing, public defender Gabriel Carrion said he also told the magistrate that nothing he had seen supported a terrorism case against Khan and argued that tests for the chemical allegedly found on Khan's possessions are notorious for creating false readings.
"This could affect anybody who lives in a city as contaminated as ours," said Carrion, who hopes to gain Khan's release for lack of evidence.
Police said they found more traces of the material - described as tetryl, a chemical used to boost the power of explosives - on clothes seized from Khan's apartment, Chile's state television reported.
Investigators also were looking for five more people known to Khan for questioning, the report said.
The government on Friday asked a judge to charge Khan with illicit terrorist association as well as explosives violations.
Prosecutor Xavier Armendariz wouldn't comment on the defender's complaints about rights violations, but said Khan's continued detention under Chile's anti-terrorism laws was merited because "the circumstances are without a doubt extraordinary."
State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said that the U.S. government is cooperating fully with the Chilean investigation of Khan and that "there were solid grounds for apprehending him."
Khan, 28, who came to Chile in January to study Spanish and work in the hotel industry, was summoned to the U.S. Embassy on Monday to be told that his U.S. visa had been revoked, diplomats have said.
A website apparently set up by Khan's brother, a doctoral student at Michigan State University, calls him an intelligent, educated man who has never been accused of any wrongdoing.

Load-Date: May 17, 2010


End of Document