Children May Need Help Coping With Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 13, 2002, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 337 words
Byline: BRAD SMITH, bsmith@tampatrib.com; Reporter Brad Smith can be reached at (813) 259-7365.  
Body


EXPERT'S INTERNET SITE OFFERS SOME ADVICE
The best way to help children deal with the fears and worries they might have acquired about terrorism during the past few months is to talk to them, experts say.
The tricky part is how to do it. The answer is, it depends on the age group.
Children are "the most affected and probably the least managed" group of Americans now living through the consequences of the Sept. 11 attacks, says Judith Myer Walls, a child development expert at Purdue University.
Walls offers extensive advice online on how to talk to children about terrorism at www.ces.purdue.edu/terrorism/children 
For preschoolers, Walls suggests some reassuring holding and hugging. This age group is sensitive to what adults are feeling and cannot separate media images from reality.
For children in elementary school, Walls suggests assessing a child's understanding to see if he or she knows the difference between media reports and the entertainment shows they watch on television. Children this age can benefit from expressing their ideas in art, letters, music and with puppets.
Michael Rank, co-director of the International Traumatology Institute in Tampa, says his 6-year-old son drew images of an airplane flying into the World Trade Center and people falling out on their heads after Sept. 11.
"This is a reality that I really hadn't discussed with him," Rank says. "I don't know where he picked it up, and he really can't tell me much about it. It occurred to me it's going to be a completely new perception and world view for the children who experienced 9/11."
Walls says adolescents might act like they don't care, but this is often an attempt to look strong and save face.
They will want more detail and have more coping strategies but still might not deal with terrorism issues the same way adults do.
Parents should note feelings might change as teenagers learn more and get used to the situation. Walls suggests parents tell older children how they and others feel and let kids be in charge of their feelings.

Load-Date: January 15, 2002


End of Document