CHINA AGREES TO SHARE TERRORISM DATA
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 22, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 293 words
Byline: BARRY SCHWEID, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- China will give the United States intelligence it has gathered on terrorists in a show of support for the U.S. campaign to put Osama bin Laden out of business.
The agreement to have counterterrorism experts meet next week in Washington emerged over a luncheon between Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan and Secretary of State Colin Powell.
"We firmly oppose and strongly condemn all forms of terrorism and evil acts," Tang said.
Preliminary talks were held Friday with Frank Taylor, the new director of the State Department office on counterterrorism.
"We agreed to cooperate," Powell said. "They have their own problem with terrorism."
He said China did not ask the United States for anything in exchange for its cooperation.
Meanwhile, Organization of American States foreign ministers, meeting in a special session, approved two resolutions promising to assist the United States in the counterterrorism struggle.
One of the resolutions, referring to the Sept. 11 attacks, calls on all member states to "pursue, capture, prosecute and punish and, as appropriate, to expedite the extradition of the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of these terrorist acts."
In a speech to the gathering, Powell called for a revitalization of an OAS committee set up to fight terrorism.
"We have this tool. We need it. We must use it," he said.
Powell noted that 29 of the 34 OAS member lost citizens in the terrorist attacks last week.
At day's end, Powell met at the State Department with John Manley, the Canadian foreign secretary, and praised Canada's solidarity with the United States since the terrorist attacks.
Powell recalled that 100,000 Canadians assembled in Ottawa, the capital, in a show of support.
"The American people will be forever grateful," Powell said.

Load-Date: September 23, 2001


End of Document