China targeting 'terrorism' on its western frontier;
In Depth Xinjiang far from Beijing in many ways
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 21, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 788 words
Byline: Ted Anthony ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: HOTAN, China
Body


Down the cramped alleys of Hotan's main bazaar, flat discs of bread roast in cone-shaped coal ovens. Bearded men in embroidered skullcaps hawk melons and aromatic cumin from donkey carts. On dusty walls of mud and brick, the script is Arabic and the language Turkic.
This is China, though you wouldn't know it by looking. And to the communist government, 2,300 miles east in Beijing, that's precisely the problem.
In Xinjiang, the Muslim region that makes up an Alaska-size swath of China's far west, the central government says it is fighting terrorism. But in a region divided from the rest of the land by language and religion, philosophy and tradition, it's hard to tell who the enemy is.
Is it what the government calls "separatists" - those members of the Uighur ethnic group who advocate, sometimes violently, the creation of a country called East Turkistan? Is it Islamic extremists backed by global terrorist networks? Have they joined forces?
Or, as some activists say, is it all an excuse to come down harshly on people who won't bend to Beijing's rule?
"Antigovernment activity and religious extremists and terrorists, they are all the same in nature," said Zong Jian, deputy Communist Party secretary in Kashgar, a city near the Afghan and Pakistani borders. "They incite people to be involved in violence. That unites them."
The accusations are vague, and the evidence presented is scant. Beijing-backed local leaders tell stories of Uighur separatists who worked with neighboring Afghanistan's Taliban to sow unrest in Xinjiang, of al-Qaeda involvement in training camps inside China.
This much is indisputable: The Chinese government fears any whiff of rebellion at the edges of its control, be it by Tibetan followers of the Dalai Lama or by the leaders of Taiwan, recently accused by Beijing of waging a "holy war" against it.
In Xinjiang, whose 11 million Muslims are the region's majority, things have been simmering for years. But the problem took on particular urgency after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
That day changed China's approach in two ways: It made Beijing more wary of Islamic extremism, and it gave the government - long criticized for its human rights practices - a globally endorsed excuse to crack down.
"A lot of people sort of feel that they are using the threat of terrorism to strengthen their control of the region," Dru Gladney, a specialist on Xinjiang at the University of Hawaii, said.
Today, government-run provincial television airs programs chronicling al-Qaeda's alleged evils and characterizing the Chinese-Uighur relationship as close. And Beijing is trying to broaden ties with Central Asian nations to reduce terrorism at its western edge.
In October, a Uighur named Ujimamadi Abbas was executed in Hotan after being convicted of "ethnic separatism." No details of his alleged offenses were given. In December, Hasan Mahsum, one of the country's most wanted men, the leader of the outlawed East Turkestan Islamic Movement, was killed in a shootout with Pakistan authorities.
A week earlier, Mahsum's name was among 11 "Muslim separatists" on a list released by China in a plea for foreign help against Xinjiang's "terrorist organizations."
The East Turkestan Islamic Movement was identified by the United States as a terrorist organization in 2002 - a classification many believe was a diplomatic bone thrown to Beijing in exchange for its tacit support of the U.S.-led war on terror.
"China thinks Uighur separatism is two kinds - Islamic extremism and political separatism. But since 9/11, they've put them together and said they're the same," said Dilxat Raxit, a Stockholm-based spokesman for the East Turkistan Information Center.
"Uighurs love their country - because that country is East Turkistan," said Raxit (pronounced Rasheed). "The Beijing government knows that. But they demand that their nationalism is directed toward China."
This dual identity of Xinjiang is the partial result of a deliberate attempt, through decades of encouraged migration of ethnic Hans from back east, to make the region more Chinese. It's not easy.
Xinjiang not only seems far from the rest of China; it is. Even the official time zone set by Beijing is ignored; many follow their own informal clock that runs two hours earlier. And ancient linguistic ties link the Uighurs to Turkmenistan, three countries away, and even to Turkey, on Europe's doorstep.
Urumqi, Xinjiang's capital, resembles most Chinese cities evolving from uninspired communist architecture into profit-making shininess.
But drive south on the rutted desert roads and the landscape changes dramatically. Mud-hut villages and the serpentine old parts of towns such as Hotan and Kashgar resemble Kabul more than they do Beijing or Shanghai.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
NG HAN GUAN, Associated Press
A Uigher official stands near a picture of a dead separatist at an exhibition in Hotan, China, part of the Xinjiang province. In the west, Xinjiang, whose 11 million Muslims are the majority, differs in language, religion, philosophy and tradition.
TED ANTHONY, Associated Press
Muslim Uighur men pray at the Idqar mosque in Kashgar, near the Afghan and Pakistani borders. Mud-hut villages and the serpentine old parts of towns such as Hotan and Kashgar resemble Kabul more than they do Beijing or Shanghai.

Load-Date: August 23, 2005


End of Document