China Acts to Bolster Defendants' Rights
The New York Times
March 9, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 1160 words
Byline: By SHARON LaFRANIERE; Li Bibo and Mia Li contributed research.
Body


BEIJING -- China moved on Thursday to enhance the rights of suspects and defendants in criminal cases, recommending that its handpicked national legislature adopt a series of Western-style safeguards in the most sweeping revisions to its criminal procedure code in 15 years.
The hard-fought amendments to the Criminal Procedure Law were presented to the National People's Congress and are almost certain to be adopted next week, in the legislature's most significant act this session. The new language would curb the power of the police and prosecutors to detain suspects without notifying relatives, to use evidence extracted by torture and to keep defense lawyers at bay.
Still, legal analysts said, much of the state's overwhelming advantage over criminal suspects would be preserved. They also questioned whether the new protections would be enforced or exist only on paper.
''There is no question these are welcome changes,'' said Mike McConville, a Hong Kong law professor and the author of a recent book, ''Criminal Justice in China .'' ''What I am saying is that they do not go far enough.''
China's criminal justice system is steeply tilted in favor of the police and prosecutors. The vast majority of cases turn on confessions by suspects who have no access to legal advice until long after interrogation, if ever. Defense lawyers are powerless to do much except argue for a lesser sentence. Convictions are all but assured.
An initial draft of the amendments published last year prompted fears that the police would be given even more powers than they already hold. About 80,000 people responded to the government's invitation for online comments. The most controversial proposal, called ''the disappearance clause'' by critics, would have allowed the police to hold suspects for up to six months at secret residential locations without notifying relatives.
Human rights activists and legal scholars argue that China's police use detention in secret residential sites to restrain and silence government critics, a practice they say has grown in the past three or four years as China has clamped down on dissent. The internationally known artist and dissident Ai Weiwei, for instance, was held incommunicado for 43 days last year in a secret location in Beijing before his wife was allowed to visit him.
Chen Guangzhong, an adviser to the legislative committee that drafted the amendments, said he and others had argued strenuously that the police should not be given such broad latitude. The issue was debated in a series of sessions that were also attended by representatives of the Ministry of Public Security, China's main law-enforcement body.
''I made it clear that was unacceptable,'' said Mr. Chen, a consultant to the Supreme Court and the government's top prosecutorial authority. ''That could mean that someone could be holed up in a place for six months without anybody knowing it.''
The revisions would give the police just 24 hours to inform relatives when a suspect is being held at a residential location. ''This particular battle has been won,'' said Nicholas Bequelin, a senior researcher for Human Rights Watch who is based in Hong Kong. ''This is about reformers preventing the police from getting extra powers.''
The police would also be required to contact relatives of suspects who are held in detention centers, unless notification would impede an investigation and the suspected crimes involve national security or terrorism. Even then, legal specialists said, the delay would be limited to 37 days.
Legal scholars argue that alerting relatives is important because otherwise suspects and defendants are completely isolated in a system stacked heavily against them, with no way to seek legal help.
Under the revised law, the police would also be required to record on videotape and audiotape interrogations of suspects who face possible death sentences, life imprisonment or, according to Mr. Chen, prison terms of 10 years or more.
A suspect would also be allowed to meet a defense lawyer without permission from the police, except in cases involving national security, terrorism or grave allegations of bribery. Legal aid would be provided to those in economic need before as well as during trial. And for the first time the code would specify that one goal of the criminal justice system would be to ''respect and safeguard human rights.''
But other important safeguards fell by the wayside. Mr. Chen said he had failed to win approval of a clause that would have guaranteed a suspect's right to remain silent. As a practical matter, defendants risk longer sentences if they protest their innocence or complain about the police behavior, including the infliction of torture. Nonetheless, about 5 percent of defendants insist their confessions were obtained by torture, a study by Professor McConville found.
The revised law would specify that the police must inform a suspect of his or her right to a lawyer when first questioning the suspect. But it is not clear whether suspects who want a lawyer would be granted one during the initial interrogation, which determines the outcome of many cases.
Moreover, under China's Criminal Law, which is a separate statute, defense lawyers would still be subject to prosecution if they presented evidence the prosecution deemed false. Legal experts say the threat of such retaliation poses a serious impediment to any kind of defense.
Whether the police and prosecutors will abide by the new strictures is another question entirely.
The previous round of reforms, in 1996, did not significantly change ''the behavior of all those who are in charge of the system, including police, prosecutors and judges,'' said Professor McConville, a law professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. For instance, although reformers said the revisions would make judges more impartial, Mr. McConville's study found that judges still see themselves as duty-bound to help prosecutors construct and win their cases.
In a nutshell, he said, China places a huge amount of trust in the police, prosecutors and judges while giving individuals precious few tools to defend themselves. ''The defendant is placed at enormous disadvantage,'' he said.
Legal reformers prefer that suspects be interrogated and held in formal detention centers rather than isolated at undisclosed residential locations where they might be subjected to more abuse. The latest amendments specify that residential confinement should take place in a suspect's home, for up to six months, except in cases involving threats to national security, terrorism or extreme cases of bribery. In those cases, suspects can be held at an unspecified residential location other than their home.
At a packed news conference late Thursday, Lang Sheng, a criminal law committee expert with the congress's legislative affairs commission, said that residential confinement is to be used only in limited circumstances to hold suspects who would otherwise be arrested.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 9, 2012


End of Document