China: Train station attack was terrorism Assailants with long knives hacked at travelers; 33 people are dead and 130 injured, reports say.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 2, 2014 Sunday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A18
Length: 515 words
Byline:  By DIDI TANG Associated Press 
Body


BEIJING • More than 10 knife-wielding attackers slashed people at a train station in southwestern China late Saturday in what authorities called a terrorist attack, and police fatally shot five of the assailants, leaving 33 people dead and 130 injured, state media said.
The attackers, most of them dressed in black, stormed the Kunming Train Station in Yunnan Province and started attacking people in the late evening, witness Yang Haifei told the official Xinhua News Agency in an interview from a hospital where he was being treated for chest and back wounds.
"I saw a person come straight at me with a long knife, and I ran away with everyone," he told Xinhua, adding that people who were slower ended up severely injured. "They just fell on the ground," Yang said.
Xinhua did not identify who might have been responsible for the attack, but the news agency said authorities considered it to be "an organized, premeditated violent terrorist attack."
In an indication of how seriously authorities viewed the attack - one of China's deadliest in recent years - the country's top police official, Politburo member Meng Jianzhu, was en route to Kunming, the Communist Party-run People's Daily reported.
President Xi Jinping called for "all-out efforts" to bring the culprits to justice.
A Xinhua reporter in Kunming said several suspects had been "controlled" while police continued their investigation of people at the station.
State media outlets did not immediately cite a motive for the attack nor say what group might be behind it, but they typically use the phrase "terrorist" for attacks blamed on separatists from the far western region of Xinjiang, home to a simmering rebellion against Chinese rule among parts of the Muslim Uighur population.
Most attacks blamed on Uighur separatists take place in Xinjiang, but Saturday's assault took place more than 620 miles to the southeast in Yunnan, which has not had a history of such unrest.
However, a suicide car attack blamed on Uighur separatists that killed five people at Beijing's Tiananmen Gate last November raised alarms that militants may be aiming to strike at targets throughout the country.
At a guard pavilion in front of the train station, three victims were crying. One of them, Yang Ziqing, told Xinhua that they were waiting for a train to Shanghai when a knife-wielding man suddenly came at them.
"My two town-fellows' husbands have been rushed to hospital, but I can't find my husband, and his phone went unanswered," Yang sobbed.
Footage on China's state broadcaster CCTV showed a heavy police presence near the station and plainclothes agents wrapping a long knife in a plastic bag as investigators collected evidence following the attacks.
Pictures on Sina Weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter, showed bodies covered in blood at the station.
The Security Management Bureau under the Ministry of Public Security called the incident a "severe violent crime" via its official Sina Weibo account.
The Kunming Railway Station, located in the southeastern area of the city, is one of the largest railway stations in southwest China.

Graphic

 
 A woman reacts, at the crime scene outside a railway station after an attack, in Kunming, in southwestern China's Yunnan province, Saturday March 1, 2014. China's official Xinhua News Agency says authorities consider the attack by a group of knife-wielding assailants at a train station in southwestern China in which at least 27 people died to be an act of terrorism. (AP Photo) CHINA OUT 

Load-Date: March 3, 2014


End of Document