Chiquita settles terrorism probe; Company agrees to pay $25 million after admitting that it paid a Colombian terrorist group for protection
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 15, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a5
Length: 353 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Banana company Chiquita Brands International said Wednesday it has agreed to a $25 million fine after admitting it paid a Colombian terrorist group for protection in a volatile farming region.
The settlement resolves a lengthy Justice Department investigation into the company's financial dealings with terrorist organizations in Colombia.
In court documents filed Wednesday, federal prosecutors said the Cincinnati-based company and several unnamed high-ranking corporate officers paid about $1.7 million between 1997 and 2004 to the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, known as AUC for its Spanish initials.
The AUC has been responsible for some of the worst massacres in Colombia's civil conflict and for a sizable percentage of the country's cocaine exports. The U.S. government designated the right-wing group as a terrorist organization in September 2001.
Prosecutors said the company made the payments in exchange for protection for its workers. The company also made similar payments to the leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, according to prosecutors. The group also is known as FARC, the acronym for its Spanish name.
Leftist rebels and far-right paramilitaries have fought viciously over Colombia's banana-growing region. Most companies have extensive security operations to protect employees there.
"The information filed today is part of a plea agreement, which we view as a reasoned solution to the dilemma the company faced several years ago," Chiquita's chief executive, Fernando Aguirre, said in a statement. "The payments made by the company were always motivated by our good faith concern for the safety of our employees."
Such arrangements between companies and guerrillas or paramilitaries are not uncommon but it's impossible to know how much money is paid each year.
Chiquita sold its Colombian banana operations in June 2004.
Details of the settlement were not included in court documents but Aguirre said Chiquita would pay $25 million in fines, which it set aside this year. The company reported the deal to the Securities and Exchange Commission. A plea hearing was scheduled for Monday.

Load-Date: March 15, 2007


End of Document