Chirac's last 'gift' to Mitterrand
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 12, 1988, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 16A; EDITORIAL
Length: 454 words
Body


Terrorists all over the world must be mourning Jacques Chirac's    defeat in France's presidential election. They must also be wishing    that the election campaign had lasted a few more days. Chirac might    have used the extra time to dream up even more cynical deals that would    have had the effect of furthering the cause of international terrorism.
    In the frantic final days of the French campaign, then-Prime    Minister Chirac negotiated the release of three French hostages who had    been held captive in Lebanon. The cost to France - the tangible price    in cash and the intangible price in national honor - was enormous.
 
     Chirac also ordered the early release of a French agent who had    been confined on a Pacific atoll as a result of her role in the bombing    of a Greenpeace ship in New Zealand three years ago. Thus did Chirac    cave in to other countries' terrorists while rewarding France's own.
 
     Fortunately for France and all other democracies, Chirac's tactics    failed. President Francois Mitterrand easily won a second seven-year    term, bringing his uneasy two-year "cohabitation" with Chirac to an      end not a minute too soon.
 
        If Chirac's last-minute theatrics had overcome Mitterrand's    pre-election advantage, future candidates around the world would have    been sorely tempted to indulge in similar stunts. By the time the    immediate euphoria of a hostage release gave way to the realization of    the long-term damage that all such accommodations inevitably cause, the    candidate responsible for the deal would be safely back in office.
 
     Chirac was reduced to desperation tactics because Mitterrand had    been so successful in transforming himself into a more appealing, less    threatening figure than the doctrinaire Socialist who took power seven    years ago. Gaullists' fears of left-wing extremism proved to be    unfounded as Mitterrand spent his first term positioning himself in    France's political center.
 
     As a result of the unexpectedly strong showing of National Front    presidential candidate Jean-Marie Le Pen, the immediate threat of    extremism now comes from the right, not the left. Mitterrand    capitalized on the split among his right-wing opponents on Election    Day, but he must now act to repudiate the racism and xenophobia at the    heart of Le Pen's message.
 
     Thanks to Chirac's last official acts, Mitterrand also must live    with the consequences of France's capitulation to terrorism. The    presidential campaign culminated in a new mandate for Mitterrand, but    it also inflamed two pressing problems - of terrorism abroad and    extremism at home - that weren't so apparent before the campaign began.
 
    

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document