CHOICE URGED IN TERRORISM RESPONSE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 3, 2001 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-18
Length: 467 words
Byline: Michael Paul Williams, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Michael Paul Williams at (804) 649-6815 or mwilliams@timesdispatch.com  
Body


One of the nation's foremost scholars on leadership said disagreement by Americans over how President Bush should respond to the recent terrorist attacks is not only healthy but inevitable.
"I believe that democracy turns on conflict," Dr. James MacGregor Burns said yesterday at the University of Richmond.
This nation remains haunted by the Vietnam War, a conflict America entered without the say of its citizens. Sooner or later, unlike Vietnam, "there has to be a choice given to the American people," on how to move forward now, Burns said.
Burns, a Pulitzer Prize-winning presidential biographer, is a senior fellow at UR's Jepson School of Leadership Studies.
Joined by presidential scholar Georgia Sorenson of the University of Maryland, he prodded a lecture hall of students and faculty to ponder questions of unity and dissent in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
The central question of the afternoon: How do we unite behind the president while feeling free to disagree with him on how to deal with terrorism?
No consensus was reached. But the media took hits for the use of "loaded" language and for ratcheting up already frayed emotions. Sorenson at one point agreed that world tensions might have been reduced if what occurred was described as "a heinous, international criminal act" rather than an act of war.
"If you see over and over that visual image of the twin towers being destroyed and people jumping off, that affects who you are," Sorenson said. She urged students to develop critical thinking skills to help them wade through media images.
Burns said it is natural for the nation to rally behind its president in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks. "The question is, for how long, and in what way."
If you agree with the course set by President Bush, support him, Burns said. "If you disagree with the president, don't let the argument, 'Well, we've got to stick with the president,' be the dominant thing," he added.
Sorenson, a former staff member in the Carter White House, said the events of Sept. 11 have placed her values in conflict. As a Buddhist and Quaker, "I would personally support a nonviolent approach. But that puts me in conflict with my values as a citizen."
The relatively few faculty members in the room were more talkative than the students, who still appeared a bit shell-shocked by recent events.
One young woman admitted as much.
"Right now, I'm scared to death," she said.
Burns pleaded for optimism.
"Historically, we have been in much tougher situations than this," he said, noting the trials of World War II and the carnage of the Civil War, a conflict that took more than a half-million American lives.
"We're going to come through this," he said. "Maybe blunderingly, maybe successfully, but we're going to come through this."

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document