Christchurch terrorism: Tarrant pleads not guilty
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
June 16, 2019 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 409 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


TheAustralian man charged with the Christchurch terror attack has shocked the court this morning by entering a plea of Not Guilty to 51 charges of murder.
Brenton Tarrant, 28, appeared via video link from a maximum security prison for Friday's hearing at theChristchurch High Court inChristchurch, New Zealand.
He will be remanded in isolated custody until a case review hearing takes place on 16 August.
Donned in a grey sweatshirt, Tarrant, smirked as his lawyer entered the pleas.
Tarrant first appeared inChristchurch District Court the day after the mosque attacks on 15 March, where he was charged with multiple counts of murder.
Prosecutors today laid another murder charge, two attempted murder charges, and a charge under New Zealand's Terrorism Suppression Act. "Therefore, a fitness hearing is not required".
Boris Johnson for the Next British PM?
As expected the Pound showed little reaction to the 1 ballot result. "There are six candidates left, five of them went to Oxford". Johnson said he did not want a no-deal Brexit but he ruled out a further extension beyond the current October 31 deadline.
His smiling demeanor enraged survivors still reeling from the worst massacre in modern New Zealand history, who had packed the courthouse's public gallery for a glimpse of the accused.
"If it was at a normal time it would be OK, but after the court the anger had built up".
In the March 15 attacks, 42 worshipers were killed at theAl Noor mosque and seven were killed at the Linwood mosque during Friday prayers.
He will stand trial in May next year once again.
Following two assessments of Tarrant's mental health, Judge Cameron Mander declared no issues were detected that would possibly interfere with the defendant's ability to stand trial. At least 49 people are confirmed dead, with more than 40 people injured following attacks on two mosques inChristchurch on Friday afternoon. He said he changed the start date to May 4, 2020, due to the "scale and complexity" of the case and "to avoid the possibility of an overly optimistic trial date having to be vacated and trial adjourned". "Just put me, for 15 minutes, with him in one cell and then we'll see if he can laugh anymore", said Aziz Abdul - who became a local hero after defending the Linwood mosque with an Eftpos machine during the live-streamed shootings.
She said she thought the shooter deserved to be given the death penalty, even though New Zealand no longer institutes the punishment.

Load-Date: June 16, 2019


End of Document