Christchurch attacks accused Brenton Tarrant facing new charges
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
May 23, 2019 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 295 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"The charge will allege that a terrorist act was carried out in Christchurch", police said in a statement.
The 28-year-old Australian man went on a shooting rampage that left 51 people dead in two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, on March 15.
In addition to the terror charge, Brenton Tarrant also faces 51 charges of murder and 40 of attempted murder over the March 15 attacks that rocked the South Pacific nation.
The charge was the first under New Zealand's terrorism suppression legislation, introduced in 2002, after the September 11, 2001, attacks in the United States.
George RR Martin: Game of Thrones finale was ending, also beginning
For this, Martin added that he expects to have finished The Winds of Winter by the time he attends the event in July 2020. The post lays out what is on Martin's plate for the future now that the Game of Thrones TV show concluded on Sunday.
The charges against Tarrant, who is a self-described white supremacist, were less extensive as New Zealand's Terrorism Suppression Act, introduced in 2002, was untested in courts.
Tarrant was charged with 50 counts of murder and 39 counts of attempted murder following the massacre, but officials on Tuesday tacked on an additional murder charge for a Turkish man who was wounded in the attack and died earlier this month. He was initially charged with one count of murder.
The new charge comes with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment upon conviction and will be a test case for New Zealand's terrorism law, which came onto the books in 2002 following the terrorist attacks in the USA on September 11, 2001.
Tarrant is next due to appear in court on June 14, after being remanded in custody in April and ordered to undergo psychiatric assessment to determine if he was fit to stand trial.

Load-Date: May 23, 2019


End of Document