Christopher Wray: Trump ’s FBI pick; Justice Department veteran oversaw anti-terrorism efforts in the wake of 9/11
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 8, 2017 Thursday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2017 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: USA TODAY; Pg. Z2
Length: 551 words
Byline: Herb Jackson @HerbNJDC USA TODAY Network
Body


President Trump’s pick to run the FBI, Christopher Wray, oversaw efforts to combat terrorism after 9/11 and has been on both sides of investigations that approached the top of the political ladder.
Friends and former colleagues call Wray a smart lawyer with integrity who will instill confidence in a bureau in the eye of a political storm. 
“He’s very even-keeled with a great sense of humor, a calm presence in midst of chaotic times,” said Rep. Patrick Meehan, R-Pa., a former U.S. attorney who served on a Justice Department corporate fraud task force that Wray led. 
Wray may face questions, however, from Democrats looking for law enforcement independence because of his roles in public and private practice, including representing New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie  a Trump ally  during the George Washington Bridge lane-closure scandal. 
Trump announced the selection Wednesday on Twitter, calling Wray “a man of impeccable credentials.” 
A formal White House announcement cited Wray’s work at the Justice Department, including heading the criminal division and overseeing actions in the war on terrorism post-9/11. 
Wray has been on both sides of investigations touching top political leaders. Along with representing Christie, he led a Justice Department task force that won convictions against officials of Enron, an energy firm whose CEO, Ken Lay, was Bush’s biggest contributor. 
“He has experience, knowledge and integrity,” said Michael Chertoff, Wray’s predecessor as head of the criminal division. 
But Wray’s implementation of the Justice Department’s approach to corporate wrongdoers  including agreements that let companies avoid prosecution if they submit to outside monitors and paying charities  could be a point of contention. 
On Wednesday, the White House touted Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ decision to stop using corporate fraud cases to create “slush funds” for politically favored programs, apparently unaware that Christie and Wray had worked together on an investigation of pharmaceutical firm Bristol-Myers Squibb that led to a much-criticized $5 million payment to Seton Hall Law School, Christie’s alma mater. 
“I hope the Senate will examine Mr. Wray’s role in the Justice Department’s use of deferred and non-prosecution agreements,” said Rep. Bill Pascrell, D-N.J. 
After leaving the government in 2005 to work at King & Spalding law firm, he represented Christie when prosecutors began investigating reports that toll lanes to the George Washington Bridge were closed in retaliation against a mayor who did not endorse Christie. 
State Senate Majority Leader Loretta Weinberg, a Democrat, said she did not fault Wray for representing Christie, but worried about the nominee appearing to have pre-existing loyalties. 
“We need experience and the background to do the job, and most important, we need independence and non-partisanship,” Weinberg said. 
Wray was serving as an assistant U.S. attorney since 1997 when he was tapped to join the Justice Department in 2001. 
If confirmed, Wray would succeed James Comey, whom Trump abruptly fired last month. Comey will testify before the Senate Intelligence Committee Thursday about his talks with Trump. 
Contributing: Staff writer Nick 
Pugliese, Bob Jordan of Asbury Park 
Press and USA TODAY reporters Kevin Johnson and David M. Jackson

Graphic

 
KING & SPALDING">A longtime lawyer and former Justice Department official, Christopher Wray will succeed James Comey if confirmed.

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document