CHRISTOPHER, ASSAD DISCUSS ISRAELI PROPOSALS FOR GOLAN WITHDRAWAL
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 1, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A17
Length: 529 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria
Body


Secretary of State Warren Christopher met with Syrian President Hafez al- Assad yesterday to discuss Israeli proposals for breaking a deadlock in peace talks between the two nations.
Christopher delivered to Assad a proposal for Israel to withdraw in stages
from the Golan Heights and security plans to ensure the area is not used for attacks on Israeli villages.
Christopher also carried a list of complaints. They included U.S. allegations that Syria is looking the other way on drug trafficking in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley and concern for increased counterfeiting of $100 bills in Syria. Also on Christopher's list of issues were two perennial topics - terrorism and human rights.
Details of the nearly three-hour meeting were not available.
The Clinton administration, in a report to Congress, credits Syria with an improved record on human rights and terrorism. Officials said Syria's record continued to improve this year. But the report, which covers 1993, keeps Syria on a list of seven countries promoting terrorism.
Christopher also is seeking a detailed account from Assad and Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa of an arms deal concluded last week with Russia. Christopher wants to know if Syria will be getting missiles from Moscow and, if so, of what range.
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Soskovets has said Russia intends to continue to develop ties with Syria.
Syria, with Soviet help, became a military power in the region and adopted a tough line toward Israel. The Clinton administration believes that stance is changing since the demise of the Soviet empire.
The new deal apparently includes spare parts for Soviet-made military equipment, but the extent of the resupply could be limited by a Syrian debt that Russia calculates at $10 billion.
Israel's proposals are likely to fall short of Assad's expectations. Israeli diplomats said the package did not include a pledge to relinquish all of the Golan Heights, as Assad demands.
Israel is offering to withdraw in three stages over eight years, Israeli television's Second Channel reported yesterday. In the first stage, three Druse villages would be returned to Syria. In the second stage, the Israeli settlements would be dismantled, the report said.
But Israel is not prepared to spell out how much it might yield of land it captured in the 1967 Middle East war in the final stage.
Israel's chief negotiator, Itamar Rabinovich, said yesterday that "the Americans didn't take any maps with them on which lines (of withdrawal) have been drawn."
"But they are certainly coming with ideas, impressions," Rabinovich told the state-run radio. "And I think these ideas are sufficient to have a very interesting discussion with President Assad in Damascus."
Despite a campaign pledge not to "go down" from the Golan, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has told Syria he would be willing to exchange part of the border buffer in a peace treaty and that he would not let the 15,000 Jewish settlers living there get in the way of a deal.
Rabin wants most of all to guard against cross-border attacks, a concern the Clinton administration is ready to meet with technology for an early- warning system and possible U.S. troops.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document