Christopher Layton retires after 27 years in Army
The Hancock News (Maryland)
July 3, 2013


Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2013 The Hancock News


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 449 words
Byline: The Hancock News staff
Body


While still a senior at Southern Fulton, Christopher E. Layton enlisted in February 1986 as a 31B, Military Policeman, in the United States Army Reserves.
During his enlistment he attended Indiana University of Pennsylvania where he was a Distinguished Military
Graduate and commissioned a Second Lieutenant in the Military Police Corps.
He currently serves as the Operations Officer for the Inspector General of the United States Army.
His previous assignments include Inspection Division The United States Army Inspector General Agency, Provost Marshal 1st Cavalry Division, Ft Hood, Texas, with service in Iraq, Deputy Brigade Commander and Police Transition Team Chief 89th Military Police Brigade, Ft Hood, Texas, with service in Iraq, S3 and Executive Officer 720th Military Police Battalion, Ft Hood, Texas, Rear Detachment Commander 503d Military Police Battalion (Airborne), Brigade Rear Operations Officer 16th Military Police Brigade (Airborne) Ft Bragg, N.C., Deputy and Division Provost Marshal 82nd Airborne Division with service in Iraq, S2/3 10th Area Support Group, Provost Marshal Army on Okinawa, EDRE Team Chief G3 XVIII Airborne Corps, Ft. Bragg, N.C.
Command Commander 65th Military Police Company (Airborne), Rear Operations Officer 507th Corps Support Group (Airborne), Ft Bragg, N.C, Battalion S4 728th Military Police Battalion, Camp Henry, Korea, Executive Officer and Platoon Leader 59th Military Police Company and Platoon Leader 4th Military Police Company 4th Infantry Division, Ft Carson, Colo.
He is a graduate of the Military Police Officer Basic and Advanced Courses, the Command and General's Staff Course, and holds a Master's of Science in Administration from Central Michigan University.
His decorations include the Legion of Merit, the Bronze Star Medal (2 OLC), Meritorious Service medal (3 OLC), Army Commendation Medal (4 OLC), Army Achievement Medal, Army Reserve Component
Achievement Medal, National Defense Service Medal with gold star, Iraqi Campaign Medal with two campaign stars, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Korea Defense Service Medal, Humanitarian Service Medal, Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon with numeral 5, Army Reserves Overseas Training Ribbon, Master Parachutist Badge, Combat Action Badge and Order of the in Marechaussee (Bronze).
He is married to the former Keiko Miyagi of Kintown, Okinawa, Japan and they have two sons - Sean (nine) and Jacob (six).
Lieutenant Colonel Layton will transition into the civilian sector by working as a program analyst with the Department of Veteran Affairs and will reside in the Herndon, Va. area.

Load-Date: May 6, 2015


End of Document