CHRISTOPHER DELIVERS ISRAELI APPEAL FOR AN END TO VIOLENCE WITH SYRIA
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 8, 1994, Monday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 699 words
Body


DAMASCUS, Syria (AP) - Secretary of State Warren Christopher on
Sunday registered U.S. and Israeli concerns about international
terrorism with President Hafez Assad and surveyed prospects for
"some sort of an understanding" of peace between the two countries
"We are laying the basis for future progress," Christopher
said.
The five-hour meeting evidently produced few concrete results
beyond an announcement by Christopher that he would return to the
region in September.
A senior U.S. official said Assad listened carefully to
Christopher's complaints about the fundamentalist group Hezbollah but
did not give him "any set of responses."
Jubran Kourieh, a spokesman for the Syrian president, said Assad
told Christopher his country was serious about the peace process.
Hezbollah is believed responsible for bloody attacks on Jews in
Buenos Aires, London and possibly Panama.  It has also dueled with
Israel over the border from Lebanon, where Syria is the dominant
political and military force.
"I expressed my concerns about Hezbollah," Christopher said
.  "We had a serious discussion of that issue."
On the peace track, meanwhile, "there are real gaps," said the
official, who briefed reporters after Christopher gave a terse
account of the meeting.
Mounting violence in the region and beyond has complicated
Christopher's peace mission.  Before flying here from Jerusalem he
said he would be discussing "the problem of international
terrorism," but his aides said no Israeli demands would be conveyed
to Assad.
Christopher appealed for restraint on all sides, saying the
violence could damage peacemaking in the region, which Christopher
has now visited four times in the past three months.
However,Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said Israel would
never forego "any military measure that is necessary for defensive
purposes." Insisting Israel was not trying to escalate the situation
in Lebanon, Peres said after a 70-minute meeting with Christopher,
"We weren't asked to stop it or change it."
Peres' assertion, which was coupled with an apology for civilian
casualties in southern Lebanon, came against a backdrop of growing
tensions along the border with Syria.  On Saturday, two Israeli
soldiers were killed in a clash with Hezbollah gunmen.
"A truly comprehensive peace is the answer to the kind of
incidents that we've had in the last 48 or 72 hours," Christopher
said.
"My main aim is to prevent this round of violence from cycling
and causing difficulty for the peace process."
While traveling to the region Friday, Christopher telephoned
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Syrian Foreign Minister
Farouk Sharaa to appeal for restraint.
But on Saturday morning, Israeli soldiers clashed with Hezbollah
guerrillas in a security zone in southern Lebanon manned by
Israeli-backed Lebanese militia.
After the fight, Hezbollah, an Iranian-backed fundamentalist
group, fired mortar rounds and Katyusha rockets into the zone and
also western Galilee in Israel.
The Israeli air force, meanwhile, had raided Hezbollah targets
Thursday night, hitting a house and killing several civilians.  Peres
said Sunday that Israel did not intend to harm civilians.
"It is not our policy; it was a mistake," he said.
But, Peres said, "Israel takes the necessary military and
practical measures so that such incidents do not recur.  |e This
government will never prevent recourse to any military measures that
are necessary for defensive purposes."
At the same time, the Israeli foreign minister said he and the
prime minister had passed on to Christopher "a decisive request to
both the Lebanese and Syrians to take matters into their own hands
and stop this unruliness."
Syria, meanwhile, accused Israel on Sunday of fueling tension in
south Lebanon to sabotage Christopher's Middle East shuttle.
"The smell of blood and the deliberate demolition of civilian
homes could never be a good prelude," the government newspaper
al-Thawra said in an editorial.
Similarly, state-run Damascus radio said Israel was trying "to
drag the Arabs, one after the other," into agreements that produce
peace but without Israel withdrawing from territory.
The commentary said if Israel was serious about peace it would
agree to relinquish all the land it gained in the 1967 Six-Day war

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document