Christmas Is Almost Here and Santa Is in Her Sights; Movie Review | 'Be My Oswald'
The New York Times 
November 29, 2007 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MOVIES
Length: 334 words
Byline: JEANNETTE CATSOULIS
Highlight: A seriously deranged dramedy about finding yourself through terrorism, “Be My Oswald” attempts high-wire artiness on a bargain-basement budget.
Body


 A seriously deranged dramedy about finding yourself through terrorism, “Be My Oswald”  attempts high-wire artiness on a bargain-basement budget. This works for 15 of the film’s 94  minutes, suggesting that somewhere inside this labor of lunacy lies a solidly engaging short film.
 In an exhaustingly high-strung performance, the talented Jeannie Noth shoulders most of the burden as A, an unfulfilled socialite fleeing a husband and a life of privilege. Embarking on what she believes to be a start-up humanitarian enterprise, A follows the telephone instructions of her unseen employer, the first of which is to secure a sixth-floor loft with a Broadway view. But when she discovers that the architect of her new life is a bewigged psychotic with plans to assassinate Santa during a Thanksgiving Day parade, A must table her urgent need for a manicure to summon principles she never knew she had. 
 Written and directed by Don Cato (whose wife, Katha, plays the Bible-obsessed assassin), “Be My Oswald” opens promisingly but degenerates rapidly. Shot on 16-millimeter film, the early, loft-hunting scenes — featuring a series of  landlords familiar to any New Yorker — have an energy and professionalism that evaporate once the medium changes to digital video.  By the time the focus narrows to the socialite, the killer and a stuffed cat,  not even Santa  can reclaim our attention.
BE MY OSWALD
Opens today in Manhattan. 
Written and directed by Don Cato; director of photography, Joe Dell’Olio; edited by Patrick DiRenna; music by James Halfpenny; produced by Mr. Cato and Katha Cato; released by ChipAway Productions. At the Two Boots Pioneer Theater, 155 East Third Street, at Avenue A, East Village. Running time: 1 hour 34 minutes. This film is not rated. 
WITH: Jeannie Noth (A), Katha Cato (B), Pamela Butler (Realtor), Vincent Polizzi (Building Manager), Buddy Smith (Guy) and Ben Oliver (Zaffi). 
PHOTO: Jeannie Noth as an unfulfilled socialite in “Be My Oswald.” (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHIPAWAY PRODUCTIONS)

Load-Date: March 6, 2017


End of Document