CIA accused of secret prisons
University Wire
November 4, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 530 words
Byline: By Kimberly Huebner, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


A terrorist takes the life of an innocent, and there is never an excuse for terrorism, said Peter Tarlow, Rabbi at Texas A&M University's Hillel Foundation and expert in the impact of crime and terrorism on tourism.
Tarlow was one of four panelists at a seminar Thursday night, presented by A&M's Hillel Foundation at the George Bush School of Government and Public Service.
The war in Iraq, and recently, the controversy over the CIA's interrogation practices, has spurred discussion about terrorism. The European Union and the Human Rights Watch said Thursday they will investigate alleged CIA jails, also called black sites, supposedly set up in Eastern Europe and elsewhere to interrogate terror suspects. U.S. officials have not confirmed or denied claims.
Jeffrey Engel, a professor of history at the Bush School of Government and Public Service, said the CIA received presidential authorization to go to other countries.
Engel said political reasons, as well as a rush to get information from suspected terrorists, contributed to the CIA's involvement in these operations.
"The government authorized the CIA to go in and -- in a genuine black helicopter operation -- go in the middle of the night and grab these people," Engel said.
Engel said the United States public has mixed views on these operations.
"Some may think it should be our right to do that, while others may think it is antithetical to what many of us would like to believe America stands for," Engel said. "People who both believe they are operating in the best interest of the country seem to be incapable of agreeing."
The seminar, entitled "Rethinking Torture, Is It Ever Appropriate," was intended to get people thinking about issues regarding torture and its morality.
Rabbi Peter Tarlow spent four years dealing with prisoners in Chile and witnessed people being tortured on a daily basis.
"These things really do happen," Tarlow said. "It's not a pretty sight to see someone being tortured. When you have to deal with it on a real level, on an educational level it's a whole different world."
Reverend Kyle Walker, minister of United Campus Ministry, said the government's actions often blur the definition of torture in American society.
"The Bush administration has been blocking efforts to explicitly outlaw torture," Walker said. "I do believe that torture is still cruel, unhuman and degrading, whether it is on our soil or on somebody else's."
Walker said citizens should question the need for torture.
"If we no longer embrace liberty and human rights, then what makes us different from the terrorists?" Walker said.
Thomas Tai-Seale, professor of public health at A&M and member of the Bahai faith, said his religion teaches that protecting people against torture will lessen the impact of war on international relations. He said he feels that most religions are similar in their objection to terrorism and the morality involved with torture.
"Justice is very important in this world, but we as humans are not very good at figuring out what is just," Tai-Seale said. "The trouble is that we still live in a world where people don't talk to each other about their frustrations."
(C) 2005 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 4, 2005


End of Document