CIA director speaks at Texas Tech on counterterrorism
University Wire
September 25, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Daily Toreador via U-Wire
Length: 681 words
Byline: By Matt McGowan, Daily Toreador; SOURCE: Texas Tech
Dateline: LUBBOCK, Texas 
Body


Lubbock residents had an opportunity Monday to hear firsthand accounts about counterterrorism efforts following Sept. 11, 2001.
Cofer Black, who directed the CIA's counterterrorism unit during the Sept. 11 attacks and who also worked in counterterrorism for the U.S. Department of State, presented his lecture, "Adapting U.S. Policy to Evolving Threats," to a full auditorium at the International Cultural Center.
Black said the public often has a skewed view of the true nature of counterterrorism, relating it to Hollywood and forming its opinion solely from media reports.
"Don't you believe for a moment that American counterterrorism is slow," he said. "The CIA's ability to operate as a worldwide intelligence agency is just magnitudes off the charts."
The Sept. 11 attacks were no surprise to Black, he said, because he and his colleagues had warned the Bush administration of a growing threat from Al Qaeda during the summer of 2001.
"This terrorism business was really new. We ran out of time before effective counter-action was really taken," Black said. "I really wasn't surprised; I was shocked by the carnage. We knew we would be struck."
Watching the events unfold from the upper levels of the government after the Sept. 11 attacks, he said, was like watching history in progress.
"In that time and that space it was like reading a history book of these leaders and commanders making their decisions," Black said. "We had more support internationally than we've had ever since in those days."
The U.S. government implemented two main plans in the aftermath of the attacks, he said.
The first was a war plan to project the U.S. military into Afghanistan to degrade the Taliban, while the second was to act on a worldwide terrorism matrix the CIA had compiled comprised of 114 terrorist organizations around the world that could potentially pose a threat to the U.S.
"Every Taliban city had fallen within 10 weeks, which ain't bad compared to the Soviet Union, which took 10 years and 10,000 troops," Black said. "The worldwide program went well, and I think we bought this country some time."
Counterterrorism issues are not going anywhere in the near future, he said, because the prevention of terrorism is a process of patience and will be needed to stabilize the current situation in Iraq.
"The most important factor in the stabilization is the stabilization force in regards to the size of the population," he said. "I think that the numbers of troops needed for this are unattainable right now. Rather than brute force, we're going to have to use the judo technique."
Black said he believes the U.S. needs to be careful about how it handles the threat from Iran in the coming months, because there is potential in the region for big mistakes on both sides.
Also, he said there are many people working within the government to make sure innocent people do not die.
"You should be confident," he said. "There are a lot of people working hard for you, and they're pretty clever. We have to fight terrorism in an effective and complete way as possible. For me, the appropriate solution is using all the avenues of power to appease this. We don't need to hurt those people, we need to reward and punish."
Tibor P. Nagy, the vice provost for international affairs at Tech and a personal friend of Black, said he had been wanting him to come to Lubbock to speak for some time.
"We have one of the world's greatest counterterrorism experts here to share his knowledge," Nagy said. "At Texas Tech, throughout the year we have had quite a few incredible human resources come speak, and we want students to come out and learn from them. It's up to the students to come out, though."
Jay Voyce, a nursing student at Tech and a former member of the U.S. Special Forces in Iraq, attended the meeting and said he found Black's lecture informative.
"I thought he was exceptional, very candid," he said. "Usually we get a biased opinion. We usually get the view from the media that the intelligence community is a bunch of inept bums, but he showed us otherwise tonight."
(C) 2007 Daily Toreador via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 25, 2007


End of Document