CIA GUILT TERRORISM CREATED
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 19, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 498 words
Body


LAST MONTH, when a terrorist bomb in Saudi Arabia killed 19 American
soldiers and seriously wounded 148 others, it's possible that part of
the blame rested on - believe it or not - the CIA and the Reagan White
House.
In the 1980s, former President Reagan was so paranoid about communism
that he secretly sent the CIA to arm, train and pay any band of
cutthroats willing to make armed attacks on any Marxist government.
Reagan's surrogate "covert wars" were waged around the world.
The May Atlantic Monthly says one of these clandestine operations -
arming Muslim fanatics in Afghanistan - produced a "blowback," a spy
term for backfire. It created a permanent cadre of secret "holy
warriors" who later traveled to other nations and attacked Western
targets.
"The CIA poured billions into a jihad against Soviet-occupied
Afghanistan, creating a militant Islamist Abraham Lincoln Brigade
believed to have been involved in bombings from Islamabad to New
York," the magazine said.
About $ 3 billion of U.S aid was given to seven mujahideen (holy
warrior) militias. Most went to warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who got
his start as a Muslim firebrand by throwing acid in the faces of
Afghan college girls who didn't wear veils.
Hekmatyar worked arm-in-arm with blind Sheik Omar Abdul-Rahman, who
had left Egypt after being accused of helping assassinate President
Anwar Sadat. In their jihad (holy war), 25,000 young Muslim men from
30 nations flocked to Afghanistan as volunteer fighters.
The CIA plot succeeded. The rebel factions drove the Soviet Army out
of Afghanistan. Then they wrecked their own country by plunging into
murderous power struggles. Recently, their civil war seemed near an
end - but the Taliban militia of religious students loosed a new
onslaught. Afghanistan has been reduced to ruin and misery.
Foreign holy warriors who had fought in Afghanistan fanned out to lead
Muslim terrorism in a dozen nations. Sheik Rahman went to New York,
where he caused the bombing of the World Trade Center.
The Atlantic says other CIA-trained mujahideen "went off in search of
new jihads, in Tajikistan or Kashmir, or joined some 3,000 veterans of
the jihad who went as volunteers to Bosnia." Some became active in
Egypt and Algeria. Many remained in mountainous parts of Pakistan near
Afghanistan, and are suspected in deadly bombings there.
Meanwhile, the magazine says, some volunteers returned to Saudi Arabia
and joined Islamic militants who want to drive U.S. soldiers out of
the nation. Last November, a blast killed five Americans at a Riyadh
barracks. Four fanatics - three of them Afghan veterans - were
beheaded for it on May 31.
Less than a month later, the U.S. compound at Dhahran was blasted,
presumably in reprisal for the beheadings. The horror goes on and on.
Muslim extremism is a world threat of the 1990s. It would be
occurring, even if the CIA hadn't trained a mujahideen army in the
1980s. But it's bitter to realize that part of the peril stems from a
furtive White House scheme that has returned to haunt America.

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document