CIA abduction cases under inquiry are few in number, official says Agency may have taken innocent terror suspects from one country to another.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 28, 2005 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 487 words
Byline: By Katherine Shrader THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The CIA's independent watchdog is investigating fewer than 10 cases in which terrorism suspects may have been mistakenly swept away to foreign countries by the agency, an official says.
That figure is lower than published reports but still enough to raise concern among some.
After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, President George W. Bush gave the CIA the authority to conduct the now-controversial operations, called "renditions." The agency got the power to act without case-by-case approval from the White House or other administration offices.
The practice involves grabbing terrorism suspects off the street of one country and flying them to their home country or another where they are wanted for a crime or for questioning.
In all, 100 to 150 people have been snatched up since 9/11. Government officials say the action is reserved for those considered the most serious terrorism suspects. They say they have assurances that the suspects won't be tortured.
Bush has called these transfers to other countries a way to protect the United States and its allies from attack.
But some operations are being questioned.
CIA Inspector General John Helgerson is looking into fewer than 10 cases of potentially "erroneous renditions," an intelligence official said on condition of anonymity.
For instance, someone may be grabbed wrongly or, after further investigation, may be less directly linked to terrorism as initially believed.
Human rights groups consider the practice of rendition a run-around to avoid the judicial processes that the United States has long championed. Experts with those groups and congressional committees familiar with intelligence programs say errors should be extremely rare because one vivid anecdote can do big damage.
Said Tom Malinowski of Human Rights Watch: "I am glad the CIA is investigating the cases that they are aware of, but by definition, you are not going to be aware of all such cases when you have a process designed to avoid judicial safeguards."
He said there was no guarantee that Egypt, Uzbekistan or Syria would release people handed over to them if the suspects turned out to be innocent. And he said he distrusted the promises that the individuals would be spared from torture.
Bush and his aides have said the United States seeks those assurances -- and follows up on them. "We do believe in protecting ourselves," the president said. "We don't believe in torture."
In the last 18 months, his administration has come under fire for its policies and regulations governing detentions and interrogations in the war on terrorism.
The CIA faces a lawsuit from Khaled al-Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese descent. He says he was arbitrarily detained after he was arrested in Macedonia in December 2003 and taken to Afghanistan by a team of covert operatives in an apparent case of mistaken identity.
---
Link to more about the CIA and its independent watchdog at STLtoday.com/links.

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC from The Associated Press - High-profile renditions  

Load-Date: December 28, 2005


End of Document