CITIES URGED BY U.S. TO PAY MORE ATTENTION TO TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 29, 1997, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 284 words
Byline: JIM MCKINNON, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Nearly a decade ago, armed guards were posted at the Highland Park reservoir, the largest water supply in Pittsburgh, where terrorists had threatened to contaminate millions of gallons of drinking water.
''We were on pretty high alert,'' said Glenn Cannon, Pittsburgh's director of public safety at the time.
''The FBI had pretty good information that someone would try to contaminate it.''
The threat, Cannon said, shows not only the country should be concerned about a possible poison gas attack by terrorists but that it is worth taking precautions.
''Our country is thoroughly unprepared and extremely vulnerable to terrorist attack,'' Cannon said last night. ''We are just very fortunate that they are real threats but there haven't been many incidents.''
Cannon now is Allegheny County manager, a position that puts him again in charge of the public's safety, among other things.
He said America's collective sigh of relief at the end of the Cold War and the lessening of the threat of nuclear holocaust had allowed emergency service planners to turn their attention elsewhere.
Still, trouble does not have to come from terrorists.
It could be just as bad, he said, if there were an accidental chemical explosion at a chemical plant on Neville Island or at the nuclear power plant in Shippingport.
In the past year, committees have been formed locally to study how local emergency workers should handle chemical and biological incidents, whether accidental or intentional.
Also, other federal agencies, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the FBI, have conducted training sessions for local Hazardous Materials Teams in the county.
There are five teams, one in the city and four in the suburbs.

Load-Date: December 29, 1997


End of Document