CITING INTELLIGENCE "CHATTER," OFFICIALS WARN TRAVELERS OF TERRORISM THREAT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 20, 2003 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 494 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* Barring more specific information, the national alert level is not expected to be raised.
U.S. officials are telling holiday travelers to be vigilant about the threat of terrorist attacks - a warning prompted in part by a raised level of ominous intercepted communications for months.
The significance of the sustained level of intelligence "chatter" is unclear, the officials said.
Homeland Security officials said they did not expect the national threat warning to be raised from yellow - the midpoint on its five-color scale - unless more specific intelligence was received.
Since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, analysts have observed a pattern of spikes in the chatter and other threat intelligence suggesting new assaults. Those spikes were always followed by periods of relative calm.
But since late summer, that pattern has been broken. The threat intelligence has poured in at a sustained rate, officials said, but it has been frustratingly short of specifics.
"The Department of Homeland Security remains very concerned," said spokesman Brian Roehrkasse. "We continue to encourage our homeland security professionals to be on a heightened state of alert, especially as we enter this busy holiday travel period."
Intelligence officials said they don't know what to make of the new pattern in threat chatter - a shorthand term that describes intercepted communications and other intelligence.
The change could mean an attack is in the offing, officials acknowledged.
But it could also be an effort to scare people and fool the warning system by making false threats, on the assumption that U.S. intelligence will intercept them. Or it could mean nothing at all, the officials said.
Much of the threat information suggests attacks directed at U.S. interests in Saudi Arabia and Iraq, officials said. The State Department recommended this week that its nonessential diplomatic personnel as well as diplomatic families leave Saudi Arabia. And a defense official said threat information pointed toward an attack in the next six weeks.
But U.S. officials also believe there is a domestic threat from al- Qaida operatives. One senior intelligence official said on the condition of anonymity that analysts were particularly concerned about the threat of Sept. 11-style attacks, in which terrorists would use hijacked airliners as weapons.
A recent warning also was issued about a strike using a fuel tanker truck.
Over the past six months, Homeland Security officials have become more resistant to raising the terrorism alert level when the general threat information increases.
Still, officials described the intelligence as a reminder to holiday travelers and security personnel to remain vigilant.
On Friday, the Arabic television network Al-Jazeera aired a new statement reportedly from Ayman al-Zawahri, the chief deputy of Osama bin Laden.
"We are still chasing the Americans and their allies everywhere, even in their homeland," the voice purported to be al-Zawahri's said.

Notes

TOP OF THE NEWS

Load-Date: December 20, 2003


End of Document