Cities, travel hubs step up security; Bin Laden's death sparks possibility of groups' reprisals
USA TODAY
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 496 words
Byline: Alan Levin and Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY
Body


Federal and local law enforcement agencies stepped up security Monday in key cities and transportation hubs in reaction to the death of Osama bin Laden, the mastermind of the bloodiest terrorist attack in history on the nation's aviation system.
No specific threat emerged and travel flowed normally across the nation, but government leaders here and in Europe warned that the shooting of the infamous terrorist leader would make al-Qaeda and its shadowy splinter groups more dangerous -- not less -- at least in the short term.
"Though bin Laden is dead, al-Qaeda is not," CIA Director Leon Panetta said in a message to the spy agency's employees. "The terrorists almost certainly will attempt to avenge him."
Within hours of the successful attack on bin Laden by a team of Navy SEALs, the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security issued an advisory to field offices and local law enforcement agencies alerting them that the death could spark reprisals.
The notice specifically mentioned transportation systems because they have been targets of past attacks, said officials who reviewed the advisory, but who declined to be identified because they were not authorized to comment publicly.
Without any specific intelligence indicating an impending attack, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano chose not to issue a heightened security alert. "However, our security posture, which always includes a number of measures both seen and unseen, will continue to respond appropriately to protect the American people," Napolitano said.
The killing of bin Laden and several other top al-Qaeda leaders in recent years has weakened the group, but risks from other similar groups with parallel goals have grown, security experts said. Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, a terrorist group inspired by bin Laden but operated independently in Yemen, succeeded in planting bombs on two U.S. cargo jets in October. The bombs were defused before they could explode.
"This is a time for vigilance, not relaxation, in these anti-terrorism efforts," said Clark Ervin, former Homeland Security inspector general. At the same time, the experts said that the reaction should be viewed in the broader context of the past decade, in which the nation has endured repeated attempts to take down planes, set off bombs or to kill in the name of terrorism.
"You do have a window of vulnerability, but it's a window that we have had open for a long time," said Frank Cilluffo, director of the Homeland Security Policy Institute at George Washington University.
Security, particularly at airports and other transportation facilities, was stepped up  from Europe to Asia.
Despite the warnings, airports functioned normally Monday and some fliers were almost blase. Lu Wolff, 68, preparing to board a flight to Kansas City from Seattle, said she wasn't worried about a terrorist attack.
"I fly no matter what," Wolff said. "We're going somewhere, we fly."
Contributing: Thomas Frank in Seattle; the Associated Press 

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document