Citizens must stand up against hate
Chicago Daily Herald
August 21, 2017 Monday


Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 1063 words
Body


Citizens must stand up against hate The recent horrifying events that took place in Charlottesville, Virginia, call us all to take a stand. Evil in the guise of KKK, Nazis, white supremacists and others came to Charlottesville to spread their messages of hate, racism, bigotry, anti-Semitism and other forms of intolerance. They were met by those who oppose this evil in all its forms. Prairie Circle Unitarian Universalist Congregation stands with those who oppose this evil. 
As Unitarians, we believe in the inherent worth and dignity of every person, justice, equity and compassion in human relations, acceptance of one another, peace, liberty and justice, and respect for the interdependent web of all existence. There is no place for hate in our beliefs. On Friday evening, Aug. 11, as the hate groups marched with their lighted torches shouting Nazi messages, we were stunned and horrified to see that this kind of disgraceful behavior was taking place on the campus of the University founded by Thomas Jefferson. We were appalled on the following Saturday by the extreme violence and displays of hate. But it was like a stake in our heart when a young woman, who was there to stand up for justice, was brutally murdered by a purveyor of hate. Following this outrage, Americans looked for leadership to take the moral high ground and to help heal the damage done by these vicious people, but, sadly, what we got was leadership asserting a moral equivalency between those who represented evil and those who represented good. PCUUC rejects any attempt to establish any equivalency. Hate is wrong. Bigotry is wrong. Anti-semitism is wrong. Racism is wrong. Opposition to these evils is right. We call on all good people to join with Prairie Circle Unitarian Universalist Congregation in rejecting hate and choosing instead to stand on the side of love. Scott Helmke, President Board of Trustees Prairie Circle Unitarian Universalist Church Grayslake Leaders need to be clear in denouncing hate Loud alarms should be ringing to alert all of us about the dangers of what happened in Charlottesville. Hate-filled people marched in Nazi regalia, shouting out their anti-Semitic and racist sickness. Although many of our grandparents fought and died in a world war to protect us from this hate, the president of the United States needed to be prompted by his own party to say more than nonsense. White supremacist websites saw the president's initial response as a form of implied support. While there will always be hateful people on the fringe protected by the First Amendment, the ambivalent response of some leaders is the main reason to worry. I applaud the Daily Herald editorial board and Mayor Burns of Geneva for clearly announcing that this ideology and behavior is unacceptable. We need to see all our mayors and community leaders publicly condemning the events in Charlottesville and the ideology of racial supremacy. Promoting diversity with mutual respect is a great value — let's encourage it. Jon Kessler Elk Grove Village Editorial unfairly jabbed President Trump I was surprised by the "Our View" piece in the Aug. 15 Daily Herald. While centered around terrorism, there is this underlining jabbing of President Trump. Let's see, Trump or POTUS is mentioned six times, the terrorist group responsible for Virginia, none, zero. Like it's somehow Trump's fault, because it took two whole days for him to make a statement. Actually, he made a statement on Friday night, but it didn't include the right words for the left and some members of the right. But, he responded immediately. So Monday he releases another statement going into detail by naming terrorist groups, something Obama never did. But, still not good enough for the Daily Herald. Nope. Had to use the words "domestic terrorism" to satisfy them. Funny …. Two days. Terrorism. Took Obama four days before making a statement on Ferguson, and Ferguson was not a onetime event. Things got worse as days passed. But, Obama was vacationing while Ferguson burned. Even when he made a statement, it did not include the word terrorism. Then there's Benghazi. Hard to find the word terrorism anywhere in there. Took Obama not days, but weeks before he made a true statement. One that did not include the words "some video." Can't recall reading any jabs on the president in "Our view" on those events. You could probably count on two hands the number of times Obama used the word "terrorism" in eight years. Funny. Two Days. Nick Herman Bartlett Republican sabotage costs people money Has modern U.S. political history ever seen anything as vicious and irresponsible as the Republicans' deliberate efforts to sabotage the Affordable Care Act? They have deliberately tried to make policies more expensive with less coverage by denying funding authorized by the law to help consumers with premiums and insurance companies plan against uncertain risks. This forced out of business many nonprofit co-op plans intended by ACA to offer low-cost policies and increase competition, and continuing threats to refuse payments authorized by the law have made insurance companies even more uncertain about the risks they are undertaking. This unnecessarily raises premiums, copays and deductibles. Millions of Americans are being forced to pay right now hundreds or even thousands of dollars more for insurance premiums and uncovered medical costs than they would be if Republicans would simply respect the law of the land. We know about the millions denied Medicaid out of sheer spite in Republican-controlled states, but the Republicans have also been trying to make health insurance more expensive with less coverage to build dissatisfaction with the law. To top it off, Mitch McConnell and other Republicans have the chutzpah to complain about the high costs and weaker coverage they have caused. Deliberately forcing consumers to pay hundreds or thousands of dollars more than they should have to pay should get any member of Congress voted out of office. But has the press, including the Daily Herald, published anything to make the Republicans pay for it? Have they informed people who must buy policies on the exchanges how much they are being overcharged due to this sabotage? Will the Daily Herald recognize its responsibility to the public and hold the Republicans accountable for it? Stephen Weber Arlington Heights

Load-Date: August 21, 2017


End of Document