City to Get $64 Million To Counter Terrorism 
 The New York Times
November 14, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 489 words
Byline:  By RAYMOND HERNANDEZ
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13  
Body


The Bush administration announced on Thursday that it would provide the New York City region about $64 million for antiterrorism programs, an amount that several New York lawmakers called inadequate.
     The money was part of a $725 million aid package that Congress recently approved to help large metropolitan areas considered most vulnerable to terrorist attack. The federal Department of Homeland Security is disbursing the money. 
 The pot of money for high-risk urban areas was created this year to address concerns of New York lawmakers in both parties. The lawmakers had complained that the city, a past target for terrorists, was being shortchanged because Washington was distributing a limited pool of security money to every state, regardless of the threats they faced.
But Thursday's announcement provoked a new round of complaints from New York lawmakers, who said the money the Bush administration had set aside for the New York region was far less than what it received the last time such money was disbursed. In May, Homeland Security announced that it planned to provide the region a little more than $200 million in grants out of the money set aside for cities considered most vulnerable to attack.
After Thursday's announcement, Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a Democrat from Manhattan, sharply questioned the Bush administration's commitment to fighting terrorism on American soil.
"Who would believe that New York City -- still the terrorists' No. 1 target -- has spent a billion dollars out of its own pocket for security, but gets only a fraction from the federal government?" she asked. "But that is the sad truth."
Senator Charles E. Schumer, a Democrat from New York, was a little more conciliatory.
"The bottom line is every penny counts," he said. "But New York's security expenses are enormous, and we need the administration to do a better job of recognizing that."
Even the office of Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican, voiced concerns over the amount. Lynn Rasic, a spokeswoman for Mr. Pataki, said that "the appropriations do not fully recognize the risks to New York."
"Again, we urge Congress to adopt a threat-based formula to appropriate Homeland Security dollars," she said.
The bulk of the grants announced on Thursday -- $675 million -- was divided among 50 cities, including New York City ($47 million), Chicago ($34 million), Washington ($29.3 million), Los Angeles ($28 million), San Francisco ($26.4 million), Philadelphia ($23 million) and Houston ($19.9 million), according to the administration.
In May, the aid was divided among only 29 cities, including New York. That is the main reason New York's allocation was so much larger the last time, officials said.
Rachael Sunbarger, a spokeswoman for Homeland Security, dismissed the lawmakers' complaints, noting that the administration had disbursed nearly $240 million to the New York City region before releasing this latest round of money.      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 14, 2003


End of Document