City Readies Terrorism Training
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 3, 2003, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: PLANT CITY,
Length: 521 words
Byline: KARLAYNE R. PARKER, kparker@tampatrib.com; Reporter Karlayne R. Parker can be reached at (813) 754-3763.  
Body


POLICE, FIREFIGHTERS DRILL FOR EMERGENCIES
PLANT CITY - Since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, life has changed for those who work in public safety.
Putting out fires, responding to crime scenes and treating and transporting patients is just part of the job.
Beginning next week, firefighters and police officers from Plant City Fire Rescue and Plant City Police Department will receive training in emergency response to terrorism.
While Plant City is not perceived as a potential terrorist target, officials want to be prepared - just in case.
"Even if they don't hit us directly, we may be able to give assistance to other jurisdictions," said Eugene Shuler, chief of Plant City Fire Rescue's training department.
Plant City is one of many departments in Florida offering the training, which is being paid for by an $80,000 federal grant administered through the Florida State Fire College in Gainesville.
Chief Mike Morgan, who is the program coordinator, said several other Tampa Bay area public safety departments plan to hold training sessions as well. Training began in Bartow last week.
"These types of courses have become more requested since 9-11," Morgan said. "It shows what to look for and what to watch for.
"The emphasis is on how to respond. They are given lifelike scenarios and have to work out the solutions," he said. "It's not preventive. They must be aware that the call they go on tomorrow could be a terrorist attack."
More than 60 people are expected to participate in the four-day training sessions this month in Plant City, Shuler said.
The courses were developed by the National Fire Academy in Maryland.
The first course - "Emergency Response to Terrorism: Basic Concepts" - will be held Tuesday and Wednesday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. at the Planteen Recreation Center, 301 N. Dort St.
The course, designed for fire rescue and emergency medical service personnel, focuses on the history and types of terrorism, terrorist organizations in the United States and abroad, self-protection measures, crime scene and perimeter control and other defense tactical operations.
A second course - "Emergency Response to Terrorism: Tactical Considerations for the Company Officer" - is designed for supervisors. The participants will be trained in security considerations, identifying signs of terrorism, anticipation of unusual circumstances and other assessment actions that should be done in a terrorist attack. That course is 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. May 12-13 at Plant City Stadium, 1904 S. Park Road.
Plant City Fire Chief George Shiley said the department has never undergone that type of comprehensive training.
Soon after the terrorist attacks, firefighters here were told to be more aware of their surroundings. In addition, the department offered a general terrorism self-study course for firefighters.
"Since 9-11 there have been individual trainings in specific areas," Shiley said. "The police have had some individual sessions. This is just very structured.
"It's the same basic information for personnel across the country," he said. "We'd like to think that we would be of some assistance if there was an event in Tampa."

Load-Date: May 5, 2003


End of Document