CITY NOT FORTRESS, BUT IT'S SAFE;
PITTSBURGH EMERGENCY TEAMS ON ALERT FOR TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 16, 1998, Sunday,
FOUR STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 1629 words
Byline: JONATHAN D. SILVER, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Terrorism - The unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives. (Federal Bureau of Investigation definition) %BC% * %EC%
On April 30, Glenn Cannon, Allegheny County's emergency management coordinator, took what amounted to a final exam for his position.
Holed up in a conference room at his Point Breeze office with roughly 60 emergency workers from government agencies, Cannon spent two intense hours coordinating the group's response to a string of imaginary calamities.
It was one disaster after another: a tornado in Imperial, a bomb threat at the county courthouse, a tanker accident in Bridgeville that spilled a mysterious brown substance.
Then the terrorism began.
At 1:45 p.m., an explosion crumbled the Fort Pitt Tunnel. Twenty-five minutes later, a bomb shredded the Smithfield Street Bridge. In the grand finale at 2:57 p.m., a detonation burst the Loyalhanna Dam in Westmoreland County.
Terrorists in Downtown Pittsburgh? If you think it's too outlandish to be true, think again. Five years ago, injecting a terrorism element into a local emergency management role-playing exercise would have been unlikely. But that was before Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center.
Today, terrorism drills are almost unavoidable. At every level of government in the United States, officials have been tackling the unsettling issue of when, where and how terrorism could strike - and Pennsylvania is no exception.
Terrorism in the '90s has taken on a new aura thanks to several incidents. A cult's poison gas attack on Tokyo's subway system in 1995 provided a chilling warning to major cities around the world that determination combined with derangement could disrupt a major mass transit system and easily spread terror.
At home, there are reasons for concern. The 1996 Olympic bombing in Atlanta remains unsolved. Since 1995, terroristic acts - some successful - against federal facilities or personnel have been recorded in Oklahoma, Arizona, California, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and West Virginia, according to the Department of Defense.
Many predictions made in a 1993 Pentagon-sponsored report on terrorism predictions that were considered too alarmist and far-fetched by the Pentagon itself - have been borne out, according to an investigation by the Los Angeles Times that was reported in Monday's editions of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Doubtless, the American psyche has been scarred during this decade. When bombs went off nearly simultaneously earlier this month at U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, who didn't think back to the destruction at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma in 1995?
It is small wonder, then, that the unsolved disappearance this summer of 25 tons of ammonium nitrate from a Preston County, W.Va., farm services company immediately sent the FBI swarming from its Pittsburgh field office.
The compound, in this case rated explosive grade rather than fertilizer grade, can be potent. Two tons of the stuff were used in making the bomb that destroyed the federal building in Oklahoma City.
Not long ago, the FBI's Pittsburgh field office might have viewed such a theft as just that - someone, perhaps, trying to skirt permits for using explosives and stealing ammonium nitrate for legitimate purposes. These days, however, agents can't afford to ignore what might prove to be the next federal building bombing.
''We are relentless in our investigation,'' said Earl Freilino, an FBI agent in Pittsburgh with 15 years' experience in combating terrorism. ''Recent events have heightened awareness and intensified efforts to prevent these occurrances.''
The FBI says there is no credible evidence that the ammonium nitrate was stolen for nefarious purposes.
But local officials are not waiting to be blindsided. In the last year, they have generated a three-page list called ''Risk/Target Facilities Counter-Terrorism Planning.''
On it appear 72 names of buildings or facilities in Pittsburgh that are considered tempting to terrorists. They include government offices, utilities and religious organizations.
Another list in the hands of local officials contains 70 anniversary dates of significant events that terrorists might want to celebrate in their own destructive way. The dates include Adolf Hitler's birthday and the anniversaries of the U.S. invasion of Iraq and the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing. When these dates roll around, emergency dispatchers know to be particularly wary of calls to sensitive locations.
''Do we believe that Pittsburgh and Allegheny County are threatened by the potential of this type of incident occurring? The answer to that would be a resounding yes,'' said Robert Full, chief of the county's emergency services.
''We believe that our rivers could be a target. Think about the economic impact if one of our dams were to be disabled,'' Full said.
''And Allegheny County and the city of Pittsburgh are rich in facilities that house dangerous chemicals.''
FBI agents such as Freilino downplay the likelihood that terrorists would be attracted to Pittsburgh, which has no particular symbolic value for the rest of the nation. It is not the country's seat of government, for instance, nor is it a hub of finance.
However, it is precisely Pittsburgh's low profile, some say, that could make it a so-called ''soft'' target, much like the embassies in Africa. Lacking the prominence of a Washington, D.C., or a New York City, Pittsburgh might be perceived as less secure and, therefore, easier prey.
''The bottom line is, if you're a smart terrorist - and these people aren't stupid; they may be fanatics but they're not dumb - you don't want to attack something that's well fortified,'' said Raymond DeMichiei, operations supervisor for the city's 911 communications center. ''So Pittsburgh is higher in a risk category because it's considered a soft target.''
Local FBI agents say they have carefully assessed the possibility of terrorist threats at high-profile events in the area, including the U.S. Open golf tournament held in Oakmont in 1994 and last year's national convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, held Downtown.
In 1996, the FBI arrested seven people affiliated with a militia group on charges of plotting to blow up the federal Criminal Justice Information Services Division complex near Clarksburg, W.Va.
To better prepare for such a threat, about 1,000 county emergency management workers have gone through a 16-hour course sponsored by the U.S. Department of Justice that deals with nuclear, biological and chemical threats. Next February, a federal Department of Defense counter-terrorism course, which has already visited larger cities, will come to town.
Many of the counter-terrorism measures already in place in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County trace their genesis to DeMichiei of the city's 911 center.
An energetic man who can smoke, file papers, answer incessant e-mails on the two computers in his cramped, cluttered office, and carry on a conversation all at the same time, DeMichiei has spent about 20 percent of his time studying terrorism.
In 1996, he, Full - who was with the city at the time - and Robert Conley, who recently retired as assistant fire chief, pulled together a group to address terrorism issues.
From a handful of city agencies and the FBI, the Pittsburgh-Allegheny N.B.C.-W.M.D. (Nuclear, Biological, Chemical - Weapons of Mass Destruction) Counter-Terrorism Working Group has at least doubled in size. It has added the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Pennsylvania State Police as attendees during monthly meetings.
During one such gathering earlier this year, information was shared about a labor dispute involving riverboat pilots. There was a fear that an errant pilot might beach a boat carrying hazardous materials at the Point, or that someone might hurl a bomb onto a boat from a bridge. In the end, no problems cropped up locally, and the dispute was resolved. But no one complained about having the intelligence.
DeMichiei is working on creating a detailed protocol for dealing with different levels of terrorist threats, and he has put together a new chapter in the city's emergency operations manual dealing specifically with terrorism.
No matter the preparation for a terrorist attack, conventional wisdom holds that no plan is perfect, no defense impenetrable. Groups such as the FBI are only as good as their intelligence, especially since Americans are willing to give up only so many personal rights in favor of security, Freilino said.
''Intelligence is the key to prevention,'' Freilino said. ''We'll never become a fortress society, and there will always be vulnerabilities as a result.''
Of particular concern are lone zealots with access to weapons but without any links to terrorist groups, said Rick Mosquera, the FBI's special agent-in-charge in Pittsburgh.
What's more, while training to deal with chemical disasters has long been a part of local emergency management planning, biological weapons - viral and bacterial scourges - pose a whole new threat.
Then there is the problem of simple logistics. Are enough vaccines available on short notice? Are there enough hospital beds in the case of mass casualties? Is there enough equipment on hand to protect emergency workers from hazardous materials?
Perhaps the most sobering assessment of Pittsburgh's ability to confront and contain terrorism can be found in the operating procedures drafted by DeMichiei.
 
''The effects of a chemical, biological, or nuclear terrorist act,'' reads the seventh paragraph of the first page, ''will likely overwhelm local, regional and state capabilities.''

Load-Date: August 18, 1998


End of Document