CITY TO LEARN TO HANDLE TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 21, 1998, Monday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: AREA/STATE,
Length: 282 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NEWPORT NEWS
Body


Mention mass destruction to Hampton Roads officials and most no doubt would talk about their preparation for hurricane damage.
The Department of Defense would prefer that they think a bit more in terms of nuclear bombs and biological warfare.
As part of a national anti-terrorism initiative, defense officials will visit Newport News Oct. 5 to teach city leaders how to deal with terrorist strikes.
The training, mandated by Congress in the 1996 Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, is being offered to cities throughout the country. Newport News, with its heavy concentration of Naval ships, planes and personnel, qualifies as a high-risk area, said Lt. Col. Bill Darley, a Department of Defense spokesman.
And while military bases make the city strategically important to international terrorists, there's a growing concern about a much more subtle threat, Darley said: the guy next door with the capacity to mix chemicals and viruses in his garage.
Military-heavy localities like Newport News began to raise their guard after the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and the 1996 Olympic Park incident in Atlanta. And their watchfulness increased further after the Aug. 7 bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa and the American military's response strike in Afghanistan and the Sudan.
But still, city officials said, they haven't given too much thought to the possibility of a terrorist incident so close to home.
"That's not one of the things we have addressed in our emergency plan," said Newport News Assistant City Manager Randy Hildebrandt. "We would be more likely to prepare for natural disasters. . . . I suppose we've never specifically looked at responses to terrorism."
They will now.

Load-Date: September 26, 1998


End of Document