CITY COUNCIL QUESTIONS TERRORISM PREPAREDNESS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 20, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 606 words
Byline: TIMOTHY MCNULTY, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Pittsburgh City Council members questioned the city's preparedness for terrorism yesterday, as they preliminarily approved supplemental pay for city personnel called to military duty in the wake of last week's terrorist acts.
 Council, at the regular Wednesday meeting, also debated extending a Downtown improvement tax, prohibitions on wild animals as pets and licensing ticket scalpers.
 No council member criticized the city's response to the Sept. 11 incidents, which included a hijacked jet flying through Pittsburgh airspace before crashing in Somerset County. The Murphy administration decided not to evacuate Downtown, after keeping tabs on the aircraft with the help of county and federal officials.
But Sala Udin questioned whether the city was caught off guard by the events and Barbara Burns asked that existing safety procedures be re-evaluated. Gene Ricciardi asked for an explanation of the city's evacuation plans and how they are communicated to neighborhoods citywide.
 "I don't know that we are well coordinated and ready" for terrorist attacks, Udin said.
 Burns said city residents should be notified of the city's public safety plans. Residents have been notified in the past of the city's emergency procedures, Deputy Mayor Sal Sirabella said in an interview, but he agreed the Murphy administration should explain them again, through public hearings, mailings or other communication.
 Regarding evacuation, the city's emergency operations plan says before it can be ordered, a confirmed danger is necessary, Sirabella said. Public officials could whip up a worse situation if they create panic through an unneeded evacuation order, and sometimes it is safer for people to have "shelter in place" and not leave their buildings, he said.
 The emergency plan also orders city officials to notify Downtown building owners when notified of suspicious activity. In cases of confirmed danger the city can order the buildings evacuated and in unconfirmed cases the building owners can order evacuations themselves.
 The latter occurred Sept. 11, when many Downtown buildings were closed, even as the city decided no danger existed and government buildings remained open through much of the crisis.
 In related news, council yesterday moved to guarantee that city employees called into military service will be paid the difference between their military and city pay while on duty. They and their families will also keep receiving full health benefits.
 Allegheny County's government yesterday announced a nearly identical policy for its employees who are going on active military duty.
 Council rejected its plan to create a trust fund for the children of New York City personnel killed in the World Trade Center attacks, after New York Gov. George Pataki announced his own plans for a similar fund.
 In other action, council today preliminarily approved another five years for the Downtown business improvement tax, which funds extra cleanup and promotion efforts for the district.
 The extra tax was first implemented in 1997 and pays for the yellow-suited workers who clean Downtown and the promotion efforts of the Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership. About 200 Downtown property owners pay the tax, which is assessed on their land values. It is currently 3.5 mills but is set to rise to 3.71 mills in 2002.
 Council tentatively approved a task force to study prohibitions against owning wild animals as pets. A bill exempting ticket scalpers from city peddling rules was rejected, when Ricciardi, the measure's sponsor, said he wanted to receive reports from the Sports & Exhibition Authority and the Stadium Authority on the matter.

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document