City Opens Laboratory That Will Help Investigators in Bio-Terrorism Cases
New York Sun (Archive)
July 14, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEW YORK; Pg. 2
Length: 426 words
Byline: By JILL GARDINER, Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


City officials unveiled a new lab yesterday they say will allow the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to test high volumes of infectious materials and respond more quickly to bioterrorism outbreaks and scares.
Housed on the second floor of a nondescript municipal health building on First Avenue, the $16 million facility is a substantial upgrade from the patchwork of small, scattered labs that, until now, served as the clearinghouse for suspected specimens of anthrax, West Nile virus, SARS, and even bubonic plague.
"I don't think there is any doubt that New York remains a terrorist target," Mayor Bloomberg said after touring the lab. "This new facility will help us deal with any potential attacks, should they occur. It will also play an important role in the defense against infectious diseases."
Roughly 7,000 square feet in the 20,000-square-foot facility is designated as "Bio-Safety Level 3," nearly doubling the city's ability to handle highly infectious agents and reducing the need to farm out testing to federal labs.
"The main thing that the physical plant change does is allow us to deal with higher volume," said the city's health commissioner, Dr. Thomas Frieden. "When anthrax hit we had literally thou sands of specimens. They would come in very rapidly to a very small laboratory space and that didn't work well."
"This lab really has more capacity than we had just a few years ago," he said, alluding to the string of anthrax scares in 2001 that temporarily paralyzed the postal system and left many New Yorkers fearful of their own mail.
Still sterile-looking with yet-to-be used stainless steel fixtures, the lab is expected to be fully operational in a few weeks, in time for the Republican National Convention, widely considered a terrorist target. The opening also comes amid reports the federal government is sending antidotes to the city in case of a chemical attack.
Scientists are working in selected areas of the lab and most of the equipment is in place in the negative air-pressure rooms. Autoclaves, for example, have been installed to disinfect tools and wide yellow showerheads in the corridors serve as emergency washing sites.
The city spent $16 million from the capital budget on the renovation, with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention adding another $3.6 million to offset the cost of equipment and staff. A few years ago the city had only two staffers trained in bioterrorism, leaving it ill-equipped to handle terrorism-related scares. Now, there are more than 100 health department staffers trained.

Load-Date: July 14, 2004


End of Document