CITYROOM; Terrorism Fighter Finds New Adversary
The New York Times
December 10, 2010 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 32
Length: 1032 words
Byline: By COREY KILGANNON
Body


For most of the past four years, Richard A. Falkenrath's job was helping to protect New York City against possible terror strikes. Now, he is defending his block in Riverdale in the Bronx against the Jewish academy next door, making his case at the local community board - and invoking his terror-fighting past in the process.
Mr. Falkenrath, 41, says he is frustrated by the traffic congestion caused by the academy, the Salanter Akiba Riverdale Academy, and also by its plans to alter the property, which include building a trash storage shed.
He says that the chaotic traffic and parking situation at drop-off and pickup times has been a simmering problem, and that when he was the Police Department's deputy commissioner for counterterrorism, ''My wife told me to call in the SWAT team, the way, in counterterrorism, you bring in the heavy artillery'' - meaning, calling in officers to issue tickets.
Mr. Falkenrath resigned from the department in April, and he is now a private citizen. In an interview, he said he wanted to mobilize his neighbors and petition city officials to hold the academy accountable for local issues - and he stressed that he would never have actually used his position to send officers to write tickets. Still, he cited his antiterrorism background at the recent community board hearing, clearly getting the attention of those in attendance.
He said he had spoken to the local precinct commander and put in calls to several city agencies to air his concerns about academy plans to build the garbage shed with officials ''at high levels.''
Mr. Falkenrath has positions as a commentator for Bloomberg TV and as a consultant with the Chertoff Group, a security firm formed by Michael Chertoff, former head of the Department of Homeland Security.
On Monday night, he attended a meeting of Board 8's Land Use Committee. He watched the board review the academy's trash-shed proposal and then approve a resolution to pass it on to the full board, before review by the city's Planning Commission.
Mr. Falkenrath stood up and made his annoyance known in no uncertain terms, even getting into a shouting match with the board's chairman, Charles G. Moerdler.
These meetings can often be tedious, long-winded colloquiums on small-bore issues, a place where locals kibitz, neighborhood association sign-up sheets are passed around and board members drone on about square footage and zoning particulars. But when the man in the spiffy blue suit, with television looks, stood and identified himself as having been the president's top antiterror adviser, it seemed to jolt the roughly 100 people there.
Mr. Falkenrath accused the academy of having a history of flouting zoning rules and other regulations. He said he had concerns with the academy's plan to build the trash shed because ''my house looks out on all that garbage.''
He ticked off some of his resume, including being special assistant to the president on counterterrorism, in Washington. He is also a former National Security Council staff member, and a regular commentator on CNN as a security analyst.
When he complained that changes were sprung on the neighborhood abruptly, Mr. Moerdler disputed it.
Mr. Moerdler is a veteran lawyer at Stroock & Stroock & Lavan in Manhattan and a grizzled labor negotiator with a booming voice. He is also a former city commissioner of housing and buildings and is on the board of the New York City Housing Development Corporation and New York State's Dormitory Authority.
Salanter Akiba Riverdale has hired lawyers and architects to handle the community vetting process necessary before applying to the city for permits. The proposal, originally submitted in November, was amended. Mr. Moerdler told Mr. Falkenrath that the committee had tried to address neighbors' concerns.
''And you failed,'' Mr. Falkenrath countered.
''You should recuse yourself from this matter,'' Mr. Falkenrath told Mr. Moerdler, who has had children and grandchildren graduate from the academy.
In an interview after the meeting, Mr. Falkenrath mentioned his wife's ''SWAT team'' suggestion, but he added that ''I never did that because it would've been a misuse of my power.''
Jay Segal, a lawyer for the academy, said in an interview that the proposed alterations ''will only improve things'' for the neighbors. These include adding more parking spaces, thus helping the traffic and parking problems, and would consolidate currently exposed trash areas into one enclosed shed.
Regarding Mr. Falkenrath - ''The fellow who discussed his antiterror credentials'' - Mr. Segal said, ''It's a net positive for him, so I don't know why he's concerned.''
Mr. Segal acknowledged that the academy had made unauthorized alterations to the property in the past, but he called them ''comparatively minor things'' and said that the school had made formal compensatory plantings and procedures to rectify any problems.
On Tuesday afternoon outside the academy, Armando Penn, an academy maintenance worker, said there was a noticeable increase in tickets issued to illegally parked cars in recent days. Mr. Falkenrath said that he did not use his connections to call for more ticketing, but that he did call the commander of the local 50th Precinct, Capt. Brandon del Pozo, to ask for information about the parking problem.
Captain del Pozo, who has a philosophy degree from Dartmouth College and a master's from Harvard, said that the department was ''agnostic'' about the debate and that the precinct ''bases parking enforcement on accidents, injuries and valid complaints, and not as a way of participation in the local political process.''
He called the traffic and parking situation around the academy ''typical of any school in Riverdale, during pickup and drop-off times'' and said that enforcement issues there were ''given the same attention as at any other schools.''
Mr. Falkenrath was adamant that the traffic ''will not be solved by ticketing,'' but rather by the proper regulations. Officials at the city's Department of Transportation said they were exploring ways to improve traffic and parking conditions on the streets around the school.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Richard Falkenrath in 2007, in his counterterrorism days. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILFREDO LEE/ASSOCIATED PRESS)                         

Load-Date: December 10, 2010


End of Document