CITY ON GUARD FOR TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
October 19, 2000, Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 463 words
Byline: By FRANK LOMBARDI, T.J. QUINN and JOHN MARZULLI DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS With Pete Donohue
Body

Though no specific threats have been made against the city, local officials vowed yesterday to be prepared in the event the upcoming Subway Series becomes a potential target for terrorists.
Experts believe the frenzy generated by the staging of the national pastime in the media capital of the world increases the risk of a terrorist attack.
"If the events of the past 10 days [Israelis and Palestinians battling in the West Bank and the attack on the Navy destroyer Cole] hadn't occurred, the World Series probably wouldn't have been an issue," said Steve Davis, managing director at DSFX, an international security consulting firm.
"But now, for the city not to consider the Middle East situation would be a security oversight . . . and New York City has already been a favorite publicity site for terrorists," Davis said.
Mayor Giuliani said extra cops will be deployed at World Series games due to the specter of terrorism - not out of fear of open warfare between Mets and Yankee fans.
"Both groups of fans have behaved beautifully so far in the playoffs]," Giuliani said.
Mets Vice President Dave Howard said 600 cops will be on hand at Shea Stadium in plainclothes, uniform and on horses. About the same number will be on duty at Yankee Stadium, although the Bronx Bombers also hire off-duty cops for security inside the fabled ballpark.
Sources said the NYPD will be stepping up security in the subways where tens of thousands of rival fans will be coming and going.
Joe Hofmann, the Transit Authority's senior vice president in charge of the subway system, downplayed the potential for the subway part of the series turning into a brawl-game.
"This is a New York thing," Hofmann said. "It's not New York against Boston [the Red Sox]. We're playing against ourselves."
There will be zero tolerance for public drinking anywhere near Shea or Yankee stadiums, authorities said. Packages will be carefully searched at turnstiles for liquor or weapons and plainclothes cops will be roaming the stands to try to defuse tensions before they escalate into fights.
Last week the NYPD extended its heightened security alert - Condition Bravo - beyond high-profile buildings and landmarks to include the entire city.
Cops will be paying special attention to commuter transfer points like Grand Central Terminal, the Port Authority Bus Terminal, and LIRR and subway stations in Jamaica, Queens.
"Believe me, there will be a very visible police presence in those locations with a lot of quality-of-life enforcement," said a police official.
NYPD Chief of Department Joseph Esposito will hold a security summit today with the Bronx and Queens borough commanders, various speciality units within the department and representatives from the Fire Department and Major League Baseball to iron out plans.

Graphic

 
MARK BONIFACIO DAILY NEWS PITCHING THE SERIES City Council Speaker Peter Vallone joins Mayor Giuliani and Queens Borough President Claire Shulman yesterday at City Hall press conference. Vallone and Shulman hold up covers of Sports Illustrated touting the Fall Classic.

Load-Date: October 19, 2000


End of Document