Civic terrorism injures Spokane;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
January 29, 2002 Tuesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2002 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION; OUR VIEW; Pg.B4; EDITORIAL, COLUMN
Length: 482 words
Byline: Steve Becker/For the editorial board
Body


Combine a series of controversial issues, a group of assertive elected
 officials and a host of recent changes in the structure of city government and
 you create the perfect formula for heated disagreements. People have come to
 expect disagreements while watching Spokane's City Council in action. And many
 have let their displeasure about those disagreements be known. That's all part
 of the democratic process. But recently someone responded to a council member
 with an anonymous death threat, a threat the community cannot tolerate and
 must condemn.
The individual who made the threat obviously cannot separate controversial
 issues from elected individuals who are working on behalf of citizens. What
 the person who made this anonymous threat fails to understand is the power
 that each person has in a democratic society.
 When you don't like the votes your elected officials make, you can vote
 against them and encourage others to do the same. You can also take your
 disagreements to the City Council directly. Open public forums are a standard
 part of each meeting.
 People who stand up make candid, honest statements, sometimes said with
 anger. And it's good to remember that some of the most tense moments came in
 years past, long before the present council took office. For instance, in the
 late 1980s city leaders were considering whether Spokane should invest in an
 incinerator to handle its solid waste. City police officers were stationed in
 the Chase Gallery to prevent debate from becoming anything more than just
 debate. The democratic process during the incinerator debate wasn't always
 pretty, but it was public.
 Anonymous telephone threats undermine the integrity of city government
 played out in the civic arena.
 Threats are a dishonest and cowardly form of personal terrorism.
 Not long ago police started referring to residential burglaries as ''home
 invasions" because it better captures the violation and vulnerability victims
 feel and the lingering fear many experience. Phone threats have a similar
 effect.
 Elected officials aren't the only ones who have been victims of this
 personal terrorism. Some social service agencies in the Inland Northwest
 routinely receive death threats on their answering machines. Law enforcement
 officers, judges and journalists have also experienced threats against their
 lives.
 Modern phone technology provides some tools to fight telephone threats.
 Caller ID and instant callback are two tools, and phone companies can also
 work with people to track patterns of threatening phone calls and messages.
 Anonymous death threats - received by telephone, letter, e-mail or even
 placed under a car windshield - should be aggressively investigated. And those
 responsible, when caught, should be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
 Overreaction? Not when you remember that those who engage in anonymous threats
 threaten our democratic way of life.

Load-Date: January 31, 2002


End of Document