Civilian terrorism trial deserves praise, not scorn

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
December 14, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A12
Length: 369 words
Body


Senate Democrats should be praising - not criticizing - the Bush administration's decision to use civilian courts, rather than a secret military tribunal, to try Zacarias Moussaoui on charges he was involved with the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Actually, they are criticizing the Justice Department for not consulting with the Defense Department first. But that criticism doesn't make much sense, either. Martial law hasn't been declared in the United States. The initial "gatekeeper" is still a civilian prosecutor.
Isn't the Democratic Party the one that claims to be a protector of civil liberties?
Ever since President Bush issued his executive order to create military tribunals for terrorism cases, there have been justifiable concerns raised that employing such tribunals too broadly would trample this country's principles.
So why do we have Sen. Joseph Lieberman - the Democrat from Connecticut who wanted to be vice president - calling it a bad precedent to try Moussaoui in a civilian court.
"If we will not try Zacarias Moussaoui before a military tribunal … who will we try in a military tribunal?" Lieberman asked.
Similarly, Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., said, "It's hard to imagine that in a matter that fits the military tribunal order the way Mr. Moussaoui's case apparently seems to fit it that you (the Defense Department) weren't consulted."
Yes, it does fit Bush's order in that Moussaoui is accused of conspiring in the deaths of the people who died in the Sept. 11 attacks. But it also fits the Bush administration's explanation that military tribunals would only be "an option" and not necessarily the preferred option.
By deciding to try Moussaoui in the civilian system, the Bush administration gives Americans reason to believe the White House is not treating constitutional principles lightly. The Defense Department also apparently believes it has enough admissible evidence to convict Moussaoui without compromising national security secrets.
Defense Department lawyer William J. Haynes II said, "This is an illustration on how carefully the president plans to employ this tool he has created."
That's a good enough explanation for most Americans. Why isn't it good enough for Levin and Lieberman?

Load-Date: December 14, 2001


End of Document