Civil Libertarian Derides Rights Rollback
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
May 10, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B2
Length: 291 words
Byline: Tim Sullivan , The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Though the Bush Administration hasn't dusted off the Sedition Act of 1798, which made speaking against the government a crime, Nancy Chang believes it is getting close.
Chang was the guest speaker at the Utah chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union's Bill of Rights Celebration held Friday night at the Salt Lake City Public Library.
She is the senior litigation attorney for the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York City.
Her recent book, Silencing Political Dissent, explores the ways in which post-Sept. 11 anti-terrorism measures such as the Patriot Act threaten basic American civil liberties.
Chang spoke along similar lines Friday, explaining how the 342-page Patriot Act represents Congress' "abdication of its responsibility to seek alternate methods to make us secure without jeopardizing our freedoms."
Post Sept. 11 anti-terrorism measures, Chang said, have given the Executive Branch of the U.S. government far more power than it used to have.
"They have turned the presumption of innocence on its head," she said pointing to how few of the thousands of Muslim men arrested for terrorism suspicions were ever charged.
And the withholding of information, she said, shows a disrespect for the public.
"We lose the war [on terrorism] without firing a shot," Chang said.
Chang urged Utah ACLU members to fight these measures legally and politically.
ACLU Utah Executive Director Dani Eyer liked Chang's work because she challenged the Patriot Act before most did.
Eyer said the organization chose to hold the event in the library this year, partly to recognize librarians' roles in standing up for civil liberties.
ACLU Utah also honored Salt Lake City's Multi-Cultural Legal Center, which fought Utah's "English-Only" law with the ACLU.

Load-Date: May 10, 2003


End of Document