CIVIL LIBERTIES: Rights of Britons no longer king
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 2, 2005 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;
Length: 1455 words
Byline: DON MELVIN
Body


Runnymede, England --- Breezes sweep across the historic meadow where, 790 years ago, King John put his seal to the Magna Carta, the Great Charter of English Liberty. It was here that the absolute power of the monarch was first curtailed and the rights of the individual were first enshrined, here that trial by jury was first guaranteed.
On a summer day it can seem at first that little has changed. The River Thames, bedecked with swans, still wends its way toward London, 20 miles to the east, and thence to sea. Fishermen line its banks.
But as modern-day Britain faces the threat of terrorism, the rights of the individual, born in this meadow in 1215, are being diminished.
Since the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, and with greater urgency since this summer's deadly bombings of the London transit system, government ministers have put forward a series of proposals that increase the power of government, narrow the kinds of speech protected as free and, in some cases, abridge the rights of individuals to jury trials.
In September, Home Secretary Charles Clarke, Britain's man in charge of policing, public safety and anti-terrorism measures, said Europeans will have to accept that civil liberties must now be traded away in exchange for protection from terrorists. And if the European Convention on Human Rights --- a document descended from the Magna Carta --- gets in the way, Clarke said, it will have to be changed.
Similarly, the head of MI5, Britain's domestic intelligence service, warned recently that civil liberties might have to be eroded in order to keep citizens safe.
"The world has changed, and there needs to be a debate on whether some erosion of what we all value may be necessary to improve the chances of our citizens not being blown apart as they go about their daily lives," said Dame Eliza Manningham-Buller.
Those remarks prompted a rebuke by a former MI5 agent who thinks the intelligence services abuse their power. David Shaylor, who was jailed for six months in 2002 for revealing intelligence information to a newspaper, told the BBC that liberties lost would be hard to regain --- and their loss could turn terrorists into "martyrs."
"It really is worrying," said Massoud Shadjareh, chairman of the Islamic Human Rights Commission, who argues that Britain's hard-won freedoms are ebbing away. "If, 10 years ago or five years ago, somebody had told me this is what's going to happen in Britain, I would have said that that's impossible."
The debate in Britain today centers not so much on whether civil liberties are being diminished as on whether that trade-off makes the country more secure or less so.
Among the groups that argue that it's the latter is Liberty, an organization that supports civil liberties.
"We are as concerned as everyone else with protecting our society from the terrorist threat," said Doug Jewell, a spokesman for the group. "But this cannot be done by simply ripping up our hard-won rights and freedoms."
Liberty argues that diminishing individual rights will make Britain more susceptible to terrorism.
First, the measures will be seen as anti-Muslim, making British Muslims less likely to come forward with the kind of information that helped police solve the attempted London bombings of July 21, Jewell said.
And second, he said, if Prime Minister Tony Blair is right that the fight against terrorism is an ideological struggle, eroding Britain's freedoms makes the country's position weaker, not stronger.
Among the controversial anti-terrorism measures either already in place or being proposed:
Control orders
The government --- with the approval of a judge but without a trial --- can impose a "control order" on a suspected terrorist if it has "reasonable suspicion" the person might be dangerous. The person will be subject to a curfew, tagged with an electronic bracelet, denied the use of the Internet or mobile phones, allowed only restricted use of a landline phone, and be permitted to meet only with people approved by the government.
"Control orders are a punishment without trial," Jewell said.
"Why not charge these people with crimes?" asked professor Conor Gearty, director of the Center for the Study of Human Rights at the London School of Economics. The reason, he said, is that the government doesn't have the evidence to gain convictions.
And Shadjareh argues that Britain has created a third category of people --- those who are considered neither guilty nor innocent but are instead in perpetual limbo. "It really is a very barbaric way of keeping people," he said.
Control orders are, however, less severe than what the British government first implemented after the 2001 attacks in the United States. Under the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001, the government was, without trial, imprisoning indefinitely terrorist suspects who were not British citizens.
Late last year, Britain's supreme court of appeal, a committee of the House of Lords, ruled that this violated Britain's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights. By that time, some suspects had been in prison without trial for two or three years.
Some suffered serious psychological problems and required psychiatric hospitalization, said Gareth Peirce, a lawyer who represented some of the suspects.
Limits on free speech
The government has announced its intention to ban speech that justifies terrorist violence or that might lead to intercommunity violence. Bookstores and Internet sites may be shut down as well.
Human-rights campaigners say that is a goal worthy of support. But they say the government's definitions of banned speech are too broad and too vague. For example, three years ago, Cherie Blair, the prime minister's wife, made comments that appeared to show sympathy with Palestinian suicide bombers, saying they acted because they felt no hope.
And London Mayor Ken Livingstone wondered what would have happened had the government applied such measures 20 years ago.
"Would the supporters of Nelson Mandela have been thrown out of this country because they were supporting the bombing campaign against the apartheid racist regime in South Africa?" he asked. If so, the mayor said, he would not support the restrictions.
And, while some racist writing is theoretically banned, most large bookstores stock copies of Mein Kampf, Adolf Hitler's anti-Jewish autobiography.
Record-keeping
Clarke is urging all European nations to require that companies preserve and store cellphone and e-mail records for considerable periods of time.
While some critics have raised concerns about privacy, others say they have no problem with this as long as access to this enormous database is restricted to police officers investigating a specific crime.
Extended detention
The government has recently announced that it wants to increase the period a person can be held without charge from two weeks to three months.
"Three months, it's ludicrous," Shadjareh said. "To be honest, there's no justification." There has never been a case in which a suspect released after two weeks has gone on to commit an atrocity, he said, and most suspects are never charged at all.
The government's argument is that trimming civil liberties is better than getting blown up. Its critics contend that abridging those rights is giving in to the terrorists.
And many Muslims believe the measures are aimed at them.
"It feels a bit targeted, especially at the Muslim community," said Mohammed Islam, 51, a clerk at the Slyhet Shaj Ghor Asian clothing store in London's East End. "People are worried. Everybody's rights are being lessened."
He is outraged by control orders imposed without trial. And he said banning speech supporting terrorism is acceptable only as long as the government does not confuse terrorists with "freedom fighters," such as the Palestinians.
Gearty said he is greatly concerned about "the way in which a discourse is developing which sees civil liberties as respect for the equality of persons as somehow outmoded and outdated in the new circumstances post 7 July," the day of the deadly London attacks.
"This is incoherent nonsense, empty verbiage," he said. "To take just one example, subversive violence was far, far worse in the 1970s and 1980s, and yet nobody suggested that our whole system of freedom needed to change. Quite the reverse, in fact. People were determined not to hand the subversives the victory."
These measures are targeted at Muslims and those who look like Muslims, Shadjareh argued. But he said other groups should not be lulled into false security.
"Once you lose civil liberty, it affects not only one community," he said. "It destroys the whole fabric of society."
 
* Don Melvin, the European correspondent for Cox Newspapers, is based in London.

Graphic

 
JANE MINGAY / Associated Press Security cameras survey London's Trafalgar Square in August. The British government has made clear that those who would attempt to foment terrorism are not welcome in the United Kingdom. ; Associated Press Britain's Home Secretary Charles Clarke speaks in the House of Commons in February. In September, in response to the July 7 bombings of London's mass transit system, Clarke said Europeans will have to accept the loss of civil liberties in exchange for protection from terrorists. He said if the European Convention on Human Rights gets in the way, it will have to be changed.

Load-Date: October 2, 2005


End of Document