CLAIM 'IRRESPONSIBILITY' FOR ACTS OF TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
January 8, 2003 Wednesday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2003 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A10; Letter
Length: 580 words
Body


I believe it started as far back as the 1970s that, when a terrorist act took place, the rest of the world waited with anxiety to hear who would have committed such a deed. It was during one of Paul Harvey's broadcasts that I questioned why the media uses the word "responsibility" in explaining who was the force behind acts of terrorism.
Wouldn't it be refreshing to hear someone say that "X" group notified authorities and claimed "irresponsibility?"
- Mike Herman, Madison
 
 Sock Club money helps St. Vincent's buy beds
Thank you to Wisconsin State Journal's Youth Services Empty Stocking Club for their donation of $2,000 to St. Vincent de Paul to provide mattresses to children in the needy families we have visited. This year we have experienced a dramatic increase in all the services we provide. That need has included furniture and especially beds. During our pre-Christmas push to give a bed to everyone who has asked for one, we needed 171 beds in one week to make this happen. Your donation helped us provide these mattresses. I thank you and all your generous donors for helping us help our neighbors in need.
- Ralph Middlecamp, executive director, District Council of Madison Society of St. Vincent de Paul
 
 British, not famine, killed the Irish
Gov. Jim Doyle's inaugural address announcing a "new day" for Wisconsin was most inspirational. Unfortunately, there was one gross historical inaccuracy uttered by Gov. Doyle when he explained how he, the heir of Irish immigrants, happened to be in the state of Wisconsin.
He referred to the "potato famine" of more than 150 years ago as the cause for his ancestors leaving Ireland to seek a better life in America. There was a potato blight that hit not only Ireland but also the European continent as well. There was mass starvation in Ireland but there happened to be an ample food supply that could have fed the population. The truth of the matter is, the British government starved the Irish people to death. Lack of potatoes did not kill them.
- Robert E. Nordlander, Menasha
 
 What Brett Favre should have said
The text from the Brett Favre news conference I wanted to hear Monday morning:
"Ladies and gentlemen, it is my plan to retire from professional football after the 2003 season. I am fully committed to the Green Bay Packers for one more season.
"Drastic times call for drastic measures - and certainly, 'drastic' describes the way we limped out of the playoffs for a second straight year. So, I've asked Director of Pro Personnel Reggie McKenzie to restructure my contract for my final year. I've asked that I get paid only the league veteran minimum, instead of the scheduled $5.9 million base salary.
"I know they haven't played Super XXXVII yet, but I have dibs on XXXVIII. To that end, I would hope that McKenzie and Coach Sherman would use that newly freed $6 million to shore up three areas of our team: First, go out and buy us a kick returner; second, find us one good run-stopper for the defense; and third, acquire the quarterback of the Packers' future so I have a year to work with that person.
"We have seven months to heal, both physically and mentally. Seven months to make some personnel moves that will improve our chances of winning the Super Bowl next year. Seven months to enjoy and spend with our families, because come the end of July, every man on this team belongs to me. We will ride one final ride together, and I fully expect to earn the ultimate reward. Thank you."
- Scott Rippe, Belleville

Load-Date: January 9, 2003


End of Document