Claim denied on a terrorism technicality Christopher Elliott • The Travel Troubleshooter helps readers get a refund.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 1, 2009 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EXPLORE; Pg. T2
Length: 439 words
Byline: Diane Gandara, Napa, Calif.
Dateline: 0 
Body


My travel insurance claim has been denied, and so have my appeals. I hope you can help us.
My husband and I were scheduled to visit India last Thanksgiving, the day after the horrific terrorist event began. British and Americans were being singled out and murdered, hotels were being burned and threats were made of hijacking and attacks on airports and train stations in the country.
We were terrified of the unfolding events and canceled our travel plans. We had purchased a travel insurance policy through Access America. One of the named perils is a terrorist event.
Access America has denied our claim because we were scheduled to travel to New Delhi, and the hotel that was under siege was in Mumbai. I believe that the definition of destination - according to their policy and the online dictionary - includes the entire country. Plus, as part of the terrorist activity, impending threats were made to airports, train stations and other places throughout India.
We've lost about $7,300. Is there anything you can do?
I agree with your definition of a destination. Access America should have refunded the money you spent on your vacation.
Why didn't it? I asked the company, and a representative told me that in order to make a successful claim, the terrorist event would have to occur in the city you were traveling to. Since you were on your way to New Delhi, not Mumbai, the claims examiner was technically correct to deny your request.
That clause should have been clearly spelled out in your contract. If you didn't read it before you bought your policy, you should have reviewed it before making your claim.
I read contracts every day, but none are as confusing as the ones for travel insurance. I'm not entirely convinced that you would have been able to understand your contract even if you'd studied it. Do you need a law degree to make sense of the paperwork? Maybe.
You were correct to appeal your case to Access America. More than 90 percent of insurance appeals are decided in a traveler's favor. After that, you could have gone to arbitration, which means you allow a neutral, third party to decide your case. Or you could have taken Access America to court.
Copying the insurance commissioner in your state might also motivate an insurance company to see things your way.
As it turned out, none of that would be necessary. Access America recently switched to a new underwriter with a more inclusive definition of "destination." It reviewed your claim again. "In this case," said spokesman Mark Cipolletti, "the entire country of India should be considered the destination."
Access America agreed to process your $7,300 claim.

Load-Date: November 2, 2009


End of Document