Classified docs hold up Padilla resentence date
The Columbia Chronicle: Columbia College
February 12, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS_WIRE; Pg. 1
Length: 533 words
Body


Production of thousands of classified documents material sought by the attorney for convicted terrorism plotter Jose Padilla is holding up his resentencing in the case.
Prosecutors told a federal judge Wednesday it will take two months to disclose about 4,700 Defense Department documents that Padilla's attorney wants. The exact nature of those documents is unknown, but Padilla was held for more than three years without charge as an enemy combatant at a Navy brig before he was indicted in Miami.
U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke says she will set a firm resentencing date at an April hearing.
A federal appeals court ruled in 2011 that Padilla's original 17-year prison sentence on conspiracy and terror support convictions was too lenient, given Padilla's lengthy criminal record and terrorist training at an al-Qaida camp.
Initial allegations that Padilla plotted to set off a radioactive device on U.S. soil were dropped.
THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below.
After months of delay, a South Florida judge on Wednesday will begin examining the issues surrounding the resentencing of convicted terrorism plotter Jose Padilla.
Padilla, 43, was originally sentenced in 2008 to 17 years in prison for terrorism support and conspiracy convictions.
This case is back before Miami U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke because the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in 2011 that the sentence was too lenient, given Padilla's lengthy criminal record as a Chicago gang member and terrorist training at an al-Qaida camp in Afghanistan.
"He is far more sophisticated than an individual convicted of an ordinary street crime," the appeals judges said.
Since the appeals court's ruling, the case has been in limbo. The Wednesday hearing could finally set the stage for a resentencing date. Prosecutors originally sought a life sentence but have not said whether they will ask for that term again.
Prosecutors did say in a Feb. 5 filing that the appeals court decision should not allow for a re-opening of the case beyond the sentencing issues or to discuss such issues as Padilla's treatment at the so-called "Supermax" federal prison in Florence, Colo. He is currently house at a Miami federal detention center.
Padilla, a U.S. citizen who became a Muslim convert in prison, was arrested by the FBI in 2002 at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in what authorities at the time said was an al-Qaida plot to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb" in a major U.S. city.
Padilla was held in solitary confinement at a Navy brig in South Carolina for more than three years without criminal charge as an enemy combatant. Just as challenges to his confinement were ripe for U.S. Supreme Court to consider, the Justice Department under President George W. Bush added him to an existing Miami terrorism conspiracy indictment and the "dirty bomb" allegations were dropped.
Over the objections of prosecutors, Cooke gave in her original sentence gave Padilla credit for his three years held as an enemy combatant. The appeals court found that decision improperly reduced Padilla's sentence as well.
_____
Follow Curt Anderson on Twitter: http://twitter.com/Miamicurt

Load-Date: February 12, 2014


End of Document