CLASHING VIEWS IN SUMMATIONS AT TERROR TRIAL
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 8, 1995 Friday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 395 words
Byline: Larry Neumeister, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


A prosecutor blamed Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine followers yesterday for stealing Americans' "freedom from fear," just before a lawyer for Abdel- Rahman defended her client as wrongly accused of plotting a campaign of urban terrorism.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald, finishing up his third day of closing arguments in the months-long trial, jolted jurors to attention by accusing the defendants of personifying terrorism.
"Terrorism is real. It is here. It is in this courtroom," Fitzgerald said. "It is in the persons of the defendants who wanted to be the foot soldiers, to build the bomb, to drive the car with the bomb, to provide the detonators for the bomb, to provide the fuel oil for the bomb."
Lynne Stewart, lawyer for the 57-year-old blind Egyptian sheik, warned jurors minutes later that Fitzgerald was playing on their emotions. "Don't be fooled," she said.
Her client, she told them, was "an innocent man, wrongly accused."
She suggested the government had planted in the sheik's apartment a bulletproof vest and a metal box that detects eavesdropping devices. Holding up the box, she said sarcastically: "Oops. It signals with a red light. Not very useful for a blind man."
Fitzgerald said terrorism arrived in the United States in 1990 when extremist Rabbi Meir Kahane was shot to death in a midtown hotel, allegedly by defendant El Sayyid Nosair. Nosair was acquitted of murder in state court in 1991 but was convicted of related weapons charges.
Fitzgerald said the United States has since learned that the 10 defendants, led by the sheik, also plotted to kill Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and bomb the United Nations, FBI headquarters in Manhattan, and two tunnels and a bridge linking New York and New Jersey.
He said the Feb. 26, 1993, World Trade Center bombing that killed six people and injured more than 1,000 others was part of the campaign, although the defendants are not charged directly with it.
He said the attacks were part of a war of urban terrorism meant to shock the United States into changing its Mideast policies.
Stewart, leading off summations by 10 defense lawyers over the next two weeks, began by referring to her client as "beloved and respected."
She blasted the government's main witness, Emad Salem, an Egyptian immigrant who secretly taped the defendants for two months before the first arrests in the case in 1993.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document