Clear standards urged for terrorism trials
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 7, 2005 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 462 words
Byline: REBECCA CARR
Body


Washington --- The federal government lacks a clear or consistent policy for how suspected terrorists should be brought to trial --- with Zacarias Moussaoui and others sent to federal courts while others are kept languishing for years in military custody, unable to testify in open court, a law school study released today found.
More than three years after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the "legal landscape of the nation's fight against terrorism remains unsettled," researchers at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law concluded.
The report questions whether the nation needs the secretive military commissions that President Bush created after the al-Qaida attacks. It challenges Congress to address the competing demands of secrecy, fairness and accurate decision-making in terrorism trials.
"Protecting national secrets in terrorism trials presents a genuinely difficult problem," the report said. But it is "dangerously short-sighted" to shunt that problem aside by using Bush's military commission.
Prosecutors have tools for addressing classified information problems in the federal courts and in the court-martial system used by the military before the commissions. If those tools are inadequate, Congress should expand them, the report suggests.
"We stand to lose far more than we gain by vesting unchecked power in a hermetically sealed executive branch," the report states.
The Justice and Defense departments responded by saying the government provides terrorism defendants with fair trials while protecting national security.
In addition, the Defense Department referred to a commission fact sheet that states such commissions give defendants "more rights than the Constitution requires, more rights than the United States has ever granted to alleged war criminals in the past, more rights than the Supreme Court required in the detainee cases decided last June, and as many rights or more than those granted by international tribunals."
To date, four suspects held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have been charged and brought before the commissions in initial, pretrial sessions. But all proceedings are on hold until pending litigation challenging their use can be resolved.
Open government advocates say military commissions rub against the intent of the constitutional right to a fair and open trial.
Essentially, there is no accountability for the processing or treatment of the thousands of people that have been locked up since the Sept. 11 attacks, said Steven Aftergood, director of the Project on Government Secrecy at the Federation of American Scientists, a nonpartisan organization based in Washington.
"In effect, the military has been given a blank check," Aftergood said. "That is very dangerous because it invites abuse."

Load-Date: June 7, 2005


End of Document