Clifford Again Denies Knowledge of B.C.C.I. Link
The New York Times
October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk; Column 1;
Length: 513 words
Byline: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,

By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24
Body


For the second time in six weeks, Clark M. Clifford went before Congress today to defend his good name. He insisted, as he had last month, that he had been "grossly deceived" by representatives of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"Our consciences are clear," Mr. Clifford said as he painstakingly answered question after question about his relationship, and that of Robert A. Altman, his law partner and protege, with the corrupt international bank.
"We have not violated any law," Mr. Clifford declared. "We have not been guilty of any impropriety."
 
A Sense of Deja Vu
 Today's hearing, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations, had the quality of a rerun. Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman responded to questions almost exactly as they had last month before the House Banking Committee.
And while spectators lined the walls last month to catch a glimpse of a fallen mainstay of the Washington establishment -- a former Secretary of Defense and an adviser to every Democratic President since World War II -- the hearing room was largely empty today.
Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who heads the subcommittee and who has mastered the intricacies of the B.C.C.I. scandal, presented Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman a three-inch stack of documents that in one way or another seemed to tie the Washington lawyers with the international bank. But Mr. Kerry had no smoking gun, and Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman were able to explain away every item that seemed to dent their account.
 
Ownership Comes to Light
 Over the summer, bank regulators in several countries closed down B.C.C.I. and accused the bank of a variety of crimes like money laundering, fraud and sponsoring terrorism.
The Federal Reserve stated outright what had been rumored for some time, that B.C.C.I. owned the controlling stock in First American Bankshares, the largest bank holding company in Washington, where Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman were the top officers. Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman were allowed to buy the bank in 1982 after assuring the Fed that B.C.C.I. had no stock in the deal and no control over its operations.
Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman insisted today that they had thought a group of Arab investors owned the stock, that the millions of dollars they made in First American stock financed by a loan on unusually favorable terms from B.C.C.I. was completely above board, and that they and not B.C.C.I. had run the bank.
 
Response to Previous Testimony
 "My word has been important here for a great many years in Washington, and I ask you to take it," said Mr. Clifford, who is 84 years old.
On Monday, Abdur Sakhia, a former senior official of B.C.C.I., told the subcommittee that he found it "impossible to believe" that Mr. Altman did not know of the secret ownership of First American and that Mr. Clifford had countenanced lying.
Mr. Altman called those claims "false and without factual foundation." Mr. Clifford said they were "totally untrue," "outrageous," "grotesque" and "totally and categorically false."

Load-Date: October 25, 1991


End of Document