Clinton, world leaders pledge to fight terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
June 28, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 309 words
Body


LYON, France - President Clinton and other world leaders pledged solidarity Thursday "to fight terrorism by all legal means" in the aftermath of a "barbarous and unjustifiable" truck bomb that killed 19 Americans in Saudi Arabia.
The leaders of seven major industrial democracies - the United States, France, Britain, Japan, Germany, France, Canada and Italy - scheduled a follow-up meeting of their top security officials for next month in Paris.
An Associated Press Report
"We are all united in condemning the dreadful bombing that has taken place," said French President Jacques Chirac, host of this year's economic summit. "We changed our agenda" to deal with "this appalling event," Chirac said.
And Clinton, who had sought the quick action, said the joint statement by the U.S. economic allies showed, "We understand that an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us and that none of us is invulnerable."
Clinton thanked his international counterparts for "this very powerful statement."
Among areas of expanded cooperation the leaders cited: a pledge to "better equip our law enforcement authorities to work together to combat terrorism."
Clinton indicated that such efforts as the recent U.S. sharing with Israel of bomb-detection equipment would be high on the list.
Presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said Clinton would present specific proposals at today's session of the economic conference. The United States is seeking agreement on tougher extradition guidelines, more sharing of national intelligence on possible terrorist activity and efforts to make it harder for suspected terrorists to cross national borders.
In their joint communique, the leaders asserted: "We proclaim our common resolve to unite our efforts and our determination to fight terrorism by all legal means."
"We rededicate ourselves and invite others" to do likewise, it said.

Load-Date: June 30, 1996


End of Document