CLINTON IGNORED REALITY OF IRA TERRORISM IN ALLOWING ADAMS' VISIT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 1994, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 7B; EDWIN YODER COLUMN
Length: 696 words
Byline: Edwin Yoder Copyright Washington Post Writers Group
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Among the prices Bill Clinton paid for the Democratic presidential nomination two years ago was a brief but foolish flirtation with the radical chic view of the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Irish-Americans vote in large numbers in the important New York primary.  Many of them are schooled in a grotesquely twisted view of the long and tragic conflict between the heavily Protestant six counties of Ulster and the mainly Catholic Irish Republic. Many of them erroneously view the role of the so-called Irish Republican Army in that conflict as a "war of liberation" against British rule.
Clinton is too intelligent to share that view. But it probably explains his dalliance with the IRA line during the 1992 New York primary. And along with the intervention of important Democratic senators, it likewise explains why he recently overruled his foreign policy advisers and admitted Gerard Adams to the United States on a 48-hour visa. Adams is president of Sinn Fein, the "respectable" political front for the thugs who do the IRA's grisly dirty work with bullets and bombs.
There is no greater distortion of any significant problem of direct interest to Americans than the illusion that the IRA's terror campaign is a legitimate expression of democratic wishes or impulses. The IRA terrorists, and their Sinn Fein front men, have been repudiated by every lawful political faction and every peacemaker in both Irelands, Catholic and Protestant alike.
Indeed, while Adams, a slick ex-bartender with a deceptively mild manner, was gulling air-headed talk show hosts all over New York and Washington, his IRA chums at home were mortaring the forces of law and order. His last public appearance before coming to New York was as pallbearer for an IRA bomber who blew up and killed nine unoffending bystanders in a fish and chips shop in Belfast. Some peacemaker!
Clinton claims that he viewed the admission of Adams (who has been barred from the United States by every previous administration) as an "appropriate" gesture to help the peace process in Ireland. The president is misinformed.  The unyielding objective of Adams and his crowd is to force Northern Ireland against the will of its voting majority into union with the Irish Republic - and by a terror campaign that makes life unbearably nasty for everyone.  Reunion on those terms, by those means, has long been renounced by the Irish Republic itself, if not yet by parlor patrons of terror in the U.S.  Senate and the White House.
Adams' interim goal is to drive the British army out, even though - as he and his colleagues would like the world to forget - the army had to be sent to Northern Ireland in the first place to protect Catholics against Protestant rowdies.
So Adams was allowed for two days to sing his siren song to gullible audiences who have no inkling of the complexity of the Irish issue, nor of its implications for other potential trouble spots where an antiquated romantic nationalism could play havoc with people's lives.
The issue in Ireland is one of the byproducts of Ireland's tragic history.  Its roots reach back to Cromwell's 17th century conquest in the name of Protestantism. It is an antique survival of sectarian religious controversy which long ago subsided elsewhere. One can believe that the partition of Ireland (a price forced on the British government by an army mutiny when Ireland was given independence following World War I) makes little sense and should be ended. But the world is full of quirky divisions, ratified by events, which defy strict logic. Violence, far from removing or blurring, deepens and sharpens such divisions. And that has been the clear result of the IRA-Sinn Fein campaign in Northern Ireland.
Adams and his confederates have not advanced the cause of peace or union and are not advancing it now. They retard it by killing innocents and by setting sly negotiating conditions, which are repudiated by many of those they claim to speak for.
Those in New York, Boston and Washington who stroke Adams and his kind are at best naive and at worst in danger of bloodying their hands as accessories to the murder campaign conducted by his allies in the terrorist underworld.

Load-Date: February 8, 1994


End of Document