CLINTON, OBAMA DEFEND STANDS ON LOBBYING AND TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 8, 2007 Wednesday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-5
Length: 647 words
Byline: JESSE J. HOLLAND, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHICAGO 
Body


Democratic rivals last night accused New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of being too cozy with lobbyists and Wall Street, but the party's presidential front-runner portrayed herself as a champion of working people and commonsense policies, drawing cheers from a crowd of union activists.
Illinois Sen. Barack Obama, running second to Mrs. Clinton in most polls, leveled some of the criticism, but was forced to defend his own recent statements on Pakistan during the 90-minute debate sponsored by the AFL-CIO at Chicago's Soldier Field.
"You will never see a picture of me on the front of Fortune magazine," said former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards -- a dig at Mrs. Clinton, who recently was featured on the business publication's cover.
Mr. Obama said U.S. trade agreements have tilted against workers because "corporate lobbyists" have had too much influence, a theme he has developed in recent days, especially when alluding to Mrs. Clinton.
The former first lady, who appeared content with her front-runner status, replied: "The other campaigns have been using my name a lot.
"For 15 years, I've stood up against the right-wing machine," she said, as many in the crowd cheered. "If you want a winner who knows how to take them on, I'm your girl."
Mr. Obama's turn in the bull's-eye came when Connecticut Sen. Chris Dodd chided him for recently suggesting that he would strike terrorist targets in Pakistan if he had information about the location of al-Qaida terrorists, even without the permission of Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
"General Musharraf is no Thomas Jefferson," Mr. Dodd said, but he is an ally in the war on terror.
Mrs. Clinton joined in, saying to Mr. Obama, "You should not always say everything you think if you're running for president, because it has consequences across the world."
Mr. Obama shot back: "I find it amusing that those who helped to authorize and engineer the biggest foreign policy disaster in our generation are now criticizing me."
Mr. Dodd, Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Edwards and Delaware Sen. Joseph Biden voted to authorize the Iraq war in 2002. Mr. Obama, who was in the Illinois legislature at the time, spoke out against the invasion.
The seven candidates praised organized labor lavishly, seeming to jockey to portray themselves as the most committed to the cause.
Mr. Edwards, who especially is banking on strong support from labor, twice told the crowd of some 15,000 that he has walked 200 picket lines in the past two years. "Who was with you in crunch time?" he asked. "Who will stand with you when it really matters?"
The stadium crowd was raucous and loud at times, cheering some candidates and interrupting others. MSNBC televised the debate, which was moderated by the cable network's Keith Olbermann.
At the debate's start, the candidates largely agreed that the nation should invest more money in infrastructure and less in the Iraq war, citing the Minneapolis bridge collapse as a symptom of neglect. The candidates cast the matter as one of creating jobs as they addressed thousands of labor union activists, a constituency that could prove pivotal in deciding which contender emerges as the party's nominee.
"I happen to believe that putting our country back to work begins by cutting the funding for the war in Iraq," said Mr. Dodd, who added that $1 billion in domestic infrastructure spending would create 40,000 jobs. He said the United States is spending $12 billion a month in Iraq, although government figures have put it closer to $10 billion.
New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson said he would find money to improve roads, bridges, water systems and other infrastructure by having Congress eliminate "the $23 billion they put forth for congressional earmarks," or special spending projects.
Several questions dealt with trade, a sensitive subject for union activists, who argue that too many U.S. jobs have gone overseas.

Load-Date: August 8, 2007


End of Document