CLINTON, PERES INK PACT FOR GLOBAL WAR ON TERROR
Daily News (New York)
May 01, 1996, Wednesday


Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  2
Length: 329 words
Byline: By CORKY SIEMASZKO With News Wire Services
Body


President Clinton yesterday signed an anti-terrorism agreement with Israeli leader Shimon Peres and promised to stymie those who "aim to kill the growing hope for peace."
Today, Clinton meets with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, who is also expected to collect kudos for the Palestine National Council's decision to revoke long-standing charter clauses calling for the destruction of Israel.
Yesterday's accord, which grew out of the multi-nation summit in Egypt in March, affirms U.S.-Israeli agreements on sharing information and experts and extraditing known terrorists.
It comes on the heels of another agreement signed Sunday that expands the countries' cooperation against missile attacks and provided Israel with laser weapons that could shoot down rockets.
Syria yesterday said Israel should concentrate more on making peace and less on acquiring better weapons.
"Heaping weapons on Israel will never rid it of its state of insecurity," state-run Damascus Radio said.
But Peres yesterday said Israel wants to turn Syrian President Hafez Assad into a partner for peace, in the same way that Arafat has become one.
Arafat, however, was expected to strain the relationship today when he asks Clinton directly whether he will support a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
Peres on Monday said he adamantly opposes that plan.
"We are going to keep Jerusalem united as the capital of Israel and just the capital of Israel," said Peres.
In less than a week, Israel is to begin new talks on a final settlement with the Palestinians.
Meanwhile, the State Department yesterday released its annual report on terrorismand singled out Iran as the "premier state sponsor of international terrorism."
The State Department placed Syria on its list of countries that support terrorism, but said the country had not been directly involved in terrorist attacks since 1986.
Rounding out the list of terrorism-backing countries are Cuba, Iraq, Libya, North Korea and Sudan, officials said.

Graphic

 
AP ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER Shimon Peres and President Clinton prepare to ink anti-terrorism pact.

Load-Date: May 1, 1996


End of Document