CLINTON PROPOSES $ 2.8 BILLION TO COMBAT NEW ERA OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 23, 1999, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 27
Length: 515 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* The president says chemical weapons and computer technology are "new tools of destruction" for terrorists.
President Bill Clinton warned on Friday that terrorists are seeking new ways to strike, and that the United States "must be ready" for attacks against computer networks and threats of chemical and germ warfare. He recommends spending $ 2.8 billion more on anti-terrorist initiatives.
"This is not a cause for panic," the president said. "It is a cause for serious, deliberate, disciplined, long-term concern."
Clinton spoke of cyber-era threats in a speech before the National Academy of Sciences, dwelling on a subject of deepening concern and anxiety in the White House. Four years ago, the world was shocked by a nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway; more recently, a rash of anthrax hoaxes have been perpetrated in the Los Angeles area.
"We do not know of any imminent attack being planned in the United States using chemical or biological weapons or using cyber attack techniques," said Richard Clarke, the president's national coordinator for anti-terrorism programs.
"But we do want to raise consciousness . . . that such attacks are growing increasingly likely."
Clinton said terrorists were seeking "new tools of destruction" because they recognize that they cannot defeat the United States with military force.
"We must be ready - ready if our adversaries try to use computers to disable power grids, banking, communications and transportation networks, police, fire and health services of military assets," the president said.
Likewise, Clinton said, "we have to be ready to detect and address a biological attack promptly, before the disease spreads."
Clinton's proposal must be approved by Congress. It represents a 40 percent increase for cyber defense over 1997. It would double spending for chemical and biological weapons defense over two years. The $ 2.8 billion would be in addition to Clinton's $ 7.2 billion request for conventional counterterrorism security programs.
On Capitol Hill, Clinton's initiative got a better-late-than-never reaction from Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., chairman of the House Armed Services subcommittee on research and development.
"We have been grossly underfunding programs to protect our information assets," Weldon said. "While a late step, the president's announcement should help us regain some lost ground."
 
Crackdown on bin Laden
U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies have prevented Osama bin Laden's extremist network from carrying out truck-bomb attacks against at least two American embassies since the bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania last year, Clarke told The Washington Post on Friday.
Clarke also said U.S. officials do not believe that bin Laden, a Saudi millionaire now living in the mountains of Afghanistan, has acquired chemical or biological weapons.
"I think we've made life extraordinarily difficult for (bin Laden), but he's still there," Clark said. "I think it is very difficult for him and his lieutenants to travel. I think it's very difficult for them to raise money or move money or move explosives."

Load-Date: July 6, 1999


End of Document