Clinton aide faces criminal inquiry after taking terrorism documents
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 20, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A04
Length: 413 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, is the focus of a criminal investigation after removing highly classified terrorism documents and handwritten notes from a secure reading room during preparations for the Sept. 11 commission hearings, The Associated Press has learned.
Berger's home and office were searched earlier this year by FBI agents armed with warrants after he voluntarily returned documents to the National Archives. But some drafts of a sensitive after-action report on the Clinton administration's handling of al-Qaida terrorist threats during the December 1999 millennium celebration are still missing.
Berger and his lawyer said Monday night that he knowingly removed handwritten notes he had made while reading classified anti-terrorism documents he reviewed at the archives by sticking them in his jacket and pants. He also inadvertently took copies of actual classified documents in a leather portfolio, they said.
"I deeply regret the sloppiness involved, but I had no intention of withholding documents from the commission, and to the contrary, to my knowledge, every document requested by the commission from the Clinton administration was produced," Berger said in a statement to the AP.
Berger served as Clinton's national security adviser for all of the president's second term and most recently has been informally advising Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry. Clinton asked Berger last year to review and select the administration documents that would be turned over to the commission.
The FBI searches of Berger's home and office took place after National Archives employees told agents they believed they witnessed Berger place documents in his clothing while reviewing sensitive Clinton administration papers, officials said.
When asked, Berger said he returned some classified documents that he found in his office and all of the handwritten notes he had taken from the secure room but said he could not find two or three copies of the highly classified millennium terrorism report.
"In the course of reviewing over several days thousands of pages of documents on behalf of the Clinton administration in connection with requests by the Sept. 11 commission, I inadvertently took a few documents from the Archives," Berger said.
"When I was informed by the Archives that there were documents missing, I immediately returned everything I had except for a few documents that I apparently had accidentally discarded," he said.

Graphic

 
photo; Photo headshot - (Sandy) Berger Says removal of files was inadvertent

Load-Date: July 20, 2004


End of Document