CLINTON TO MEET SYRIAN; CHRISTOPHER CALLS IT 'NATURAL' THAT 2 TALK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 10, 1993, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 678 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


The campaign for a broad Middle East peace settlement advanced on two levels Thursday with the announcement that President Bill Clinton will meet with Syrian President Hafez Assad and that bilateral negotiations will resume in Washington early next year.
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher said in a news conference in Damascus, Syria, that Clinton's direct involvement was "important to our role as full partner and active intermediary in the Arab-Israel peace process." Christopher also announced an alteration in the format of the peace talks to make them less formal and to encourage freer exchanges than in the past.
In the hope of achieving a breakthrough, the administration bypassed its own assessment of Assad's government as a sponsor of terrorism involved in drug trafficking.
Christopher said the United States had "no plans at the present time" to change that official assessment of Syria. A senior administration official on the trip, commenting only on the condition of anonymity, said a peace agreement between Syria and Israel would largely resolve the problem of Syrian support for terrorism.
Clinton and Assad will meet next month in Geneva, probably immediately after Clinton attends a NATO summit meeting in Brussels, Belgium.
"The purpose of the meeting will be to move the peace process forward," Christopher said. Only days earlier, Christopher branded as "inaccurate" press reports that such a meeting would be offered to Assad.
Christopher made the announcement after a three-hour meeting with Assad.
He said that Clinton had met with the leaders of all the other parties to the Mideast negotiations and that "it is appropriate and, indeed, natural for him to be meeting with President Assad at this time."
He declined to say what guarantees might have been exchanged in the discussions that led to scheduling the meeting between Clinton and Assad and reopening of the bilateral talks.
Earlier in the week, Assad promised to cooperate with a U.S. team coming to the Middle East to investigate the fate of six Israeli soldiers missing in Lebanon. He also promised to grant exit permits by the end of the year to any Syrian Jews who request them.
Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Sharaa said at the news conference with Christopher that Syria was "committed to peace" and that "this is a strategic option for us."
U.S. officials traveling with Christopher cited Sharaa's comment as a significant advance. But Sharaa restated firmly that on the issue of the Golan Heights, Syria would accept "nothing less than a total withdrawal from the Golan for the establishment of free and comprehensive peace in the region." Israel has occupied the Golan Heights since the 1967 Middle East war.
Christopher said Syria and Lebanon would send delegations to Washington in early January to prepare for the talks.
The heads of the delegations for those two countries as well as the delegation leaders for Israel, Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization will participate in what he called "simplified and streamlined talks" on Jan. 18 in preparation for the formal bilateral negotiations a couple of weeks later. Those talks will be between the Israeli delegation and, one by one, the other delegations.
A senior administration official said the simplified talks would be one-on-one and held in private - to provide a better opportunity to try out positions without the glare of publicity.  Settler Kills Palestinian
An Israeli extremist ordered a Palestinian farmer off his tractor and then fatally shot him Thursday.
Police detained a 16-year-old Jewish settler in the killing. Another man, a 29-year-old immigrant from the United States, was arrested and charged with complicity, said Efi Arditi, a police spokesman. Police did not release their names.
Meanwhile, an Israeli woman was reported to have suffered a minor stab wound in an attack by two Palestinians.
The escalating violence, much of it between Jewish settlers and Palestinian militants, is threatening to derail the PL0-Israel peace process only days before the autonomy accord is scheduled to start.

Load-Date: December 11, 1993


End of Document