Clinton returns to campaign trail; security, terrorism day's top issues;
Giuliani joins Bush in Colorado and Iowa
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 26, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 355 words
Byline: Scott Shepard and Bob Kemper Cox News Service
Body


PHILADELPHIA - Former President Bill Clinton added his political star power to John Kerry's White House bid on Monday, returning to the campaign trail just seven weeks after quadruple bypass surgery.
A noticeably thinner but exuberant Clinton joined Kerry at a mid-day rally in the heart of this historic city, and tens of thousands of people spilled out into the surrounding streets of Kennedy Plaza.
"If this isn't good for my heart, I don't know what is," Clinton beamed as he sought to lend a hand to Kerry in the final eight days of the presidential campaign.
Clinton's highly anticipated return came as Kerry pounced on a New York Times report that hundreds of tons of deadly Iraqi explosives disappeared after U.S.-led forces deposed Saddam Hussein last year.
President George Bush did not directly address the missing explosives during a campaign swing through Colorado and Iowa, nor did he take questions about it from reporters traveling with him.
However, White House spokesman Scott McClellan played down the threat posed by explosives missing from the Al-Qaqaa installation. He said there was no threat of nuclear proliferation, and preferred to concentrate on the weapons that have been destroyed, not those lost.
First in Dover, N.H., and again here, with Clinton at his side, Kerry accused Bush of incompetence for failing to secure the explosives and thereby increasing the threat to U.S. forces in Iraq and the American homeland.
"George W. Bush, who talks tough and brags about making America safer, has once again failed to deliver," Kerry said as he embarked on a day of campaigning in four states.
Bush, traveling to Colorado and Iowa with former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani at his side, expanded and intensified his attacks on Kerry over the issues of terrorism and Iraq. Bush charged that Kerry would be an ineffective wartime president because he has already insulted America's allies and lacks the will to use military force. Clinton attended another pro-Kerry rally Monday evening in Miami. Today he is to highlight an event in Broward County, Fla. Later in the week, he plans to travel to Nevada and Arkansas.

Load-Date: October 30, 2004


End of Document