Clinton calls for anti-terror help; The secretary of state, visiting India, says the United States needs allies against terrorists.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 19, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A17
Length: 447 words
Byline: By Robert Burns Associated Press
Body


MUMBAI, India - Off the injured list and back on the world stage, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on Saturday, July 18, gave an impassioned defense of American demands that India and other countries do more to tackle terrorism and global warming.
Opening a three-day visit to India, Clinton sought to emphasize common interests, symbolized by the terrorist attacks in this seaside city last November that killed 166 people. "It must be stopped," she said, adding that the United States cannot do it alone.
Part of the backdrop to Clinton's visit is a sense of unease among Indians that the Obama administration is focusing more on its antiterror campaigns in Afghanistan and Pakistan, at the expense of attention to the world's largest democracy.
Clinton is the highestranking administration official to stop in India, where she has been widely popular since visiting as first lady in the 1990s.
Showing no visible effects from elbow surgery in mid-June, Clinton met with business leaders, was serenaded by female entrepreneurs and participated in a televised discussion at a college on what's wrong with education in India and the U.S.
It was the first event of her day, however, that underscored most strongly the central message she carried from Washington.
"The bottom line for me is, our government is committed in the fight against terrorism," she told reporters at the Taj Mahal Palace and Tower after meeting privately with a group of survivors of last year's attacks on the Taj and an adjacent hotel.
"And we expect everyone" who shares the American desire to end violent extremism "to take strong action to prevent terrorism from taking root on their soil and making sure that terrorists are not trained and deployed - and we believe that around the world." 
In an event closed to reporters, Clinton met at the Taj with workers who survived the attacks. One was the hotel's general manager, Karambir Kang, who lost his wife and two children during the three-day siege.
One of the most contentious issues between India and the U.S. is the administration's push for India to accept limits on carbon emissions as part of an international climate change agreement. To emphasize the importance of the matter, Clinton traveled with the special U.S. envoy for climate change, Todd Stern.
Clinton urged India to avoid the missteps that occurred during U.S. industrialization.
"We acknowledge now with President Obama that we have made mistakes in the United States, and we along with other developed countries have contributed most significantly to the problem that we face with climate change," she said. "We are hoping a great country like India will not make the same mistakes."

Graphic

 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton smiles as she interacts with members of Self Employed Women's Association, a nongovernment organization, in Mumbai, India on Saturday, July 18. Associated Press photo by Rajanish Kakade 

Load-Date: July 21, 2009


End of Document