CLINTON PUSHES ISRAELI LEADER FOR TROOP PULLBACK TO RESTART MIDEAST PEACE;
TALKS;
NETANYAHU SAYS TERRORISM BY PALESTINIANS CONTINUES;
PRESIDENT WILL MEET WITH ARAFAT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 21, 1998, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 845 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton pressed Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday for a "significant and credible" troop pullback from the West Bank to revive collapsed peace talks. Netanyahu made no commitment, stressing Israel's security concerns.
"We didn't anticipate the heavens to open today," Mike McCurry, the White House press secretary, said after the president and prime minister met for more than 90 minutes. "A lot of hard work remains."
The two leaders reconvened for more talks at night after Clinton returned from a scheduled political speech.
Netanyahu brought a proposal for a limited troop withdrawal. He warned that any pullback must depend on security guarantees for Israel and on a Palestinian fulfillment of pledges, which he said "has been lacking so far."
Sitting next to Clinton in the Oval Office, Netanyahu said, "We're prepared to move forward but not to jeopardize the security of the state of Israel."
After more than a year of stalled efforts and discouraging setbacks, Cl inton summoned Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to meetings to urge them to make hard decisions for peace. Arafat is to see Clinton on Thursday.
The administration is unhappy with Israel over building projects in the West Bank and delays in troop withdrawals. Israel accuses the Palestinians of failing to abide by promises to stop terrorism.
The U.S. position also calls for the Palestinians to make a "100 percent effort" to stop terrorist attacks against Israelis and to agree to an accelerated pace for negotiations on a final peace treaty.
Despite tensions, Clinton refused to blame either side for the impasse, saying, "I think what we ought to talk about is what both sides can do now to get the peace process moving again."
Netanyahu said he did not feel pressured by Clinton or snubbed because his visit lacked a White House dinner, a joint news conference or other VIP treatment. Administration officials also rejected the idea that Netanyahu was slighted, pointing out that Clinton has met with him six times - more than with any other leader.
Netanyahu said the meeting "was, in fact, a wholehearted and serious effort at finding common ground." He said he thought the United States "recognizes Israel's understandable and overriding concern with security."
It was a day of intense diplomacy. Netanyahu met with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright over breakfast, saw Clinton in the Oval Office, had lunch with Vice President Al Gore and conferred with Sandy Berger, the president's national security adviser.
Albright told reporters after her two-hour meeting with Netanyahu that the talks had been "very useful" but suggested the two sides were not close to an accord.
"There are gaps. We are trying to narrow those gaps," Albright said. "I think we're doing well, given the fact that we're working on very, very difficult issues.
"What we are talking about are the appropriate elements for a further redeployment - that is timing, the quality, quantity and, of course, security aspects involved in that."
Netanyahu said they were trying to achieve "a package of goodwill. The goodwill is there. The pieces are there. We're trying to put them together, and we're making a real effort to do so."
Netanyahu showed Clinton statements by Palestinian leaders calling for violence against Israel, an Israeli diplomat said.
The official said Netanyahu had told Clinton that Israeli troop withdrawals must depend on the Palestinians making good on pledges, such as the jailing of terrorists and the annulment of a provision in the Palestinian charter calling for the destruction of Israel.
Netanyahu did not discuss the specifics of his withdrawal plan. By all accounts, he is offering about 9 percent of the West Bank, adding to the 27 percent already under the control of the Palestinians.
Reaching out for support, Netanyahu also met Tuesday with House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., and Christian conservatives, including some of Clinton's harshest critics.
Gingrich said in a letter to Clinton that the administration had "consciously chosen to insult and undermine" Israel by giving Netanyahu less than VIP treatment. Gingrich also called Netanyahu's security concerns "legitimate."
The Rev. Jerry Falwell said he and several leaders of the Southern Bap tist Convention had told Netanyahu that they would mobilize evangelical churches to oppose steps to give up any more territory.
To get out the word, Falwell said, "There are about 200,000 evangelical pastors in America, and we're asking them all through e-mail, faxes, letters, telephone, to go into their pulpits and use their influence in support of the state of Israel and the prime minister."
In courting conservative Christians on this trip, Netanyahu has apparently angered Clinton, who was said to be outraged that Netanyahu had met with Falwell. Some American Jewish leaders were also dismayed at Netanyahu's courtship of evangelical Christians because evangelicals and Jews tend to be on opposite sides in the debates over school prayer, vouchers for private and parochial schools, and abortion.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - President Bill Clinton meets Tuesday with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in the White House. Netanyahu brought a proposal for a limited troop withdrawal from the West Bank.

Load-Date: January 21, 1998


End of Document