Clinton seeks a 'bridge' to Mideast peace
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 8, 1997, Tuesday


Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 388 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Clinton sought Monday to build a bridge between Israelis and Palestinians, but U.S. officials cautioned that his meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu may produce no ''magic wand'' for Middle East peace.
''It's very important to get the peace process back on track,'' Clinton said as he greeted Netanyahu at the White House.
He reiterated his call for Palestinian leaders to declare ''zero-tolerance'' for terrorism and said Israel should not have to make concessions for it. ''Freedom from terrorism is something no one should have to purchase,'' Clinton said.
Also, in a veiled message to Israel, he said his goal was to ''re-establish the confidence necessary for the parties to go forward.''
Netanyahu, accusing Palestinian leaders of ''an almost zero effort'' to stop terrorists from murdering Jewish civilians, said Israel would not make concessions to get Yasser Arafat to comply with his obligations.
''If they want peace, they must fight terrorism,'' the prime minister told an enthusiastic gathering of thousands of Christians and Jews at their fourth annual unity conference.
Speaking before the White House meeting, presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said, ''It is a moment in which the peace process needs new ideas and hard work and the president is prepared to deliver.''
The diplomatic task facing Clinton and Netanyahu could prove difficult: Israelis and Palestinians are maintaining hardline stances over a Jewish housing development in Jerusalem that prompted Palestinian violence and a sidetracking of scheduled peace talks.
Netanyahu said Israel was building 10 Arab projects in the city, as well. He said it was perfectly natural for neighborhoods to expand. ''Nothing justifies the murder of innocent people. Nothing. Nothing,'' he said.
Even as Arafat insisted that building must stop to lure him back to the negotiating table, Israelis on Sunday speeded up construction at the Har Homa project, working around the clock.
And in the West Bank all was not calm Monday. A Jewish settler armed with an assault rifle fired on Palestinians after his van was stoned, injuring two people. There was a similar confrontation in Hebron.
''Terrorism is never justified,'' Dennis Ross, the top U.S. Middle East negotiator, said Monday. ''Ultimately, the parties have to make their own decisions.''

Load-Date: April 3, 1998


End of Document