CLINTON TALKS ABOUT RELATIONS WITH IRAN
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 29, 1997, Thursday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. 5C
Length: 401 words
Body


LONDON - President Clinton reached out today to the new moderate
government in Iran, saying the United States' 18-year estrangement
with Tehran can come to an end if Iran abandons its support for
terrorism.
The election of Mohammad Khatami, a moderate cleric, as president is
"a hopeful sign," Clinton said. Yet, he added, Iran must renounce
violence, terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
"I have never been pleased with the estrangements between the people
of the United States and the people of Iran," Clinton said. "I hope
the estrangements can be bridged."
Khatami, elected this week, has said he does not expect any warming of
relations between the two countries.
Clinton spoke during a joint news conference with British Prime
Minister Tony Blair, discussing topics ranging from European economic
policies to the peace process in Northern Ireland.
Clinton, 50, quipped he was "sick of" the parallels drawn between him
and his youthful counterpart, Blair, who at age 44 is seen as an
ideological soul mate.
On Northern Ireland, Clinton reiterated U.S. support for the peace
process, a principle topic during their meeting.
"We have discussed, obviously, Northern Ireland and our determination
to do all that we can to bring about the cease-fire that will allow
all-party talks to proceed in the best possible climate and of a
cease-fire that is genuine and credible with all the parties there,"
Blair said.
Clinton agreed, saying talks in Northern Ireland "can only succeed if
there is an unequivocal cease-fire in deed and words" and urged the
IRA once again to lay down its guns.
The president described the peace process as "an article of faith in
my life and household" as Blair ushered Clinton to meet with the
Cabinet, an honor accorded only one previous American president,
Richard M. Nixon in 1969.
Regarding Iran, Clinton said the United States hopes for "a
reconciliation with a country that does not believe that terrorism is
a legitimate extension of political policies" and would end its
vehement opposition to the Middle East peace process.
The United States broke diplomatic relations with Iran after Islamic
radicals occupied the U.S. embassy in Tehran in 1979, holding
diplomats hostage for more than a year.
The Clinton administration has maintained a strict economic embargo
against Iran, and urged other nations to do the same. It also has
insisted that normal relations cannot be resumed until Iran renounces
terrorism.

Load-Date: May 30, 1997


End of Document