CLINTON IN THE MIDDLE EAST: THE OVERVIEW;
CLINTON REPORTS PROGRESS IN TALKS IN SYRIAN CAPITAL - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 1314 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS JEHL, 

By DOUGLAS JEHL,    Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Oct. 27
Body


President Clinton made a one-day venture into shuttle diplomacy today in hopes of speeding the way toward an Israeli-Syrian peace. He said he won some private assurances from President Hafez al-Assad of Syria that could speed the peace talks but did not get from the Syrian leader a message that aides had hoped might soothe an anxious Israeli public.
Instead, as Mr. Clinton became the first American President in 20 years to visit Damascus, the Syrian capital, Mr. Assad used a joint appearance with Mr. Clinton to question why Israelis should fear for their security if they were to surrender the Golan Heights and to ask why anyone should expect him to visit Israel as a show of good will.
The President and his top deputies said that Mr. Assad had in fact made private commitments that could lead to substantial progress in moving the peace talks along, and Mr. Clinton discussed those details with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel after arriving here this afternoon.
In a news conference here tonight, neither Mr. Clinton nor Mr. Rabin would reveal what Mr. Assad had said in private. But the President pronounced himself satisfied by what he said he had gained during more than three hours of talks with Mr. Assad in the Syrian leader's fortress-like presidential palace on a barren hilltop high above Damascus.
"I went there because I was convinced that we needed to add new energy to the talks," Mr. Clinton said, "and I came away convinced that we have." In Jerusalem, where large sections of the Old City were shut down by the security forces, which were deployed by the thousands to protect him, the President won a cautious endorsement from Mr. Rabin, who said that whatever differences remained between Israel and Syria, what mattered most was that the two countries were still on a path toward peace.
"It might take time," Mr. Rabin said. "One has to be patient, one has to understand that there are problems."
Mr. Clinton's debut as an intermediary between Jerusalem and Damascus, however, was complicated by the fact that Mr. Assad made no public condemnation today of the bombing of a Tel Aviv bus last week by a terrorist, an attack that killed 22 people, and by American officials' acknowledgement that Mr. Clinton had not pressed Mr. Assad directly about his Government's role in providing haven to terrorist groups.
But Mr. Clinton said at his news conference here that Mr. Assad had privately criticized the bombing, for which the Islamic militant group Hamas took responsibility.
"I regret that President Assad did not take the opportunity to say in public what he said to me in private about his deep regret about the loss of innocent lives and particularly the bus bombing," Mr. Clinton said.
 "He said to me, 'You know, we have to end the killing of innocents wherever it occurs, whether it was on that bus or in Hebron'," Mr. Clinton added.
He was referring to the attack by a Jewish settler in a Hebron mosque earlier this year that left more than 100 Palestinians dead.
Among the issues that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Assad were believed to have discussed privately today were the possible timing and security arrangements for a deal that would see Israel pledge to withdraw from the Golan Heights in return for a full peace with Syria. As possible steps toward that end, they were also believed to have discussed the prospect that Syria might issue a public condemnation of terrorism or agree to elevate its talks with Israel to a higher level.
Mr. Clinton asserted tonight that whatever concessions were made by Mr. Assad today represented "forward movement in ways that I believe are not insignificant." And with those sensitive issues tightly guarded, the remarks made by Mr. Assad in public did little to add to his recent past statements and those of his Government.
His declaration of support for "peaceful, normal relations" with Israel in exchange for its full withdrawal from occupied territory on the Golan Heights was much the same as he offered last January during a first meeting with Mr. Clinton in Geneva. And because he voiced such sharp criticism of sentiments widely held in Israel, Mr. Assad's performance caused American officials to acknowledge that the public dimension of the President's controversial visit had gone less well than they had hoped.
"In terms of substance, we made a move," a senior Administration official said after the news conference in Syria, at which Mr. Assad, looking gaunt and gray, shared a stage with Mr. Clinton in a vast marbled chamber of the hilltop palace. "In terms of public diplomacy, we would have liked to have seen more."
What most troubled American and Israeli officials alike, they said tonight, was Mr. Assad's response to a question put to him by David Makovsky, the diplomatic correspondent for The Jerusalem Post, who asked Mr. Assad what assurance he could offer to Israelis who do not believe it is safe for Israel to give up the Golan Heights.
The Syrian Government has not previously allowed Israeli reporters to travel to the country, but the White House helped to coordinate Mr. Makovsky's visit as part of the 200-member delegation of American and foreign reporters who accompanied Mr. Clinton to Damascus. In his question to Mr. Assad, Mr. Makovsky politely suggested that Israeli mistrust might have been compounded by the Syrian leader's refusal to visit Israel or to begin direct talks with its leader.
Administration officials said later that they believed the question had given Mr. Assad an easy opportunity to make a conciliatory gesture. But the Syrian leader replied instead with a lecture in which he said security concerns could never justify any effort "to preserve the lands of other states."
He went on to mock the importance of an official visit, saying that adversaries through history have "not put conditions for achieving peace that one party should visit the other or not visit the other."
Mr. Clinton's very decision to visit Syria has been controversial since he announced it a week ago, principally because of the country's role in allowing guerrillas from the Party of God and other Iranian-backed groups to operate in regions of southern Lebanon under its control. That has kept Syria on the State Department's list of states that support terrorism, and has dissuaded each of Mr. Clinton's predecessors from visiting Damascus since Richard M. Nixon did so in 1974.
In dropping the cold-shoulder approach today, Mr. Clinton brought Air Force One and an identical back-up plane to a Syrian airport tarmac lined with security agents in ill-fitting double-breasted suits. Mr. Assad and his Government were plainly eager for high-level attention.
The Syrian President greeted Mr. Clinton with a firm handshake, and then accepted an invitation to join the American President in his bulletproof limousine during the 25-minute drive to the hilltop palace. Along with a return journey, Administration officials said, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Assad spent more than two hours today alone in private discussions; they were joined by their top advisers at the longest single meeting, which lasted nearly two hours.
But sensitivities over terrorism confounded their efforts to show common cause. Asked during the news conference whether Mr. Clinton had asked him to halt support for terrorist groups, Mr. Assad said terrorism had not been on the agenda of their discussions.
Mr. Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, visited Israel 13 years ago, making this the one stop on their whirlwind tour of the Middle East that was a return journey. Tonight, the President addressed the Israeli Parliament, where he expressed renewed admiration for Israel's courage in concluding a formal peace treaty with Jordan while warning against extremism and irresolution that he said could stall its quest for a wider peace.
"Having come so far," Mr. Clinton declared, "you cannot give up what you have begun."
Correction

An article yesterday about President Clinton's talks with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria misstated the number of victims in the mass killings of Muslim worshipers in February at a mosque in the West Bank town of Hebron. It was 29, not 100.

Correction-Date: October 29, 1994, Saturday

Graphic

 
Photo: President Clinton and President Hafez el-Assad of Syria reviewed the honor guard at the Damascus Airport. (Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: October 28, 1994


End of Document