CLINTON-ERA POLICIES BLINDED FBI, ASHCROFT TESTIFIES/ RENO SAYS HER DIRECTIVES HAD NO SUCH RESTRICTIONS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 14, 2004 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1; ANALYSIS/U.S. INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS
Length: 1794 words
Byline: Bill Lambrecht/ Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft on Tuesday blamed counterterrorism failings on a previous administration that had "blinded itself to its enemies" while he defended his own alleged lapses as he testified before the Sept. 11 commission.
On a day of conflicting testimony and agonizing ac-counts of missed opportunities, Ashcroft took the most aggressive tone in a parade of law enforcement officials sum-moned to explain their role in the intelligence failure.
Former Attorney General Janet Reno also testified, as did ex-FBI director Louis Freeh and former top officials in the FBI and CIA. The current FBI director, Robert Mueller, will take his turn on the hot seat today as the commission concludes the law enforcement and intelligence phase of its investigation.
Wan and 20 pounds lighter after gallbladder surgery less than six weeks ago, Ashcroft was nonetheless vigorous in blaming President Bill Clinton's administration for policies that he said had built a wall that restricted the flow of intelligence information.
Ashcroft produced a newly declassified 1995 memorandum stamped SECRET that he said effectively prohibited the sharing of intelligence within the FBI. He observed that the document was written by one of the commission members doing the grilling, Jamie Gorelick, a former deputy attorney general.
Federal agents "were isolated by government-imposed walls, handcuffed by government-imposed restrictions and starved for basic information technology," Ashcroft said.
"We did not know an attack was coming because for nearly a decade our government had blinded itself to its enemies," he said.
His words conflicted with testimony of Reno, who asserted earlier in the day that her directives for separating criminal justice and terrorism cases posed "no legal restrictions at all on the ability of members of the intelligence community to share intelligence information with each other."
Two commission members questioned the accuracy of another Ashcroft assertion - that covert-action limitations implemented during the Clinton administration prohibited assassination of Osama bin Laden.
Ashcroft said that when he became attorney general, he had requested expanded covert action rules "to allow for decisive, lethal action; we should end the failed 'capture' policy. We should find and kill bin Laden."
Richard Ben-Veniste, one of two commissioners who questioned Ashcroft's statement, said that because of national security reasons, he could not say why it was wrong.
Priorities questioned
In perhaps the day's most clear-cut conflict, Ashcroft denied an assertion by former acting FBI director Thomas Pickard that Ashcroft told Pickard that he wanted to hear less during their meetings about the terrorist threat.
"I did never speak to him saying that I did not want to hear about terrorism," Ashcroft said, removing his glasses and responding forcefully to a question from commission member James Thompson, a former Illinois governor.
Instead, Ashcroft said that he had interrogated Pickard during their meetings in summer 2001.
Ashcroft also dismissed Pickard's recollection that Ashcroft had not made terrorism a high priority in the months leading up to the attacks on New York and Washington. Pickard testified that on Sept. 10, in the hours before the attacks, Ashcroft had turned down a final appeal to bolster the counterterrorism budget.
Ashcroft conceded that, unlike Reno, he had not been privy to the presidential daily briefings. That included the now-famous Aug. 6, 2001, briefing that suggested bin Laden was determined to strike in the United States.
That instance of apparently faulty communication was one of many highlighted by the commission as potentially fateful stumbles that prevented the government from moving swiftly enough against terrorism leading up to 9-11.
A commission report said that on July 5, two months before the attack, the CIA had alerted Ashcroft to the al-Qaida threat, "warning that a significant terrorist attack was imminent and a strike could occur at any time."
But the urgency did not spread through the ranks of Ashcroft's Justice Department, the staff report said.
As an example, the report said that an international terrorism squad supervisor in the Washington field office, six blocks from FBI headqu arters, told the commission that he wasn't aware in summer 2001 of an increased threat and therefore took no special precautions.
Lapses are cited
New commission staff reports and testimony Tuesday highlighted the lack of communication in both the Justice Department and the CIA that impeded the capture of at least two 9-11 hijackers and a potential one known to be in the country planning the attack.
In one prominent case noted by the commission, officials didn't recognize the significance when terrorism suspect Zacarias Moussaoui was taken into custody in August 2001 when it was discovered that he was attending flight school in Minnesota.
Because of a dispute between FBI field agents and supervisors, no search warrant was immediately obtained to search his computer. The commission report said that if Moussaoui's computer had been searched they might have unearthed his connections to a cell in Germany, where the hijacking plot is believed to have been hatched.
Pickard testified that he didn't learn of Moussaoui's arrest and other potential clues until he gathered more than 50 field supervisors on a conference call on the afternoon of Sept. 11.
Similarly, the search for two men who were later identified as Sept. 11 hijackers, Khalid al-Mihdhar and Nawaf al-Hazmi, dragged because of confusion over sharing intelligence leads with FBI criminal agents. One upshot of that snafu was assigning the case to an inexperienced agent not fully aware of the need for speed.
One of the staff reports used a basketball analogy, saying the CIA deployed a "zone defense" focusing on a geographical area where an attack might happen, while the FBI took a "man-to-man" approach zeroing in on individuals.
Commission investigators described the FBI's counterintelligence as hobbled by information-hoarding and a continuing focus on drug trafficking and other crimes rather than shifting to anti-terrorism efforts. In 2000, twice as many agents were devoted to illegal drugs than to combating terrorism, and at the time of the attack, just 6 percent of the FBI's personnel was directed toward terrorism intelligence work.
Anti-terrorism work was viewed in the FBI as "backwaters" where advancement came hard because of the agency's traditional focus on arrests and indictments as examples of success, a commission report said.
Ongoing threat
Freeh, who was FBI director for a decade until June 2001, remarked that terrorism was not on the minds of Americans.
"Terrorism was not discussed; this was not an issue that the (presidential) candidates, the people talked about during that period," he said.
But Freeh acknowledged under questioning that the FBI lacked the capacity to analyze information, which he blamed on a shortage of money from Congress.
Commission chairman Thomas Kean, a former governor of New Jersey, is among those suggesting that a new domestic spy agency may be needed to remedy the nation's disjointed intelligence apparatus. He has pointed to Britain's MI-5, an intelligence service separate from Britain's law enforcement agencies.
Reno contended that the nation would be making a mistake to set up such a department in the government. "The worst thing you can do is create another agency, and they will be asking whether they can share this and that," she said.
The session took place in the Senate hearing room across the street from the Capitol that has produced riveting testimony in recent weeks first by the government's former terrorism chief, Richard Clarke, and last week by national security adviser Condoleezza Rice.
Empty seats suggested that the public's fascination with the 9-11 inquiry might be waning, but the hearings nonetheless produced some emotional moments.
Pickard described being haunted by the terrorist attacks, how he and others in law enforcement "over and over relive the days prior to 9-11, searching both our memories and our actions for missed chances."
He recalled an individual he didn't name who was tormented after surviving the World Trade Center attacks. "He told a number of people about his thoughts. Some months later, for this and probably other reasons, life became too difficult for him, and he took his life," he said.
Pickard said he had talked to current and former FBI officials who asked him to give the families of the 9-11 victims a message: "Each day the FBI family suffers with you the memory of 9-11."
Pickard described in alarming terms the sophistication and abundance of budding terrorists.
"Al-Qaida was turning out five times more graduates from their camps than the FBI and CIA were graduating from their training schools," he said.
Cofer Black, former director of the CIA's counterterrorism center, delivered an equally sobering analysis of the terrorism threat.
"No matter how many plots we uncover and disrupt, no matter how many terrorist organizations we degrade or destroy, another individual or group will rise to take their place," he said. "We need to remind the American public of this reality."
===
Tuesday's developments
* Report from the staff of the Sept. 11 commission cites chronic problems within the FBI, including limited intelligence and analysis capabilities, outdated technology, poor information-sharing and floundering attempts at reorganization.
* Louis Freeh, who headed the FBI from 1993 to mid-2001, testified that he sought permission to hire almost 1,900 counterterrorism linguists, analysts and agents in his last three years but was allowed to add just 76. He also said legal impediments made it difficult for agents to pursue terrorism investigations.
* Former Attorney General Janet Reno also spoke of a lack of resources but said the FBI under Freeh did a poor job keeping track of the information its agents gathered. "The FBI didn't know what it had," she said. "The right hand didn't know what the left hand was doing."
* Attorney General John Ashcroft, Reno's successor, said a key reason for the failures to uncover the terror plot was a legal restriction that prevented sharing of FBI intelligence information with criminal investigators. Ashcroft said the Justice Department was still operating under the previous administration's budget in 2001. He said President George W. Bush had proposed the largest counterterrorism budget increase for five years and was moving urgently to upgrade the FBI's antiquated computer systems when the attacks took place.
* Former acting FBI Director Thomas Pickard, who headed the bureau just before the attacks, told the panel Ashcroft did not seem to consider terrorism a priority.

Notes

FOCUS ON TERROISM/ Reporter Bill Lambrecht/ E-mail: blambrecht@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 202-298-6880  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Color PHOTO headshot - (John) Ashcroft/ Says 1995 memo prohibited intelligence sharing within FBI/ (2) Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Former U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno, in testimony Tuesday, cautioned against establishing another intelligence agency modeled after Britain's MI-5.

Load-Date: April 14, 2004


End of Document