CLINTON GETS OVATION FROM WORLD LEADERS / AT THE U.N., THERE ALSO WERE BEAR HUGS - AND EVEN SYMPATHY FROM A HIGH-RANKING IRAQI.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 22, 1998 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 824 words
Byline: John Donnelly, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


As America watched President Clinton's videotaped grand jury testimony yesterday, he received a rousing reception from the world's diplomats.
At the 53d annual U.N. General Assembly, leaders from around the world gave the battered President a standing ovation that lasted for a minute - a rare greeting. At a luncheon, two diplomats gave him bear hugs. And several diplomats - even a high-ranking Iraqi envoy - said later that they felt sympathy for the President.
"On a human level," said the envoy, whose delegation rarely has much good to say about the U.S. government and who asked not to be identified, "I feel really sad. I watched a few minutes of the videotape, and I couldn't tolerate it. I couldn't watch it anymore. He was in such an awkward situation. You know, we have a cultural saying: 'Cats usually feel happy in funerals because there's a lot of meat thrown out.' But we are not cats. We don't base our happiness in someone else's trouble."
The videotape was rolling unedited on television sets around the country and inside the U.N. building, but Clinton gave no indication of being bothered. Instead, he appeared touched by the moments of kindness.
Clinton said nothing about the troubles displayed in the taped testimony. For him, the day was about foreign policy.
In a series of meetings, he addressed arguably the world's three most pressing issues back-to-back-to-back: fighting terrorism, halting nuclear proliferation, and arresting global economic crises. He had a private chat with Secretary-General Kofi Annan on what to do about Iraq, which has prevented some U.N. weapons inspectors from doing their jobs.
In an address to the General Assembly, Clinton argued that the spread of terrorism was not a clash between Western civilization and Islamic civilization, as some have suggested, but rather represented a split between civil and uncivil society. He also said it was not solely an American problem.
"Let me urge all of us to think in terms of terrorism, to see it not as a clash of cultures or political action by other means, or a divine calling, but a clash . . . between those who tear down and those who build up, between hope and fear, chaos and community," Clinton said.
Later, National Security Adviser Samuel R. Berger said the President intended to submit a $1.8 billion emergency supplemental bill to Congress to expand the fight against terrorism. Berger said the money would be used to rebuild the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, which were bombed in August, to build defensive barriers for other embassies, and to beef up intelligence-gathering.
"This will not solve all of the problems we have" at embassies, Berger said. "But we've looked at the most serious problems, and these are the ones that we need to address on an emergency basis."
After the U.N. speech, Clinton met privately with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawal Sharif, who told the President he was pleased by the diplomats' standing ovation. Berger quoted Sharif as saying: "It reflects the love and respect the international community has for you."
In their meeting, according to Berger, Sharif indicated he would have a "positive statement" on nuclear nonproliferation in his address to the General Assembly later in the week. Clinton and his top foreign policy team have quietly held talks with Indian and Pakistani officials since the two countries conducted nuclear tests in May. Berger said yesterday that those discussions would continue.
In a nod to Pakistan's troubles, Clinton said in his meeting that he understood the country's economic difficulties and expressed "his hope that we would be able to ease or lift the sanctions" imposed after the Pakistani nuclear tests, Berger said. Such action would need congressional approval.
And on global economics, Clinton told a friendly audience at New York University later in the day that it was in the self-interest of developed societies to "help make the global economy work" for the Third World and for economies now in the midst of crisis.
U.N. diplomats appeared to be pleased by the image of an engaged U.S. president tackling some of the world's problems, but some officials expressed concern.
"This [Lewinsky] matter has to be a distraction to him," said Pierre Lelong, Haiti's U.N. ambassador. "But the problems of the world cannot be set aside. Terrorism cannot be set aside. The problems of drugs cannot be set aside. We need a strong American president to help us deal with these issues."
Enkhsaikhan Jargalsaikhan, Mongolia's U.N. ambassador and head of the legal committee studying ways to battle terrorism, said the world needed Clinton: "Look even at the problems of Mongolia. We have a border with Russia, so what happens with the crisis there affects us. We are surrounded by two nuclear states, so we care deeply about nuclear proliferation. And every nation is affected by this global economic crisis and terrorism. It's unfortunate what is happening to your president."

Notes

The Clinton Testimony

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document