CLINTON: ARAFAT STILL ON BOARD SAYS PLO CHAIRMAN HAS PROMISED TO COMBAT TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
October 26, 1994 Wednesday PM EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 05
Length: 495 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, Associated Press
Dateline: AQABA, Jordan
Body


President Clinton, poised to join a historic treaty-signing ceremony at the Israeli-Jordan border, said today PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat pledged a "firm and unambiguous" fight against terrorism.
But the promise came even as Arafat, angry over treaty language giving Jordan a special role in administering Jersualem's holy sites, organized protests in the West Bank and Arab East Jerusalem. He already had decided to boycott the signing ceremony.
Clinton met with the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak earlier today in Cairo. After that session, Clinton proclaimed himself "satisfied with the response" he gave.
Mubarak, whose country made peace with Israel 15 years ago, said the countries laboring for reconciliation in the troubled region must not allow terrorists to "spoil the peace process."
Clinton sounded upbeat after his session Arafat, who reached a limited peace accord with Israel last year, on the need for the PLO leader to do more to control Hamas and other Islamic extremist groups.
"Chairman Arafat said he would continue to do all he could to combat terrorism, specifically Hamas, but other groups as well," Clinton said.
"I felt that we got a very firm and unambiguous response," the president added. "He understands, I think, clearly that Hamas is his enemy now."
Hamas has been linked to last week's bloody bus bombing in Tel Aviv and the execution of an Israeli soldier.
Clinton began his six-nation Mideast trip with a nighttime visit to the grave of assassinated Egyptian leader Anwar Sadat, who signed the Arab world's first full peace pact with Israel.
The United States has appealed to Arafat to do more to rein in militants in Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho, which the PLO administers under its agreement with Israel. But, so far Arafat has had limited success in controlling the extremists.
"I think we would all admit that it is impossible to guarantee 100 percent success in any effort," Clinton said. "What we want is 100 percent effort."
Administration officials, agreeing with Israeli leaders, take the view that Arafat is at a critical juncture, having to decide whether to pursue broader self-rule on the West Bank by negotiating with Israel or to line up with militants trying to obstruct the peace process.
In fact, Secretary of State Warren Christopher had said in advance of Arafat's meeting with Clinton that the PLO chairman had to choose between peace with Israel or tolerance of Hamas.
Christopher suggested that Arafat use his 11,000-person security force to control the Hamas militants. "I think it's one or the other. Either get along with Hamas or get along with Israel and us," he told reporters aboard Air Force One en route to Egypt.
Arafat did not appear at the news conference with Clinton and Mubarak.
At a photo session at the beginning of their meeting, however, the PLO leader was asked how he would choose. "My choice is the peace, the peace of the brave," he replied.

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document