Clinton escalates the war on terrorism
USA TODAY
May 22, 1998, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 392 words
Byline: M.J. Zuckerman
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Clinton today presents a sweeping new
strategy for coordinating a U.S. war on terrorism.
At the Naval Academy commencement in Annapolis, Md., Clinton will
offer an overview of the "security landscape" of the future
and outline a new level of commitment to training, research and
developing ways to thwart terrorist plots.
The speech will enable Clinton to "talk to the next generation
of military leaders about the next generation of national security
threats," says Richard Clarke, who will be appointed to the newly
created post of national coordinator for security, infrastructure
protection and counterterrorism.
"What we have to worry about is the potential threat and the
new ways of attacking large numbers of people (using) technology,"
says Clarke.
Clinton is expected to announce that after years of study, he
has signed two directives assigning specific jobs to Cabinet-level
departments.
One directive covers "unconventional threats to the homeland"
-- such as chemical or biological agents.
It is a road map for action on security precautions, prosecution
and international cooperation.
The second deals exclusively with computer security and protecting
the nation's critical infrastructure, such as communications,
power grids, finance systems, pipelines, water supplies and government
services.
The directives, to be completed in five years, include:
-- Stepping-up efforts to gather intelligence to "disrupt"
terrorist threats. The FBI and CIA have assigned thousands of
agents to those tasks.
-- More money for research -- perhaps $ 1 billion a year -- to
develop tools for detecting cyberassaults and isolating the spread
of such assaults.
-- A study of vulnerabilities in the Global Positioning Satellite
System.
-- Vigorously recruiting computer technicians for law enforcement.
-- Stockpiling vaccines and antibiotics to treat civilians in
the event of germ warfare.
-- Creating a National Infrastructure Assurance Council, an industry-government,
federal-local panel to share information on cyber threats.
Although a presidential commission reported in October that it
found "no evidence of an impending cyberattack," Clarke says
other countries -- not just teen hackers -- are looking for U.S.
vulnerabilities.
"We can say there's evidence of foreign powers engaging in cyber
reconnaissance," against the United States. "And we hope that's
all it's been."

Load-Date: May 22, 1998


End of Document