Clinton Urges Fast Action on Terrorism Bill
The New York Times
May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 4;  National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 653 words
Byline: By TIM WEINER 

By TIM WEINER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 8
Body


Returning political fire from Speaker Newt Gingrich, President Clinton today urged quick passage of a bill to give Federal agents sweeping new eavesdropping powers for combatting terrorism.
Boarding Air Force One for a flight to Russia, Mr. Clinton said the proposed new law should be passed without delay and without politics degrading the debate.
Drafted after the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, the bill proposes increases in the investigative powers of the Government, but such provisions have been criticized from both the right and the left as a threat to civil liberties and an undue expansion of Federal power.
"Nothing can justify turning this bill into a political football," Mr. Clinton said. "We have kept politics completely out of our fight against terrorism. We kept it out of our mourning. We kept it out of our law-enforcement efforts. We are going to keep it out of the rebuilding efforts in Oklahoma. And we must keep it out of this legislative effort."
The President's comments were an indirect response to criticisms raised by Mr. Gingrich yesterday. The Speaker said there was a "genuine fear of the Federal Government" in the land, a fear that Easterners and urbanites failed to understand, which should not be addressed by an increase in Government powers.
Mr. Gingrich also said that Attorney General Janet Reno's decision to promote a senior official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Larry A. Potts, to become the bureau's deputy director "will further slow down the terrorist legislation."
Mr. Potts is trusted by the Director of the F.B.I., Louis J. Freeh, and has received praise for his work on the Oklahoma City case. But he was officially censured for his role in a 1992 siege at the home of a radical white separatist, Randall C. Weaver, in Ruby Ridge, Idaho, in which Mr. Weaver's unarmed wife was killed by an F.B.I. sharpshooter. He also oversaw the 1993 raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., in which about 80 people died in a fire after an assault by Federal law-enforcement officials.
Republican members of Congress have scheduled hearings this month on the Texas and Idaho confrontations, a potential political embarrassment for Federal law-enforcement authorities.
Politics aside, the President said today, the proposed legislation "will strengthen our ability to investigate and prosecute and to deter, to deter the kinds of problems we saw and the kind of horror we endured at Oklahoma City."
"The Government needs the ability to deal with the technological challenges presented by terrorism in the modern age," he said. "This legislation does it, and there is simply no reason to delay it."
The bill would allow the Administration to hire up to 1,000 new agents, prosecutors and other Federal law-enforcement and support personnel to investigate, deter and prosecute terrorist activity. It would create a national Domestic Counterterrorism Center, headed by the F.B.I. A large counterterrorism center already exists at the Central Intelligence Agency, but the C.I.A.'s charter forbids it from spying on Americans.
The legislation would also permit the Government to obtain a wiretap to investigate any suspected Federal felony, and would lower legal barriers to the use of eavesdropping evidence in court. Federal agents would have expanded powers to search credit records.
Telephone companies would have to help Government wiretappers gain access to digital telecommunications lines under court orders; digital lines are difficult to bug without the companies' assistance.
And the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878, which restricts the military's involvement in domestic law enforcement, would be changed to allow soldiers to help investigate crimes involving high explosives, chemicals and biological weapons.
At the F.B.I.'s headquarters in Washington, officials said the 20th day of the Oklahoma City investigation produced no significant new leads.

Load-Date: May 9, 1995


End of Document