Clinton flip-flop angers terrorism victims' kin President blocks compensation he called for in 1996
USA TODAY
October 28, 1999, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 528 words
Byline: Tom Squitieri
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- After Cuba's air force shot down planes flown by
members of a Florida-based anti-Castro group in 1996, President
Clinton called on Congress to pass legislation giving victims'
families access to the frozen assets of terrorist governments.
Congress did just that. But when two sets of victims went to court
and won compensation, the Clinton administration blocked the families
from receiving the awards.
Clinton's controversial decision in August to offer clemency to
16 Puerto Rican terrorists has prompted new efforts by the families
and sympathetic members of Congress to force the administration
to allow the awards due under the 1996 Anti-Terrorism Act.
"I don't believe our policy against terrorism works very well,"
Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., said Wednesday at a Senate hearing.
Stuart Eizenstat, deputy treasury secretary, said granting the
payments would violate international law, could cause the United
States to violate diplomatic law and would likely use up all of
the frozen assets. He also said the assets are significant leverage
needed by U.S. negotiators to deal with terrorist states.
Eizenstat did not directly respond to repeated requests by senators
to explain why Clinton sought the bill and said it was proper
under international law in 1996 but now opposes it. Instead, he
suggested the problem be solved by forming a commission to study
the matter.
Feinstein scoffed at that suggestion. "Somebody who doesn't know
what to do says, 'Get a commission.' "
In 1996, Clinton signed with much fanfare the Anti-Terrorism Act
that permitted Americans harmed by acts sponsored by Cuba, Iran
and other nations on the State Department's terrorism list to
seek compensation in U.S. courts against those countries. The
United States has blocked$ 166 million in Cuban assets; the government
could not provide a specific total for frozen Iranian assets.
In 1997, a federal judge awarded $ 187 million to relatives of
the pilots from Brothers to the Rescue, a Cuban exile group that
rescued boat refugees fleeing Cuba. In 1998, relatives of Alisa
Flatow, a New Jersey student killed in Israel by a terrorist bomb
attack, won $ 247.5 million in damages against Iran, which supported
the terrorist group.
In both cases, Clinton used his waiver power under the act to
claim national security interests to block distribution of the
Cuban and Iranian assets.
"No words can possibly explain our shock when we went to court
and found U.S. attorneys sitting down at the same table as Cuba's
attorneys," said Maggie Alejandre Khuly, the sister of one of
the downed pilots. "We thought Cuba was the terrorist, the guilty
party."
Stephen Flatow, the father of Alisa Flatow, told how Clinton called
him when Alisa died on April 10, 1995, and promised to help find
those responsible. He attended Clinton's signing of the Anti-Terrorism
Act.
However, "more than a year after obtaining my judgment, I'm still
being opposed by the State Department in my efforts to make the
Iranians pay the price prescribed by the Anti-Terrorism Act,"
he said.
Sens. Connie Mack, R-Fla., and Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., have
introduced a bill to restrict Clinton's ability to waive future
judgments.
The White House opposes the bill.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Larry Downing, Reuters; Flatow: Clinton called him when his daughter died in a bombing in 1995. The State Department now opposes his efforts to make Iran pay damages.

Load-Date: October 28, 1999


End of Document