CLINTON TO ATTEND ANTI-TERROR SUMMIT;
U.S., EGYPT WILL HOST MEETING AIMED AT SAVING PEACE PROCESS; ARAB STATES;
LIKELY TO ATTEND
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 8, 1996, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 510 words
Byline: ANN DEVROY AND THOMAS W. LIPPMAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton will travel to Egypt Wednesday to join other world leaders in a hastily organized summit meeting aimed at emphasizing international condemnation of the terrorism that is threatening to destroy the Middle East peace process.
White House officials said yesterday evening that the United States, at the urging of Jordan and Israel, was sponsoring the anti-terrorism conference, to be hosted by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Participants will include Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, Jordan's King Hussein, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, and probably representatives of other Arab countries, Russia and the G-7 economic powers, the officials said.
Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Qatar are likely to participate, Arab diplomats said. Syrian President Hafez Assad will be invited, White House spokesman Michael McCurry said, but it is not known if he will attend. Syria is technically still at war with its neighbor Israel and is base for several terrorist organizations.
Whatever the outcome of the meeting, Arab diplomats said, the fact that Egypt would host and other Arab countries would attend a high-level gathering aimed at halting terrorism in Israel would bolster pro-peace forces in the region. The summit also will dramatize the relative isolation of Hamas, the extremist group that has claimed responsibility for recent suicide bombings in Israel, they said.
The meeting is to be held at Sharm el Sheik, a scuba-diving resort at the southern tip of Egypt's Sinai peninsula, White House officials said. Clinton will go on from there to make a brief visit to Israel, they said.
A senior U.S. official said the conference grew out of a conversation between the Jordanians and Israelis and was heavily promoted by Peres. Officials said PLO leader Arafat also gave the conference strong backing.
The G-7 countries, which are expected to participate, include Britain, France, Germany, Japan and other leading industrialized democracies.
According to Arab diplomats and State Department officials, one purpose of the meeting is to put on a show of public commitment to the objective of isolating nations that support terrorism. Another is to try to get more money for Arafat's Palestinian Authority, on the theory that he is trying to break up the terrorist rings and needs more assistance.
Arab diplomats said they did not know if Syria would attend. A Syrian diplomat attended a White House meeting two days ago at which the idea of the conference was discussed, but did not take a position, U.S. officials said.
U.S. officials said they recognize that the invitation could put Syrian president Assad in a tough spot. He could refuse to attend, in which case he could probably forget about getting Syria off the State Department's list of nations that sponsor terrorism, and he also would undermine his campaign to persuade Israel to return the Golan Heights to Syrian control.
Or Assad could attend but refuse to make any commitments, in which case he might win points in Washington and Jerusalem but not enough to achieve his diplomatic objectives.

Load-Date: March 23, 1996


End of Document