CLINTON, CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS TO MEET TODAY ABOUT TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 29, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 517 words
Body


NEW ORLEANS (AP) - A day after a pipe-bomb explosion cast a pall over
the Summer Olympics, President Clinton summoned congressional leaders
to the White House today to seek tougher measures against a growing
threat of terrorism.
"As Americans, we can and must join together to defeat terrorism
wherever it strikes and whoever practices it," the president said in a
speech Sunday.
Specifically, he said Congress should reverse itself and make it
easier to wiretap telephones used by suspected terrorists. And he
called for a requirement for putting chemical markers, known as
taggants, in explosives to make it easier to track down bomb makers.
The president vowed "to do whatever is necessary to give law
enforcement the tools they need to find terrorists before they strike
and to bring them swiftly to justice when they do."
To build a case for tougher steps, Clinton invited FBI Director Louis
Freeh to today's meeting. The president said he was encouraged by
comments by House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who exppessed willingness to
consider expanded wiretaps and taggants.
Gingrich, R-Ga., was invited to today's meeting, along with Senate
Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., Senate Minority Leader Tom
Daschle, D-S.D. and House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, D-Mo. All
were expected to attend, White House deputy press secretary David
Johnson said.
Under pressure from liberals and conservatives, Congress dropped the
wiretap provision in anti-terrorism legislation Clinton signed April
24. The taggant provision also was watered down.
Gingrich, interviewed on NBC's "Meet the Press," said, "I think that
we should have a provision that allows us to recognize that we now
live in the age of the cellular telephone and allows us to track an
individual person" He said the taggant requirement was "a
possibility."
The threat of terrorism was Clinton's primary focus as he addressed
the 75th annual convention of the Disabled American Veterans.
Before an audience of many World War II veterans, Clinton said, "You
know what it is personally to face an enemy. Today, we have an enemy
it is difficult to face, because the enemy is so often hidden, killing
at random, surfacing only to perform cowardly acts.
"Their aim is to demoralize us as a people and to spread fear into
everyday life. We must not let them do that."
Clinton got a good reception from the DAV and was welcomed with strong
applause. A conservative radio talk show host had urged listeners
Friday to complain about the president's appearance, triggering a
flood of calls to a DAV service center here.
The president said "we all are outraged" by the bombing in Atlanta.
"We all admire the athletes, the thousands of volunteers, the tens of
thousands of fans who made a strong statement to the world yesterday
when they showed up and carried on the Olympics, saying that they
would not be intimidated by terrorism and that no terrorist could kill
the Olympic spirit."
In the aftermath of the TWA explosion and the Atlanta bombing, t
errorism has suddenly moved to the front of the nation's domestic
agenda, drawing election-year attention from both Clinton and
Republican rival Bob Dole.

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document