Clinton wants to boost security - President may seek funds for upgrades at U.S. diplomatic posts  
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 22, 1998, Tuesday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 292 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


UNITED NATIONS - President Clinton says he is ready to ask Congress
for emergency funding to upgrade security at U.S. diplomatic posts
around the world as he renews a global call to arms against terrorism.
"This is a threat to all humankind," Clinton said Monday in a
21-minute speech to the opening of the 53rd session of the United
Nations General Assembly.
Stressing that the United States is carrying its load in the
anti-terrorism battle, aides said the congressional request Clinton
mentioned in his U.N. speech will be for $ 1.8 billion to repair damage
to the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that were bombed last
month and to strengthen embassy security worldwide.
Rather than focus on specific actions to combat terrorism, Clinton
sought in his speech to define the global scope of the problem and
dispel the idea that it is caused by an inevitable clash of cultures
and a Western disregard for poorer nations.
"It is a grave misconception to see terrorism as only, or even mostly,
an American problem," Clinton said. "Indeed, it is a clear and
present danger to tolerant and open societies and innocent people
everywhere."
He listed terrorist incidents around the world over the past decade,
including deaths in Northern Ireland, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Sri Lanka
and Argentina, as well as the bombings last month at the U.S.
embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 12 Americans.
"Some people believe that terrorism's principal fault lines center on
what they see as an inevitable clash of civilizations," he said. "It
is an issue that deserves a lot of debate in this great hall.
Specifically, many believe there is an inevitable clash between
Western civilizations and Western values and Islamic civilizations and
values. I believe this view is terribly wrong."

Load-Date: September 24, 1998


End of Document