Clinton proposes $2.8 billion to fight terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 23, 1999, Saturday


Copyright 1999, Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. a 2
Length: 486 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


Raising consciousness: A new wave of cyber-era threats sparks the spending plan
WASHINGTON (AP) - Warning that terrorists are seeking new ways to strike, President Clinton said Friday "we must be ready" for attacks against computer networks and using chemical and germ warfare. He urged spending $ 2.8 billion more to safeguard the nation.
"This is not a cause for panic," the president said. "It is a cause for serious, deliberate, disciplined, long-term concern." He said that "we have a better-than-good chance of success."
Clinton spoke of cyber-era threats in a speech before the National Academy of Sciences, dwelling on a subject of deepening concern and anxiety in the White House. Four years ago, the world was shocked by a nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway; more recently there has been a rash of anthrax hoaxes in the Los Angeles area.
"We do not know of any imminent attack being planned in the United States using chemical or biological weapons or using cyber-attack techniques," said Richard Clarke, the president's national coordinator for anti-terrrorism programs.
"But we do want to raise consciousness … that such attacks are growing increasingly likely," he said at a White House briefing with Attorney General Janet Reno and Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala.
Clinton said that terrorists, recognizing they cannot defeat the United States with military force, are seeking "new tools of destruction."
"We must be ready - ready if our adversaries try to use computers to disable power grids, banking, communications and transportation networks, police, fire and health services of military assets," the president said.
Likewise, Clinton said, "we have to be ready to detect and address a biological attack promptly, before the disease spreads."
Clinton's $ 2.8 billion proposal must be approved by Congress. It represents a 40 percent increase for cyber defense over 1997. It would double spending for chemical and biological weapons defense over two years. The $ 2.8 billion would be in addition to Clinton's $7.2 billion request for conventional counterterrorism security programs.
The president acknowledged that the United States has been too slow to react to new challenges.
"For too long," he said, "the problem has been that not enough has been done to recognize the threat and deal with it. And we in government, frankly, weren't as well-organized as we should have been for too long." He announced a sharp acceleration in the government's effort in May in a graduation speech at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md.
On Capitol Hill, Clinton's initiative got a better-late-than-never reaction from Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., chairman of the House Armed Services subcommittee on research and development. "We have been grossly underfunding programs to protect our information assets," Weldon said. "While a late step, the president's announcement should help us regain some lost ground."

Load-Date: January 26, 1999


End of Document