CLINTON TRIES TO CALM Y2K TERRORISM FEARS
Daily News (New York)
December 23, 1999, Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 416 words
Byline: By MARTIN MBUGUA, JOHN MARZULLI and RICHARD SISK DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body

President Clinton yesterday tried to soothe New Year's terror jitters yesterday even as the FBI arrested a man for allegedly threatening to blow up the Holland and Lincoln tunnels.
"We are doing everything we possibly can," Clinton said in the face of bomb scares that have prompted tighter security at airports and public buildings and sent FBI agents and police chasing tips on suspicious activities.
"For the citizens, I would say they ought to go about their holidays and enjoy themselves and make the most of it," Clinton said. "We're taking extraordinary efforts in the government to act, based on the incident out in the Pacific Northwest."
He was referring to the capture by customs officers in Washington State last week of Algerian national Ahmed Ressam, 32, as he got off a ferry from Canada, allegedly with the makings of a huge bomb in his car.
A federal grand jury in Seattle yesterday handed up a five-count indictment charging Ressam with smuggling explosives.
"This destructive device would easily have taken down a building," Assistant U.S. Attorney Francis Diskin said at Ressam's arraignment.
Ressam, who faces up to 40 years in prison if convicted, pleaded not guilty. He was held without bail.
Law enforcement officials also reportedly were looking for three suspects, whom they declined to name, as possible accomplices.
Nervous cops with bomb-sniffing dogs were pulling over vans at the entrances to several tunnels to Manhattan yesterday after an ominous message was posted on an Internet chat room.
The message threatened that a blue van packed with explosives would be parked sideways inside the Lincoln or Holland tunnel and detonated.
"FBI and CIA BEWARE!" the message read.
The FBI traced the message to the Newark home of Renato DeSousa Flor, and said he was arrested for transmitting threats across state lines.
Investigative sources said Flor was inspired by the movie "Arlington Road," starring Tim Robbins as a deranged terrorist.
The officials had yet to find a link between Ressam and alleged terror bankroller Osama Bin Laden, a Saudi exile in Afghanistan, but FBI counterterrorism chief Dale Watson said U.S. authorities were aware that Bin Laden had issued Islamic calls to action, or fatwas, against the United States.
Security was tighter at Kennedy Airport, where travelers didn't seem to mind extra searches and longer lines.
"So long as it's not harassment, it's a good thing," said Maya Korica, 16, a student from Pennsylvania who was boarding a flight for Germany.

Graphic

 
SHANNON STAPLETON TERROR WATCH City police officer and bomb-sniffing canine partner check vehicle at Midtown Tunnel yesterday. Security has been beefed up because of threats, including one posted on the Internet warning of tunnel bombings.

Load-Date: December 23, 1999


End of Document