CLINTON ENCOURAGED BY TALKS WITH SYRIA; 'SOMETHING IS CHANGING,' HE DECLARES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 28, 1994, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 969 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


In talks in Syria, President Bill Clinton said Thursday that President Hafez Assad "went beyond anything he said before" on making peace with Israel. Clinton then sped to Jerusalem to meet with Israeli officials who said progress, indeed, had been made.
Assad, who has built his career on confrontation with Israel, spoke anew of "full peace" in return for the Golan Heights and Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon, Clinton said. Clinton told the Israeli Knesset that "something is changing in Syria."
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin expressed confidence that Israel could overcome differences with Syria and Lebanon, the last two holdouts to peace among Israel's neighbors.
"It might take time. One has to be patient," Rabin said. "I believe that it will not take long, and hopefully we'll find ways and means by which to overcome these gaps."
Clinton said Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher would return to the Middle East in a few weeks on a follow-up peace mission.
Although Clinton stressed that a peace treaty was not at hand, U.S. officials said they believed that Assad had showed new and promising signs of flexibility.
After the first trip to Syria by a U.S. president in 20 years, Clinton observed that Assad had spoken openly about transforming the region from a state of war to a state of peace, enabling Arabs and Israelis to live in security, stability and prosperity. "We have been urging President Assad to speak to you in a language of peace that you can understand," Clinton said in an evening address to the Knesset. "Today he began to do so."
The president said he believed that "something is changing in Syria. Its leaders understand it is time to make peace."
Clinton's assurances were welcome news in a nation where tension is high after a surge of terrorism by Muslim extremists. But Israeli officials expressed disappointment that Assad did not publicly renounce terrorism, although Clinton said he had done so privately.
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres expressed caution after being briefed by Christopher. "Perhaps there's been a softening, but a softening of opening positions is still required and that still hasn't happened," Peres said.
Christopher also cautioned: "There's long, tough negotiations ahead."
Midway through a trip through six Mideast countries, Clinton bade farewell to King Hussein in Jordan, flew to Syria for talks at Assad's hilltop palace and then went on to Israel, where outside the Knesset he placed a wreath at a monument to Israel's fallen soldiers.
Clinton decided against visiting Jerusalem's holy places after a tentatively planned tour stirred up a political ruckus between Israelis and Palestinians, who dispute jurisdiction over the areas. But Hillary Rodham Clinton visited the Western Wall, bowing her head and slipping a written prayer into a crack between the ancient limestone blocks of Judaism's holiest shrine.
Damascus was Clinton's most difficult stop on a trip highlighted by celebration over a peace agreement between Israel and Jordan ended 46 years of hostility.
Remarking on his talks with Assad, Clinton said: "He drives a hard bargain. He's a tough man."
Clinton and Rabin adamantly refused to disclose specifically what had encouraged them about the talks with Assad. Rabin said it was obvious that there are important changes in attitude in the Arab world.
"Don't ask me today about details on this part or that part of the negotiations," Rabin said. He also reaffirmed that "in principle we have agreed to withdraw" from the Golan Heights but said that "there's no agreement on the border with Syria."
Clinton said in a news conference with Rabin that he had found changes in Syria's position on key issues. But Rabin said Clinton "did not tell me there is a historic breakthrough."
At a joint news conference with Clinton in Damascus, Assad flashed anger, first at questions about the sincerity of his commitment to peace with Israel and then when asked whether Syria sponsors terrorism, as the United States charges.
"There's nothing we have that proves our design for peace except our saying we want peace," Assad snapped. Questioning Israel's intentions, he asked: "What also makes us believe that they want peace?"
Although Assad denied any role in terrorism, Christopher said later that "it continues to be an issue between us and Syria." He said the United States believed that Syria gives safe harbor and support to terrorists.
Clinton said Assad had told him privately that he opposed the killing of innocent civilians in last week's bus bombing in Tel Aviv as well as in the massacre of Muslim worshipers in Hebron by a Jewish extremist. But, he said in his news conference with Rabin, "I regret that . . . President Assad did not take the opportunity to say in public what he said to me in private, and that is his deep regret about the loss of lives, and particularly the bus bombing."
Negotiations between Israel and Syria broke off in February after more than two years of inconclusive talks. The major obstacle is Assad's insistence that Israel withdraw completely from the Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 Middle East War. Israel has offered a partial withdrawal over several years.
Syria also wants Israel to withdraw from Lebanon, where Syria is the de facto power, and to dismantle Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Standing alongside Clinton, Assad stressed the principle of "full withdrawal for full peace."
He made a somewhat similar comment last winter after meeting with Clinton in Geneva. However, American officials thought that it was particularly significant that Assad did not mention the West Bank and Gaza or the status of Jerusalem on Thursday. Moreover, they were encouraged by his direct references to Israel within the context of "peaceful, normal relations."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Color Photo By AP - President Bill Clinton places his hand over his heart during the playing of the national anthem after he arrived Thursday at Ben-Gurion Airport in Israel. Standing with Clinton (from left) are Reuma Weizman, Israeli President Ezer Weizman and Hillary Rodham Clinton. (2) Color Photo By AP - Hillary Rodham Clinton speaks with Rabbi Yehuda Getz (left) and Jerusalem President Ehud Olmert during a visit to the Western Wall on Thursday. Mrs. Clinton slipped a prayer into a crack between the ancient blocks of Judaism's holiest shrine.

Load-Date: October 29, 1994


End of Document