CLINTON SUGGESTS AN ARRAY OF STEPS TO FOIL TERRORISM
The New York Times
September 10, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 1199 words
Byline: By TODD S. PURDUM 

By TODD S. PURDUM 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 9
Body


President Clinton challenged Congress today to find more than $1 billion a year to finance a catch-all collection of anti-terrorism measures, including sweeping new airline security equipment and procedures to use computerized records to single out some passengers for extra scrutiny.
The proposal also calls for stepped-up protection at Federal offices, museums and monuments around the nation and the world, as well as increased staffing for the F.B.I., the Federal Aviation Administration and Federal prosecutors and courts.
"We know we can't make the world risk-free, but we can reduce the risks we face, and we have to take the fight to the terrorists," Mr. Clinton said in an Oval Office ceremony where he accepted the recommendations of an airline safety commission headed by Vice President Al Gore. "If we have the will, we can find the way."
Senior Administration officials acknowledged that the measures, taken together, would commit the Government in the short term to expanding markedly its financial and operational role in assuring airport security, in the name of overall national security.
Airport security has been handled in the past largely by airlines and airports, and the Administration officials said that over time the commercial airline industry would also be expected to bear a significant part of the new costs, running to billions of dollars. But they said they could not estimate how large a portion of those costs would ultimately be borne by the carriers, or how the industry would finance it.
Aiming to reassure a public shaken by incidents from the Oklahoma City bombing to the explosion of Trans World Airlines Flight 800 -- and the security loopholes revealed after that crash, which investigators believe to have resulted from a bombing -- Mr. Clinton proposed not only new airline saftey measures but also a broader ranger of anti-terrorism provisions. They included a study of placing chemical markers in explosives to make them easier to trace, a step the Republican-controlled Congress has repeatedly rejected.
Officials said the initial $1 billion cost would be negotiated as part of the regular budget process in coming months and was not expected to require new revenue.
The first part of Mr. Clinton's proposal, with a cost of about $430 million, involves new air safety measures, some of them under consideration for years and others newly recommended by Mr. Gore in the wake of the explosion of Flight 800.
These include ordering immediate criminal background checks for airport workers with access to secure areas, starting a test program to match each piece of luggage with its passenger on all domestic flights (as is already done on international flights), making the National Transportation Safety Board the agency responsible for dealing with the families of air crash victims and creating a special computer tracking system to flag, or "profile," passengers and identify those with suspicious travel patterns or criminal histories.
The names, addresses, telephone numbers, travel histories and billing records of passengers would be run through a giant database that might lead to a search of the luggage of those deemed suspicious. That concept has raised the hackles of civil liberties groups concerned about privacy violations, and Mr. Gore has ordered the creation of an advisory group of civil liberties experts to consult on the development of the "profiling" system to insure that it does not violate privacy rights.
Kenneth Quinn, who was general counsel of the Federal Aviation Administration under President George Bush, warned that the proposals might be premature.
"This whole rapid-response concept has gotten out of hand," Mr.  Quinn said. "These are all very expensive, intrusive solutions in search of a problem. We still have not determined a probable cause on T.W.A. 800, and the normal domestic threat assessment has been quite low. You're talking about major expenditures and disruptions without knowing for certain what brought down this aircraft."
Mr. Quinn said airlines had customarily tried to respect passenger privacy to the greatest degree possible, and added, "This represents a whole new reach into the privacy interests of aviation passengers."
But Ivan Michael Schaeffer, president of the Woodside Travel Trust in Bethesda, Md., an alliance of travel agencies at 4,000 locations in 65 countries, said: "I think some travelers may be offended. However, it's prudent. We need to make the sky safe, and if the cost of making the sky safe is an intrusion of very low magnitude, that's not too high a price to pay."
At the same time, the President asked for $667 million to meet a variety of other security needs, including upgrading security at United States military and diplomatic installations around the world, relocating troops in the Perisan Gulf, enhancing security at the Government's infectious disease laboratories, replacing Secret Service equipment lost in the crash of a White House plane in Jackson, Wyo., last month, and increasing the staffing of Federal courts and prosecutors' offices to handle the expected rise in cases resulting from the recently passed anti-terrorism bill.
Jacob Lew, the acting director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, said the Administration believed that the intial $1.09 billion annual cost of all the measures could be met without increasing the deficit. He said that determining how to pay for the program would be part of overall negotiations on the budget for the fiscal year that starts Oct. 1, and of the annual appropriations process in Congress.
With the approach of the fall election and a Congressional recess, prospects for any immediate progress on the legislation are dubious at best. While promising to work with Mr. Clinton, some Republicans said the action was unnecessary, since Congress just passed the $1 billion anti-terrorism bill, in April.
"The Administration would be wise to utilize the resources Congress has already provided before it requests additional funding," said the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah.
Mr. Gore cautioned against expecting too much.
"There is no silver bullet or single magic answer," he said. "So we're presenting a combination of approaches -- some high-tech, some low-tech, even some no-tech."
Mr. Gore's senior domestic policy adviser, Elaine Kamarck, said the goal was to have the new equipment and procedures in place at all airports eventually, beginning with the biggest, busiest ones. She said the equipment would be distributed based on an assessment, to be conducted by the F.A.A., of the potential threat and need at each airport.
One member of the Vice President's commission, Kathleen Flynn, whose son was killed in the explosion of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, expressed hope that many of the recommendations initially proposed after that crash would at last be carried out.
"I think it's about time," she said. "The climate in America is such that the public is frustrated, and ready, willing and able to do something about it. We have a long, long road, and it's going to take a lot of work. The key here is oversight and implementation."

Graphic

 
Chart lists highlights of President Clinton's $1 billion anti-terrorism proposal      

Load-Date: September 10, 1996


End of Document