Clinton stumps for Obama in St. Pete
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 3, 2012 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 6
Length: 523 words
Byline: JEROME R. STOCKFISCH, The Tampa Tribune
Body


Former president says he's more enthusiastic than he was in 2008
BY JEROME R. STOCKFISCH
The Tampa Tribune
ST. PETERSBURG A hoarse but hearty Bill Clinton touted President Barack Obama's record as "decider-in-chief" on Friday, lauding his fellow Democrat's record on economic recovery, equal pay for women, health care and the war on terrorism.
"Look, we're coming down to the end of this election. And as usual, Florida's got a lot at stake," the 42nd president told about a thousand people at the Coliseum in downtown St. Petersburg. Noting that he had made about 70 campaign appearances for Obama in 2008, Clinton added, "I am far more enthusiastic about him this time than I was four years ago."
Obama inherited an economic crisis, Clinton said, "but then we started to come back."
In typical fashion, the Democrats' senior statesman delved into a wonkish analysis of the recovery, citing an economic treatise, "This Time It's Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly." Clinton called the book by economists Kennth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart "the most important book ever written on financial crisis."
Clinton recalled a conversation with author Rogoff, who said typical recovery from a situation such as the one faced by the United States would take 10 years. The former president asked Rogoff if Obama could shorten that time period.
"He said, 'We can do it in seven or eight years if we do the right thing,'" Clinton recalled. "Barack Obama is doing the right thing. He did a good job with a bad hand."
Clinton said that in signing the Lilly Ledbetter Equal Pay Act, Obama recognized that equal pay isn't a women's issue but an economic issue. He said the president has "fought terrorism strongly and pursued diplomacy vigorously."
On the subject of the Affordable Care Act -- a national health care program that Clinton himself was unable to push through Congress -- he referred to another former president's description of the highest job in the land, parroting George W. Bush's contention that it took a "decider-in-chief."
"This is a decider-in-chief issue," Clinton said. "There is a mountain of evidence ... The truth is that when you have insurance, you go to the doctor sooner, it costs less, you live longer. The reason I think they (the Mitt Romney camp) want to repeal it is that pesky little requirement that 85 percent of your premium goes to your health care and not to profits."
Clinton battled a belligerent sound system and his own hoarseness in his fourth Florida campaign appearance of the day, with a fifth to follow in Tallahassee. The previous day he appeared on behalf of Obama in Wisconsin and Ohio, and he was scheduled to visit additional swing states throughout the weekend.
Clinton was joined at the dais by Tampa Mayor Bob Buckhorn, U.S. Rep. Cathy Castor, and Charlie Crist, who served as Florida's governor as a Republican.
"This campaign is about optimism," said Crist, who has left the GOP. "The other guy's is about pessimism. It's a lot more fun to be here."
jstockfisch@tampatrib.com
(813) 259-7834
Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: November 5, 2012


End of Document