CLINTON SEEKS WAYS TO FIGHT TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 27, 1995, Thursday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 716 words
Byline: Tim Poor Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton unveiled a number of proposals Wednesday to beef up federal investigations of terrorism in the wake of the bombing in Oklahoma City.
His 12-point package includes a request for 1,000 new federal law enforcement officials to investigate, deter and prosecute terrorism at an estimated cost of $ 1.2 billion over five years.
His proposals would permit use of the armed services to fight crimes involving "weapons of mass destruction" and would expand the government's ability to wiretap.
The president stopped short of calling for expanded FBI authority to infiltrate domestic groups suspected of terrorism, one proposal that has drawn considerable concern from civil liberties groups.
Clinton discussed his proposals Wednesday afternoon with congressional leaders.
Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., said he hoped "all or most" of Clinton's proposals, along with some from members of Congress, could be passed by Memorial Day.
"We all agreed we should move as quickly as we can . . . but be careful about trampling on anybody's constitutional rights," Dole said.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., said everyone at the meeting voiced "a serious commitment . . . to write a bill that protects our civil liberties while protecting us. We're not going to rush this thing through."
House Minority Leader Richard A. Gephardt, just back from a trip to his district in St. Louis County, said "the American people are outraged" by the bombing and that Republicans and Democrats should "work hard to come up with one piece of legislation" that would enhance the government's ability to respond to terrorism.
Other parts of Clinton's proposals would have Congress:
Require the inclusion of "taggants" - microscopic particles - in raw materials for bombs that would permit their tracing after explosions.
Require the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to study whether common chemicals and other materials like fertilizer can be made so as to limit their usefulness in making bombs.
Allow the armed forces to participate in criminal investigations involving chemical, biological or other weapons of mass destruction.
Permit any federal felony to be used as a basis for wiretaps and electronic surveillance.
Ease restrictions on the use of information from such surveillance by foreign governments.
Allow the use of illegal surveillance unless law enforcement officers "acted in bad faith" in obtaining the evidence.
Authorize "roving" wiretaps in cases where suspects use several telephones.
Criminalize the use of chemical weapons in liquid or solid form.
Increase penalties for transferring a gun or explosive knowing it will be used to commit a violent crime or in drug trafficking.
Heighten punishment for acts of violence against all current and former federal employees and their families when the crime is related to the employee's official duties.
The Senate Judiciary Committee will hold a hearing today on one piece of legislation that Clinton sent to Congress earlier this year to curb international terrorism in the United States. The bill includes speedier procedures for deporting foreign terrorists.
Arab-American and civil liberties groups have criticized some parts of that bill. Guards Understaffed
According to The Associated Press, fewer than 400 uniformed guards are on duty at federal buildings around the country, even though the law calls for 1,000 officers.
Officials "simply didn't obey the law," says John Sturdivant, president of the American Federation of Government Employees.
Congress did not earmark enough money, counter officials of the General Services Administration.
Congress moved to increase the size of the federal security force in 1988, ordering the GSA to hire at least 50 additional officers each year and to reach the equivalent of 1,000 full-time officers by 1992. There were about 750 at the time.
But by the time of last week's bombing in Oklahoma City, fewer than 400 uniformed officers were on the payroll, said Jim Boyd, a security specialist for the Federal Protective Service, a division of GSA.
He said the service has had to rely on contract guards to help patrol federal buildings.
One contract guard was responsible for patrolling four federal buildings in Oklahoma City. He was not in the Alfred P. Murrah Building at the time of the explosion.

Load-Date: April 28, 1995


End of Document