Clinton urges updating anti-terrorism resources
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
May 22, 1998, Friday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 03G
Length: 537 words
Series: Final
Dateline: Washington
Body


Heading into the 21st century, the United States must amass germ-warfare vaccines and buttress its computer networks against cyber-terrorists, the Clinton administration says. In remarks prepared for a commencement speech at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., today, President Clinton called for an interconnected ''cyber-system'' and national center for warning of and responding to attacks on the computers that control the stock market, banking, utilities and air traffic. Private companies including IBM, Dell Computers, Bell South and GTE have already agreed to participate in the system, which Clinton wants to be fully operational by 2003, the Associated Press reported, quoting a White House official. Clinton is appointing National Security Council adviser Richard Clarke, who specializes in such issues as drug trafficking and terrorism, to oversee the project. Former Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia and Jamie Gorelick, formerly the Justice Department's No. 2 official and now Fannie Mae's vice chairwoman, will lead a private industry advisory group, the AP said. On another terrorist front, Clinton was to tell Navy graduates he has ordered the stockpiling of antibiotics and vaccines for civilian protection in the event of biological warfare. At least two recent White House briefings with experts in chemical and biological weapons convinced Clinton of the urgency of these initiatives, presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said Thursday. Headlines during Clinton's presidency such as the nerve-gas attack on Tokyo's subway system in 1995 and the 1993 World Trade Center bombing also have underscored the changing nature of national security.
''The new threats in this world are not the old Cold War threats of a world divided by ideology,'' McCurry said. ''They are the threats that present themselves because of the proliferation of information technologies, the organization of criminal behavior that sometimes crosses international lines.'' Establishing vaccine stockpiles for the U.S. cities considered most vulnerable could cost billions of dollars and take years to achieve. The Defense Department announced last year it was stockpiling, at an estimated five-year cost of $ 320 million, anthrax, smallpox and other vaccines for the 2.4 million people in the active and reserve military. Any civilian stockpile would require far more doses. ''There is some spending involved with this but, in part, it's both a change of attitude, a way in which we organize ourselves better, and a way in which we better prepare ourselves in case we face a terrorist threat,'' McCurry said. Moreover, the initiative requires further scientific innovation. Anthrax is the only potential germ weapon for which a vaccine has been proven safe and approved by the Food and Drug Administration. ''This is clearly something that will take some time,'' Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters Thursday. ''There's still a lot of scientific work that has to be done in a number of these vaccines in terms of developing them and achieving FDA approval.'' One group of specialists advising the White House on this issue listed five agents posing the most immediate threat: anthrax, smallpox, plague, tuleremia and botulinum toxin.

Load-Date: May 23, 1998


End of Document