CLINTON TO MEET ASSAD IN GENEVA TODAY IT IS THEIR FIRST MEETING. THE SYRIAN LEADER SEEKS THE RETURN OF THE GOLAN HEIGHTS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 16, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A14
Length: 911 words
Byline: Mona Ziade, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: GENEVA
Body


The complex quest for Mideast peace moves to Switzerland today when President Clinton meets Hafez al-Assad of Syria, a nation ostracized for its links to terrorism but crucial to any hopes for a lasting Middle East settlement.
It will be the first meeting between Clinton and Assad, although the two leaders have exchanged letters and talked by telephone.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said it is important for Clinton and Assad to get acquainted, but he downplayed any hopes of an immediate breakthrough.
"Frankly, if there's an important result we probably won't see it for several months," he said on CNN yesterday.
Clinton and Assad both arrived in this heavily guarded Swiss city yesterday and were staying at the same luxury hotel where their talks will be held.
Syria's immediate goal is the return of the Golan Heights, the strategic plateau captured by Israel in 1967 and annexed in 1981. That put Israeli troops only 35 miles from Damascus.
Christopher met with Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa, who later said today's summit "will focus on the peace process, how to pave the way for a comprehensive and just peace in the region."
"The second item will be the bilateral relations between Syria and the United States - how to improve them . . . from different aspects," he said.
State Department spokesman Mike McCurry said Syria was anxious to be removed from the U.S. list of terrorist nations, "but the U.S. insists on Syria curbing support for terrorism and improving human rights."
"The Syrians have said there's no justification for them being on the list. They feel it's a symbol of why the relationship cannot go forward," he said.
Assad met yesterday with U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. U.N. spokeswoman Therese Gastaut said Boutros-Ghali declared the United Nations ready to help the Mideast talks in any way it could.
Israel has demanded that Syria commit itself to a peace treaty that includes open borders, free trade and diplomatic relations before the Jewish state offers any territorial concessions.
One Israeli cabinet minister said yesterday that if Syria agrees to those demands, "Israel will have to give up its sovereignty over the Golan."
The statement by Environment Minister Yossi Sarid was the first by a high- ranking official to discuss full withdrawal. Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin said he was ready to discuss details of withdrawal if Assad revealed his position.
Assad has his own agenda. Long the self-proclaimed leader of Arab causes, he seeks commitments from the United States and Israel that he will have a leading role in Mideast politics once peace is achieved.
Christopher said he believed the talks could "give some signal as to the attitude of President Assad toward peace with Israel and peace in the Middle East."
Sarid, the Israeli minister, shared that assessment.
"I would find it very hard to believe that President Assad is dragging
himself all the way to Geneva and dragging President Clinton there just to tell him the old stories," Sarid, a leading dove, told Israeli army radio yesterday.
In Damascus, the state-run Al-Thawra newspaper said the summit could revive Middle East peace talks only if the United States "provides a sufficient driving force for overcoming the Israeli intransigence which has led the peace process to a standstill."
Assad rarely travels abroad. And in Damascus, the very fact that Clinton is meeting him is viewed as tacit recognition that Syria holds the key to Mideast peace.
Since 1979, the State Department has listed Syria as a sponsor of international terrorism and has indicated that status will not change while Assad holds out on peace with Israel. But Washington has also acknowledged Syria's cooperation in several key areas.
Syria helped free Western hostages in Lebanon and joined the U.S.-led coalition against Iraq in 1990. In pre-summit gestures, Assad agreed last month to lift travel restrictions on Syria's 1,250 Jews and pledged to help determine the fate of six Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon.
Assad believes Washington owes him for these acts and wants to be taken off the terrorism list so resource-poor Syria can have access to badly needed international aid.
But after years as the champion of radical anti-Israeli forces, his ability to manipulate events has been curtailed by the collapse of the Soviet Union, his patron for more than two decades, and a growing Arab willingness to recognize Israel.
Assad, who has ruled Syria with an iron grip since 1970, has been wary of signing a peace treaty that might curb his domestic and regional influence.
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat's Sept. 13 accord with Israel, negotiated secretly behind Assad's back, marginalized the Syrians to some extent.
Assad has boycotted U.S.-sponsored peace talks since September, ostensibly
because Israel would not commit itself to withdrawing from the Golan, but he also appeared to be angry that Arafat had outflanked him.
Although Assad has stopped short of openly rejecting the PLO-Israeli accord, he has tacitly encouraged Palestinian factions opposed to it.
Jordan has said it will not sign an agreement until Assad does. And Lebanon, occupied by Syrian troops, does what it is told by Damascus.
Talks are expected to resume in Washington Jan. 24, and Syrian officials say what happens then will depend on what emerges in Geneva.
For the last two weeks, Syria's state-run media have been hailing the summit as a "turning point" and trumpeting Syria's role.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document