Clinton tries to rescue Mideast peace Warns Arafat that terrorism must be stopped
USA TODAY
April 2, 1997, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 480 words
Byline: Lee Michael Katz
Body


Prodded by Jordan's King Hussein at the White House Tuesday, President
Clinton said he was making an "urgent" attempt to save the faltering
Middle East peace process.
Clinton offered no specifics beyond saying he had "some ideas."
He pledged "to personally do all I can to put this process back
on track."
But he sent a pointed warning to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat,
saying that the United States has "zero tolerance" for further
violence.
And in a signal of increased diplomatic activity, he invited Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to the White House on Monday.
U.S. officials said they are interested in an Israeli proposal
to accelerate talks on a a final Palestinian-Israeli peace pact.
The White House may be responding to criticism that it has done
little to bring the two sides together. King Hussein suggested
that the administration hasn't done enough to save the peace efforts
from total collapse.
"Let's hope that we see a more active participation by the United
States," he said after meeting Clinton. "We can't continue to
slide backward as we have. The situation is approaching a dangerous
point. It's time for action."
The peace plan is frozen because of a spate of violence and angry
rhetoric.
A plan by Israel to build Jewish housing near Palestinian areas
of East Jerusalem prompted the Arab League to call for an end
to doing business with Israel. Palestinians angered by the housing
project, which they view as thwarting their hopes to make East
Jerusalem the capital of a Palestinian nation, have been rioting
since bulldozers began clearing the construction site two weeks
ago.
Tuesday, two Palestinian suicide bombers were killed when their
bombs detonated before they reached their targets. Two weeks ago,
a Palestinian suicide bomber killed three Israeli women at a cafe
in Tel Aviv.
Netanyahu has charged that Arafat gave bombers a "green light"
by freeing members of the radical Hamas group from prison. On
Tuesday, Clinton said recent moves by Arafat to control violence
through his Palestinian police "are encouraging." But he emphasized
that Arafat must curb terrorism before talks can restart.
King Hussein has had his own recent traumas with Israel. A Jordanian
soldier opened fire on a group of Israeli students visiting a
peace site in Jordan last month. Seven schoolgirls were killed.
Hussein visited their families, endearing himself to many Israelis.
The attack came after Hussein wrote Netanyahu a letter criticizing
the housing plan for "plunging the region into an abyss of bloodshed
and despair." Tuesday he was more muted in his comments about
Netanyahu, saying, "I have a sense he's feeling his way."
He also seemed more restrained in his reaction to Clinton. In
their previous 14 meetings, Hussein stood beaming next to the
president. Tuesday, he looked somber. White House spokesman Mike
McCurry said the president and the king met alone, without any
of their aides present.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Ruth Fremson, AP

Load-Date: April 2, 1997


End of Document