CLINTON PUSHES ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 14, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. B1
Length: 382 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- President Clinton called on Congress Saturday to pass an anti-terrorist bill that has languished for a year despite a promise of quick action after the Oklahoma City bombing.
A majority of Republican lawmakers are hoping to craft a compromise on the bill and send it to the president by next Friday, the first anniversary of the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City where 168 people were killed.
Clinton accused Republican lawmakers of "foot-dragging" and bowing to special interests such as the National Rifle Association in blocking passage of an anti-terrorist bill that he considers acceptable.
"In the wake of Oklahoma City, Congress promised to send me the bill six weeks after the tragic bombing," said Clinton in his weekly radio address. "And yet, unbelievably, almost an entire year has passed and Congress still has not managed to send me strong anti-terrorism legislation.
"I urge Congress to change course. Put the national interest before the special interests," he said. "There is simply no excuse for this foot-dragging."
According to Republican congressional sources, a compromise bill being discussed would allow the government to ban fund-raising in this country by representatives of terrorist organizations and speed the removal of foreign nationals with links to terrorist organizations.
Clinton supports both those provisions, but said Saturday the bill also should give law enforcement officials new surveillance and investigative tools aimed at terrorists and require the chemical tagging of bomb-making material including explosives make tracing easier.
Senior Republican congressional aides said the proposed compromise, which could be unveiled as early as Monday, was aimed at gaining Clinton's support and avoiding a veto.
"We need to get it done," Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole told reporters in Iowa. "We'd like to pass it before (Friday). We think we can."
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, meanwhile, told a town meeting in Smyrna, Ga., that his chamber will pass the bill "in the next few days."
"We have had as much trouble from Democrats as from conservative Republicans" in passing a compromise bill, the Georgia Republican added.
"We've had zero help from the Clinton administration, which is big on rhetoric and short on practical work."

Load-Date: April 16, 1996


End of Document