Clinton says GOP hopefuls' rhetoric is damaging anti-terrorism efforts; Trump is blatant; others use 'veiled language,' she says
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 10, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 19
Length: 513 words
Byline: LISA LERER

The Associated Press
Dateline: WATERLOO, Iowa  
Body


 Hillary Clinton accused Republicans of undermining U.S. efforts to fight Islamists, saying Wednesday that the hateful campaign rhetoric of front-runner Donald Trump and the rest of the GOP field is providing new material for Islamic State propaganda.
Instead of showing leadership, some of the leaders in this campaign are resorting to really hateful rhetoric, Clinton said at a town hall meeting. Donald Trump, he does traffic in prejudice and paranoia. It's not only shameful, it's dangerous.
Trump's proposal to block Muslims from entering the U.S. has prompted widespread condemnation from lawmakers of both parties and from leaders around the globe.
Clinton said that though Trump's GOP rivals use veiled language to talk about their plans, their remarks also are undermining efforts of U.S. negotiators to build a global coalition against the Islamic State militants.
Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson has questioned whether a Muslim-American should be president. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz have floated the idea of a religious test for Syrian refugees fleeing violence in the Middle East.
That runs counter to what I and others who've actually been in the situation room know we have to do, Clinton said. We have to enlist help from American Muslims around the world in defeating the radical jihadist and the hateful ideology.
Trump fired back, singling out Clinton as his top competitor during a television appearance Wednesday morning.
She doesn't have the strength or the stamina, he said on Live With Kelly and Michael. I mean, you know, she's got a name, and people will stupidly vote for her.
Clinton spent Wednesday campaigning in Iowa. Though her mention of Trump's name drew boos from the largely elderly crowd, the audience did not raise the issue of terrorism or the conflict in the Middle East. Instead, questioners focused largely on domestic issues such as health care and child care costs - a reflection of the economic concerns that remain central in the Democratic primary battle.Clinton is promoting her plans to stop corporate inversions, a practice that permits U.S. companies to merge with corporations overseas to lower their tax bills.
If you become successful in America, said Clinton, you should pay what you owe just like everybody else. She added, This is not only about fairness; this is about patriotism.
The November announcement of a plan to merge drugmakers Pfizer and Allergan to create the world's biggest pharmaceutical company reignited a fierce political debate over whether such deals should be permitted.
Under the deal, New York-based Pfizer would move its headquarters to Ireland, where Allergan is based. That would enable Pfizer to slash its tax rate from about 25 percent this year to about 18 percent. Ireland's lower corporate tax rate would have saved Pfizer nearly $1 billion of the $3.1 billion in U.S. taxes it paid in 2014.
Clinton said she would have the executive authority as president to address so-called earning stripping, a practice that shrinks the taxable U.S. profit of multinational corporations.

Load-Date: December 10, 2015


End of Document