CLINTON DEDICATES TERRORISM BILL TO VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 25, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 346 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Survivors of the bombings in Oklahoma City and the
World Trade Center - some of them wiping away tears - watched President
Clinton sign a bill Wednesday providing new tools and tougher penalties
for the war against terrorism.
At a ceremony on the South Lawn, Clinton told the bombing survivors and
the families of victims of 11 other terrorist attacks, "We renew our
fight against those who seek to terrorize us, in your names.
"We send a loud, clear message today all over the world, in your names:
America will never surrender to terror."
In a presidential election year, it was an opportunity for a warm
display of bipartisanship on a sunny, spring day. It brought Clinton
together on the same stage with his GOP presidential rival, Senate
Majority Leader Bob Dole.
In all, nearly two dozen members of Congress joined the president. Dole
stood behind the president as the bill was signed, and the two leaders
shook hands afterward.
More than a year in the making, the bill expands the government's power
to exclude suspected foreign terrorists from the United States.
Authorities say it also will make it easier for police to trace bombs to
the criminals who made them, by requiring chemical markers in some
explosive materials.
Further, it imposes unprecedented curbs on federal appeals by death-row
inmates.
In the South Lawn audience were 22 survivors of the Oklahoma City
bombing a year ago, seven survivors of the 1993 World Trade Center
bombing and four relatives of victims of Pan Am Flight 103, blown up
over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
Lisa and Ilsa Klinghoffer were there. Their father, Leon Klinghoffer,
was killed and thrown overboard in the 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship
Achille Lauro.
Others in the audience included the parents of Matthew Mitchell
Eisenfeld and Sara Duker. Engaged to be married, they were killed in a
Jerusalem bus bombing.
"This is a good day," the president said, "because our police officers
are now going to be better prepared to stop terrorists, our prosecutors
better prepared to punish them, our people being better protected from
their designs."

Load-Date: April 25, 1996


End of Document