Clinton rebuffed at summit
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 29, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World, Pg. b 10
Length: 331 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: LYON, France
Body


In a rare rebuff by allies, President Clinton was taken to task Friday over U.S. efforts to penalize international companies that trade with renegade regimes like Cuba and Libya.
"I don't think economic retaliation is most effective. Taking an entire population hostage is not elegant," said French President Jacques Chirac, host of this year's seven-power economic summit, pointedly aiming at the United States.
Chirac's sharp comments came after he announced an economic communique that took issue - in the bland language of diplomacy - with U.S. legislation designed to impose economic sanctions on companies that do business with countries the United States has designated as terrorist regimes. The dispute came just a day after Clinton won the leaders' support for a package of measures to counter terrorism.
The seven-nation statement said the trade sanctions would be "in contradiction with" recently liberalized global free-trade rules.
The dispute spilled over into a heads-of-state lunch. Several leaders criticized the U.S. policy and Clinton's support for it. "The president pushed back fairly hard on the issue of needing to confront terrorist states," said Daniel Tarullo, a White House aide.
The unusual note of disharmony came as the so-called Group of Seven powers - the United States, Britain, Japan, France, Germany, Canada and Italy - issued a mostly upbeat joint economic statement.
U.S. officials acknowledged the dispute with allies, but shrugged off the discord at the session in this French industrial city.
"Every summit we have been at there have been some matters that we disagree with our summit partners on," said Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin.
The summit's focus on terrorism was underlined by fresh attacks involving three of the nations represented here.
Following up on Thursday's anti-terrorism declaration, the administration released a list of 40 specific proposals for fighting terrorism and said Clinton would press summit partners to endorse them today.

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document