Clinton lashes out at terrorism charge; Heated exchange: Lazio says New York doesn't need advice from 'Arkansas political machine'
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 29, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000, Telegraph-Herald
Section: Pg. b12
Length: 432 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


ITHACA, N.Y. (AP) - Senate candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton said Saturday that she was outraged by reports that New York Republicans were linking her to the terrorist bombing of the USS Cole in phone calls to New York voters.
"I believe the Republican Party and Congressman (Rick) Lazio owe an apology to the families of the sailors who died in the terrorist bombing of the USS Cole," she said.
Clinton called the phone calls "unacceptable," adding, "Everyone should be condemning it."
Lazio, her opponent in the New York Senate race, said that New York Republicans did not need "any instructions or lessons from the Arkansas political machine" surrounding Clinton.
"We don't need any advice from (adviser) Harold Ickes and Hillary Clinton on how to run campaigns in New York - people who are now forced to return $ 50,000 to people who associate themselves with terrorism and violence in the Middle East," Lazio said.
And Dan Allen, spokesman for the state Republicans, said the party was not apologizing, adding, "She's the one who ought to be apologizing. … She's been taking money from groups that support terrorism."
Last week, the Clinton campaign returned $ 50,000 that came from a Boston fund-raiser sponsored by a group that supports the Palestinian organization Hamas.
The Clinton campaign denied knowing that the group was involved with the fund-raiser.
Setting her off were newspaper reports Saturday that the New York State Republican Committee was calling voters to say that Clinton accepted money from an Arab organization that "openly brags about its support for a Mideast terrorism group, the same kind of terrorism that killed our sailors on the USS Cole."
Other calls also began going out in recent days to potential Jewish voters in which the state Republicans do not mention the USS Cole bombing, but do dwell on her dealings with Palestinians and her acceptance of contributions from Arab-Americans.
A New York 1 News statewide poll out Thursday had Clinton leading Lazio, 50 percent to 43 percent, and running close to the congressman from Long Island in upstate New York.
In their final debate, held Friday, the two testily hurled charges and repeatedly interrupted each other.
The verbal fireworks began just minutes into the one-hour debate when Lazio accused the Clinton administration of governing by poll results and the first lady of leaving Arkansas' schools "at the bottom of the barrel."
After arguing that "the work we did in Arkansas received numerous awards and praise," Clinton said, "I'm not here to defend Arkansas. I'm here to run for Senate to represent New York."

Load-Date: October 31, 2000


End of Document