CLINIC BOMB AN ACT OF TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
JANUARY 31, 1998 Saturday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; Pg. 13
Length: 336 words
Body


News reports don't say what Robert Sanderson, the off-duty police officer killed in the bombing Thursday of a Birmingham, Ala., women's clinic, thought about abortion.
Was he a dedicated supporter of a woman's right to end her pregnancy, or was he working at the clinic because he needed the part-time job?
It doesn't matter. Terrorism is terrorism, no matter who the victims are.
The other victim, who suffered serious injuries, was a nurse opening the clinic Thursday morning. Yet, the fact that the first person killed in the bombing of an abortion clinic was not an "abortion provider" highlights the horror.
This was not the first time anti-abortion terrorists showed their contempt for society's laws and society's protectors.
In last year's bombing of an abortion clinic in Atlanta, a second bomb was set off in a successful attempt to injure police and other rescuers of victims from the first blast.
Not only are citizens endangered should they be near one of these cowardly attempts at intimidation, the democratic rule of law is imperiled by those who would use violence to achieve political ends.
The bombing came a week after the 25th anniversary of Roe vs. Wade prompted an escalation of rhetoric, already heightened by the emotional - and manipulative - debate over a late-term abortion method. The method, described with the inflammatory but inaccurate term "partial birth abortion," is used only rarely but makes for the goriest diagrams and the most impassioned speeches. Clinic bombings and arson have escalated over the past year.
The unhesitating condemnation of the bombing by most anti-abortion-rights groups is encouraging - and also politically correct:
Even if Americans are ambivalent about abortion, they are not ambivalent about their rejection of violence as a tactic for preventing it.
The response to this latest outrage must be the same as to any terrorism, be it in Jerusalem or Oklahoma City or anywhere else: Keep on, keep open - and make good on vows to find the terrorists and punish them.

Notes

In Our Opinion

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Sanderson

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document