Clinton slams Congress for not passing his anti-terrorism law
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 28, 1995, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 437 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Turning up pressure for his anti-terrorism package, President Clinton accused congressional critics Saturday of trying to deny police expanded wiretap authority and other tools they need for a fight "we have to be able to win."
"I want the police to stop those people cold," Clinton said in his weekly radio address.
"The restrictive view taken by some people in Congress would handicap our ability to track terrorists down, follow them when they move and prevent their attacks on innocent people."
An Associated Press Report
Clinton's criticism drew a swift rejoinder from Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, who stressed that legislators from both parties had objected to some portions of the president's package. Dole added that the bill under Senate consideration includes many of Clinton's own proposals.
"The president should really direct his frustration at the Democrats who have delayed passage of the anti-terrorism bill by offering more than 60 amendments to the budget resolution," said Dole, who is seeking the Republican presidential nomination to challenge Clinton in 1996.
Congressional critics maintain that Clinton's anti-terrorism proposals go too far, could erode constitutional protections and infringe on civil liberties.
At issue are Clinton proposals to:  - Expand wiretap authority. Clinton wants police to be able to move their wiretaps without getting a new court order each time terrorists move to evade surveillance.
"We shouldn't force law enforcement to lose valuable time by making them get a court to agree that a terrorist is trying to knowingly evade us," Clinton argued.
The Senate voted 52-28 on Friday to block a Democratic attempt to expand the government's wiretapping authority. Republicans expressed concern that the provision could infringe on the civil liberties of domestic political groups.  - Expand the role of the military in fighting terrorism. Clinton wants to involve the military when terrorists are contemplating the use of biological or chemical weapons. Currently, the military can join in criminal investigations only when they involve nuclear weapons.
Critics are wary of giving the military a greater role in domestic law enforcement, warning of potential government abuse of individual rights.  - Place traceable materials in chemicals that can be used to make bombs. Clinton wants to include tiny plastic tracers known as "taggants" in certain explosive materials so that bombs can be tracked to their source.
The idea of tracers has been around for years, drawing opposition from the explosives industry and the National Rifle Association, which cited safety concerns.

Load-Date: June 5, 1995


End of Document