Clinton says pass anti-terrorism bill
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
April 14, 1996, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 464 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- President Clinton called on Congress Saturday to pass an anti-terrorist bill that has languished for a year despite a promise of quick action after the Oklahoma City bombing.
A majority of Republican lawmakers are hoping to craft a compromise on the bill and sent it to the president by Friday, the first anniversary of the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City where 168 people were killed.
Clinton accused Republican lawmakers of "foot-dragging" and bowing to special interests such as the National Rifle Association in blocking passage of an anti-terrorist bill that he considers acceptable.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
"In the wake of Oklahoma City, Congress promised to send me the bill six weeks after the tragic bombing," said Clinton in his weekly radio address. "And yet, unbelievably, almost an entire year has passed and Congress still has not managed to send me strong anti-terrorism legislation,"
"I urge Congress to change course. Put the national interest before the special interests," he said. "There is simply no excuse for this foot-dragging."
According to Republican congressional sources, a compromise bill being discussed would allow the government to ban fund-raising in this country by representatives of terrorist organizations and speed the removal of foreign nationals with links to terrorist organizations.
Clinton supports both those provisions, but said Saturday the bill also should give law enforcement officials new surveillance and investigative tools aimed at terrorists and require the chemical tagging of bomb-making material including explosives make tracing easier.
Senior Republican congressional aides said the proposed compromise, which could be unveiled as early as Monday, was aimed at gaining Clinton's support and avoiding a veto.
The Senate passed a bill, largely acceptable to the White House, but then the legislation ran into trouble in the House where some lawmakers, with the backing of the NRA, said it would give the government vast new powers that threatened individual liberties.
A scaled-back version of the bill eventually passed the House last month. GOP aides have been working to reconcile the different Senate and House bills.
Republican sources, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said many of the provisions scrapped by the House were being restored, but others -- such as a Senate-passed measure to make it easier to obtain wiretaps in terrorist cases -- were not expected to be included.
It also was not clear whether a requirement to chemically mark bomb-making material would survive, although Clinton said Saturday such devices -- known as taggants -- would help police trace explosives.
"If we know where the explosives come from, we have an edge in tracking down the criminals who use them," said Clinton.

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document