CLINTON GIVES ISRAEL $100 MILLION PLEDGE
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 15, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 667 words
Body


JERUSALEM (AP) - Grieving with the Israeli people, President Clinton
pledged $ 100 million on Thursday to the fight against terrorism. But he
acknowledged that no one - not presidents or princes or prime ministers
- can guarantee "a risk-free world."
In an emotional trip that coupled meetings with Israeli Prime Minister
Shimon Peres with a visit to the grave of Peres' slain predecessor,
Yitzhak Rabin, Clinton imagined aloud how Americans would react to the
terrorism that confronts Israel.
"Our people would be off the wall. They would be angry. They would be
furious. They would want action," he said.
To that end, Clinton pledged the $ 100 million over two years to pay for
anti-terrorism initiatives, in-cluding training, bomb-detection
scanners, X-ray systems and ro-botics for handling suspect packages.
Israeli officials said they envisioned using much of the U.S. aid to
help establish a separation zone with the West Bank to try to prevent
terrorist infiltration. The idea of the zone, which would include
electronic fences, guard towers and bomb-sniffing dogs, was first
proposed by Rabin and was approved by the Israeli Cabinet March 3.
In Washington, however, a State Department official said, "The United
States does not intend for any of its aid to be used in any kind of
permanent separation zone."
Clinton intends to use $ 50 million already approved by Congress, and is
asking for another $ 50 million for the fiscal year that begins in
October.
Shlomo Dror, spokesman for the Israel army liaison with the
Palestinians, said the U.S. government was being asked to provide
special training for bomb-sniffing dog units and for electronic
equipment to be used along the separation line. Israel also needs
helicopters and all-terrain vehicles to help patrol the zone, he said.
Clinton left Israel Thursday evening, leaving behind a team of U.S.
officials including CIA Director John Deutch and Secretary of State
Warren Christopher to work on an anti-terrorism accord. The aim is to co
mplete an agreement before Peres visits Washington late next month.
At a joint news conference with Clinton, Peres promised that the peace
process would continue, although he said the terrorist attacks on Israel
made it more complicated. "It's not black and white. It's like climbing
a mountain. It is difficult, it takes time. You don't reach the peak in
one jump," he said.
Clinton's visit came a day after the Red Sea summit, which saw Israelis,
Arabs and other world leaders gathered together in an unprecedented
joint stand against terrorism.
"The foundation was laid down to go ahead with peace and reject
terror," Peres said.
Said Clinton, "Can we create a risk-free world here in Israel? No. Can
we reduce the risks and do much better? Yes."
He brought with him a stone from the White House lawn, where Rabin had
sealed with a handshake a landmark peace agreement with Yasser Arafat,
now head of the Palestinian Authority.
Wearing a black skullcap, Clinton placed the stone on the slain prime
minister's tombstone at Mt. Herzl Cemetery, in accordance with Jewish
tradition. Rabin's widow, Leah, looked on, and afterward joined hands
with Clinton. Rabin was killed Nov. 4 by a Jewish militant opposed to
relinquishing Gaza and most of the West Bank to the Palestinians.
Clinton stopped, as well, at Beit Hinuch, a Jerusalem high school that
lost three graduates in the four suicide bombings that have rocked
Israel since Feb. 25. Outside, he told reporters: "If you want to be
free and safe, you have to stand against terror. It doesn't matter
whether you're Israelis or Palestinians."
By all appearances, Clinton's message was well-received by a country
whose confidence in U.S.-backed land-for-peace deals with the Arabs was
shaken by the bombings. All open societies are vulnerable to violence,
he said.
In Tel Aviv, he said terrorism had its roots in "the grip of that
ancient fear that life can only be lived if you're looking down on
someone else."
"We know your pain is unimaginable, and in some extent unsharable, but
America grieves with you," he said.

Load-Date: March 15, 1996


End of Document