CLINTON SCOLDS OBAMA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 11, 2014 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-6
Length: 548 words
Body


WASHINGTON - Hillary Clinton is taking on President Barack Obama with the same issue he used against her in the 2008 Democratic primary: foreign policy vision.
Mr. Obama lacks a specific doctrine, according to an Atlantic magazine interview with Ms. Clinton, the unannounced presidential candidate who is leading Democrats and Republicans in 2016 polling.
Ms. Clinton's effort to show differences with Mr. Obama has become necessary for Ms. Clinton, Mr. Obama's first secretary of state, to draw contrasts as his approval ratings have cratered.
Hawaii governor loses
HONOLULU - Incumbent Hawaii Governor Neil Abercrombie was soundly defeated in the state's Democratic primary, results showed Sunday, in an election that came as the state was cleaning up from one powerful storm and preparing for another.
The loss by Mr. Abercrombie, who had been endorsed by Hawaii-born President Barack Obama, marked the first defeat for an incumbent Democratic governor in Hawaii since it was granted statehood in 1959, potentially re-arranging the political landscape before the U.S. general election in November.
Ahead of the election, tropical storm Iselle struck the island of Hawaii, also known as the Big Island, on Thursday.
All but two polling stations on the east coast of the Big Island opened on Saturday morning, election officials said.
Those late votes could determine the U.S. Senate primary race between incumbent Brian Schatz and his Democratic challenger, U.S. Representative Colleen Hanabusa. Ms. Schatz holds a lead of about 1,600 votes over Hanabusa, election results showed.
Bank sued over terror
NEW YORK - The suicide bomber who boarded the crowded Number 2 bus in Jerusalem in August 2003 killed 23 people including Tehilla Nathansen, a three-year-old whose family was returning from prayers at the Wailing Wall.
Eleven years later, in another August dominated by violence, Tehilla's family and about 300 victims of attacks in Israel and their relatives seek a verdict that may help recoup hundreds of millions of dollars from a bank that they say counted terrorists among its customers.
Arab Bank Plc, Jordan's largest lender, faces a trial set for today on claims brought under the Anti-Terrorism Act, which lets U.S. citizens who are victims of terrorism sue supporters of attacks. Ms. Nathansen and her mother, Chana Nathansen, who was injured in the bus bombing, held U.S. and Israeli citizenships.
Amazon stifles Disney
NEW YORK - Amazon.com has halted pre-orders of some Disney movies, the Wall Street Journal reported on Sunday, in what appears to be another contract dispute after the online giant began a protracted spat with publisher Hachette Book Group this year.
Messages sent to Amazon.com and Disney were not immediately answered.
Amazon has been waging a battle against Hachette, the fourth-largest U.S. book publisher, over the price the online retailer can charge for e-books.
Also in the nation...
The much-debated Keystone XL pipeline could produce four times more global warming pollution than the State Department calculated earlier this year, a new study concludes. ... The average price of a gallon of gasoline in the United States fell by six cents in the past two weeks as crude prices have continued a broad decline, according to the Lundberg survey released on Sunday.

Load-Date: August 12, 2014


End of Document