CLINTON TO VISIT SYRIA DESPITE TERRORISM LINKS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 22, 1994, Saturday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 1350 words
Body


By Steven Greenhouse WASHINGTON _ President Clinton said Friday
that he would travel to Damascus, Syria, during his trip to the
Middle East next week to coax Syria toward peace with Israel, despite
concerns that he would risk criticism for visiting a country linked
to terrorism.
At a news conference in which he vigorously defended the
administration's foreign and domestic policies, Clinton said he was
going to the Middle East because it was important "to stand with our
friends at this moment when they're standing up for peace and the
enemies of peace are trying to derail them."
Administration officials said that whether to visit Damascus had
been the stickiest issue in planning the trip, partly because of
heightened emotions and security concerns after the bombing of a bus
in Tel Aviv, Israel, on Wednesday that killed at least 21 people.
Some Clinton advisers feared the president could be embarrassed
politically for visiting a nation that is on the administration's
list of countries that sponsor terrorism.
The centerpiece of the trip, which is shaping up as the most
extensive presidential trip to the region since President Nixon
visited 20 years ago, is the signing of a peace treaty between Israel
and Jordan on their southern border Wednesday.
Clinton, who will depart on the four-day trip Tuesday, also will
address the Israeli and Jordanian parliaments and visit American
troops in Kuwait.
He will also travel to Saudi Arabia to see King Fahd and visit
Cairo, where he will meet with President Hosni Mubarak as well as
Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The president's aides say that
visiting Damascus is a political gamble worth taking because
they are confident that in a face-to-face meeting, Clinton can
persuade President Hafez Assad of Syria to take some new steps toward
compromise that would hasten a peace treaty with Israel.
The president also said he would talk with the Syrian leader
about the importance of combatting terrorism.
"I will visit Syria," Clinton said Friday, "because it is my
judgment that the visit will further the goal of an ultimate peace
agreement between Israel and Syria.  And until that is done, we will
never have comprehensive peace in the Middle East."
But the president's advisers admit the decision holds risks.
Some Jewish groups have opposed such a visit unless Assad, in return,
makes some highly visible, major steps toward peace with Israel, such
as announcing that he would meet with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin
Since January, peace efforts between Israel and Syria have
inched forward, with Secretary of State Warren Christopher visiting
the region five times since May to mediate between the two countries
Administration officials say they hope for a major breakthrough
in the peace talks in the next three or four months.  The rough
outline of an agreement is well-known: Israel would withdraw from the
Golan Heights, and in return, Syria would normalize relations with
its longtime enemy.
The points of disagreement are how quickly and extensively any
Israeli withdrawal would be, and how quickly and completely Syria
would recognize Israel and accept steps to meet its security concerns
With Washington and Jerusalem urging Assad to engage in more
public diplomacy to show he is serious about peace, senior
administration officials say they hope the Syrian leader will use the
president's visit to make some tough public statements against
terrorism.
They also voiced confidence that Assad would go further than
before in his public remarks favoring peace.  In addition, several
officials said they expected Assad to show increased flexibility
behind the scenes to help narrow his negotiating differences with
Israel.
"This meeting was agreed to on one basis: substantive moves
forward in the peace process," said one administration official.
"You won't see developments on the private negotiating track for a
while, but we expect him to be more forthcoming on the public side
."
The official continued, "Assad knows what we need out of this
and what he needs out of this.  He's not going to embarrass the
president.  "
President Clinton decided to visit Damascus after a long debate
in which his advisers painstakingly listed the many pros and cons,
administration officials said.  Some advisers said they feared that
Assad would feel slighted if Clinton bypassed Syria.  Such a slight
could be a step backward in the Syria-Israeli peace talks, they said
On the other hand, the president's aides expressed concern about
safety in Damascus, especially after the recent wave of terrorism.
They also worried that unless the Syria visit produces some tangible
steps toward peace, the president could lose face among Israelis.
Some administration officials noted that President Bush had a
meeting with Assad and that Clinton met with the Syrian leader last
January in Geneva.  In an important step forward in the peace
process, Assad announced in Geneva that he had made a strategic
choice for peace with Israel.
In 1974, Nixon met with Assad in Damascus and the United States
and Syria re-established diplomatic relations, which were broken off
in 1967.  In 1979, President Carter visited Israel and Egypt in a
diplomatic effort that helped seal a peace treaty between the two
countries.
"Going there at this time will give the negotiations a push at
a time the negotiations have slowed because of the complexity of the
issues," said a senior administration official.  "It's an
investment by President Clinton to produce a result a little down the
road, rather than a dramatic breakthrough now."
Clinton indicated that he would discuss terrorism with Assad.
"It is a serious issue," Clinton said Friday.  "It has been
constantly discussed between us, and it will continue to be."
American officials have told Assad that if he wants Syria to be
taken off the administration's list of nations that sponsor
terrorism, he needs to do more to crack down on Party of God
guerrillas in southern Lebanon.
In the administration's view, Iran is the chief sponsor of the
militant Shiite Muslims, but Syria can do more to stifle their
operations.
The Party of God has fired three waves of rockets from southern
Lebanon over the past two days, and administration officials said
Friday that they expect Assad to stop such attacks.
White House officials said that in his meeting with Arafat,
Clinton will discuss a wide range of topics, including financial
assistance, the fight against terrorism and the PLO's peace talks
with Israel.
At his news conference, Clinton said he had ordered federal
agencies to redouble their efforts to stop any Americans from sending
money overseas that could be used for terrorism by Hamas, the
militant Muslim organization that claimed responsibility for the Tel
Aviv bombing.
An administration official said Friday that officials at the
National Security Council in recent days discussed whether there were
any American links to Hamas and informally asked law enforcement
agencies to keep alert for such possibilities.
The word has now filtered down to relevant officials at Justice,
the FBI and other agencies.
On other subjects, Clinton said he would keep his promise to
Congress and ask the U.N. Security Council to adopt a resolution to
lift the arms embargo against Bosnia.  He said if that fails, he
would consult with Congress about lifting the embargo unilaterally
Nonetheless, Clinton said that for more than two years he has
believed that a unilateral lifting would be a mistake because it
would lead to the withdrawal of U.N. troops from Bosnia and would
hurt Washington's ability to work with its allies to end the war
there.
Clinton also defended the accord signed Friday with North Korea
in which it vowed to freeze its nuclear program in return for having
the United States and other nations build it modern nuclear reactors
He acknowledged that some people are upset by the decision to
delay inspections of waste sites believed to hold evidence showing
that North Korea has diverted fissile material to make nuclear
weapons.
But Clinton said the important thing was "the waste sites are
not going anywhere" and "we have a commitment for a freeze and then
a dismantling" of North Korea's nuclear facilities.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document