CLINTON WINS BACKING IN CONGRESS, MURTHA TOLD OF ATTACK IN ADVANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 29, 1993, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 353 words
Byline: PAT GRIFFITH, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU
Body


When the White House began notifying key members of Congress late Saturday afternoon that Tomahawk cruise missiles were zeroing in on the headquarters of the Iraqi Intelligence Service in Baghdad, Rep. John Murtha, D-Johnstown, was among those who got a call.
The lawmaker, a powerful voice on defense issues who chairs the House Appropriations subcommittee on defense, was not surprised by the information he received.
''I had talked to them a number of times,'' he said yesterday, ''and had recommended that if the report about the plot (to assassinate President Bush) was true, it was essential that the United States take some sort of military retaliation … I think it was the right response.''
At the same time, he said he doubts the Pentagon will ever know with certainty how much physical damage was done to Saddam Hussein's intelligence operation.
The U.S. can't believe any reports coming from the Iraqis, he explained, and yet it's possible that the 500-pound missiles might not have burrowed deep enough to reach the most protected operation centers. ''So I don't know if we'll ever know how much damage they did,'' he said.
But from the standpoint of international politics, Murtha rates the attack a clear success, because it demonstrated that President Clinton ''is willing to use his authority, consulting with Congress, and is prepared to take military action against terrorism, which I think is the most serious problem we're going to face.''
Murtha said he is particularly concerned about nuclear proliferation, and the prospect that outlaw nations will secretly develop a nuclear device. ''There's going to be the time when we have to take those installations out, when we have proof they have a nuclear device they might use. I have said very strongly to (the White House) that in such a case, we should react.''
Beyond Iraq, Murtha said, nations such as North Korea, which is pursuing nuclear development, will probably decide to test Clinton at some point, and now they know what to expect.
''So he did the right thing,'' Murtha said. ''Will it deter terrorism from Hussein? We'll just have to wait and see.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document