Clinton Tells of Anti-Terrorism Plans
The New York Times
May 23, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 520 words
Byline: By JAMES BENNET 

By JAMES BENNET 
Dateline: ANNAPOLIS, Md., May 22
Body


Warning that "we must be ready to fight the next war, not the last one," President Clinton announced measures today to guard against terrorism.
He called for protecting computer systems against what he called "cyberattack" and stockpiling vaccines around the country to protect against biological weapons.
In a speech to graduating midshipmen at the United States Naval Academy here, Mr. Clinton warned that as links increase among computer networks that control everything from banking to communications to air traffic, such systems are becoming more vulnerable to disruption.
"Intentional attacks against our critical systems are already under way," he said.
Mr. Clinton announced three initiatives today: a stepped-up campaign against terrorism; an effort to detect vulnerabilities in the nation's computer networks and defend against attacks, and a plan to protect civilians against biological attacks by training local officials, stockpiling vaccines and conducting research into new medicines and diagnostic tools.
"Our security is challenged increasingly by nontraditional threats, from adversaries both old and new," he said, "not only hostile regimes, but also terrorists and international criminals, who cannot defeat us in traditional theaters of battle but search instead for new ways to attack."
In a cool breeze on a brilliant day, Mr. Clinton spoke at the academy's football stadium, addressing 908 graduates in their new uniforms. He was for the most part warmly received as he stood on the podium to greet each graduate.
Many hugged or high-fived him as they received their diplomas.
A wave of laughter swept the crowd when, in introducing Mr. Clinton, Secretary of the Navy John H. Dalton said: "There's something you probably don't know about President Clinton." It turned out to be that he had been aboard more naval vessels than any other President since Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Mr. Clinton also urged the graduates to enjoy the freedom that they served to protect.
"Work hard," he said, "but don't forget to pursue also what fulfills you as people -- the beauty of the natural world, literature, the arts, sports, volunteer service."
Mr. Clinton announced the appointment of a National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection and Counterterrorism to coordinate the effort of Federal agencies and enlist the cooperation of the private sector.
He named Richard A. Clarke, who is now his special assistant for global affairs.
Mr. Clarke said that the President had asked the Department of Health and Human services to recommend vaccines to be stockpiled. So far, he said, the agency had focused on medicines to counter anthrax and smallpox.
He said that "every day in the United States there are hundreds of attempts to do nonauthorized intrusions" into computer systems. But it was hard to tell, he said, whether those intrusions were acts of vandalism, industrial espionage or terrorism.
Mr. Clinton said that in setting up new systems to warn of such attacks, "we must also be careful to uphold privacy rights and other constitutional protections. We do not ever undermine freedom in the name of freedom."

Graphic

 
Photo: President Clinton, the commencement speaker at the United States Naval Academy's graduation ceremonies in Annapolis, Md., watched as a newly commissioned officer held up his diploma. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: May 23, 1998


End of Document