CLINTON VOWS U.S. WILL HELP ISRAELIS IMPROVE SECURITY PRESIDENT PLEDGES $100 MILLION FOR INCREASED ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORTS
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 14, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. 03A
Length: 796 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


JERUSALEM - Standing with Israel in the face of terror, President
Clinton today pledged at least $ 100 million to combat terrorists and
promised stronger security ties with the Jewish state. "Fear must be
conquered, security must be restored and peace must be pursued," he
said.
Wrapping up a two-day trip of summitry and solace, Clinton told Israeli
citizens, "Only you can convince others to lay down their fears.
But he warned that open societies are open to violence; the ballyhooed
anti-terrorism summit - and even Middle East peace - can't wipe out
terrorism.
"Can we create a risk-free world here in Israel? No," Clinton said in a
joint news conference with Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres. "Can we
reduce the risks and do much better? Yes."
Clinton and Peres met a day after they joined other world leaders in an
unprecedented Red Sea summit against terrorism. "Yesterday the
foundation was laid down to go ahead with peace and reject terror,"
Peres said.
Over and over, Clinton expressed sympathy with Israeli victims of
violent extremists.
Wearing a black yarmulke, the president followed a Jewish tradition and
gently placed a stone at the gravesite of former Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin, who was slain Nov. 4 by a Jewish militant opposed to peace.
In a gesture laced with symbolism, Clinton had brought the stone from
the South Lawn, where Rabin shook hands with Yasser Arafat to seal a
historic Middle East peace pact with the Palestinians. Rabin's widow,
Leah, locked hands with Clinton as they stood facing the grave.
And he stopped by Beit Hinuch, a Jerusalem high school that lost three
graduates in the four suicide bombings that rocked Israel since Feb. 25.
Outside, he told reporters: "If you want to be free and safe, you have
to stand against terror. It doesn't matter whether you're Israelis or
Palestinians."
Offering more than sympathy, Clinton pledged $ 100 million over two years
to pay for a host of anti-terrorism initiatives, including training,
bomb-detection scanners, X-ray systems and robotics for handling suspect
packages.
White House officials said half of the money will come out of funds
approved by Congress for other Pentagon uses. The other $ 50 million
would require a new spending bill. Clinton said he sent his request to
Congress Wednesday night.
He was returning home tonight, but CIA Director John Deutch and Lt. Gen.
Daniel Christman are staying in Jerusalem to work on a counter-terrorism
accord. It could result in increased cooperation between American and
Israeli intelligence operations in going after terrorists, officials
said privately.
In a second step, the administration is working with Israel on a defense
agreement, hoping to conclude it before Peres visits Washington at the
end of April. The deal would provide for closer military ties between
the nations.
In a poetic plea for peace, Clinton said in Tel Aviv that terrorism has
its roots in "the grip of that ancient fear that life can only be lived
if you're looking down on someone else."
"We know your pain is unimaginable, and in some extent unsharable, but
America grieves with you," he said at a Tel Aviv performing arts
center, his last scheduled stop of the two-day Middle East trip.
Earlier, the president tried to imagine how Americans would react to the
type of horror suicide bombers brought Israel. "Our people would be off
the wall; they would be angry, they would be furious, they would want
action," he said.
Clinton's visit was bolstered by the Egyptian summit Wednesday that
brought Israelis and Arabs together with other world leaders. But he
conceded that presidents, prime ministers, princes and all the
politicians in the world can only do so much. Open societies are victims
of terrorism, Clinton said, citing the Oklahoma City bombing and poison
gas attacks in Japanese subways.
"There is no guarantee here," Clinton said. "There are no guarantees in
life."
Peres pledged that the peace process would continue, though the
terrorist attacks made it more complicated. "It's not black and white.
It's like climbing a mountain. It is difficult, it takes time. You don't
reach the peak in one jump."
Clinton became emotional when a reporter asked whether world leaders can
stop suicide bombers. "No one can do that," he replied. "You couldn't
do it before the meeting and we can't do it in six months time."
"I wish I had it in my power to reach into the hearts of those young men
who have bought some apocalyptic version of Islam and politics that
together causes them to strap their bodies with bombs and blow
themselves to smithereens and kill innocent children," the president
added. "I wish I could do that."
But Clinton said the risks can be minimized.
"The question is can we improve the capacity of Israel and the Palestine
Authority to prevent these things from happening. The answer is yes,"
Clinton said.
-30

Load-Date: March 15, 1996


End of Document