Clinton Signs Measure on Terrorism and Death Penalty Appeals
The New York Times
April 25, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 578 words
Byline: By ALISON MITCHELL 

By ALISON MITCHELL 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 24
Body


President Clinton today signed broad legislation that provides new tools and penalties for Federal law-enforcement officials to use in fighting terrorism and also sharply restricts the ability of death row inmates and other prisoners to appeal their sentences.
Mr. Clinton approved the measure at a ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House, with the Marine band playing and American flags whipping in the breeze.
The audience included families of those killed in terrorist incidents, including the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, the 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City and last year's bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Two dozen members of Congress from both parties also attended. Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader and presumptive Republican Presidential nominee, stood behind Mr. Clinton as he signed the bill and shook his hand afterward.
And Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney who prosecuted the Trade Center bombing, was on hand to praise the bill.
Mr. Clinton told the assembled families, sitting on folded chairs on the lawn: "Your endurance and your courage is a lesson to us all. Your vigilance has sharpened our vigilance."
He added: "We renew our fight against those who seek to terrorize us in you names. We send a loud, clear message today all over the world, in your names: America will never surrender to terror."
Mr. Clinton had called for the passage of counterterrorism legislation within days of the Oklahoma City bombing. But the measure stalled in Congress because some provisions faced opposition from an unusual coalition of gun rights advocates and civil liberties organizations.
The version that Mr. Clinton signed was stripped of some measures he had supported, including increased wiretap authority and lowered standards for lawsuits against sellers of guns used in crimes. But it included a measure he had not sought that would generally give death row inmates six months from their final state court proceeding to file a habeus corpus petition, the process that convicts use to obtain Federal review of their convictions. Other prisoners would get a year, provided the state makes counsel available to the prisoner.
Current Federal law provides no time limits and supporters and opponents of the measure both said said it would drastically accelerate executions by shaving years off appeals in most capital cases.
Civil liberties groups and defense lawyers are already preparing constitutional challenges. And in Philadelphia, death penalty lawyers rushed to Federal court to prevent the State of Pennsylvania from taking advantage of the new law's expedited habeas corpus procedures.
In other provisions, the measure would make it easier to deport aliens suspected of terrorism and would make it more difficult for terrorist organizations abroad to raise money in the United States. It would also authorize the Government to spend $1 billion over the next five years to fight terrorism in the United States.
Some at the ceremony had tear-filled eyes. Praising the President, Ann DiGiovanni of Valley Stream, L.I., whose son John died in the World Trade Center bombing, said, 'We're not going to stand by, no."
Mrs. DiGiovanni said she wished the bombers had been executed, adding, "I can't see why they had to put them in jail. They should have given them a dose of their own medicine."
The four men convicted of the bombing were sentenced to prison terms that assure they will be in prison for life.
      

Load-Date: April 25, 1996


End of Document