CLINTON: U.S. WON'T CAVE IN TO TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 9, 1998, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 552 words
Byline: THOMAS W. LIPPMAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton pledged yesterday that neither the lethal bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa nor any other acts of terrorism would cause the United States to retreat from its global responsibilities or shrink its official presence around the world.
''Americans are targets of terrorism, in part, because we act to advance peace and democracy and because we stand united against terrorism,'' Clinton said in his weekly radio address to the nation. ''To change any of that, to pull our diplomats and troops from the world's trouble spots, to turn our backs on those taking risks for peace, to weaken our opposition to terrorism, that would give terrorism a victory it must and will not have.''
Recalling that the United States has captured and successfully prosecuted suspects in previous terror attacks years after they occurred, Clinton said again that ''no matter how long it takes, or where it takes us, we will pursue terrorists until the cases are solved and justice is done.''
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, meanwhile, commented on the known U.S. victims. The list, which contained the names of several military and support personnel, reflected the fact that many Americans employed at embassies abroad are not State Department diplomats but security staff, aid workers and technicians who represent several government agencies.
She joined Clinton in reaffirming that ''the United States will spare no effort and use all the means at our disposal to track down and punish the perpetrators of these outrageous acts.''
Clinton's senior foreign policy and national security advisers - including Attorney General Janet Reno and FBI director Louis Freeh, who by law are responsible for investigating the crimes even though they occurred outside the United States - met at the White House to review the status of rescue operations and of the incipient investigation, administration officials said.
Administration officials resolutely refused to theorize responsibility for the deadly attacks, saying that a painstaking investigation has just begun.
Independent analysts and specialists in terrorism also cautioned against speculating about who might have organized and carried out the bombings, but several noted that there was a limited universe of groups and individuals with the motive and capability to perpetrate such massive, coordinated attacks.
Most commentators focused on two prominent terrorism suspects who are based in Afghanistan and believed to be cooperating with each other.
One is Ayman Zawahri, whose name also has been transliterated as Iman Zowaheri, a leader of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad organization. His name tops a ''Wanted: Masterminds of International Terrorism'' list posted on the Egyptian government's official Web site.
According to Edward V. Badolato, a private security consultant who was military attache at the U.S. Embassy in Lebanon, Zawahri is a ''running mate'' of the other man most frequently named in speculating about suspects, Osama bin Laden.
Bin Laden is a renegade Saudi millionaire, the son of a road-building contractor who had close ties to the Saudi royal family. According to the State Department, bin Laden uses his money to finance a relentless campaign against the Saudi rulers and against the U.S. military presence in the kingdom.
THE EMBASSY BOMBINGS

Load-Date: August 10, 1998


End of Document