Clinton urges quick action from Congress Some lawmakers wary of moving too hastily
USA TODAY
July 31, 1996, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 663 words
Byline: Bill Nichols
Body


President Clinton urged Congress on Tuesday to pass additional
anti-terrorism legislation by the end of the week, even if that
means dropping proposals the White House supports.
Congress needs to produce "the best, strongest bill they can,"
said Clinton. "Keep in mind, we're trying to do something very
quickly here. . . . We need to keep this country together right
now."
Clinton's comments came as resistance to some of his anti-terrorism
proposals, particularly the use of chemical markers in explosives
to make bombs easier to trace, seemed to harden on Capitol Hill.
Both House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., and Senate Majority Leader
Trent Lott, R-Miss., indicated that Congress might pass a very
limited version of Clinton's proposals this week, then revisit
the issue after the congressional recess ends in September.
"I doubt if we are going to rush to a final decision this week,"
said Lott. "But we're going to take steps that will lead to final
action."
White House chief of staff Leon Panetta met with congressional
leaders to try to forge a compromise on the new anti-terrorism
package, prompted by last week's bombing at the Olympic Games
and the crash of TWA Flight 800.
And White House spokesman Barry Toiv said agreement had been reached
on several of Clinton's proposals, including expanding the government's
wiretap authority.
But after the Panetta meeting, Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, warned
that, "These are very controversial provisions that the White
House wants. Some they're not going to get."
Hatch called the use of chemical markers -- or "taggants" --
a "phony issue," that should be studied before it's put into
wider use.
And Sen. Larry Craig, R-Idaho, warned Democrats against "playing
politics with this issue," by exploiting fears about the Olympics
bombing and the TWA crash.
A coalition of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans
joined forces to strip an anti-terrorism bill passed earlier this
year of the taggants and wiretapping provisions.
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who also participated in the meeting
with Panetta, accused the GOP of trying to add "a whole bunch"
of issues unrelated to fighting terrorism.
"I hope for some moderation on their part, but I haven't seen
it yet," said Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del. Other Democrats accused
Republicans of caving to pressure from the National Rifle Association.
White House aides said Clinton will push for a separate vote on
the taggants issue, to make sure Republican opposition is noted
on the record.
A Senate subcommittee did grant Clinton's requests Tuesday, adopting
a bill funding the Justice Department and other agencies in 1997
after adding provisions expanding a study of use of taggants and
broadening wiretap authority.
WHAT'S REQUESTED
President Clinton is seeking broader anti-terrorism powers in
the United States and abroad. He wants Congress to pass a an anti-terrorism
bill that would:
-- Expand authority for wiretaps, including "roving wiretaps"
that allow police to monitor all telephone lines used by suspected
terrorists, not just the ones they own.
-- Allow the FBI to get information on suspects from hotels,
telephone companies and storage facilities in foreign counterintelligence
cases.
-- Allow terrorists to be prosecuted under federal racketeering
laws.
-- Extend the statute of limitations for terrorism laws.
-- Increase FBI anti-terrorist funding.
-- Provide $ 25 million for a six-month study of tagging chemicals,
called taggants, that can be placed in explosive material to trace
its origin, and expand the study to include black and smokeless
gunpowder, used in making bombs.
In Paris Tuesday, eight major nations joined in issuing 25 recommendations
to combat terrorism. They include:
-- Tighter border checks.
-- Legal methods to track terrorists through telecommunications,
including the Internet.
-- Investigations of charities that support terrorist groups.
-- Simpler procedures for extraditing suspects.
-- Better exchange of information on international fund transfers
when a suspected terrorist group is involved.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Dennis Cook, AP; At White House: President Clinton and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak at a news conference.

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document