CLINTON-SYRIA TALKS TEST PEACE PROCESS ASSAD SEEKS MIDEAST IMAGE BOOST DESPITE TERRORISM LINKS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
JANUARY 16, 1994, SUNDAY,
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 397 words
Byline: MONA ZIADE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: GENEVA
Body


The complex quest for Middle East peace moves to this Swiss international center today when President Clinton meets Hafez Assad of Syria, a nation ostracized for its links to terrorism but crucial to any hopes for a lasting settlement.
The two leaders arrived yesterday, with Clinton, accompanied by his wife, Hillary, flying in from Minsk, the capital of Belarus, where he made a stopover after his summit meeting in Moscow with Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Syria's immediate goal is the return of the Golan Heights, the strategic plateau captured by Israel in 1967 and annexed in 1981. That left Israeli troops only 35 miles from Damascus, the Syrian capital.
Israel has demanded that Syria commit itself to a peace treaty that includes open borders, free trade and diplomatic relations before the Jewish state offers any territorial concessions.
Assad has his own agenda. Long the self-proclaimed leader of Arab causes, he seeks commitments from the United States and Israel that he will have a leading role in Mideast politics once peace is achieved.
Before turning to the Middle East, Clinton wrapped up the Eastern European portion of this trip yesterday by praising Belarus for leading the way among former Soviet republics in abandoning its nuclear-weapon stockpile.
''That was the right choice,'' Clinton said in the Belarussian capital of Minsk, offering millions of dollars of aid in return.
In part, Clinton's six-hour visit after summit talks with Russian President Boris Yeltsin in Moscow, was intended to demonstrate to neighboring Ukraine that disarmament pays off. Ukraine signed an agreement with Russia and the United States on Friday to scrap its nuclear arsenal, but there is opposition to the pact in the Kiev parliament.
Clinton stopped at a Victory Square in the center of Minsk where an eternal flame commemorates World War II dead.
He signed a treaty with Belarus intended to lure American businesses here by offering legal protections for investments.
The president also approved formation of an American trade center. And he added $ 25 million to the pot of U.S. money Belarus can use to dismantle its 76 remaining nuclear missiles and covert defense industries to civilian use. The new money increases Belarus' take to $ 101 million.
In his weekly radio address to American audiences, Clinton said the United States ''can't afford to ignore'' problems in Europe.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Greg Gibson/Associated Press: President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, leave for Minsk from Moscow's Vnukovo Airport yesterday.

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document