Clinton and Lazio Turn Negative On Campaign Use of Cole Attack
The New York Times
November 1, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1257 words
Byline: By DEAN E. MURPHY 

By DEAN E. MURPHY 
Body


The New York Senate race, mired in a dispute over Muslim American support for Hillary Rodham Clinton, turned vitriolic yesterday as both Mrs. Clinton and Representative Rick A. Lazio resorted to invective and abusive attacks that centered on the bombing of the destroyer Cole.
Mrs. Clinton began broadcasting a television advertisement that opens with a picture of the crippled ship and the sound of taps playing in the background. In the ad, the announcer accuses Mr. Lazio of exploiting the Cole bombing through a New York Republican Party telephone campaign that tried to link the first lady to groups that condone Middle East terrorism.
"If this is how Rick Lazio campaigns for office," the announcer says, "what would Rick Lazio do in office?"
Joined by former Mayor Edward I. Koch at the East Midwood Jewish Center in Brooklyn, Mrs. Clinton reinforced the advertisement's message by delivering one of her harshest and most partisan speeches in recent weeks.
"This campaign should be about not me or my opponent, certainly not about his misleading, inaccurate, offensive, outrageous, despicable attacks," Mrs. Clinton said. "It ought to be about you."
Later, she added: "You can run a negative campaign, Mr. Lazio, but you cannot hide. You cannot hide from your record. You cannot hide from your positions. You cannot hide from the fact that you would go to Washington to be a vote for Trent Lott and Jesse Helms. You cannot hide from the fact that you do not represent the mainstream of New York voters."
Mr. Lazio, speaking to reporters during a campaign stop in Binghamton, suggested that voters look at his record in Congress, not Mrs. Clinton's advertisements, to determine how he would act as a senator. He said Mrs. Clinton's offensive was "exactly what I would expect" from the first lady after a week in which she had returned $50,000 in political contributions collected during a fund-raiser organized by the American Muslim Alliance and $1,000 from a prominent member of another group, the American Muslim Council.
"She's caught," Mr. Lazio said. "She has to return $50,000 of tainted money, money that is given to her by people who believe in terrorism. And what does she do? Well, she tries to attack somebody else, to divert attention, to rip somebody else down." Earlier, in interviews on two morning network programs, Mr. Lazio declined to apologize for the Republican Party telephone calls about the Cole, which ended over the weekend, and defended their underlying premise: that Mrs. Clinton is soft on Israel and sympathetic to groups that condone violence in the Middle East.
"I think if you look at the underlying facts of what happened, you see that Mrs. Clinton had invited people to the White House who espoused terrorism and violence as a political tool, people that believed in Hamas, which is a terrorist group," Mr. Lazio said on the "Early Show" on CBS.
On NBC's "Today," Mr. Lazio said there was "no moral equivalency" between the Republican telephone campaign about the destroyer Cole and Mrs. Clinton's support from Muslim American groups.
"There's one candidate here who's actually receiving financial contributions from a group that supports terrorism, murder and violence to achieve political gain," Mr. Lazio said. "There's nothing for me to apologize for."
Both Muslim American organizations have members who have been quoted supporting the right of Palestinians to used armed force against the Israeli government.
But the two groups are generally regarded as mainstream in their views and have been praised by a variety of Democratic and Republican politicians. Both organizations belong to a larger umbrella organization that recently endorsed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president.
In September 1999, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, an Ohio Democrat, introduced remarks into the Congressional Record honoring the American Muslim Alliance for playing "a crucial role in training and educating American Muslims nationwide about the political process." In October 1998, Representative Thomas M. Davis 3rd, a Republican of Virginia, introduced similar remarks about the American Muslim Council after attending the group's national convention.
In an interview yesterday, Abdurahaman Alamoudi, the former executive director of the American Muslim Council, who contributed $1,000 to both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Bush, apologized for remarks he made over the weekend at an anti-Israeli rally in Lafayette Park in Washington. Mr. Alamoudi told a crowd of several thousand people that he supports both Hamas and Hezbollah, militant Islamic groups in the Middle East.
Mr. Alamoudi said he made the comments "in the hype of emotion" and out of anger over allegations by Mr. Lazio that he supports terrorism. Mr. Alamoudi said the remarks, which were reported in yesterday's Daily News, should be measured against his service over the past few years as a goodwill ambassador for the State Department.
Mr. Alamoudi said he had made a half-dozen or so trips to Muslim countries for the State Department, including visits last week to Oman, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, where he speaks to groups about the political progress made by Muslims living in the United States. Mr. Alamoudi, who was born in Eritrea and moved to the United States from Yemen in 1979, said he was paid $100 to $200 a day for his travels and also had his travel and accommodations covered.
"I regret that I did that," Mr. Alamoudi said about his remarks at the rally. "Frankly, I was a little taken aback by all of the controversy, that I am being associated with terrorism and all of that. I was a little mad about that and I underestimated the effect of my words."
Mr. Alamoudi said he had been reprimanded by the American Muslim Council for his remarks and, ultimately, he would resign from its board if the board calls for him to step down. Yahha Mossa-Basha, president of the council, said Mr. Alamoudi's statements were "something not acceptable" to the council, but a decision had not yet been made about his resignation.
Mrs. Clinton said during a news conference in Brooklyn that she did not know about Mr. Alamoudi's remarks about terrorism until they were reported in The Daily News. She said she returned the money, as Mr. Bush did, immediately.
Mr. Lazio's campaign, however, rejected her explanation.
"Clearly, Hillary Clinton wants to hide the fact that she has politically courted an individual who has expressed support for terrorist organizations who have murdered hundreds of Americans and Israelis," said Bill Dal Col, campaign manager for Mr. Lazio. "New Yorkers don't believe her disingenuous excuses about how she didn't know who her administration's pro-terrorism ambassador of goodwill was. That's the real story here, and New Yorkers won't allow Hillary Clinton to deflect attention from her Hezbollah and Hamas baggage."
But the leaders of eight prominent Muslim American organizations, including the two groups involved in the Clinton-Lazio dispute, put the blame on Mr. Lazio for introducing "racism and bigotry" into the Senate race and using "deceitful accusations" about Muslims to promote his candidacy.
"Mr. Lazio is trying to turn Muslims into the Willie Horton of 2000," the eight groups said in a joint statement. "He is telling New Yorkers that Muslims are guilty by virtue of being Muslims. This reprehensible tactic is designed to malign the entire Muslim community and to lock its members out of the political process. His scurrilous campaign is an attack on democratic norms and on our constitutional rights."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Representative Rick A. Lazio went trick-or-treating last night in Brightwaters, N.Y., with his daughters, Molly, 8, left, and Kelsey, 7. Below, Hillary Rodham Clinton at Fordham University yesterday. (Associated Press); (Librado Romero/The New York Times)(pg. B5)      

Load-Date: November 1, 2000


End of Document