Clinton Presses Terrorism Issue in 2d Meeting With Arafat
The New York Times
September 30, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 779 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER 

By STEVEN ERLANGER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29
Body


President Clinton met today with Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and emphasized the work that the Palestinians need to do to combat terrorism as the Israelis withdraw from an additional 13 percent of the West Bank, senior American officials said.
It was the leaders' second meeting in two days, after a session on Monday with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, and it demonstrated, Mr. Clinton's aides said, the President's determination to complete an interim agreement between Israel and the Palestinians in a few weeks.
Now that Israel has accepted a phased withdrawal from the West Bank, of the 13 percent that Washington had insisted on, American attention turned to the more complicated details of how Palestinians can improve security. The improvements are supposed to be made parallel with the Israeli pullbacks.
Those topics involve issues like dismantling terrorist cells, confiscating some guns and halting the "incitement" of residents through anti-Israeli speeches and propaganda.
"Peace is a Palestinian need, Israeli need, Arab need, international need," Mr. Arafat said after the hourlong talks with Mr. Clinton. "We are very close on a number of subjects."
Mr. Arafat expressed hope that a deal could be reached at a meeting here next month, a move agreed to on Monday.
Mr. Clinton's spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said, "The President is determined to see an agreement arise from this exercise."
"We've been treading water for 18 months and now we're swimming," a White House official said. "We have a timetable and the personal engagement of the two leaders."
Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Arafat, whose personal and ideological dislike and distrust for each other have become ingrained, met on Monday for the first time in almost a year. Even more important, senior American officials said, they agreed to a series of contacts and a way to manage crises between them.
Mr. Clinton also wanted to reassure Mr. Arafat of Washington's commitment to help the Palestinians through aid and investment, White House officials said. Mr. Clinton emphasized "how much terrorism undermines Arafat, as well," one official said.
The Americans also wanted to go over some of Mr. Arafat's concerns about what remains to be done, including Palestinian needs for security from attacks by Israeli settlers, officials said.
Early next week Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and the Middle East negotiator, Dennis B. Ross, will travel to the Middle East for talks with the two sides, to try to insure that the meeting next month succeeds.
The idea is to have Mr. Netanyahu, Mr. Arafat and their aides and experts at a site near Washington, with American officials guiding their negotiations and Mr. Clinton involving himself as necessary.
If an interim deal can be finished, talks will formally open on a final settlement between Israel and the Palestinians, originally envisioned in the 1993 and 1995 Oslo accords to be completed by May 4.
Although American, Israeli and Palestinian officials acknowledged that much work remains to be done, all expressed a new confidence that the time is ripe for a deal.
American officials expressed particular concern about the dangers of new violence or unilateral actions by either side that could quickly erode the wary willingness of the two men to work together.
Mr. Clinton emphasized to both that they needed to avoid embarrassing each other.
He and Ms. Albright pressed Mr. Arafat in his United Nations speech on Monday to avoid any commitment to declare an independent Palestinian state after May 4, if the final-status negotiations have not succeeded by then.
Mr. Arafat, while asking the help of the world to achieve that goal, complied with the American request.
Mr. Netanyahu, speaking here on Monday, said he had told Mr. Arafat that any such unilateral step would force him to respond in kind and destroy the peace effort.
The other great concern is of another bombing of Israeli civilians by Palestinian radicals opposed to Mr. Arafat and the peace effort. American officials pointed to an explosion today in Ramallah, on the West Bank, of a car that was apparently being equipped as a bomb for use against Israelis. The explosion killed a participant in the Hamas organization and wounded two other supporters of the militant Islamic group.
Similar attacks have disrupted momentum toward peace and pushed Mr. Netanyahu to attack Mr. Arafat for his apparent failure to insure complete security for Israelis, even when the bombers lived in or moved through Israeli-controlled territory.
Israel has been bracing for a renewal of Hamas bombings and today sealed its borders with the West Bank and Gaza Strip on the eve of Yom Kippur.

Graphic

 
Photo: A car apparently being equipped as a bomb for use against Israelis exploded yesterday in Ramallah on the West Bank. A Hamas participant was killed, and two supporters of the militant Islam organization were wounded. U.S. officials cited the blast in their examination of security problems. (Agence France-Presse)
      

Load-Date: September 30, 1998


End of Document