CLINTON PUSHING HARD ON ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
May 28, 1995, Sunday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8A
Length: 485 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) _ Turning up pressure for his anti-terrorism
package, President Clinton accused congressional critics Saturday of
trying to deny police expanded wiretap authority and other tools they
need for a fight "we have to be able to win."
"I want the police to stop those people cold," Clinton said in
his weekly radio address.  "The restrictive view taken by some
people in Congress would handicap our ability to track terrorists
down, follow them when they move and prevent their attacks on
innocent people."
Congressional critics maintain that Clinton's proposals go too
far, and could erode constitutional protections and infringe on civil
liberties.
At issue are Clinton proposals to:
Expand wiretap authority.  Clinton wants police to be able to
move their wiretaps without getting a new court order each time
terrorists move to evade surveillance.
The Senate voted 52-28 on Friday to block a Democratic attempt
to expand the government's wiretapping authority.  Republicans
expressed concern that the provision could infringe on the civil
liberties of domestic political groups.
Expand the role of the military in fighting terrorism.
Clinton wants to involve the military when terrorists are
contemplating the use of biological or chemical weapons.  Currently,
the military can join in criminal investigations only when they
involve nuclear weapons.
Critics are wary of giving the military a greater role in
domestic law enforcement, warning of potential government abuse of
individual rights.
Place traceable materials in chemicals that can be used to
make bombs.  Clinton wants to include tiny plastic tracers known as
"taggants" in certain explosive materials so that bombs can be
tracked to their source.
"Every day that goes by without a law like this a terrorist can
walk into a store and buy material that is virtually untraceable,"
Clinton said.
The idea of explosive tracers has been around for years, drawing
opposition from the explosives industry and the National Rifle
Association, which cited safety concerns.  Critics also argue tagging
would push up the price of explosives and gunpowder, and could put
miners and others who work with them at risk.
Clinton rejected suggestions that any of the three proposals was
over-reaching, saying that the battle against terrorism was "a fight
we have to be able to win."
"Constitutional protections and legal restrictions are not
being repealed," he said.  "We are simply giving law enforcement
agencies who are committed to fighting terrorists for us the tools
they need to succeed in the modern world."
Clinton unveiled his $ 1.5 billion anti-terrorism package one
week after the April 19 bombing in Oklahoma City.  Congressional
leaders supported many of its provisions and pledged to complete work
by Memorial Day.
However, work on the legislation was delayed while legislators
focused on the federal budget and amid partisan finger-pointing over
the best way to get tough with terrorists.

Load-Date: May 30, 1995


End of Document