Clinton, Trump at odds over tackling terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 14, 2016 Tuesday


Copyright 2016 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 6
Length: 334 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - In both style and substance, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton offered drastically different proposals Monday for stemming the threat of terrorism and gun violence that have Americans on edge following the deadly weekend attacks at a gay nightclub in Orlando.
Trump focused heavily on the nation's broken immigration system in his fiery address, although the Orlando shooter was born in the United States. The presumptive Republican nominee redoubled his call for temporarily banning Muslims from the United States, saying he would lift the ban once the government could "properly and perfectly" screen immigrants.
Going further, Trump said he would also "suspend immigration from areas of the world where there's a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe and our allies." He did not specify what countries would be affected or whether the suspension would apply regardless of religion.
Clinton said she would prioritize stopping "lone wolf" attackers as president - those who may be radicalized without having direct contact or orders from a larger terror network. Overseas, the presumptive Democratic nominee called for ramping up the U.S. air campaign targeting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and pointedly called out U.S. partners in the region by name, saying Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Qatar must stop their citizens from funding terrorism.
Clinton also vigorously reiterated her call for banning assault weapons, like one of the guns the Orlando shooter used.
Clinton's address was measured and sober. While she drew implicit contrasts with Trump, she never mentioned him by name, declaring, "Today is not a day for politics."
Trump felt differently, hammering Clinton repeatedly in his remarks. He accused her of wanting to abolish the Second Amendment - in connection with her proposals for tougher gun laws - and said she can't claim to be supportive of gays and lesbians when she supports allowing immigration from countries where they are discriminated against.

Load-Date: June 14, 2016


End of Document