CLINTON SEEKS TO SHOW SOLIDARITY WITH ISRAELIS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 15, 1996, Friday, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 805 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


After grieving with the Israeli people over its recent losses to terrorists, President Bill Clinton pledged $ 100 million on Thursday to the fight against terrorism.
But he acknowledged that no one - not presidents or princes or prime ministers - can guarantee "a risk-free world."
Clinton said terrorism had its roots in "the grip of that ancient fear that life can only be lived if you're looking down on someone else. We know your pain is unimaginable, and in some extent unsharable, but America grieves with you."
In an emotional trip that coupled meetings with Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres with a visit to the grave of Peres' slain predecessor, Yitzhak Rabin, Clinton imagined aloud how Americans would react to the terrorism that confronts Israel.
He said: "Our people would be off the wall. They would be angry. They would be furious. They would want action."
To that end, Clinton pledged the $ 100 million over two years to pay for anti-terrorism efforts, including training, bomb-detection scanners and robotics for handling suspect packages.
But Israeli officials envision using much of the U.S. aid to set up a separation zone with the West Bank to try to prevent terrorists from infiltrating. The idea of the zone, which would include electronic fences, guard towers and bomb-sniffing dogs, was initially proposed by Rabin and was approved by the Israeli Cabinet March 3.
The project is expected to cost $ 300 million and take at least two years to complete.
Clinton intends to use $ 50 million already approved by Congress and is asking for another $ 50 million for the fiscal year that begins in October.
Shlomo Dror, a spokesman for the Israel army liaison with the Palestinians, said the United States was being asked to provide special training for bomb-sniffing dog units and for electronic equipment to be used along the separation line. Israel also needs helicopters and all-terrain vehicles to help patrol the zone, he said.
Palestinian leaders have denounced the plan for a separation zone.
'Climbing A Mountain'
On Thursday night, Clinton took off for Washington, leaving behind a team of U.S. officials including CIA Director John Deutch and Secretary of State Warren Christopher to work on an anti-terrorism accord with Israel. The aim is to complete an agreement before Peres visits Washington late next month.
At a joint news conference with Clinton, Peres promised that the peace process with Palestinians would continue, although he said the four recent suicide bombings in Israel made it more complicated. "It's not black and white," Peres said. "It's like climbing a mountain. It is difficult, it takes time. You don't reach the peak in one jump."
Clinton's visit took place the day after an international anti-terrorism meeting in Egypt, at which Israelis, Arabs and other world leaders gathered to make an unprecedented joint stand against terrorism. Peres said Thursday, "The foundation was laid down . . . to go ahead with peace and reject terror."
Clinton said: "Can we create a risk-free world here in Israel? No. Can we reduce the risks and do much better? Yes."
He brought with him a stone from the White House lawn, where in September 1993 Rabin had sealed with a handshake a landmark peace agreement with Yasser Arafat, now head of the Palestinian self-rule A uthority. Clinton placed the stone on the slain prime minister's tombstone at Mount Herzl Cemetery, in accordance with Jewish tradition.
Clinton rose, and he and Rabin's widow, Leah, stood silently for a moment, facing the monument. Clinton took her left hand in his right. They clasped hands for a time, then turned and walked away.
Yitzhak Rabin was killed Nov. 4 by a Jewish extremist opposed to giving up the Gaza Strip and the West Bank to the Palestinians.
Visits High School
Clinton stopped, as well, at Beit Hinuch, a Jerusalem high school that lost three graduates in the four suicide bombings that have rocked Israel since Feb. 25.
The 21-hour visit gripped Israelis, replacing the past weeks' gloom with appreciation of the show of support from the most powerful leader on Earth.
Roe Ben-Ami, a senior at the Beit Hinuch High School in Jerusalem, said, Clinton "is No. 1 in the world. He has influence. When there is someone like this standing with us, it helps."
Clinton later met with hundreds of high school students at Tel Aviv's opera house, a few minutes' walk from the shopping mall where a bombing last week killed 13 people, including five teens.
Clinton won over his audience with praise for Jewish resilience in the face of adversity and pledges of America's commitment to stand by Israel.
"It seems especially painful that a country like Israel, full of people with such great intellect and energy . . . should still be in the grip of such ancient hatreds," he said in a speech punctuated by loud applause and standing ovations.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - President Bill Clinton lays a wreath Thursday at the gravesite of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin at the Mount Herzl Cemetery in Jerusalem. The president then placed a stone on the tombstone. With him is Leah Rabin, Rabin's wife.

Load-Date: March 15, 1996


End of Document