CLINTON EXPECTED TO VETO BUDGET CUTS DISASTER, ANTI-TERRORISM FUNDS MAY BE SACRIFICED IN PROCESS
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 17, 1995, Wednesday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 316 words
Byline: LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON _ House and Senate negotiators have approved a record
$ 16.4 billion in spending cuts, but White House aides confirmed that
President Clinton plans to use his first veto to block the bill,
which would take most of its cuts from federal housing assistance and
other programs for the poor.
In threatening to veto the 1995 "rescissions" package _ so
named because it would rescind funds previously committed but not yet
spent on scores of federal programs _ Clinton is sending the message
that he is willing to return a measure to Congress, even though it
involves tough choices for him.
In this case, a veto would kill two items that the
administration wants: $ 6.7 billion in disaster relief for states and
$ 240 million to beef up anti-terrorism efforts in the wake of the
Oklahoma City bombing.
But a veto also would strengthen Clinton's hand in the
full-scale budget battle to come this summer.
Many liberal groups were waiting nervously to see if Clinton
would veto the measure and some officials were acknowledging
anxieties about whether the often-accommodating Clinton would make
the tough choice.
But White House aides said the fact that the conferees did
little to improve the bill made the choice less difficult.  One
official said the veto offers Clinton a welcome opportunity "to lay
out a road map on the right way to make deficit cuts."
Noting that the GOP-controlled negotiating panels had restored
more than $ 1 billion for pet building projects at the expense of
programs for the poor, Democrats denounced the spending cuts package
as retrogressive and vowed to oppose final passage.
But Republicans called the bill proof of their determination to
balance the budget.
"It would be bad politics to veto this bill," said House
Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert L. Livingston, R-La., adding
that the cuts in the package are evidence that the Republicans "are
keeping our promises" to lower the deficit.

Load-Date: May 18, 1995


End of Document