CLINTON URGES PLAN TO COMBAT TERRORISM;
CITES NEW DANGERS FACING THE NATION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 18, 2000, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 480 words
Byline: JAMES GERSTENZANG, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: NEW LONDON, Conn.
Body


President Clinton warned yesterday of an angry sea of new dangers facing the United States in the 21st century, from evolving cyberterrorism to miniature weapons of mass destruction, and announced a plan to add $ 300 million to the nation's counterterrorism campaign.
Offering the prospect of "a fateful struggle" between global harmony and chaos, the president said the technological advances that made possible the Internet and the human genome project also make "the tools of destruction deadlier, cheaper and more available, making us more vulnerable to problems that arise half a world away."
Clinton presented a dark picture of malevolence lurking in the new technology as he addressed 190 cadets graduating from the Coast Guard Academy -- a third of them women. He cited the nation's experience at the arrival of the new millennium, when, with the aid of Jordan, "we shut down a plot to place large bombs at locations where Americans might gather on New Year's Eve.
"We learned this plot was linked to terrorist camps in Afghanistan and the organization created by Osama bin Laden," the president said, reiterating assertions by senior officials linking the threat to the man the United States holds responsible for the fatal blasts at U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya in 1998. "A short time later, a customs agent in Seattle discovered bomb materials being smuggled into the United States, the same materials used by bin Laden in other places," he said.
Computers, on which the world places ever greater reliance, are subject to viruses that can halt global commerce, such as the "love bug" that ran rampant through computers two weeks ago.
Biological, chemical "and maybe even nuclear weapons" can, in the hands of free agents, bring chaos to the world.
Health threats such as AIDS and malaria "can ruin economies and threaten the very survival of nations and societies." Global warming and narco-terrorism loom.
Clinton warned, too, of the risk posed by nations and organizations seeking the expertise of Russian nuclear weapons scientists, whose average salary is less than $ 100 a month.
The new reality, he said, is that globalization and information technology "have magnified both the creative and the destructive potential of every individual, tribe and nation on our planet."
But the solution is neither a "survivalist foreign policy" that turns the oceans into protective moats around the United States nor a "go-it-alone foreign policy," he said, but rather international cooperation and preparation.
Without cooperation from Jordan and Canada in breaking up the alleged bin Laden threat, he said, "we'd have had bombs going off here as we celebrated the millennium."
Clinton's immediate answer is the $ 300 million additional budget request, on top of the $ 9 billion he is seeking from Congress for counter-terrorism programs in the 2001 fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.

Load-Date: May 19, 2000


End of Document