CLINTON, ALLIES PLEDGE ATTACK ON TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
June 28, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 823 words
Body


LYON, France (AP) - President Clinton and other world leaders pledged
solidarity Thursday "to fight terrorism by all legal means" in the
aftermath of a "barbarous and unjustifiable" truck bomb that killed 19
Americans in Saudi Arabia.
The leaders of seven major industrial democracies - the United States,
France, Britain, Japan, Germany, France, Canada and Italy - scheduled
a follow-up meeting of their top security officials for next month in
Paris.
"We are all united in condemning the dreadful bombing that has taken
place," said French President Jacques Chirac, host of this year's
economic summit. "We changed our agenda" to deal with "this appalling
event," Chirac said.
And Clinton, who had sought the quick action, said the joint statement
by the U.S. economic allies showed, "We understand that an attack on
one of us is an attack on all of us and that none of us is
invulnerable."
Clinton thanked his international counterparts for "this very powerful
statement."
Among areas of expanded cooperation the leaders cited: a pledge to
"better equip our law enforcement authorities to work together to
combat terrorism."
Clinton indicated that such efforts as the recent U.S. sharing with
Israel of bomb-detection equipment would be high on the list.
Presidential spokesman Mike McCurry said Clinton would present
specific proposals at today's session of the economic conference. The
United States is seeking agreement on tougher extradition guidelines,
more sharing of national intelligence on possible terrorist activity
and efforts to make it harder for suspected terrorists to cross
national borders.
Meanwhile, in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, FBI agents searched Thursday for
some clue - any clue - at the U.S. military complex demolished in the
massive truck bombing. U.S. officials acknowledged they had no leads
on who the bombers were, and said they doubted several anonymous
claims of responsibility.
The remains of the 19 Americans killed in the blast were flown to
Dover Air Force Base in Delaware to be honored at a private ceremony
with a 21-gun salute. Forty of the hundreds of Americans wounded were
flown to the main U.S. military hospital in Germany for treatment.
Suspicion for the bombing was focused on Muslim militants opposed to
the 5,000 U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia - but no proof has yet turned
up.
In London, an Arabic newspaper said an anonymous caller had claimed
responsibility for the bombing on behalf of a previously unknown
group. The caller identified the group as the Legion of the Martyr
Abdullah al-Hufaizi - a Saudi citizen beheaded last year for throwing
acid at a policeman.
The daily Al-Arab said the caller threatened more attacks if foreign
forces "occupying the holy Saudi land" did not withdraw.
It was impossible to determine if such a group actually exists.
American broadcast networks reported a second responsibility claim
made by another unknown group calling itself Hezbollah-Gulf. U.S.
State Department Spokesman Nicholas Burns said a claim also was made
to a newspaper in Riyadh, the Saudi capital. It wasn't clear whether
that was a separate, third claim.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher was not inclined to believe
the claims. "Where terrorism is concerned," he said, "first guesses
usually are wrong."
Burns added: "We have no leads whatsoever."
Many of those killed in the attack, including Master Sgt. Kendall K.J.
Kitson of Yukon, Okla., had home leave coming up.
Nancy Kitson, clutching a letter from her 39-year-old brother that
arrived Wednesday, sobbed as she described how excited he was about
coming home next week.
"He was tall and handsome and had a kind of strange sense of humor. He
could always crack a joke," she sobbed. "He was just a real good
person."
The United States says 270 Americans were injured in the blast. Saudi
Arabia puts the figure at 386, including 147 Saudis and 118
Bangladeshis.
In Washington, with the fatal blast much in mind, the Senate
unanimously passed legislation Thursday allowing the military to train
law enforcement agencies in this country against terrorism involving
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
"We are woefully unprepared to deal with this kind of catastrophic act
of terrorism if it occurs," Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., coauthor of the
measure, said in floor debate. "The police departments, the fire
departments are on record as saying, 'We need help.' And that's what
we're trying to do here. This is not going to solve the problem. This
is a beginning."
Offered as an amendment to the pending 1997 defense authorization
bill, the measure passed 96-0. A senior House Republican and Democrat
then introduced the identical bill in the House.
Despite the unanimous vote in the Senate, the fate of the legislation
is uncertain. Earlier this year, House-Senate negotiators dropped a
provision from an anti-terrorism bill that would have allowed greater
involvement by the military in combating domestic terrorism. That
provision had been included in the Senate version of the bill, but not
the House version.

Load-Date: June 28, 1996


End of Document