CLINTON TARGETS MODERN TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 23, 1999, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 819 words
Byline: JOHN M. BRODER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Seeking to muster public support for a large increase in federal spending to defend against unconventional terrorist attack, President Clinton appeared yesterday with top government health and law enforcement officials to announce steps to strengthen domestic defenses against biological, chemical and computer warfare.
In an address at the National Academy of Sciences, Clinton said that terrorists with computer skills and access to chemical and biological agents had extended the field of battle from physical space to cyberspace and from land, sea and air to the human body.
Clinton said the Department of Health and Human Services was being enlisted in the battle against domestic terrorism, expanding its disease-fighting role into a national security mission. The agency will be charged with developing and stockpiling vaccines and treatments against chemical and germ weapons and with mobilizing public health agencies to respond to any suspected attack of infectious agents.
The president's actions mark a significant expansion of federal involvement in efforts to respond to threats that officials say are quickly moving from the realm of science fiction to reality. Clinton said that defenses against unconventional threats had failed to keep pace with the speed of development of new kinds of weapons of terror, weapons that can be developed in a clandestine laboratory and transported in a briefcase or sent through the mail.
The president also warned that a talented hacker with a desktop computer and a modem could now threaten the nation's military, banking, communications, power, transportation and water networks.
"All of you know the fight against terrorism is far from over, and now terrorists seek new tools of destruction," Clinton said. "The enemies of peace realize they cannot defeat us with traditional military means, so they are working on two new forms of assault which you've heard about today: cyberattacks on our critical computer systems, and attacks with weapons of mass destruction - chemical, biological, potentially even nuclear weapons."
The president sought to increase awareness of emerging threats without raising undue alarm about events that have yet to materialize on American soil. He said the government would assure civil liberties even as it organizes its military, intelligence, criminal justice and public health agencies to respond to the threat of biological or computer terrorism.
"This is not a cause for panic," Clinton said. "It is essential that we do not undermine liberty in the name of liberty. We can prevail over terrorism by drawing on the very best in our free society: the skill and courage of our troops, the genius of our scientists and engineers, the strength of our factory workers, the determination and talents of our public servants, the vision of leaders in every vital sector."
The president's plan devotes $ 2.8 billion to prepare for attacks with exotic weapons and to combat computer warfare threats.
Over the last two years, the administration has virtually doubled the funds devoted to protecting Americans against attacks with unconventional weapons. The president's 2000 budget proposal allocates $ 1.4 billion.
Included in the total are $ 683 million to train emergency workers in U.S. cities to cope with a chemical attack or an outbreak of bioterrorism; $ 206 million to protect government facilities; $ 381 million for research on pathogens, development of vaccines and therapies, technology to detect and diagnosis rare illnesses, and decontamination of affected areas.
The White House is also requesting $ 87 million, a 23 percent increase over current spending, to improve the nation's public health surveillance system to better detect the outbreak of an epidemic and determine if it is an act of nature or of deliberate terror.
The proposal also includes $ 52 million to continue to build a national stockpile of specialized medicines to protect civilians against attack by germ agents such as anthrax, smallpox or pneumonic plague. The administration also is seeking to triple spending, to $ 24 million, to create 25 new urban medical response teams in major U.S. cities. Only four cities - Miami, Denver, Washington and Charlotte - have teams prepared to respond to a biological or chemical weapons emergency.
The other half of the president's proposal is an intensified effort to protect the nation's critical, computer-based infrastructure - from power grids to firefighting networks. Such defenses have seen a 40 percent spending increase in the past two years, from slightly less than $ 1 billion in 1998 to the more than $ 1.46 billion being sought for fiscal year 2000.
Much of that money will go to the Pentagon for development of systems that detect unauthorized intrusion into sensitive computer networks. The administration also proposes to spend $ 500 million for research on preventing computer hacking.
THE FUTURE OF TERRORISM

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Susan Walsh/Associated Press: (cover photo) President Clinton; listens to remarks yesterday at the National Academy of Sciences in; Washington, D.C. Clinton used the appearance as an opportunity to announce new; programs to defend against biological and chemical attacks as well as attacks; on computer networks.

Load-Date: January 26, 1999


End of Document