Clinton aides are focus of probe
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 29, 2013 Wednesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 450 words
Byline: JEREMY W. PETERS, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: House Republicans want e-mails, documents detailing the response to the Benghazi attack.
Body


WASHINGTON - Several top aides to Hillary Rodham Clinton, the former secretary of state, are targets of the latest subpoena for information about the drafting of talking points after the siege last fall on a U.S. compound in Benghazi, Libya.
Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., who is the chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, wrote in a letter to Secretary of State John Kerry that the Obama administration's refusal to cooperate fully with a House investigation left him "with no alternative but to compel the State Department to produce relevant documents through a subpoena."
Issa's move was the latest effort by congressional Republicans to increase pressure on the Obama administration as they proceed with a series of investigations into two controversies that have ensnared the White House: the handling of the Benghazi attacks and the Internal Revenue Service's targeting of conservative groups that sought tax-exempt status.
Through hearings on Capitol Hill and other requests for documents, e-mails and other correspondence inside the executive branch, Republicans have sought to determine what Clinton knew about Benghazi and whether she might have played a larger role than acknowledged in the administration's response.
Republicans have accused the Obama administration of misleading the U.S. people by initially focusing on an anti-Islamic video as the impetus for the attacks, which killed four Americans. Later on, administration officials settled on terrorism as an explanation for the attack.
Specifically, Issa and Republicans in Congress have zeroed in on how administration "talking points" were revised to exclude any mention of terrorism before Susan Rice, the U.N. ambassador, went on television to discuss the attacks.
Issa's letter says that the State Department is "withholding documents related to the Benghazi talking points," and that those documents are "crucial to the committee's investigation."
The letter goes on to list 10 State Department officials whose correspondence might be relevant to the subpoena, including Clinton's former chief of staff, Cheryl Mills, and other top advisers like Philippe Reines, Victoria Nuland and Patrick Kennedy.
The fact that so many of Clinton's top aides were named in the letter was not lost on Democrats. Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Md., the senior Democrat on Issa's committee, said Republicans were not interested in conducting an impartial investigation.
"House Republicans appear to be obsessed with Hillary Clinton and are distracting Congress from conducting responsible oversight to protect our diplomatic personnel serving overseas," Cummings said. "This investigation has been politicized from the beginning."

Load-Date: June 3, 2013


End of Document