CLINTON DEMANDS ACTION ON ANTI-TERRORISM PACKAGE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 9, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 321 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton demanded immediate congressional action on his anti-terrorism package Monday, disregarding Republican warnings that an FBI promotion could stall the legislation. "It needs to pass and pass now," he said.
In a rebuke to House Speaker Newt Gingrich, the president said, "Nothing can justify turning this bill into a political football."
Gingrich, R-Ga., suggested Sunday that Attorney General Janet Reno's decision to make Larry Potts the FBI's deputy director "will further slow down the terrorist legislation and will mean even greater concern over civil liberties, which I don't think is inappropriate."
Anti-government groups have criticized Potts since he oversaw the 1992 siege at the home of white separatist Randall Weaver in Ruby Ridge, Idaho, a situation begun by the U.S. Marshals Service. He also oversaw the 1993 standoff and ultimate destruction of the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas, following a raid by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Potts was censured for his role in the Weaver episode, after an FBI sharpshooter accidentally killed Weaver's wife. But Potts is a trusted associate of FBI Director Louis Freeh and has been commended for his leadership in the bombing investigation in Oklahoma City.
Gingrich spoke of the "genuine fear" many rural Americans have of the federal government, and said the Potts promotion was "sending a signal that watching the FBI is not illegitimate."
Before boarding Air Force One for Russia, Clinton said, "The government needs the ability to deal with the technological challenges presented by terrorism. This legislation does it, and there is simply no reason to delay it."
The proposal would expand the federal government's ability to investigate and monitor presumed terrorist groups. The measure enjoys considerable bipartisan support, but lawmakers have expressed concern about the possibility of government abuse of individuals' rights.

Load-Date: May 10, 1995


End of Document