Closing arguments to come Thursday in terrorism trial of Dayton man
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 27, 2018 Tuesday


Copyright 2018 Dayton Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 430 words
Byline: Mark Gokavi, STAFF WRITER
Body


The first terrorism trial in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio is scheduled for closing arguments Thursday morning.
The defense rested Tuesday without calling a witness in Laith Alebbini's bench trial in front of U.S. District Court Judge Walter Rice.
 Federal prosecutors rested Monday after eight days of testimony related to Alebbini, 28, who is on trial for conspiracy and attempting "to provide material support and resources to a foreign terrorist organization in the form of personnel to work under ISIS's direction and control."
 Prosecutors questioned 12 witnesses, including a local confidential FBI source and Alebbini's childhood friend, who prosecutors said tried to talk Alebbini out of any terrorism plans. Alebbini moved to the Dayton area in early 2017.
 Numerous exhibits were read, played or entered into the record during the prosecution's case. Court records do not indicate any timeline for Rice to announce a verdict. Alebbini waived his right to a jury trial.
 In April 2017, Alebbini allegedly tried to travel overseas from Cincinnati's airport in an effort to join ISIS and fight in Syria. He was arrested and has been detained ever since.
 In the hours before Alebbini went to the Cincinnati airport to allegedly fly overseas to join ISIS in April 2017, he argued with family members who begged him not to go, a prosecutor said during opening statements.
 In a purported text conversation with his sister, shown to Rice via television display, Alebbini's sister Lina told her brother that she had a class on terrorism and that, regarding ISIS, "I swear to God, this is terrorism."
 In his final response, Alebbini texted back: "Do you think I am a criminal? I am a terrorist. I am mujahid."
 Alebbini also texted his parents and told them to watch a pro-ISIS YouTube video.
 One of Alebbini's defense attorneys said his client "has not hidden his pro-Islamic State views from family, friends or government" but that Alebbini also has been deeply affected by the "systematic slaughter of Syrian neighbors" by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, including the use of Sarin gas to kill people including babies.
 Alebbini's attorney also told Rice during opening statements that Alebbini had "no firm intent or plan" other than getting to Istanbul to talk to refugees, that he never planned any terrorist attack against anyone, didn't communicate with anyone with ISIS and that he denounced the killing of innocent people.
 MORE: Read other stories from Mark Gokavi
 SOCIAL MEDIA: Follow Mark Gokavi on Twitter or Facebook
 DOWNLOAD OUR FREE MOBILE APPS

Graphic

 
Caption Laith Alebbini

Load-Date: November 28, 2018


End of Document