Closing P.L.O. Office Tells Where U.S. Stands
The New York Times
October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 22, Column 3; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 300 words
Body


To the Editor:
You say closing the Palestine Liberation Organization's Washington office ''won't hurt the P.L.O.'' (editorial Topics, Sept. 17). Success in the battle against terrorism begins with willingness to identify those responsible and refusal to treat them as ordinary folk.
The State Department action makes clear where the U.S. stands on the P.L.O. and may encourage other countries that have been passive.
You say the action has no ''practical effect'' because the P.L.O.'s American supporters have the right to form a new office. True, American P.L.O. supporters have the right to run a pro-P.L.O. office here, but such an office, unlike that closed down, will not be able to receive funds or direction from the P.L.O.
Moreover, the closing demonstrates vividly that the U.S. protects fundamental constitutional rights of Americans while not allowing itself to be paralyzed when international terrorists demand equal treatment. This distinction helps build consensus to counter terrorism by avoiding both the extremes of civil liberties violations and passivity in the face of terrorism. Finally, you say this is an ''empty gesture'' that will result in a ''public relations windfall'' for the P.L.O. But if it is made clear that the action does not stifle the civil liberties of Americans but merely involves closing a foreign terrorist entity in this country, there is no reason to fear the impact on public opinion. To the contrary, further airing of what the P.L.O. and terrorism are about is all to the good.
In sum, you ought to be applauding Secretary of State George Shultz, members of Congress and the American Jewish community whose collective action produced this heartening step.
ABRAHAM H. FOXMAN
   National Director, Anti-Defamation
   League of B'nai B'rith
   New York, Sept. 18, 1987


End of Document