Closer Look: Tracking down the hidden costs of terrorism
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
May 1, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 1731 words
Byline: GREGG HERRINGTON, Columbian staff writer
Body


If you go to the Bank of Clark County to transfer money to the Engineering Equipment Corp. in Khartoum, what will happen is the same thing that will happen if you try to send money to Osama bin Laden:
A bank computer will pick out the intended recipient from among several thousand blacklisted names provided by the Office of Foreign Assets Control and block the transaction.
A bank employee will call federal agents and you soon will be in an office somewhere, facing a barrage of questions.
That scenario might never occur in a bank here, but the software already has cost the Bank of Clark County $ 5,000.
That's just one small part of the war on terrorism's hidden costs, paid every day in numerous ways by businesses and government, their customers and taxpayers.
It's impossible to come up with a list of all the ways Clark County residents have been paying for increased security since 9/11, but here's another:
At least 10 city of Vancouver employees, almost all of them in the fire and police departments, are in the military reserves and were called to active duty for the Iraq war. Five people who work for Clark County government also were called.
For months, those local governments -- i.e. taxpayers -- have been paying overtime to fill their shifts.
"We can't just let a chair sit empty," said Vancouver Assistant Fire Chief Dennis Walker. "We have to fill the seats on a fire apparatus."
Ron Gibson, financial analyst for the Vancouver Fire Department, estimates that the overtime paid to fill in for just four reservist-firefighters is in the $ 175,000 range so far. Two returned to town last week and will soon be back at work.
The effects of paying to protect against terrorism are felt, directly or indirectly, throughout city and county government here as money is shifted to emergency services.
"In order for first responders to make a difference in this community, they have to have the resources to do their jobs," Vancouver Mayor Royce Pollard said early this year.
'Breaks my heart'
"This hits every segment of city government," City Councilwoman Pat Jollota said. "There are a lot of hidden costs."
When the city drafted a two-year budget last December, "we cut quality-of-life services to increase police and fire," she said. "A lot of things we used to do we can't afford. It breaks my heart."
Larry Smith, who resigned in February as director of the combined Vancouver-Clark Parks and Recreation Department, said, "For at least the next two years, parks development is frozen here because there isn't enough money to maintain them."
For example, Smith said, a 29-acre site on Northeast 136th Avenue across from a new WinCo food store is already designated as Haagen Community Park. The plan had been to begin developing it this year, but that was put on hold.
Parks and recreation cuts also have come in after-school and summer-playground programs, among others.
While local government wants Congress to pay more of the increasing anti-terrorism bill, officials know it doesn't necessarily work that way.
"We've had to redeploy resources to achieve (federal) mandates," said Glenn Olson, Clark County's budget director.
Still, at the fire, police and health departments and other emergency agencies, there are benefits to all the planning and training since 9/11.
For starters, they are working together better than ever to prevent and deal with terrorism, an ongoing process that also includes federal agencies such as the FBI.
The improved communications and training also are making them better prepared to deal with natural disasters such as earthquakes.
"Working closer with everyone else just might be the most significant thing in all this," said Walker, the assistant fire chief. "Terrorism has gotten everyone's attention and given us a common goal."
Private sector feels it
But, like banks with $ 5,000 software to identify potential terrorists, much of private industry is faced with making changes and spending time and/or money in the effort.
Today in Portland, the FBI is co-sponsoring a half-day seminar for businesses to learn how to address terrorist threats.
As many as 200 people are expected to hear presentations on topics such as:
* The psychological impact of the threat of a future terrorist attack.
* Emergency preparedness in the workplace.
* Raising employees' awareness about security issues.
Many private businesses, such as SEH America in Vancouver, are spending more for security in the new era of international terrorism.
"We've made a few enhancements to our procedures," said spokeswoman Julie Bradford at the 920-employee high-tech operation.
"I can't divulge much, but we've made some enhancements and closed some loopholes," she said.
At the Georgia-Pacific paper mill in Camas, spokeswoman Carolyn McGreevy said the company hasn't had significant out-of-pocket expenses because of the terrorism threat but has put staff time into it.
"What we've done since 9/11 is review and affirm that everyone has the 'crisis communication' protocol on hand and that we have all been trained" how to react, she said.
While that expenditure of employees' time might not be directly traceable to any increase in the cost of paper towels, it's still a diversion of company resources.
On the other hand, there are private-sector beneficiaries of terrorism, and not just duct tape manufacturers.
"We saw a huge spike in our business after 9/11," said Brent Graham of Vancouver-based Metro Watch Protective Services. "We're one of the few private security companies that can provide qualified armed people as well as unarmed guards."
Convenience, privacy
Some anti-terrorism expenses come at the cost of personal convenience and privacy. An example of each:
* SEH America no longer allows its employees to have personal packages delivered to them at work.
"Our shipping department refuses those packages now," Bradford said.
* The Fort Vancouver Regional Library District is working out guidelines to conform to the USA Patriot Act, passed in the wake of 9/11.
Under the old law, if the FBI wanted to see what books a library patron has checked out or monitor his use of a library computer, the agency had to show a judge "probable cause" that the library user was involved in illegal activity.
Under the new law, federal agents need only convince a judge they are investigating "to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities."
Candy Morgan, the library's director of community services, said court orders will put more demands on libraries.
But the public won't learn about them because the USA Patriot Act also says libraries may not even tell the press or public how many court orders they have responded to.
"Because of the gag order, no one much knows what is happening," Morgan said.
BPA facility a concern
Perhaps the Clark County site of most concern to authorities who are paid to worry about terrorism is the Bonneville Power Administration's Ross Complex in Hazel Dell, nerve center for the Northwest power grid.
Security costs are among BPA's operating expenses, which it makes up in the price it charges its customers, including Clark Public Utilities.
Security at Ross was beefed up substantially after the April 19, 1995, bombing of the federal office building in Oklahoma City, then further stepped up after 9/11, says BPA spokeswoman Dulcy Mahar.
There are, for example, more armed guards on duty at the Ross Complex than before 9/11, and vehicles entering the compound face closer, more labor-intensive inspections.
"At a time we're tightening costs in every other area, security is one place our costs are increasing," she said.
A FEW HIDDEN COSTS AND EFFECTS OF THE WAR ON TERRORISM
* In the wake of post-Sept. 11 anthrax incidents, it takes five to 10 business days for a letter to reach members of Congress.
That's because it is first sent to a federal site for irradiation and then undergoes more screening at the Capitol before it is delivered to offices.
* Kids First after-school programs of the Vancouver-Clark Parks and Recreation Department are being cut from eight to six sites, with Hearthwood and Burnt Bridge Creek schools to be dropped.
* The department's summer playground eight-week programs will drop the Marrion Elementary and Skyline Crest sites.
* Cutbacks are expected in parks and recreation programs for teens and the disabled.
* The FBI is shifting some emphasis to large cities where the threat of terrorism is perceived to be greater. An agent in the Vancouver office retired in December and still hasn't been replaced, leaving two agents here.
According to Ray Laurer of the Seattle FBI office, "It's an open question" if and when the Vancouver vacancy will be filled.
* "We have had to divert a lot of our very limited infectious-disease staff to be prudently prepared for the possibility of bioterrorism," says Kay Kuntz, director of the Clark County Health Department.
"During the anthrax scare we had most of them spending all day answering calls from very concerned citizens about white powder. We've been a little slower in tracking other infectious diseases."
On the other hand, Kuntz and other emergency-service officials say they are better prepared to deal with disasters than before because of the increased training, planning and coordination with other agencies throughout the Portland-Vancouver area and the state.
* Vancouver City Councilwoman Pat Jollota says the shift of city funds to anti-terrorism efforts is why neighborhood associations no longer can use the Marshall House on Officers Row at no charge.
They now must pay the same rate as other nonprofits, almost $ 200 for a three-hour weekday evening. So far, none has done it.
"They can't afford it," said a Marshall House employee.
* It's a discretionary expense, but Clark County residents rushed to buy guns after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
In August 2001, the sheriff's office processed 246 gun permits and did 211 background checks on gun purchasers.
In October 2001, the first full month after the attacks, it handled 395 permits and did 361 background checks.
* Financial institutions are to take steps to ensure their customers don't send money to terrorists or groups suspected of supporting terrorism. The federal blacklist can be found on the Web at www.treas.gov/offices /enforcement/ofac/sdn /t11sdn.pdf.
Gregg Herrington covers state and local issues and may be reached at 360-759-8025, or via e-mail at gregg.herrington@columbian.com.  

Graphic

 
Clint and Teresa Overall run with their dog Samantha through parkland north of Cascade Park. The park's development is delayed because anti-terror costs have depleted local funds.

Load-Date: May 1, 2003


End of Document