Closure, perspective on Bin Laden death
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 23, 2011 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2011 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8
Length: 265 words
Byline: Lauren Paullin
Dateline: Richmond 
Body


Editor, Times-Dispatch:
As a member of the millennial generation, I bristled at Isaac Wood's Commentary column, "Growing up with bin Laden."
Wood claims our generation "has known terrorism and lived under its specter for every moment of our adult lives." I, however, walked to my high school every day, watching the skies for the threat of rain or snow while children in the Middle East were walking to school searching the skies for bombs. We are the fortunate ones; those children have lived in the shadow of terrorism.
Wood sees our America as one that "flailed through disappointing war" and pales in comparison to the glory of our grandparents "triumph in World War II." He forgets that WWII saw 60 million causalities, more than half of them civilian, and our grandparents sent their brothers, sisters, classmates and friends overseas with just as much uncertainty as we do now. We should not envy their war. It was just as horrible as and 100 times more deadly than the one we've grown up with. We should look to both the veterans of their generation and those of our own with utmost respect.
Wood is right that the death of bin Laden brings closure to a chapter of our lives that forced us to grow up a little too fast, to face the realities of war and terrorism at too young an age. But the image he paints of college campuses flooded with jubilant spectators is disappointing. There is a certain satisfaction in knowing that the villain of our childhood has been defeated, but we are adults now. Let us show pride for our leaders and our military and save our celebration for another day.

Notes

CORRESPONDENT OF THE DAY Copyright © 2011, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: May 24, 2011


End of Document