Clues Aplenty Connect Saddam With Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 28, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 429 words
Body


Terrorist leaders live shadowy lives of spies. They operate in secret to avoid the relentless pursuit of U.S. agents and their foreign counterparts.
So it may never be known exactly how much support the killers of al-Qaida received in Iraq from Saddam Hussein. This uncertainty is being exploited by critics of President Bush to make it appear the theat from Iraq was wildly overestimated. The facts that have come to light suggest otherwise.
Earlier this month in New York, the families of two of the victims of the Sept. 11 attacks asked a judge to rule that Iraq did indeed provide material support to Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida.
U.S. District Judge Harold Baer ruled that a link does exist, which means the former Iraqi regime could eventually be found to owe millions of dollars in damages to the families.
On these pages the other day, columnist Ellen Goodman stated there was "no verified link between the hijackers and the Iraqis." This has become a common Democratic theme. Former Sen. Carol Moseley Braun, writing in National Review Online, says, "This administration chose to pursue oil and revenge rather than the terrorists who attacked our country on 9/11."
They and others pounding this theme must not have read of Judge Baer's ruling. The judge, by the way, is a Clinton appointee.
The evidence, Baer said, was "classically hearsay." It seems bin Laden and Saddam weren't foolish enough to hold a press conference or sign a contract of mutual aid. But Saddam could not contain his delight about the damage done in New York City and Washington, and he made no secret of sending cash to the families of homicide bombers in Palestine.
That behavior makes the hearsay clues all the more convincing. One of the Sept. 11 hijackers was seen meeting with an Iraqi consul in Prague. Iraqi defectors told of camps in Iraq where terrorists were trained. The camps also showed up in satellite photos.
R. James Woolsey, who headed the CIA from February 1993 to January 1995, has testified that Iraq trained outsiders in airplane hijacking and other forms of terrorism.
A lawyer handling the case of other Sept. 11 victims says he has established a financial link between Iraq and al-Qaida.
No, Bush couldn't know exactly what Iraq would do nor what weapons it might develop to do it with. But the bulk of the evidence, coupled with the atrocities that everyone admits were being suffered daily by the Iraqi people, demanded action. 
There was no doubt whose side Saddam was on, and there is no doubt the intolerable threat of state-sponsored terrorism from Iraq has been eliminated.

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: May 29, 2003


End of Document