CNN to air NCHS discussion
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
September 5, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: News; Pg. A3
Length: 605 words
Byline: Rebecca Loda
Body


NORMAL -- As a CNN camera rolled, they weighed a go-it-alone approach to terrorism versus a global initiative, homeland security versus foreign aid.
They are not politicians in Washington, D.C. They are international-relations students at Normal Community High School.
Their discussion is part of "Responding to Terrorism: Challenges for Democracy," an education unit developed through the Thomas J. Watson Jr. Institute for International Studies at Brown University.
On Thursday, there also was an added component in Kelly Keogh's classroom: CNN was in town to film the discussion for a report scheduled to air Sept. 11 on "NewsNight with Aaron Brown."
Keogh helped develop the curriculum on terrorism through the Choices for the 21st Century Education Program at the Watson Institute.
The Watson curriculum is just one way area teachers have incorporated the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, terrorism itself and related events -- including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq -- into their lessons.
Modern media and constant updates also have been important tools in making that happen.
"It (access to up-to-the-minute information) opened the door for bringing current events, current issues into the classroom," said Rich Baldwin, lead teacher in the Bloomington High School social studies department. "Anytime something happens, you're constantly linking it to your curriculum."
As part of the unit in Keogh's classes, groups of his students represent different U.S. responses to terrorism. In Thursday's discussion, "senators" -- actually students who already have been through the lesson -- posed challenging questions to the groups.
"We believe terrorism is a global, not national problem," said one student, whose group represented a response led by the United Nations. "A united effort would be much more effective than if we do it alone."
Another group said the United States should fight terrorism alone if necessary. A third said homeland security should override foreign policy, while a fourth said military funds should be used toward rebuilding war-torn countries and addressing the underlying causes of terrorism.
Although those options were predetermined, Keogh said students also will have the opportunity to develop their own.
Discussions about the attacks are likely to become common as the anniversary nears, said Brad Hutchison, curriculum and instruction director in Stanford-based Olympia High School.
"It's very fresh in people's minds," he said. "Most of us can think about what we were doing in that particular moment in time."
How that conversation progresses usually depends on the age of the students, he added.
"I think because we all lived through Sept. 11, it sometimes heightens our need to understand our country and how it works and our world and how it works," said Sally Tucker, assistant superintendent of curriculum in District 87.
Although there has not been a formal curriculum at BHS, Baldwin said related issues are raised in many ways. Discussion of the Bill of Rights, for example, will also include the Patriot Act.
Parallels also can be raised between today's events and those in the past. Classes may discuss the definition of terrorism and how it is applied to the past, whether current fears about immigration are similar to fears expressed a century ago and how previous presidents may have handled current challenges, said Baldwin.
"That's all part of the process of teaching kids to think historically, to think in terms of the context in which they live," he said. "It really raises the level of critical thinking you can bring to the classroom."
----------
Contact Rebecca Loda atrloda@pantagraph.com  

Graphic

 
Teacher Kelly Keogh, right, spoke to his International Relations class as a CNN newscrew, left, filmed him Thursday morning at Normal Community High School. Keogh's class discussed four options to the U.S. response to terrorism. The discussion will air on CNN's NewsNight with Aaron Brown on Sept. 11.
Normal Community High School junior James McCauley spoke on terrorism during his International Relations class Thursday morning at the school. CNN was at Normal Community filming the class to air as a segment on Sept. 11.

Load-Date: September 17, 2003


End of Document