COAST GUARD, BUSY FIGHTING TERRORISM, REDUCES PATROLS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 29, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 289 words
Byline: MELISSA B. ROBINSON, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- With the Coast Guard pressed into anti-terrorism work, traditional ocean patrols to catch poachers and rescue boaters are being cut back.
The Coast Guard boarded fewer than half as many fishing boats in the last three months of 2001 as they did in the last quarter of 2000.
Coast Guard officials acknowledge air and sea patrols are also down since Sept. 11, though there are no hard figures.
"They need to be out there to save us," said fisherman Bill Amaru of Orleans, Mass. He said he used to see frequent Coast Guard patrols in the air and water, but "since the middle of September, I haven't seen a cutter out here."
The Coast Guard is responsible for law enforcement and rescues along the 95,000 miles of U.S. coastline. After the terrorist attacks, it embarked on the largest port security operation since World War II, but with a force of about 35,000 people less than a sixth its size during that war.
Fisheries enforcement which includes monitoring closed fishing areas and boarding vessels to check for compliance with regulations dropped by as much as 90 percent immediately after the attacks. Some Coast Guard crews have returned to their traditional work, although officials won't say how many, citing security concerns.
"We're still catching violators, it's just at a reduced rate," said Coast Guard Cmdr. Michael Cerne.
There is concern that, with fewer patrols, poachers could move into areas like Georges Bank in the North Atlantic, which was closed to commercial fishing more than seven years ago to allow cod, haddock and flounder stocks to rebuild.
President Bush said last week he would propose $ 282 million in additional funds for the Coast Guard when he sends his 2003 budget request to Congress next week.

Load-Date: January 29, 2002


End of Document