COD to Host Free ‘Domestic Terrorism: The Lone Wolf Threat' Workshop Nov. 10
Chicago Daily Herald
October 26, 2017 Thursday
WEB EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: SUBMITTED CONTENT; Pg. 0
Length: 284 words
Byline: COD News Bureau
Body


The Homeland Security Training Institute is hosting the interactive "Domestic Terrorism: The Lone Wolf Threat" workshop from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Friday, Nov 10, in the Homeland Security Training Center on the College's Glen Ellyn campus, 425 Fawell Blvd. This event is free and open to the public. 
During this workshop, participants will learn about the threat of lone wolf terrorists, individuals who prepare and commit violent acts alone, outside of any command structure and without material assistance from any group; the psychology of a lone wolf actor; and potential means of identification. In addition, this workshop will provide an open discussion with a panel of experts regarding how communities, businesses, churches, schools and law enforcement agencies can engage to prevent lone wolf attacks in the future. Speakers will include counter terrorism expert Dr. Jennifer Hesterman, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, author and instructor specializing in fighting domestic terror, transnational crime and the exploitation of the Internet by terrorists and criminals, and forensic psychologist Dr. Nancy Zarse, a full professor in the Forensic Department at The Chicago School of Professional Psychology, a member of the FBI's Terrorism Liaison Officer's Committee, and a consultant a variety of law enforcement agencies including the FBI's Countering Violent Extremism section and the Chicago Police Department. Participants can attend the event live at the College of DuPage campus in Glen Ellyn at the Homeland Security Education Center or view the webinar online. Comments and questions can be emailed during the broadcast. Click here for more information and to register for this free workshop.

Load-Date: October 26, 2017


End of Document