Codey urges state to stay calm during terrorism exercise;
The five-day drill, billed as the largest in the U.S.,
is to start Monday and involve all 21 counties.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 30, 2005 Wednesday JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B03
Length: 392 words
Byline: Wayne Parry ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: TRENTON
Body


State officials are invoking the panic touched off by the infamous War of the Worlds radio broadcast as they warn residents to stay calm during a massive terrorism drill planned for next week.
"The public needs to know that an exercise is going on," acting Gov. Richard J. Codey said yesterday. "You might hear about something strange at your local hospital, or see first responders in hazardous-materials suits, or see a large number of ambulances in your area."
Starting Monday, New Jersey officials will begin responding to a simulated bio-terror attack designed to test the limits of the state's health-care capabilities. Ambulances will whiz to hospitals, investigators will search for clues in marked and unmarked cars, and volunteer "victims" will be taken to emergency rooms.
The drill - called TOPOFF 3 - will be the largest, most comprehensive counterterrorism exercise ever conducted in the United States, said Matt Mayer, acting executive director of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Office of State and Local Government Coordination and Preparedness.
Codey cautioned people not to be alarmed.
"We don't want this to turn into War of the Worlds," he said. "It happened before, and it could happen again."
Orson Welles' 1938 broadcast of a Martian invasion in Grovers Mill created panic among people who didn't realize it was fictitious.
Next week's "attack," which has taken two years to plan, will be centered in Middlesex and Union Counties, selected for their population densities and major highways and train systems. The five-day exercise will start when a vehicle used to disperse a "biological agent" is found in New Jersey and people pretending to be seriously ill start to overwhelm hospitals, federal officials said. A concurrent attack involving fake chemical weapons is to occur in New London, Conn.
In New Jersey, all 21 counties and 82 hospitals have roles to play, as do state police, hazardous-materials teams, emergency-management personnel, and police, fire and emergency first-responders.
To Verify a Problem
Anyone in New Jersey who sees something amiss Monday and is unsure whether there is a real problem is urged to call the state's Domestic Security Task Force at 1-866-4SAFENJ (1-866-472-3365). "Tell them you saw something, you're not sure what it is, but you wanted to report it," acting Gov. Richard J. Codey said.

Load-Date: September 8, 2005


End of Document