COHEN URGES THE NATION TO BETTER FIGHT TERRORISM;
BOTH EQUIPMENT AND COMMITMENT ARE NEEDED.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
July 25, 1996, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 292 words
Body


As Americans wait to learn how TWA Flight 800 was destroyed last week, Sen. William Cohen is looking ahead. The nation, Cohen told CNN recently, needs to upgrade its airports and attitudes to deal effectively with terrorism.
''Much more,'' Cohen said bluntly, ''needs to be done.''
If indeed the evidence shows that Flight 800 was destroyed by terrorist action, the time to start doing more is now. The place to start is on the ground.
Initially, safeguarding the traveling public will require costly upgrades in airport security. Sophisticated equipment and more thorough security checks are needed at most major American airports. Equipment and personnel alone may cost millions, perhaps billions, of dollars.
A greater cost can be expected in an asset that travelers value even more time. Passengers will have to become used to longer, more intrusive check-in procedures.
Cohen, however, carries the need for safeguarding lives one important step further.
As airports become less penetrable, he believes, terrorists will focus on ''softer targets.'' Safeguarding them means fighting terrorism at its source. The United States should approach directly those nations that are sponsoring terrorism, ready to use economic pressure, even military force, to end support for terrorist groups.
Such harsh approaches have become necessary, Cohen said, because ''international terrorism as well as domestic terrorism is going to, in fact, be a part of our lives for the forseeable future.''
Beyond horror and headlines, Mainers learned this week how far the tragedy of a jumbo jet disaster can spread. Among the 230 people killed on Flight 800 was Francois Manchuelle, who taught African history at Bowdoin College in 1993-94.
Improved security may be his lasting memorial.

Load-Date: July 26, 1996


End of Document