Cold War Secrecy, Reheated by Terror
The New York Times
October 27, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 5; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 480 words
Byline: By RONALD SMOTHERS 

By RONALD SMOTHERS 
Dateline: NEWARK, Oct. 26
Body


The Government's use of secret evidence to detain immigrants is a cold war-era practice that re-emerged amid the terrorism jitters of the 1990's.
Under laws and court rulings dating to the 1950's and renewed in the 1996 Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act and the Immigration Reform Act of the same year, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has been allowed to detain and deport noncitizens on the basis of secret evidence without revealing exactly what the evidence is or where it originated.
Immigration and intelligence officials have asserted that such secrecy is necessary to protect intelligence-gathering methods and the lives of informers.
The rationale dates to the 50's, when the Government used evidence about political activity as grounds for deporting hundreds of people who had been members of the Communist Party.
David Cole, a volunteer lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights and a part of the team representing Hany Kiareldeen, a Palestinian immigrant released on Monday after being held for 19 months on the basis of secret evidence, said that the immigration service had relied on a 1956 United States Supreme Court ruling, Jay v. Boyd. In that case, Mr. Cole said, a man facing detention on the basis of secret evidence that he was a Communist challenged whether the agency had the authority to use such evidence under immigration law. A divided Court said the authority did exist under the statute, though the justices never addressed the constitutionality of the use of the evidence. In recent years, other rulings have raised questions about the use of secret evidence in pressing other actions, such as deporting immigrants or preventing their entry.
Hiroshi Motomura, a professor at the University of Colorado School of Law and an expert in immigration law, said that after the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, fear of terrorism approached the level of fear that Communism generated in the 1950's. But Mr. Motomura noted that, just as Americans eventually realized that Communism was a far smaller threat to the nation than the weakening of constitutional rights, immigration judges and others have begun to question whether they should allow the Government unlimited power in fighting terrorism.
"There is a sense that they need to more closely scrutinize these claims of terrorism and national security," Mr. Motomura said of the judges, "and a sense that they don't want to repeat the mistakes of the 50's where they realize we went overboard."
Representative David E. Bonior, a Democrat of Michigan and sponsor, along with 53 other members of Congress, of the Secret Evidence Repeal Act, said it would take legislation, not just court opinions, to end such practices. Mr. Bonior is pressing for hearings on his bill in the Republican-controlled House, and he said that time is running out in this session for Congress to take action.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 27, 1999


End of Document