Cold-nosed fleet puts heat on terrorism
USA TODAY
November 18, 1996, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1304 words
Byline: J. Taylor Buckley
Dateline: LACKLAND AFB, Texas
Body


LACKLAND AFB, Texas
The decision to evacuate the TWA terminal at New York's Kennedy
Airport last week was based on no less of an authority than a
15-month-old yellow Labrador named Sheba.
And while the bomb scare (Sheba had detected traces of nitrates
in a passenger's bag) ultimately proved to be a false alarm, its
resolution was exactly how airport security is supposed to work
these days.
In fact, on the front lines of the war against terrorist bombers,
the most potent weapon currently available just might be a dog's
nose.
Though Congress recently earmarked about $ 144 million for more
sophisticated airport screening systems, the government is hedging
its bets, counting heavily on dogs.
Congress appropriated $ 8.8 million for Federal Aviation Administration
bomb dog training and deployment, plus $ 7.5 million for the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) to train detection dogs
and develop a certification program for all government dogs.
Recent legislation also requires the operators of each of the
nation's 50 largest airports to supplement existing bomb and weapons
detection procedures with dogs.
The FAA, which already operates more than 100 canine teams at
31 airports, will boost that number by 114 teams and cover four
more airports in a matter of months.
Separately, the ATF, which now trains dogs mostly for foreign
governments, is to begin turning out 100 dogs a year after 1997
for use by law enforcement agencies at all levels, perhaps raising
the number of covered airports even higher.
The bomb threat is formidable, and it is growing. From 1990 through
1994, ATF counted 10,526 actual or attempted bombings in the USA.
The 1994 total, 2,438, was up 38% from 1990. In the five-year
span, 306 people were killed, and 3,402 were injured. Property
damage was estimated at $ 1.2 billion.
"Four-footed soldiers," they call them here at the "world's
largest dog school." This is where Sheba was trained. The school
handles 300 to 350 dogs at any given time.
And, right now Lackland Air Force Base's recruiters and trainers
can't work fast enough to satisfy demand for their graduates.
In the first few days of training here, Labrador and golden retriever
pups not yet 2 years old learn to alert a handler to a bag of
gunpowder stashed in a box or drawer.
The training is military. Dogs wait in line, then get a furious
workout sniffing stacks of boxes in a room with slippery wooden
floors.
The dogs come in on consignment. Drive and spark are what trainers
look for, but if they don't pass a physical exam or any phase
of a rigorous 10-day evaluation, they're sent home like failed
recruits.
The graduates will put their lives on the line to make travel
safer and public places less threatening.
But why dogs? What's become of technology?
While the government and industry have spent millions developing
detection devices that are years from going into widespread use,
"we already know that dogs work," says Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va.,
a champion of funding for sniffer dog training and deployment.
Dogs can pick out land mines in a field of rocks. Dogs have been
trained and used to detect gas line leaks. And, as contraband
detectors, dogs have no peers.
Though researchers have barely scratched the surface of what dogs
can -- and cannot -- smell, there is no doubt almost any dog can
be trained to cue on an odor it can smell in return for
a small reward.
Science has yet to quantify a dog's sensory capacity. Depending
on whom you talk with, a dog's sense of smell is anywhere from
200 to 5 million times greater than a human's.
"Smell is their dominant sense," says Susan Hallowell, a research
chemist at the FAA technical center in Atlantic City. "Just like
sight is the dominant sense for humans. We see things in our dreams.
I think dogs probably dream in smells."
Lawrence Myers, associate professor of physiology and pharmacology
at the Auburn University School of Veterinary Medicine, says research
shows that dogs can detect some compounds up to one part per quadrillion.
Hence, you could convert the national debt to one dollar bills,
spread them out on an airport runway, and a dog could easily find
the dollar you dabbed with nitroglycerin.
A certified bomb detector can pick up the scent of the nine basic
explosives groups and then, in the presence of any of them, home
in on any of tens of thousands of different bomb compounds.
Scanning machines can alert their operators to a possible danger,
which would trigger a hand search of a bag or freight parcel.
A dog can scan-sniff a whole waiting lounge or warehouse in one
crack.
It would be hard to find a more eloquent and enthusiastic supporter
of dogs than Lee Grodzins, who, ironically, works for the competition.
He is vice president for advanced products at American Science
and Engineering, a major name in the manufacture of X-ray security
devices.
Grodzins, an MIT physics professor and self-described "technocrat,"
gives several reasons "why I'm strongly for dogs:"
-- "When people see dogs sniffing, everyone is nervous. They're
all thinking, 'What's this dog going to find?' That scares the
hell out of terrorists.
-- "The very fact that they are inconsistent -- like us, dogs
have good days and bad days -- works in their favor. I suspect
terrorists are very afraid of inconsistency.
-- "When working well and on top of things, dogs are probably
as good or better than the best machines we have. Dogs have actually
found explosives in a real situation. (The FAA confirms that dogs
have found explosives in an airport, but will not reveal details
or frequency.) Machines, to my knowledge, have not."
Grodzins, however, concedes that neither dogs nor machines will
be "the silver bullet. We need all the systems we can get to
force these terrorists to go through an obstacle course."
Bruce Butterworth, chief of operations in the FAA's office of
civil aviation security, says, "If a dog has good quality control,
it is as hard or harder to defeat than a machine."
The alert at Kennedy was a perfect example of how Butterworth
sees "the systems" -- dogs and machines -- working.
An electronic sensor first picked up indications of explosives
in a suitcase. Sheba was brought in to confirm. She did, and the
TWA terminal was closed for an hour while the bomb squad dug deeper.
There was not a bomb. But traces of nitrates were found on a pair
of shoes in the bag. Though identical to the ingredients in some
explosives, these traces were mere residue from the tanning process
used on the leather soles of the shoes.
Sergio Magistri agrees that dogs play a key role in security,
although as head of the company that makes the million-dollar
CTX-5000 explosives detector he confesses he lacks "complete
objectivity."
Magistri's company, InVision Technologies Inc. of Foster City,
Calif., makes the only mechanical bomb detector approved by the
FAA for checked baggage. But the detector is currently used by
only three airlines at three airports: United at San Francisco,
Delta at Atlanta and El Al at Kennedy in New York.
He acknowledges his CAT-scan-like machine's limitations (one bag
at a time up to 300 per hour) and, thus, favors a "complementary
approach" to security, using dogs, passenger "profiling," bag
matching, searches and scanning by machine.
He notes that his machine can chug along nonstop for hours on
end, while a dog "gets too hyper to perform" after a couple
of hours of work.
But next to a $ 1 million machine, a dog appears a bargain. A "single-purpose"
sniffer (explosives only) costs the FAA under $ 3,000. Training
costs $ 7,000. Yearly maintenance, including food, health care,
an annual physical and housing, costs about $ 60,000 per team,
including the handler's salary.
If all this isn't testimony enough in favor of dogs, the FAA's
Hallowell provides more. She's a cat person, but allows as how
"you can learn to love a dog, but you can't say that for a machine."
Plus, she adds, not entirely jokingly, "they're biscuit-powered."

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, Color, Darren Carroll(3); PHOTO, B/W, Darren Carroll; Ino: 'Four-footed soldier' in terrorism war Detectors: Congress has earmarked millions for high-tech airport screening systems, but the government is counting heavily on dogs trained to sniff out explosives. At left, Ino with trainer Airman Elli John Umali at Lackland Air Force Base near San Antonio. Above, Phoenix police officer Terry Cooning gets FAA handler-training at the base with Boy. Plane-time training: Ben, with his handler, Senior Airman Benjamin Riley, trains in a mock airplane at Lackland Air Force Base.

Load-Date: November 18, 1996


End of Document