Cole suit in Norfolk targets Sudan; Same team of lawyers earlier won damages against Iraq and Libya
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 12, 2007 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 903 words
Byline: BILL GEROUX

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Dateline: NORFOLK 
Body


 First, they sued Saddam Hussein's Iraq for kidnapping four American contractors in the desert after the first Gulf War, and won their clients $17 million in damages.
 Next they sued Libya for imprisoning and torturing two U.S. citizens in 1980, and won a judgment of $17.8 million.
 This week in Norfolk federal court, the same team of lawyers, including Andrew C. Hall of Miami, will take on the East African nation of Sudan. They will try to prove to U.S. District Judge Robert G. Doumar that Sudan helped al-Qaida terrorists bomb the Norfolk-based destroyer Cole in Yemen on Oct. 12, 2000.
 The Cole plaintiffs - the families of the 17 sailors killed in the bombing - are seeking $35 million in damages. Sudan has refused to take part in the trial, insisting it is immune from such suits.
 Iraq and Libya ignored their trials, too, Hall said Friday in a phone interview, but that did not stop the plaintiffs from winning the cases and subsequently extracting the money from Iraqi and Syrian assets frozen in the United States. Sudan also has assets frozen in the U.S., where the plaintiffs may be able to get them, Hall said.
 But the money is only part of the motivation in such cases, both for the clients and the lawyers, Hall said.
 "I was born in Warsaw, Poland, in 1944. I'm a Jew. I'm a victim-oriented type of person. I really do not like the idea of people being abused by a government. And when I get to fight terrorism, it's just too overwhelming an opportunity to resist," he said.
 Hall and his two associates from Texas, James Cooper-Hill and Nelson Jones, are among a small group of lawyers who represent American citizens against nations classified by the U.S. as state sponsors of terrorism. That classification deprives a country of sovereign immunity against such lawsuits, under a bill passed by Congress in 1996.
 Hall first began working with Cooper-Hill in the mid-1990s on the case of a Texas man, Chad Hall (no relation to Andrew), who wanted to sue Iraq. Chad Hall said that while he was working as a private contractor, clearing the desert of land mines and unexploded bombs after the first Persian Gulf War, he was seized by Iraqi troops near the Kuwait-Iraq border and interrogated for five days before being let go.
 Because Cooper-Hill specialized in real estate law, he sought help from Andrew Hall, who was a veteran trial lawyer, and Jones. Soon they acquired three more clients: three other Americans who had been taken by Iraqi forces after the first Gulf War, then put on trial for espionage, and finally imprisoned for months in Baghdad's fearsome Abu Ghraib prison. One of the three, Kenneth Beaty, an oil drilling rig supervisor, was held for 205 days before Iraq released him to then-Sen. David Boren of Oklahoma.
 The lawyers filed the suit in federal court in Washington. After Iraq refused to take part in the trial, Hall presented evidence to the judge, including testimony from the victims. The judge awarded the men a total of about $17 million.
 In 2005, Hall's group won a similar lawsuit against Libya for detaining and torturing two oil company workers who had been taking photos of construction projects in Tripoli. The plaintiffs testified they were beaten regularly with truncheons and terrified with mock executions in which guards held guns to their heads and pretended to fire. The judge awarded them a total of $17.8 million.
 The Cole lawsuit is more complicated, because the bombing took place in the harbor of Aden, Yemen. Hall will try this week to retrace the al-Qaida plot from Yemen to Sudan, thousands of miles away. (The plaintiffs could not sue Yemen because the country is not on the U.S. list of states that sponsor terrorism.)
 In court papers, the Cole families assert that Sudan, where Osama bin Laden lived during the early to mid-1990s, helped al-Qaida train the suicide terrorists who bombed the Cole, gave them the explosives, and harbored the skiff that carried them alongside the hull of the 500-foot guided-missile destroyer.
 Among the evidence is a sworn deposition from former CIA Director L. James Woolsey describing how Sudan helped al-Qaida operate, Hall said. "We called [Woolsey] and left a message telling him what we were doing, and he was kind enough to contact us. I think he saw it as a public service."
 Witnesses in Norfolk are to include some family members of the dead sailors. John Clodfelter of Mechanicsville, whose son Kenneth died on the Cole, said in an e-mail that a number of Cole families plan to attend the trial.
 The trial is scheduled for tomorrow through Thursday. It's not clear whether Judge Doumar will announce a verdict when it's over.
 Hall said he tries other kinds of cases - he was interviewed by phone from London, where he is representing a doctor against a shipping company - but that his work on the complex, time-consuming terrorism-sponsor cases consumes more and more of his time. The Cole lawsuit was filed in 2004; any payoff would likely be years away.
 Hall said other, similar cases are in the pipeline. Iraq's new government may make Iraq exempt from such cases, he said, but there is no shortage of potential defendants.
 "Unfortunately," Hall said, "terrorism is a growth industry."
THE CASE
 Lawyers will seek to prove that Sudan helped al-Qaida terrorists bomb the Norfolk-based destroyer Cole in Yemen on Oct. 12, 2000.
Contact staff writer Bill Geroux at wgeroux@timesdispatch.com or (757) 625-1358.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document