Cole victims' suit will resume this week; Sudan, the defendant, bows out; new details on al-Qaida possible
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 12, 2007 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-1
Length: 878 words
Byline: BILL GEROUX

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Dateline: NORFOLK 
Body


A lawsuit against Sudan by the families of the 17 sailors killed in the terrorist bombing of the destroyer Cole resumes in Norfolk federal court this week. It could disclose new details about the al-Qaida plot and attack that nearly sank the Norfolk-based warship in 2000 in a harbor in Yemen.
 Sudan, a strife-torn East African nation where Osama bin Laden once lived, has denied any role in the Cole bombing.
 But Sudan has decided to take no further part in the lawsuit. Insisting that the U.S. District Court has no authority to hear the case, Sudan has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to consider stepping in.
 The lawsuit is scheduled to go forward without the defendant, starting on Thursday with a hearing called by U.S. District Judge Robert G. Doumar to determine which laws apply, "if any," in a case filed in the United States against Sudan over an event in Yemen.
 A trial before Doumar is scheduled to begin March 7 on the heart of the case - the claim by the Cole families that Sudan's government helped al-Qaida kill their loved ones in Aden harbor on Oct. 12, 2000. The list of expert witnesses includes former CIA director R. James Woolsey.
 In a recent court filing, the Cole families' lawyers offered more particulars about the case they hope to make. The document identified 11 men the plaintiffs say trained for acts including the Cole attack at a 20-acre al-Qaida camp just south of Khartoum, Sudan's capital.
 Those men, the papers assert, relied on the Sudanese government for safe harbor, money, weapons and explosives - including the explosives that blew a 40-foot hole in the Cole's hull near the waterline.
 The papers assert that Sudanese officials repeatedly smuggled weapons and explosives for al-Qaida in diplomatic pouches. They say a former Sudanese government official once tried to sell al-Qaida "a 3-foot-long cylinder of weapons-grade uranium" for $1.5 million, but give no further details.
 In a recent motion, the plaintiffs complained to Doumar that Sudan deserved to be sanctioned for not responding to requests for documents in the case.
 They claimed Sudan possessed correspondence between its government officials and bin Laden specifically describing Sudan's contributions to the Cole plot.
 The plaintiffs also asked in vain for bin Laden's tax returns in Sudan, where he lived from about 1991 to 1996 before U.S. pressure forced him to move to Afghanistan.
 The plaintiffs' list of expert witnesses includes Woolsey, who led the CIA between 1993 and 1995 and now is a vice president at the consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. in McLean. The list also includes an economist from Florida International University, and two former journalists who have become consultants on Islamic terrorism, Steven Emerson and Douglas Farah.
 "There is going to be some new information" revealed in the course of the lawsuit, Hall said.
 The lawsuit seeks more than $100 million in damages from Sudan for the families of the 17 sailors, some of whom left behind small children. The Cole, a 500-foot guided-missile destroyer, was nearly sunk by two suicide terrorists in a skiff laden with explosives. The men guided the skiff directly alongside the hull of the Cole at a refueling stop in Aden harbor.
 Some relatives of the Cole dead remain angry at the Navy and the U.S. government. Several said in recent interviews that they would have rather seen the plotters brought to justice than seek money in a courtroom.
 After the suit was first filed in 2004, Sudan hired the law firm of Hunton & Williams to argue that Sudan enjoyed sovereign immunity from such cases.
 But the Cole families' lawyers, who have won multimillion-dollar damages awards for other clients in similar terrorism cases against Libya and Iraq under Saddam Hussein, argued Sudan did not qualify for immunity because it is considered by the U.S. State Department a "state sponsor of terrorism."
 The fact that Yemen is not on the list of state sponsors of terrorism precluded the Cole families from suing Yemen.
 The lawsuit has advanced slowly, first in Doumar's court in Norfolk in 1995, and then in the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, which refused to dismiss the case last fall and sent it back to Doumar for trial.
 Soon afterward, in December, Sudan notified Doumar through its lawyers that "it will not defend or otherwise participate in this proceeding." Sudan reiterated its position that it was immune from the suit and would ask relief from the Supreme Court.
 Hall, the Cole families' lawyer, said Sudan has followed the pattern of defendants in other terrorism cases he has brought - fighting in court only until all its technical arguments were exhausted, then withdrawing and leaving a judge to weigh evidence the plaintiffs present.
 Sudan is widely regarded as a poor nation, Hall said, but it has oil wealth, and the plaintiffs may be able to tap into some of its assets that have been frozen in the U.S.
 Gregory Stillman of Hunton & Williams, who has been representing Sudan in the case, said Friday that he plans to sit in on the proceedings in Norfolk but will not take part. He said he continues to represent Sudan in its request for a hearing before the Supreme Court.
Contact staff writer Bill Geroux at wgeroux@timesdispatch.com or (757) 625-1358.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document