COLIN CAMPBELL'S DIARY;
Notes on terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 23, 1995, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS,; Colin Campbell
Length: 791 words
Byline: Colin Campbell
Body


1 Setting off car bombs was one of the tricks that made Beirut Beirut when I was working there in 1982. A well-made, well-planted bomb (one parked underneath a high-rise building, say) would cause exactly the kind of collapse we saw in Oklahoma City.
Like the remains, moreover, of battles and massacres, the rubble after a terror bombing would be pungent with the odors of cement and plastic wiring and excrement and other substances I couldn't quite place.
2 I felt at first that the tragedy in Oklahoma had a Middle Eastern connection. But it soon seemed likelier that its anti-government paranoia and personnel were all-American, with nothing but their tactics borrowed from the Middle East.
Whatever its exact origins, one key distinction in the world of terrorist incidents is between small, private conspiracies (whether from political, religious or merely lunatic motives) and government conspiracies (which often rely on some of the same odd human types).
Small conspiracies can grow out of any number of motives - but you're rarely dealing with very many people, however dangerous and elusive they may be. In well-organized countries like this one, such people are usually captured.
Government-sponsored terrorism, on the other hand, tends to remain unsolved indefinitely. Why? Because a terrorist government can take extraordinary care to keep its connection dark and deniable even when its involvement is strongly suspected.
In either case, engaging in a "war" against terrorism is easier said than done.
3 Modern terrorism gets its character from the technologies it employs. There have always been murderous acts committed against civilians for the purpose of making a point, and there's nothing utterly new, either, in the fanatical justifications for such crimes.
Only in the past few centuries, however, have terrorist acts involved explosives. And those explosives have grown more powerful and more portable during a century that has also witnessed 160 million deaths in wartime. (I get that number from the statistically minded Robert McNamara, who notes again that our century is the bloodiest in history.)
The technology of terrorism is roughly comparable to the technology of death by small arms in peacetime. Today we have powerful new automatic handguns and assault weapons with larger and larger magazines. Accordingly, a person with murder in his heart can forget fists, knives and even six-shooters, and rely on weapons that can fire hundreds of bullets in a few minutes.
Nor are modern explosives and other weapons of large-scale destruction limited to simple ingredients such as ammonium nitrate and TNT. There are also chemical, biological and nuclear weapons - only a few of which, luckily, have yet been used. And plenty of military experts know how to use them.
Civilians in delicate targets such as skyscrapers, airplanes, trains and similar venues are obvious targets.
4 It's true that terrorism tends to happen in waves. Copycats appear. Feuds develop. Acts of inconceivable atrocity suddenly become old hat.
 
Sometimes it seems logical that radical evil cannot be stopped.
But it's also true that people rally against evil. They'll help the injured in shockingly dangerous circumstances. Their minds grow clearer. They toss aside the familiar rubbish and silliness of daily life. Even badly organized governments sometimes grow more capable. And men and woman of virtue stand out. HED A Nobel laureate's anger at Jimmy Carter
I drove to Athens on Thursday to hear two courageous writers read from their work.
One, Wole Soyinka, who won the Nobel Prize for literature a decade ago, was asked after the reading (in the beautiful old Chapel at the University of Georgia) about the latest developments in his native Nigeria, where a military dictator now rules.
Soyinka, an exile, replied that Nigeria is a mess and that the fate of many political prisoners is simply unknown.
He then criticized former President Carter for appearing to accept Nigeria's dictator, Gen. Sani Abacha, and taking too little interest in the fate of Moshood Abiola, Nigeria's No. 1 political prisoner.
Since Soyinka has until lately had quite friendly dealings with Carter - and since both men are due to appear together during this week's pre-Olympic gathering of Nobel laureates - I told Soyinka at a reception later how surprised I was to hear him criticizing Carter in public.
He told me he had to do it. He said he was so angry, he'd told his Olympic hosts that he didn't want to appear on the same platform with Carter.
 
Did that mean he wouldn't even speak with Carter?
No, he'd speak to him, he said.
(And I'll bet Carter will want to speak with Soyinka.)
Coming Wednesday: Notes on the Nobel laureate Czeslaw Milosz - and his wife, who grew up in Atlanta.

Graphic

 
Illustration: a green car sitting outside a bombed building / PAIGE BRADDOCK / Staff

Load-Date: June 27, 1995


End of Document