Collaboratory?  WVU, government, businesses fight terrorism terrorism terrorism
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
October 01, 1999, Friday friday friday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8A P8A P8A
Length: 391 words
Byline: Kay Michael michael michael
Body


If terrorists target West Virginia, they could find themselves in a
standoff with the International Telemedicine Collaboratory.
It's all right if you haven't heard of a collaboratory. Most people
hadn't until Thursday, when officials at West Virginia University
scheduled a news conference to announce the new enterprise.  enterprise.  enterprise.
Response to disaster
Robert D'Alessandri, vice president for health sciences and dean of
the WVU School of Medicine, said the collaboratory is a joint venture
of WVU's health sciences center, government and several businesses.
"The concept of this is to develop a response, an immediate response,
for biological, chemical and radiological mass disasters Many times,
you see a disaster and wonder what you can do, how you can help.
"This is our way to help."
Virtual medicine first step
A first step in developing the plan is creation of a Virtual Medical
Campus, a facility to help medical and first responder communities
prepare for the use of biological or chemical weapons and other
man-made or natural disasters.
"Using the university's resources in telemedicine and strengths in
rural emergency medicine and distance learning, coupled with high
speed communications capabilities, the VMC [virtual medical campus]
will make training resources and medical knowledge accessible to save
lives when every moment counts," authors of a WVU-issued news release
said Thursday.
D'Allessandri said it's unrealistic to assume a terrorist attack
couldn't occur in West Virginia.
"We have federal buildings. I think it's a possibility. Certainly,
it's nothing we want to happen. It's nothing we would like to
predict."
Nevertheless, he said it's a good idea to be prepared.
He said the virtual medical campus is "a series of integrated
databases - high speed telecommunication networks that will support
health-care requirements of this response plan.
"Some of that will include setting up training standards, hospital
readiness standards, medical records standards, as well as integrating
all the information we have out there on how to respond to these
disasters."
Who's participating
He said the collaboratory agreement was signed Thursday by West
Virginia University; Electronic Data Systems; ACT Inc.; COMTEL;
Conaway Group; MPL Corp.; the National Guard Bureau; and Oracle Corp.
To contact staff writer Kay Michael, call
348-1254.  1254.  1254.

Load-Date: October 2, 1999


End of Document