College Campus Ties To Terrorism Not New
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 18, 2007 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRANDON; Pg. 6
Length: 699 words
Byline: FRANK SHANNON
Body


FRANK SHANNON
Just when it seemed that the furor over former University of South Florida professor Sami Al-Arian's alleged ties to terrorism and Islamic extremism had finally died down, a couple of USF students were arrested in South Carolina by Berkeley County sheriff's deputies Aug. 4 and charged with possession of an explosive device on the basis of the pipe bombs deputies said they found in the trunk of their car.
Ahmed Abda Sherf Mohamed, 24, a native of Kuwait, and Yousef Samir Megahed, 21, an Egyptian, said they had fireworks. Mohamed said he made the devices from materials purchased at Wal-Mart.
The FBI Wednesday issued a statement saying "there is a possibility that publicly reported allegations involving the students may be proven false."
The two were stopped for speeding near Goose Creek, the site of the Navy weapons station that houses the U.S. Naval Consolidated Brig, a military prison where enemy combatants captured in the war in Iraq and Afghanistan have been held.
Deputies became suspicious when the men quickly put away a laptop computer and couldn't immediately say what they were doing in the area or where they were going, according to Berkeley County Sheriff Wayne DeWitt. They remain in custody while the investigation proceeds.
A Kuwaiti-born Palestinian, Al-Arian was a professor at USF until shortly after his arrest by the FBI in February 2003 and his indictment on charges of fundraising for terrorists. He was acquitted of eight of 17 charges after a six-month trial in U.S. District Court in Tampa.
In March 2006, Al-Arian copped a plea to one count of conspiracy to raise money for the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. The U.S. Attorney agreed to dismiss the remaining charges in the indictment. Al-Arian was subsequently subject to deportation, but he has been kept locked up on contempt charges for refusing to testify in another grand jury investigation in Virginia.
Al-Arian's protracted legal troubles have certainly been the most visible of Islamic-related troubles at USF, but it's not the first, not by a long shot.
Fall of 1979 was my first semester at USF, where I earned my degree in political science. That was long before USF fielded a football team, and before Interstate 75 offered a quick and easy route to the campus from Brandon.
In November of that year, the Iranian Hostage Crisis started when a group of militant Islamic university students took over the American embassy in Tehran, Iran's capital. What followed was 444 days of captivity for 52 American diplomats and other embassy employees.
Along the way, five Marines and three Air Force airmen lost their lives in the Iranian desert in a botched rescue attempt. The episode was likely the lowest point in Jimmy Carter's presidency.
At the time, USF counted among its student body a number of Iranians. There was also a Revolutionary Communist Youth Brigade on campus, which normally limited its visibility to occasional meetings and regularly handing out copies of The Daily Worker, a Marxist newspaper.
Right in the midst of the Iranian hostage crisis, a number of more militant Iranian students joined forces with the Revolutionary Community Youth Brigade to stage an anti-American protest on campus, an ill-advised endeavor, considering the deeply patriotic and emotional fervor that gripped the nation. But demonstrate they did one morning outside the student services building.
The problem for the Iranians and the communists was that the protest had been well-enough advertised to attract a large number of flag-waving American students as a means of counter-protest.
Emotions ran high, and things got confrontational, until the vastly outnumbered Iranians and communists barricaded themselves inside the student services building until enough police arrived to escort the embattled protesters safely out of the building and off campus.
For pre-football USF, it was the most excitement the campus had seen. The so-called "good ol' days" may be gone forever, but there's always something that brings it back a bit.
Valrico resident Frank Shannon can be contacted at FXShannon @aol.com.
Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: August 24, 2007


End of Document