Colleges add Islam, terrorism courses
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 11, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8D
Length: 563 words
Byline: Tara Tuckwiller
Body


tara@wvgazette.com  
College students want to know more about the people America is fighting, and colleges - including some in West Virginia - are developing new classes to help.
"There is an unbelievable amount of interest now," said Brent McCusker, a West Virginia University geography fellow who will teach a new course this spring, "The Geography of the Middle East and North Africa."
"It's October, and the next semester doesn't begin until January, and every day I have many, many students asking about the course," McCusker said. "So few people know the geography of the region."
Shortly after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, WVU started developing courses in several disciplines - psychology, English, history, sociology and communication studies among them - to help students understand what's going on.
"These are for students who are curious about, 'How have we gotten to where we are now? Who are these people that we suddenly see as on the other side of the fence?'" said Joan Gorham, associate dean for arts and sciences.
"It's especially important to understand the people and their belief system, because this is not a war against a country with borders … It's very difficult to understand unless you understand that Islam is a political system, as well as a religious belief system."
When WVU students make their schedules for this spring, they can sign up for a sociology class titled "Terrorism"; a psychology class about terrorism's effects on children; a course on women and Islam; a course on women and the military; a class called "History of Islam, Christianity and Judaism" and more.
They can choose freshman composition courses that concentrate on violence and peace, if they like. They can choose existing courses - sociology's "Deviant Behavior," for example - that will discuss the terrorist attacks.
"Some of [the professors] are teaching these classes on top of their regular teaching assignments," Gorham said. "Just because it is important. This is what education is all about."
To help professors understand terrorism, an international studies organization at WVU has included the topic in the workshops it offers to professors.
"If we help the teachers know the topics and understand the issues better, it will trickle down to students," said Ann Levine, assistant director of the West Virginia Consortium for Faculty and Course Development in International Studies.
Professors from 20 colleges around the state - Marshall, University of Charleston, West Virginia State and WVU-Tech - use FACDIS's workshops to brush up on current topics. At the November workshop Yvonne Haddad, an Islamic Studies professor at Georgetown University, will talk about "Terrorism: The Ultimate Example of Cultural Resistance?"
FACDIS's spring workshop was originally supposed to focus on peacekeeping. Now, it will teach professors about terrorism and national and international security issues, Levine said.
At Marshall University, instructor Majed Khader has more than doubled the enrollment limit on his course, "The World of Islam."
Instead of 30 students this spring, Khader will teach as many as 75. People who are not full-time Marshall students are invited to enroll.
The class will be on Mondays this spring, from 6:30 to 9 p.m. For information, call religious studies Chairman Clay McNearney at 696-4641.
To contact staff writer Tara Tuckwiller, use e-mail or call 348-5189.

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document