COLLINSVILLE HIRES AIR FORCE ANTI-TERRORISM EXPERT TO BE POLICE CHIEF
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 11, 2004 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C1; PROFILE/LT. COL. FRIEND WALKER
Length: 323 words
Byline: Norm Parish/ Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


Collinsville's next police chief is a retiring Air Force veteran who has specialized in anti-terrorism and criminal investigations, city officials said.
Lt. Col. Friend Walker, who serves as vice commander of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Region 3 at Scott Air Force Base, will start his new job June 21.
"He is quite capable of an executive position," Mayor Stan Schaeffer said. "Everyone says he is a leader."
Walker, 49, will replace Gerritt Gillespie, who retired Oct. 1. William Pierce, a former assistant superintendent of the Illinois State Police, is serving as interim police chief.
Walker, who will be paid about $75,000 a year, was selected from a field of 52 applicants. Two police chiefs were part of the selection panel that interviewed six semifinalists for the job.
The new chief said he planned to retire from the military June 14 after serving in the Air Force for 25 years. He must still receive training in firearms use and Illinois state law.
Walker, who lives in O'Fallon but plans to move to Collinsville, said he didn't anticipate making many changes in the 39-officer department. He said he wanted to continue the community policing program and make sure officers were "on the streets" to deter crime.
He and his wife, Debra Walker, have two grown children.
"I am looking to settle down in one place," he said. "I would like to start growing some roots in a local community. I have been in the military for 25 years and have averaged moves about every two years."
Walker is second in command of a 400-member staff and a $20 million budget in the Office of Special Investigations. He has worked in federal law enforcement and intelligence, including investigations, anti-terrorism and counterintelligence.
Walker was involved in responding to the terrorist attack on the Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001, and investigating terrorism in Turkey. He also was involved in programs dealing with gang activity and drugs.

Notes

Reporter Norm Parish/ E-mail: nparish@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 618-659-3637  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo Headshot - (Lt. Col. Friend) Walker, Will start June 21

Load-Date: February 11, 2004


End of Document