Colleges must teach terrorism correctly
University Wire
February 13, 2002


Copyright 2002 The Daily Free Press via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 355 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Daily Free Press
Dateline: Boston
Body


In response to Sept. 11, colleges across the country have raced to inform their students of what actually happened, covering events leading up to the attacks as well as the results. Terrorism has found itself a temporary place in current curricula, and by next year, that and other issues relating to the attacks will be the sole topics discussed in newly created classes. Teaching students about one of the most historic days in the history of the United States is important, but the topic must be addressed correctly.
Boston U.
First and foremost, teachers leading courses in terrorism or issues in Islam and Afghanistan must remain completely objective. It is important to keep from preaching about patriotism and how to fight back in the War on Terrorism. Rather, teach what happened, not how to feel or act. This may be incredibly difficult, as the events are so recent and the issues have yet to go away. The pain is still fresh in the minds of all Americans, and with the actions taken against terrorism in Afghanistan, this remains an issue about which people continually become emotional.
Terrorism is a topic that must be approached academically, with a limit on emotions. Teaching the facts as opposed to the theories and feelings is the best way to teach younger generations to learn from past mistakes and prevent them happening again.
Furthermore, it is vital that these classes do not restrict their teachings only to the events of Sept. 11. Professors and colleges are in danger of this if classes about terrorism and Afghanistan are created merely as a result of the recent attacks. Keep the subject matter broad - teach students about not only Sept. 11, but major terrorist attacks on the United States and across the globe that have affected society in countless ways.
It is encouraging to see students showing such an interest in learning about terrorism and its effects on their country. If these topics can be covered in an objective and academic manner, students can only benefit from the knowledge they receive. It will only help breed better future leaders.
(C) 2002 The Daily Free Press via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 13, 2002


End of Document