COLOMBIA'S DRUG THUGS STRIKE BACK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 11, 1989, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 351 words
Body


The bombing of a secret police headquarters in Colombia last week marks only the latest response of cocaine traffickers to U.S. efforts to extradite powerful leaders of the drug cartel. Following the bombing, the traffickers said in a statement that Colombia should conduct a national referendum on whether to continue extraditing these suspects.  Chances are, most Colombians would welcome a referendum and would vote to end the extraditions, given the escalating terrorism that this issue is creating. Many Colombians undoubtedly feel that the U.S. appetite for cocaine is the root cause of the drug problem; these drug thugs are simply satisfying the demand.  Like good business executives, the traffickers are always seeking new ways to maximize their profits and new markets to compensate for drops in the demand for drugs. When casual drug use began to dec line among America's middle class, for instance, the cartel introduced a cheaper and more addictive form of cocaine, crack, to compensate for the loss. Now that the U.S. demand is peaking, the cartel is moving more heavily into Europe.  This latter development should make clear that no single-handed effort by the United States - be it extraditions or firepower - can end the drug trade.  The best the Bush administration can do is urge more international cooperation to fight the problem, as it is beginning to do, by joining U.S. efforts to seize the profits of drug traffickers.  The administration also should continue tightening curbs on exporting the chemicals that traffickers need to manufacture their addictive poison.
But the biggest step the United States and a vulnerable Europe can take is to expand treatment and education programs to slash the demand for drugs.  The latter point helps to explain why Colombians probably would vote to end the extraditions: Without Western demand, the drug thugs would be out of business or, at best, small-time crooks. Certainly they wouldn't be the rich elite that now wields much political and economic power over Colombia and is willing to use terrorism in order to protect their dirty business.

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document