Colombia Hardens Line In Hunt for Drug Lord
The New York Times
February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 14; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;
Length: 779 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BOGOTA, Feb. 13
Body


In his first two years as President of Colombia, Cesar Gaviria did his best to make peace with Pablo Escobar, the leader of the Medellin cocaine cartel, trying to stop the drug-related violence that made every Colombian a potential victim.
He allowed Mr. Escobar to dictate the terms of his own surrender and turn his jail into a luxurious villa. But Mr. Escobar escaped in July during a bungled attempt by the Government to move him, and now a new wave of violence has hit the country.
With the Medellin cartel once again killing people in a series of bombings, Mr. Gaviria is taking a new tack.
 
No More Talks
 "Without doubt, Colombia's No. 1 problem is the narco-terrorism of Escobar," he said in a recent interview at the presidential palace.
The President dismissed the possibility of further negotiations, saying Colombia now has the judicial and military tools to capture and convict the drug boss.
"Even though we've returned to the era of bombings, Colombian society is more prepared than it was three years ago," he said. "Today we have witnesses, we can solve crimes, identify those responsible and obtain convictions."
In the last six months, security forces have arrested scores of Mr. Escobar's associates, killed five more and conducted some 6,000 house-to-house searches, on several occasions coming within moments of capturing the Medellin kingpin.
The Government has increased the bounty on Mr. Escobar's head from $4 million to $7 million, $2.5 million of which is being offered by the United States Government.
In addition, the authorities have issued a decree allowing judges to reduce or cancel the jail sentences of any criminal who provides valuable information in the fight against drug cartels.
But the policy of confrontation has provoked the wrath of Mr. Escobar, who finds himself increasingly isolated yet more disposed than ever to use violence to achieve his goals.
"Pablo Escobar is on a dead-end street," said Rodrigo Losada, a political scientist at Javeriana University here. "He knows that if he surrenders again he'll probably get killed, so he's trying to intimidate society into granting him amnesty."
 
Hit Squads and Bombers
 Since the escape last summer, officials have blamed Mr. Escobar's hit squads for killing more than 100 policemen in Medellin and exploding 11 bombs, one of which killed 20 people on a busy Bogota street last month.
Mr. Escobar has expanded his war to include the killing of suspected traitors inside his own organization. This has caused splits within the cartel that could cost him the cohesion he needs to carry out his campaign of intimidation.
The Semana newspaper published an interview recently with five of Mr. Escobar's former hit men who described the cartel purges in detail.
"The slightest doubt about anyone would result in his immediate execution," said one man, whom Semana did not identify by name. "In December alone at least 20 of his bodyguards were killed."
It was thus not entirely surprising that a new group calling itself "Persecuted by Pablo Escobar" has emerged, vowing to avenge each of the drug lord's terrorist acts.
The group, using the Spanish acronym Pepes, claimed responsibility for setting off three bombs in Medellin that targeted Mr. Escobar's relatives but killed no one.
In the week that followed, the tortured bodies of four of Mr. Escobar's associates were found in Medellin. One of the bodies had a sign next to it that read: "For working for the child-killing narco-terrorist Pablo Escobar. For Colombia. The Pepes."
President Gaviria said that the group had probably suffered at the hands of Mr. Escobar, but said they had no right to carry out private justice.
"We are going to combat them with the same severity with which we combat Escobar because they are resorting to terrorism and we cannot fight terrorism with terrorism," Mr. Gaviria said.
Since many of the gunmen in Mr. Escobar's private army have either deserted him or been killed or arrested, he has been forced to place his security in the hands of novices, said the former cartel operatives interviewed by Semana.
But he appears no less capable of bringing destruction upon Colombia, even if it is done less professionally. For example, after one recent bomb attack, police caught the perpetrators within hours and confiscated nearly a ton of dynamite.
President Gaviria said that there had always been violence in this country, but he insisted that much of today's bloodshed was due to the voracious appetite for cocaine in the United States and other developed countries.
"If consumption were much lower then these organizations would never have had the power nor the capacity to destabilize Colombian democracy," he said.

Load-Date: February 14, 1993


End of Document