Colombia Leader Emphasizes Anti-Terrorism
The New York Times
August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 652 words
Byline: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia, Aug. 10
Body


In a distinction lost on few Colombians, the new President carefully draws a line between narcoterrorismo and narcotrafico.
Drug terrorism - car bombings, assassinations and kidnappings - will be fought by the Government ''without concessions,'' vows the President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo.
But drug trafficking is the world's problem, the President adds.
''Just as drug terrorism is our problem, drug trafficking is an international phenomenon that can only be resolved through joint action of all affected countries,'' Mr. Gaviria said Tuesday in his inaugural speech. ''And no success will be possible in this area if there is not a substantial reduction of demand in consumer countries.''
Next weekend, Colombia will mark the anniversary of its war with the cocaine cartels, a battle triggered by the Aug. 18 murder of Luis Carlos Galan, who preceded Mr. Gaviria as the presidential candidate of the governing Liberal Party. Seeking to predict the drug war's future course, some Colombians foresee a renewed manhunt for traffickers who use terrorist tactics, but a quiet scaling down of the hunt for laboratories and shipments.
''What the President is saying is that he is not going to keep sacrificing Colombian lives for an international problem that cannot be solved on the supply side,'' a banker said Thursday.
But American diplomats here predict continued pressure on traffickers, citing what they see as the success of the first year of the campaign.
''I feel pretty confident that the effort will continue,'' said an American official with expertise in narcotics. ''If this effort is maintained over the next two to five years, Colombia will stop being the cocaine capital of the world.''
The official cited a 20 percent reduction of cocaine production, the extradition of 22 Colombian trafficking suspects to the United States for trial, the seizure of a record 40 metric tons of cocaine in the first seven months of this year and the fact that ''the heads of both cartels are on the run.''
''It has got to be characterized as a major success,'' said another official at the United States Embassy here. ''We have seen no evidence that the Colombian Government is trying to back off from fighting narcotics trafficking.''
But there have been setbacks, including the shift of cocaine production to other South American countries and a rise in Colombians' resentment of the United States, generated by the economic cost of the war to Colombia, estimated by Mr. Gaviria at $1 billion for the first year. To help Colombia, the United States extended $89 million in aid this year, a figure that is expected to jump by at least 50 percent next year. It has also started giving preferential treatment to legitimate imports from Colombia.
 
CARTEL FIGURE SLAIN
 BOGOTA, Colombia, Aug. 11 (Reuters) - The third-ranking leader of the Medellin cocaine cartel was shot to death today by the police, local radio reported.
Gustavo Gaviria, who ran the cartel's day-to-day operations and was the cousin of its boss, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, died in a shootout, the radio station R.C.N. said. It said that a special unit raided a fortress-like house in which he had been hiding in Medellin, which is about 160 miles northwest of Bogota.
A police spokesman confirmed that a man died in a police operation but would not give his identity. The radio said a woman friend of the drug trafficker and a maid were also arrested.
If the operation is confirmed, it would be viewed as a major victory for President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo.
Western diplomats said that Gustavo Gaviria had been in charge of running the cartel's business while Mr. Escobar, the nation's most wanted drug trafficker, was on the run.
His death could re-ignite a round of violence that has been on hold since the drug cartels declared a unilateral truce in late July. R.C.N. said the police and city officials were meeting in Medellin to discuss tighter security measures.


End of Document