COLOMBIAN PARAMILITARY GROUP ACCUSED OF TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 11, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 318 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- The Bush administration designated a right-wing Colombian paramilitary organization as a terrorist group on Monday as Secretary of State Colin Powell headed to Peru and Colombia to support anti-drug efforts and endorse democratic standards.
The designation of the United Self-Defense Forces as a terrorist group was based on "an exhaustive review of the AUC's violent activities over the past two years," Powell said, using the Spanish initials for the group.
"I hope this will leave no doubt that the United States considers terrorism to be unacceptable, regardless of the political or ideological purpose," Powell said.
Financial support for the group is illegal under the designation, and American financial institutions are required to block its assets.
Powell said the AUC has carried out numerous acts of terrorism, including the massacre of hundreds of civilians and the kidnapping of political figures.
"Many of these massacres were designed to terrorize and intimidate local populations so the AUC could gain control of those areas," he said.
In all, 31 groups, including FARC and ELN of Colombia, are designated as foreign terrorist groups. A State Department spokesman, Philip Reeker, said AUS was "increasingly collaborating with narco-traffickers."
Hinting that a $ 1.3 billion U.S. aid package will be increased, Reeker said, "We continually review our policy to ensure it remains effective and reflects the evolving situation."
At the same time, Reeker said Powell in his talks with government officials in Colombia would underscore a need for the government to improve its human rights record "in terms of severing all ties between security forces and paramilitary groups."
Powell's three-day trip to Peru and Colombia, where democracy has been under fire, was designed to show that U.S. interests in the hemisphere go beyond Mexico, where President Bush's attention has been focused.

Load-Date: September 11, 2001


End of Document