Colorado congressman votes no on anti-terrorism bill
University Wire
October 25, 2001


Copyright 2001 Colorado Daily via U-Wire
Length: 626 words
Byline: By Michael A. de Yoanna, Colorado Daily
Dateline: Boulder, Colo.
Body


Citing concerns about a lack of safeguards to American civil liberties and insufficient time to consider all the details, Rep. Mark Udall, D-Colo., joined a handful of representatives on Wednesday in voting against widely supported counter-terrorism legislation.
The vote on House Resolution 3162 Wednesday was 357 to 66, and saw 62 Democrats, three Republicans and an Independent vote no. Congresswoman Diana DeGette, a Democrat, was the only other Colorado representative to vote against the measure.
U. Colorado
The legislation was initiated by lawmakers concerned that the government's ability to gather domestic intelligence was partly to blame when terrorists hijacked and crashed passenger jetliners into the World Trade Center and Pentagon on Sept. 11, killing thousands.
The bill, which President George W. Bush urged lawmakers to complete by this week, will, if signed, expand the powers of the federal government to conduct surveillance of those suspected of conspiracy and treason on American soil. It calls for the creation of a counter-terrorism fund of $ 200 million a year for three years beginning in 2002.
It also contains provisions that would allow noncitizens to be held in jails longer than U.S. citizens and would "remove obstacles to investigating terrorism," for instance allowing consultation between federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations and Central Intelligence Agency.
The bill also allows the government to obtain telephone, financial, consumer and educational records in investigations where terrorism is determined to be a factor.
Additionally, the bill allows for expanded e-mail and Internet monitoring of suspected terrorists.
Udall said that though he supported money-laundering provisions that some in Washington had viewed as a stumbling block, he did not agree with the suspension of normal House rules to push the bill through because amendments could not be added.
"I felt the bill was rushed," Udall said. "It was too huge to let it be pushed through that way."
The bill contains a sunset provision that requires a re-approval in four years.
Concerns that the bill would erode the rights of those who fall under the suspicion of the federal government also factored into Udall's "no" vote. He called provisions in the bill that call for information sharing between the federal government and grand juries "disturbing." He thought the measure could lead to a situation where federal authorities would trample on the due process rights of a suspect who is the subject of an investigation.
"Grand juries are powerful by themselves," Udall said. "A check existed within the judicial branch through judicial oversight. That is being taken away."
He also said the rights of foreigners in America could be in danger. "I think basic human rights ought to be observed," Udall said.
Under the section "Immigration Provisions," the bill expands the definition of terrorists to include any member of a political group that publicly endorses terrorist activity taking place in the United States, including the spouses and children of persons engaged in terrorism.
The bill also calls on the Department of Justice to designate one official to handle complaints of civil liberties and civil rights abuses connected to the proposed law and to report them to Congress four times a year.
There were some provisions with which Udall agreed, such as the wiretapping clause.
"I thought it made some sense that with cell phones that if they want to tap a phone they should do it by person, rather than by the phone line," Udall said. "The attorney general made a good case in that regard."
The bill is expected to be considered in the Senate later this week.
(C) 2001 Colorado Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document