Colombia's victory against terrorism belongs to civilians' courage
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
October 1, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 506 words
Body


 WASHINGTON ? When Juan Manuel Santos came into office as Colombia's president and emphasized economic issues over the fight against terrorist guerrillas, he was suspected of going soft on those he had combated as minister of defense under the previous administration. Little did his critics know that he was planning the "coup de grace" against the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  The devastating Sept. 
22 attack on FARC headquarters in Colombia's central Meta province all but signifies the end of the five-decade-old conflict. The death of Jorge Briceno, aka Mono Jojoy, the feared military strategist and top commander of the organization, means two things. One, the historical leadership is now finished. Two, since Mono Jojoy's demise is the culmination of a two-year streak in which every key camp inside Colombia has been located, FARC is now unable to operate effectively within national borders. No terrorist guerrilla has ever won a war in exile. Despite the hundreds of soldiers who took part, "Operation Sodom" was not a victory of military might but of intelligence. The authorities infiltrated the headquarters and, after patient work, were able to place a GPS device inside Mono Jojoy's (U.S.-made) boots that signaled his exact location. This would have been impossible without the almost 40 million pages contained in the laptop computers of Raul Reyes, the FARC commander killed during an incursion into Ecuadorean territory in early 2008.  The attack against Reyes was savage because Colombia violated Ecuadorean sovereignty. When Bogota said it had captured vital information in Reyes' camp, the international response was skeptical even though forensic experts authenticated the files. All those who vouched for the credibility of the files have now been vindicated.  It is presumably a matter of very short time before Cano negotiates a deal or is pulverized by a barrage of smart bombs. Unless, that is, he is already in Venezuela, where Hugo Chavez feels he has nothing to gain by clinging to a political leper.  Colombia's solitude was such that even the United States began to lose faith in its ally a couple of years ago, refusing to approve a free-trade agreement that Bogota had negotiated at a major political cost.  Colombians did not give up and continued to reclaim territory for civilian rule. Much like the defeat of Venezuela's Cuba-inspired terrorist guerrillas in the 1960s, Colombia's victory against FARC is the result of civilians awakening to the evil of totalitarian terror. We get to hear about spectacular military feats, but how many outside Colombia realize that peasants, factory workers, teachers, students and others joined the struggle to defeat FARC, beautifully symbolized by the hundreds of thousands who took to the streets inside Colombia and around the world in July 2008 to clamor for the end of terror?  Alvaro Vargas Llosa is a senior fellow at the Independent Institute and the editor of "Lessons from the Poor." His e-mail address is AVLlosa@independent.org 

Load-Date: October 2, 2010


End of Document