Colombian terrorism pool proposed; Insurers seek reinsurance facility to back underwriting of country's risks
Business Insurance
November 4, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 33
Length: 550 words
Byline: ROBERTO CENICEROS
Body


BOGOTA, Colombia-Long before the events of Sept. 11, 2001, drew worldwide attention to terrorism insurance, corporations in Colombia regularly sought terrorism coverage to mitigate frequent attacks.
But because international reinsurance for terrorism events has become very costly and nearly impossible to obtain, Colombian insurers have proposed that their government help them create a terrorism pool.
The country's leading association of insurers, the Federacion de Aseguradores Colombianos, known as FASECOLDA, has asked Colombian President Alvaro Uribe to request that Congress adopt a law creating the pool and an agency to operate it.
FASECOLDA's preliminary proposal calls for the agency to be managed jointly by the national government, insurers and reinsurers.
The pool would be called Fondo Nacional de Terrorismo, or FONDTER, said William Fadul, FASECOLDA's president in Bogota.
FONDTER would back insurers providing coverage for personal and commercial risks. It would also cover publicly owned properties, Mr. Fadul explained.
There is much at stake, according to FASECOLDA documents. Local and international investment in Colombia could dry up if terrorism coverage is not available to protect those investments.
U.S. State Department reports say Colombia suffers from the worst terrorism problems in Latin American. State Department reports blame guerrillas engaged in a civil war with killing about 3,000 citizens in 1991. The same year, two guerrilla groups bombed one multinational-owned oil pipeline more than 150 times.
Terrorism coverage really came of age in 1990, when narco-terrorists sought to punish the government for cracking down on a drug cartel, Mr. Fadul said. Demand from corporations has remained high.
Purchasers ''are asking for more coverage, but the insurers can't give it, because we can't get it from the reinsurers,'' Mr. Fadul said.
Under FASECOLDA's proposal, primary insurers would retain the first layer of coverage and FONDTER would provide a second layer of coverage.
Precisely how much risk the primary insurers would retain remains to be determined, Mr. Fadul said.
For its share of risk, FONDTER would obtain funding through loans provided by the government, the World Bank and other organizations. It would also rely on collected premiums and accumulated reserves.
FONDTER would cede some or all of its risk to reinsurers. Depending on market conditions and the capacity reinsurers are willing to provide, FONDTER could provide a fourth layer of coverage above the reinsurers.
Whether FONDTER or the primary insurers would set policy pricing and terms remains to be determined, sources say.
Several government officials have told FASECOLDA that they are interested in creating the fund, Mr. Fadul said.
Just last month, Colombia's banking superintendent who regulates insurers, Patricia Correa Bonilla, told FASECOLDA that the government has great interest in creating the pool, said Manuel Obregon, president of Chubb de Colombia Compania de Seguros S.A.
Mr. Obregon said that though the severity of terrorism claims in Colombia is small, especially in comparison to the damage caused on Sept. 11, 2001, their frequency is a concern.
The most-frequent targets are telephone and energy facilities. Guerrillas favor them because they draw media attention to their cause.

Load-Date: November 8, 2002


End of Document