Colombian terrorism cover
Business Insurance
March 15, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: INTERNATIONAL; Global Briefs; Pg. 25
Length: 392 words
Byline: By Maria Kielmas
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body


The Colombian government has introduced a state-sponsored insurance program to cover bodily injury, death or public transportation vehicle damage from terrorist attacks.
The program comes after a wave of attacks and car bombings in Bogota and other major cities, which have been perpetrated by so-called ''narco-terrorists'' associated with the drug trade.
The attacks have escalated as Colombian law-enforcement officials claim to be moving in to capture Pablos Escobar, the country's No. 1 drug baron, who escaped from prison last July.
Compania de Seguros La Previsora, which is 95% state owned, will administer the program. According to La Previsora's president, Hernando Gomez, the program has two parts: Terrorism victims who are incapacitated, or the dependents of those killed by terrorists, will be compensated 8 million pesos ($ 12,400), and public transportation vehicles will be insured for the replacement value against terrorist attacks.
The government-backed insurance is a stop-loss program under which the government retains the first $ 2 million. A second layer of $ 3 million has been covered by a number of syndicates in the Lloyd's of London market.
The reinsurance premium for the second layer, which was placed by London brokers Holman Wade Reinsurance Brokers Ltd., was $ 600,000, according to Mr. Gomez.
The Colombian government considered covering some commercial risks through the program, but discarded the idea because of high costs.
Reliable loss statistics also proved prohibitive. ''We have very good statistics for people (who have suffered from terrorist attacks), but no records for material damage,'' Mr. Gomez said. But he stressed that terrorism insurance coverage exists in the Colombian market as an endorsement to the standard fire insurance policies.
La Previsora is one of Colombia's largest insurers with gross annual premium volume of 46 billion pesos ($ 71.2 million). It is the largest in terms of paid-in capital, which is 6 billion pesos ($ 9.3 million).
The largest insurer in Colombia is Colseguros S.A., with annual premium volume of 80 billion pesos ($ 123.8 million). Colseguros is part of Grupo Santo Domingo, a family-owned conglomerate.
Colombian insurers should see improved results in 1993, because reinsurance rates have hardened and the increases have been passed on to the direct clients, Mr. Gomez said.


End of Document