Colombia Rebels Turn to Ecological Terrorism
The New York Times
October 29, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 838 words
Byline: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body


The sunlit office of the nature conservancy group could have been in any country -- potted plants, desktop terminals, a poster of the endangered Pauxi Pauxi bird and a staff member wearing a shirt that said: "Plant trees -- plant hopes."
But when asked about an environmental controversy, a biologist drew a finger to his lips in a signal for silence.
"With the level of fear, no group has tried to denounce that," he said, lowering his voice.
The issue is a campaign by Colombia's most hard-line guerrilla group, the National Liberation Army, to sabotage the nation's largest oil pipeline. In the five years since oil began flowing through the 490-mile line, the guerrillas have dynamited it at least 125 times, spilling a total of 637,000 barrels and costing Colombia about $500 million in damages and lost oil exports.
 
Oil Company Stops Pumping
 In 21 dynamite attacks this year, spills have fouled lowland wetlands as well as highland riversheds in the eastern Andes. This month guerrilla bombs have broken the pipeline in two places, spilling 4,500 barrels and causing Ecopetrol, Colombia's state oil company, to suspend pumping for five days.
An attack in May released 14,200 barrels into the Cienaga de Zapatosa, the marshy lake that is the country's largest body of fresh water. Timed to explode after midnight, the dynamite charges sent oil racing down mountain river systems into neighboring Venezuela before it could be stopped with booms and skimmers.
"It has become Colombia's third-largest environmental problem, after deforestation and urban water pollution," said Alfonso Avellaneda, environmental coordinator for oil projects for the Government's Institute for Renewable Natural Resources.
This year, three of Colombia's five leftist guerrilla armies decided to lay down their weapons. A fourth group, the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces, has increasingly sought to avoid causing environmental damage, Colombian conservationists said.
 
Indifferent to Criticism
 But the National Liberation Army, led by Manuel Perez, a 48-year-old former Roman Catholic priest, struggles on, indifferent to criticism from environmentalists and opposed to talks with Colombia's new Government.
The guerrilla group is also opposed to foreign investment in the development of natural resources, and oil, coal and timber projects are among its targets. In a series of arson attacks in July and August, one guerrilla unit set fire to 262 acres of pine plantations owned by Smurfit Carton de Colombia.
Indifferent to press charges of "ecological crimes," the same unit poisoned 150,000 trout in a hatchery near the southwestern city of Popayan on Aug. 27.
The guerrillas' defenders say the means will be justified by the ends: a Cuban-style revolution in a country that recently elected a President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, who favors privatization and foreign investment.
Attacking the oil pipeline is part of a wider offensive by the 1,500 guerrillas of the National Liberation Army. In September, acting in remote regions traversed by the pipeline, the guerrillas killed seven policemen and seven soldiers in two ambushes and kidnapped the former Mayor of Cucuta, a state capital.
But it is the guerrillas' "petro-terrorismo" that has gained the most attention. Pumping 200,000 barrels a day, the pipeline from Cano Limon to Covenas was the conduit for virtually all of Colombia's $1.3 billion worth of oil exports last year. Oil is the second-largest export after coffee.
The continuing guerrilla attacks have prevented Ecopetrol from taking advantage of the recent climb in oil prices. The company's daily production dropped 9 percent in September, to 420,500 barrels.
"In September, we lost $45 million in oil exports," Andres Restrepo Londono, Ecopetrol's president, said in an interview.
Latin America's fourth-largest oil exporter -- after Venezuela, Mexico and Ecuador -- Colombia exports only 115,000 barrels a day, about 5 percent the export level of neighboring Venezuela. If reserves are not expanded, the country will become a net importer by 1996.
 
Foreign Companies Are Wary
 Work is to start next year on two oil projects, a 300-mile pipeline and a refinery producing 75,000 barrels a day. Foreign companies signed five exploration contracts with Ecopetrol this year, but many of the 40 foreign oil companies active in Colombia are reluctant to expand operations.
Fow now they are watching the guerrilla campaign against the pipeline that drains the Cravo Norte field, Colombia's largest reserve. The discovery of the field in the 1980's doubled the country's reserves.
"It's obviously a consideration we keep very much in mind," said an official with an American energy company that is considering a major investment in Colombia.
Apart from using dynamite to intimidate foreign companies, the guerrillas use threatening letters to intimidate the country's environmentalists.
"You won't hear anyone talking about the oil spills," the biologist at the nature group said, working his hands. "It's a risk for us to go against the guerrillas."

Graphic

 
Map: Covenas, Columbia

Load-Date: October 29, 1990


End of Document