COLOMBIA ARRESTS 28 IN MEDELLIN TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 16, 1989, SATURDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 357 words
Body


BOGOTA, Colombia - The army has accused 28 suspected leftist guerrillas of cooperating with drug traffickers in spreading terrorism around the cocaine center of Medellin, Colombia.  The arrests of the 28 were announced Friday in a communique from the 4th Army Brigade in Medellin, the site of almost daily bombings, shootings and arson attacks since Colombia and its cocaine cartels declared war on each other last month.  The army said the 28 belonged to the National Liberation Army, which is one of six leftist guerrilla groups operating in Colombia. But the communique did not say when the 28 had been arrested or what ''terrorist acts'' they were accused of committing.  It said simply, ''We have succeeded in capturing an entire gang of bandits from the so-called National Liberation Army that together with narco-traffickers have been carrying out terrorist acts'' around Medellin.  Drug lords in Colombia traditionally have considered guerrillas their enemies and have financed hit squads aimed at killing leftist sympathizers.  Drug traffickers also consider the army-guerrilla conflicts in remote regions as getting in the way of their cocaine processing and shipping operations.  Since President Virgilio Barco decreed special emergency powers Aug. 18 to aid in the fight against the drug lords, authorities have been rounding up drug suspects and seizing bank accounts and property presumed linked to the traffickers. The emergency measures temporarily suspend some constitutional guarantees and allow suspects to be held for eight days without being formally charged.  Early Friday, four bombs exploded at banks in the capital of Bogota, but no one was injured in the blasts.
Also Friday, a U.S. official in Bogota backed up a declaration made the day before by Colombia's defense minister, Gen. Oscar Botero Restrepo, who said there were no American military advisers in Colombia.  ''The problem is the word 'advisers,' '' said the U.S. official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''They aren't advisers. We have trainers and technicians.'' The official said there were between 24 and 36 U.S. military personnel in the country.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO...AP...A police officer cleaning debris from a bank in Bogota, Colombia, after a bomb went off Friday morning. Bombs also exploded in three other banks Friday in the country's capital…

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document