Column: Threat of terror overblown
University Wire
April 6, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 The Lantern via U-Wire
Length: 529 words
Byline: By Jack Millman, The Lantern; SOURCE: Ohio State U.
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio 
Body


While recently in Europe, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton confirmed that the Obama administration will no longer use the phrase "Global War on Terror."Â The lack of serious press on those statements shows that terrorism has gone from being a controversial issue to a non-entity.
I hope this becomes a metaphor for what will happen to the issue of terrorism itself. The fear of terrorism has been overstated and the reaction of the United States over the last eight years has been overwrought and unnecessary. Like the War on Poverty or the War on Drugs, the War on Terror has spectacularly overrun costs, brought unintended and negatives consequences, and has expanded into areas no one considered. The shock of 9/11 has faded after more than seven years, and people have been able to step back and look at the good and the bad that the War on Terror caused.
One of the best classes I have had at Ohio State was John Mueller's analysis of terrorism and policy responses. He made the often overlooked point that, compared to common events such as car accidents or homicides, terrorism causes minimal economic damage or loss of life. At the same time, the possibility of a devastating nuclear or biological attack is grossly overstated. Due to terrorism's shock value, far more money is spent combating terrorism then on other more useful areas. Since 2001, trillions of dollars has been spent to combat terrorism. All of this has been for goals that can't ever be achieved. Like poverty or drug use, it is impossible to eliminate terrorism.
The cover of professor Mueller's book was a perfect example. On it was the color code, which has said for the last seven years that the threat of a terrorist attack was yellow, or "high." As pointed out by Reason Magazine and others, your odds of dying in a terrorist attack are far lower than your odds of dying in a car crash, being murdered or drowning.
I don't doubt that former Vice President Dick Cheney was sincere when he undertook actions to radically expand the president's wartime power, nor do I doubt he believes that President Obama will make America less safe. This grows out of a world view that places such a high value on terrorism that it ignores far more important issues such as the political climate in China or economic dangers. Now, just like with any other massive program with billions of dollars invested in it, people become dedicated to seeing the program grow. It has become an industry, one where a lot of money rides on people staying afraid.
A more subtle approach would help our foreign policy and be more effective. Huge, overt moves such as the invasion of Iraq tend to consume far more resources and even exacerbate the terrorist threat by encouraging recruitment and leading to a negative image of America. By treating terrorism as an international crime issue instead, government agencies can continue to gather intelligence data while the public will not be subjected to endless fear mongering. We need to shift away from policies like the color code and the rite of shoe removal at the airport to gain a more realistic and rational analysis of the terrorist threat.
(C) 2008 The Lantern via UWIRE

Load-Date: April 6, 2009


End of Document