Column: Obama should talk with nations that harbor terrorists
University Wire
December 10, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 805 words
Byline: By Adam McGillen, Massachusetts Daily Collegian; SOURCE: U. Massachusetts
Dateline: AMHERST, Mass. 
Body


To ensure the safety of our nation moving forward, Barack Obama will need the support of the American people on a divisive issue: speaking with nations known for harboring terrorists.
The election demonstrated how divided we are on this issue, with many claiming - with reason - that speaking to leaders like Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad equates to negotiating with terrorists, a policy that America rightly proposes to never adopt.
I stand whole-heartedly behind a policy of never negotiating with terrorists. Any attempt at debate would be foolish, for a terrorist possesses no reason and seeks only to silence opposing ideas through violence. The true terrorist, committed to an extreme doctrine, is quite devoid of humanity, and in fact resembles more of a parasite than a person. Unable to reason with an entity solely intent on destroying us, we have only one decision to make: kill or be killed. That is really no decision at all.
Yet, we must learn to distinguish the terrorist parasite from the host body of a nation where terrorists reside. Certain nations like Iran, Iraq and Pakistan possess ideal environmental conditions for the proliferation of the terrorist virus, but terrorists themselves exist as rogues. They carry only the flag of fear and violence.
To deal with the problem, we must be sure to separate the host body from the parasite within in our future dealings. The leaders of nations where terrorists live may not be the biggest fans of America, and to expect the world to love us entirely is childish, but we can never hope to win over their sympathy for the war on terror by simply using our military might recklessly.
The American involvement in Iraq demonstrates what an assault on a nation can cause when the real target is a rogue enemy. We need to be more delicate in our approach to the war on terror from here on out.
We must reserve military action to direct attacks on terror cells, avoiding costly and reckless invasions of entire nations. We must address such nations, sick with the terror parasite, with heavy doses of diplomacy. Yes, America needs to sit down with nations like Iran and demonstrate that all of humanity has a stake in eliminating organizations that resort to violence alone to achieve their ends.
Simply engaging in wars against entire nations undermines our ability to dismantle organizations like Al-Qaeda. Invasions, occupations and civilian casualties only breed anti-American sentiments and in fact boost terrorist ranks.
By speaking to nations where terrorists reside, we can simultaneously improve our global image, garner cooperation in the elimination of true extremists, and demonstrate a real interest in peace. At best, diplomacy will open up doors that allow our forces to cross borders once locked to us and pinpoint attacks on terror cells untiringly committed to the destruction of America and the harming of civilians. At the very least, diplomacy will help soothe the hostile environment that breeds terrorist extremists.
The War on Terror is ultimately a war on an idea, and so must be fought with thoughtfulness. A bullet is a terrifying thing, and we will never defeat terrorism if our primary means reflects our enemy more than ourselves.
It's a fine line to walk, for I recognize the terrorist enemy's relentlessness and the necessity for armed combat to fend off those who will stop at nothing to destroy us. But, we must understand that bullets can kill terrible men, but they will never destroy the terrorist mentality.
The War on Terror possesses two fronts: a direct assault on the parasite of terrorist cells like Al-Qaeda, and a diplomatic soothing of environments where feverish anti-Americanism fosters terrorist ranks.
To successfully win this War on Terror, we need to present a unity of purpose on both fronts. We must support our troops in direct actions against the terrorists who would seek to recreate the horrific events of 9/11, and we must support our new President who has promised to open relations with nations we have not spoken with for some time. Locking out countries like Iran has done little to improve our situation. Entering a reasonable debate with nations like Iran will provide America with a stronger means to wage war on the idea of terrorism, the root from which extremists spring.
Like any argument, a unity of voice and body is necessary to achieve victory. If the body of the American people remains divided, Obama will enter relations with an empty voice. What good will his arguments be if the opposition can point to the people he represents, and demonstrate their unwillingness to pursue peace through diplomacy?
Terror is the common enemy of the world. To inspire a unity unafraid of terrorism in our world, we must begin by standing united within these states.
(C) 2008 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via UWIRE

Load-Date: December 10, 2008


End of Document