COLUMN: Domestic terrorism isn't something we can ignore
The Utah Statesman: Utah State University
April 16, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 750 words
Byline: Paul Christiansen
Body


This past weekend, the terrorists won.
No, there weren't any planes hijacked and flown into buildings. No bombs went off in the middle of a busy public event, and mass hysteria didn't break out due to deposits of anthrax being found in someone's mail.
These terrorists weren't foreign-born ruffians calling for the death of the white infidel - a stereotypical view of terrorism that has been shoved down the throats of Americans since Sept. 11, 2001. These were armed American citizens who took the law into their own hands.
I am of course talking about the situation in Nevada involving rancher Cliven Bundy and his band of armed supporters. If you haven't heard of this situation, Google it right away.
The CliffsNotes version goes like this: rancher illegally grazes his cattle on federal land for years; federal government finds use for the land, asks rancher to remove his cattle and pay fees owed; rancher refuses, calls on armed lawbreakers from around the nation to come and have a gunfight standoff against the federal agents who are rounding up and removing the cattle from land in the Nevada desert; Bundy supporters show up in droves, government agents retreat to preserve the safety of the public and federal agents.
Does this seem like justice or a win for freedom against the tyrannical federal government? I would say no - the sole winner in this is Bundy, a man who has blatantly disregarded not only federal law but also the Nevada Constitution. He has lost his battle in court - twice - on grounds of grazing his cattle in areas where he shouldn't have and then skipped out on paying the grazing fees.
Nearly 20,000 ranchers in Western states - including Utah - lawfully abide by regulations set forth by the Bureau of Land Management. But Bundy apparently believes himself special. Why is this?
He feels special because a militia of bullies and outlaws masquerading as patriots speedily came to his aid, armed with guns and a bone to pick with Uncle Sam. These individuals were ready to fight and had been told they'd need to be prepared to draw blood. If the government hadn't chosen to withdraw, allowing Bundy his victory, we would have seen American citizen firing on American citizen in a massacre that could - as terrifying as it may be - lead to a second American Civil War.
This might have been the first time this group employed such tactics to get what they wanted, but it certainly won't be the last. No, the American landscape is slowly turning into a futuristic dystopian Western film. The only difference is that the outlaws will abandon riding horses and carrying six-shooters for pickup trucks emblazoned with "Don't Tread on Me" bumper stickers and AK-47s.
I haven't met any of the members of this crew, but I would wager none of them know much about the American Constitution. Sure, they can likely recite parts of the Second Amendment from memory, but what beyond that? Are they aware the Constitution calls for the government to enforce the law? Are they also aware that the government's duty is to stamp out any rebellious actors?
These armed rebels align themselves with the Tea Party, a group of madmen in funny hats who are on a quest for revisionist history. They've forgotten - or ignored - the incident from American history where, in 1794, President George Washington raised an army and brought force against individuals who threatened government officials and refused to pay taxes.
The so-called Whiskey Rebellion quickly fell apart after the federal government brought the hammer down. Washington's quick action helped the Constitution of the newly formed United States succeed. Bundy and his armed brigade in Nevada simply avoided justice through rebellious means. That only weakens the protection of the law for all Americans.
Yes, the government was right to step down in order to avoid the bloodshed of American citizens, but other steps need to be taken in order to ensure Bundy's lawless actions don't go unaddressed and unpunished.
I bring this to light because Nevada is our neighboring state, and like in Nevada, Utah is full of strong ranching communities. This type of action is sure to come to Utah, as is the case when one lawbreaker is let go without punishment. Bundy's success is a threat to civil society, and it will only worsen while he gloats over a victory won by threat of violence.
- Paul is the former features editor of The Utah Statesman and is a senior majoring in print journalism. Send any comments to paul.r.christiansen@aggiemail.usu.edu
 

Load-Date: June 4, 2014


End of Document