Column: Leave your privacy at the airport
University Wire
July 17, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Length: 548 words
Byline: By Crystal Neifert, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


Â 
If you leave the country and try to reenter with some type of electronic media, there is a chance that your laptop, digital camera, cell phone or other electrical devices could be chosen for a random inspection and possibly be seized for a number of weeks. These inspections of what - to most people - are their most private possessions are done without cause or warrant. Yet they are completely legal because of the global fight against terrorism. But this sounds more like an excuse to ignore the Fourth Amendment.
To search a personal computer within the United States authorities need a warrant, which is granted through reasonable suspicion of illegal activity. But an American citizen is not granted this right at the border. U.S. Courts have ruled there is no need to have a warrant to search someone's belongings if they are entering the country, so any luggage can be searched without probable cause.
Since many people keep private information on their computers and other electrical devices, searching through them is similar to walking into someone's home and looking through their safe. The very thing the Fourth Amendment to the Bill of Rights was meant to protect.
A recent wiretapping bill passed in the Senate which allows increased government surveillance. The bill protects telecommunication companies from any lawsuit for helping in government eavesdropping on American citizens without warrants. The bill was practically bullied through by Mr. Bush. It gives the executive branch more freedom to eavesdrop on people believed to have ties to terrorism. In addition, the bill allows emergency wiretaps up to a week before investigators are required to request a warrant from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.
First of all, wiretapping without a warrant for any period of time shows blatant disregard for our civil liberties and rights to due process. On top of that, the executive branch doesn't need any more power or freedom than it already has. In almost every presidency, the executive branch gains more power and over time it keeps adding up.
The Fourth Amendment states "the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall be issued, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized." This is one of the main rights guaranteed in the Constitution, yet in an effort to fight terrorism it is slowly being stripped away. History repeats itself. Similar comparisons of lost rights can be made between the Red Scare of the 1950's and the scare tactics surrounding terrorism now. Fear is taking control of the country and being used as an excuse to ignore fundamental rights.
This situation reminds me of a quote from Benjamin Franklin, "Those who would give up essential liberty to purchase temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety." Remember this the next time you read about another one of our rights slowly dissolving away in the name of fighting global terrorism or any other safety matter. Stand up for yourself and don't let even a few small liberties slip away to buy the illusion of safety.
(C) 2008 Daily Evergreen via UWIRE

Load-Date: July 17, 2008


End of Document