Column: Eco-terrorism undermining movement
University Wire
May 7, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 Oregon Daily Emerald via U-Wire
Length: 763 words
Byline: By Matt Petryni, Oregon Daily Emerald; SOURCE: U. Oregon
Dateline: EUGENE, Ore. 
Body


Those of us just finishing our first nine months in the fair hamlet of Eugene this June probably know very little about the town's history. As someone who's spent the better part of four years in Eugene, I often feel utterly unaware of my context, its history and its character. At times, I'm just apathetic - a sentiment I'm sure a good many University students might share.
The "world's greatest city of arts and the outdoors," as it far-too-ambitiously fancies itself, has a much more substantial legacy than such a superficial slogan suggests. For many years, it was the conscience and breaking point of the hippie movement, or, as described by High Times, "the capital of American Anarchism." If a city was as far to the American left-wing as Rush Limbaugh is to the right, it might be safe to say that city is Eugene.
Given this position relative to the rare but radical violent left, it might come as no surprise that for many years Eugene has endured much more than its fair share of eco-terrorism, or acts of violence on behalf of the environment without the sanction of the state.
It is my position that, in comparison to thoughtful argument coupled with non-violent but persuasive action, eco-terrorism is not particularly effective as a strategy to bring about the kind of environmentalist cultural ethic our society needs to survive and come into harmony with its surroundings. Like most things that go horribly wrong when they resort to violence, eco-terrorism is generally rooted in a good set of intentions: preserving the quality of the air we breathe and the water our children drink.
Why eco-terrorism fails is, in my view, not nearly as simple as the fact it destroys property and occasionally ­- although rarely - can hurt people. Frankly, many businesses can weather property damage even when they argue they can't. Even the extreme case of losing a business in Eugene due to property destruction is no doubt annoying and traumatic, but, frankly, you're hardly likely to die from it.
By contrast, environmental degradation does indeed kill people, and regularly, all around the world. While I certainly sympathize with victims of environmental terrorism, I don't think the mere fact of their injury, which is almost always financial, is the primary cause of eco-terrorism's failure as a methodology for environmental causes.
Rather, eco-terrorism doesn't work because the method is fundamentally not adapted to the environment of the movement. Environmentalism, at its very core, seeks to end the pattern of ever-more consequential competition that necessitates ever-greater exploitation of natural and human resources. It does this not simply as a matter of principle but as a strategy for human survival. When an environment is characterized by an over-abundance of energy and resources, as was the world economy upon the discovery of fossil fuels, the species that tend to win out in this landscape are the mass-reproducing, inefficient and widespread forms of life known to ecologists as the "r-strategists." They move in quickly and colonize the new resource, exploiting as much of it as possible in order to finance a rapid increase in population. This is very much the way industrialism has behaved to date.
But over time, as the abundance of resources begins to run out and the environment is stabilized, these fast-reproducing, low-efficiency and short-lived organisms are replaced by highly adaptable, efficient and intensely symbiotic species termed "K-strategists." The environmental movement is, for human society, this replacement process.
Actions of the environmental movement that destabilize the political environment and encourage competition complicate the "K-strategy." Violence does exactly that, and as such, it won't advance this particular social movement, which can predominate only in an environment of limited resources, cooperation rather than competition, and relative stability.
Eco-terrorism, in the past, has also had very mixed results. Some actions are more effective than others, but in general, the practice mainly just fuels the foolish fires that burn to further the disregard for our reliance on nature. Using ecological reasoning, this should not be a surprise: Foster an environment in which the r-strategists dominate, and the movement will swiftly be crushed under their force. But if you contribute to an environment that prefers K-strategists, the engines of exploitative capitalism are forced to a grinding halt, irrespective of their past achievements and seemingly unlimited power.
(C) 2008 Oregon Daily Emerald via UWIRE

Load-Date: May 7, 2009


End of Document