Column contributes to Palestine confusion
SUNDAY NEWS (LANCASTER, PA.)
December 26, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: PERSPECTIVE,; LETTERS
Length: 404 words
Body


The opinion column in Perspective Dec. 19 ("Praying for light to shine in Israel'') contributes to the moral, religious and political confusion surrounding the Palestinian issue. Using very typical, religious, conciliatory rhetoric, the spokesmen for the Lancaster County Coalition for Religious and Social Justice distort rather than clarify the quest for peace.
Historically, the Palestinians never had or were a nation. After Israel was recognized by official vote of the United Nations and became a nation in May of 1948, why did the Arab League tell the Palestinians to leave the land of Israel and fight Israel, and then turn its backs on the Palestinian refugees it created? Why did the Arab League (Egypt, Jordan, Syria, etc.) concoct the myth that Israeli Arabs must have a state within Israel, even though they never had such a presence in 3,000 years of history? There is no "equal claim on the land" for the Palestinians, as the writers of the column assert.
#PALESTINELET.LIB#
The Palestinian people have been used, abused and exploited by the Arab League and manipulated and deceived by the Egyptian-born billionaire terrorist Yasser Arafat. And Western nations have compounded the Arab exploitation and Arafat's manipulation of the Palestinians along the route from Jordan to Lebanon and Sudan to Israel. Arafat developed terrorism as an effective strategy demanding world attention and negotiation. It is outrageous and absurd for the liberal Lancaster County Coalition for Religious and Social Justice to characterize Israel's rightful responsibility as a sovereign nation to defend itself from terrorism within its borders as "violence toward the Palestinian people."
American policies of appeasement of terrorism, especially under Carter and Clinton, are the cause of the mess in the whole Middle East. American liberals, political and religious particularly, have distorted the reality of the Palestinian presence in the land deeded historically by God to Israel, not to the descendants of Ishmael - the Palestinians. It's amazing how even liberal Jews can ignore that fact.
The Presbyterian Church in the USA's support of the Palestinians and its divestment of stock in companies that do business in Israel demonstrate its liberal, religious and moral ignorance and confusion and continue the process of energizing and legitimizing the terrorism that perpetuates the Middle East crisis.  Frank Testa, Christiana

Load-Date: December 29, 2004


End of Document