Column: Abortion doctor's murder is domestic terrorism
University Wire
June 8, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Length: 657 words
Byline: By Gavin Mathis, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


While distributing bulletins to congregants last Sunday at his church in Wichita, Kan., Dr. George Tiller, one of a few doctors in the United States that provided late-term abortions, was murdered.
Historically, acts of violence against physicians have hindered the pro-life movement and increased the rancor surrounding issues of women's rights, but the cacophony of abortion arguments was softened by a far more terrifying phenomenon: the role of domestic terrorism.
Abortion remained surprisingly dormant during the 2008 election due to some tactful sidestepping by the candidates. However, the confluence of President Barack Obama's commencement speech at the University of Notre Dame, the nomination of Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court and the brutal slaying of Tiller are exposing previously unreported fronts in America's culture wars.
Even those who remain largely ambivalent about the issue of abortion can agree that any act of violence perpetrated against physicians to achieve a political goal is an act of terrorism. Intending to strike fear into the hearts of women and doctors that provide abortions, Tiller's murder is a foreboding illustration of terrorism and how it dilutes civic discourse by enveloping a nation in fear.
Americans' myopic view of terrorism, which was largely shaped by the "War on Terror," fails to convey what politically motivated acts of violence really look like. Terrorism does not have a face. It is a tactic employed by morally and intellectually weak fundamentalists of all races, creeds, and faiths. The anti-abortionists who bomb health care clinics, the Jewish settlers who rampage through the West Bank and the Muslim fundamentalists who hijack planes rely on this tactic because it is effective. By simultaneously inflicting harm against one person and instilling fear in the populace, terrorism's real victims are those who succumb to fear after an attack.
In all of its shapes and forms - from the attacks of 9/11 to the Oklahoma City bombing - terrorism should not be considered as merely an illegitimate means of accomplishing legitimate ends. They are acts of violence that surrender the moral high ground and are the last vestige of depraved idealogues.
Whatever Tiller's murderer hoped to accomplish, it seems that understanding other viewpoints was not part of it. Extremists who commit acts of violence exist outside the realm of reason. It is impossible to argue with zealots who find logic in killing people to prove that killing is wrong.
Equating the events of 9/11 with terrorism is easy for Americans. No matter how amorphous the enemy, Americans can visualize a Middle Eastern mujahid. The same can not be said for cases of domestic terrorism because Americans do not want to believe their neighbor - the one with the perfectly manicured lawn who takes his children to school and worships at the local church - could possibly be a terrorist.
The perpetrators themselves are often little more than pawns in a greater political movement. Stoking the fires of extremism by calling Tiller a "baby killer," conservative commentators might not have pulled the trigger, but - in essence - they loaded the gun. The right-wing's hate-fueled rhetoric does not make them accomplices, yet it forces Americans to reconsider the responsibilities that come with the freedom of speech.
Standing in stark contrast to these venom-spewing provocations, President Obama offered a different perspective during his commencement speech at Notre Dame, where he challenged Americans on both sides of the abortion issue to change the tone of the debate and to build a mutual understanding.
Tiller's death will not move the nation any closer to a compromise on abortion. At the very least, his death must become a symbol of how Americans will not be terrorized and will not allow violence to dictate their pursuit of common ground on one of the nation's most pressing issues.
(C) 2008 Daily Evergreen via UWIRE

Load-Date: June 8, 2009


End of Document