Column: Harsh interrogation techniques deserve investigation
University Wire
August 26, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 1053 words
Byline: By Sarah Melecki, Daily Nebraskan; SOURCE: U. Nebraska
Dateline: LINCOLN, Neb. 
Body


President Obama has been in office for 220 days. Thus far, his focus has been on the economy, which is partially understandable because of the terrible shape it's in. However, I suspect another reason Obama is working so hard to keep America's attention on the economy, and it can be summed up in three words: Bush and Cheney.
Together, George W. Bush and Dick Cheney did what few administrations had done before them. They managed to bring the nation to its knees in more ways than one. Case in point: Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo and other high-security military prisons we don't even know about where suspected terrorists have been taken to await trial.
That is why I am praising Attorney General Eric Holder's recent announcement of an examination into the legality of certain CIA interrogation techniques. I think it's better late than never that Obama finally saw the light on this subject and OK'd such an interrogation unit to be located within the FBI.
Though it has taken Obama 32 weeks of his presidency to realize he can't ignore all of the mistakes his predecessors made, he has ultimately come to the correct conclusion.
Thanks to groups like the ACLU, someone is finally pointing out that these prisoners might actually have some rights, but the use of, shall we say, "harsh'" interrogation techniques have been documented at these sites.
The commander-in-chief of the United States Military may have believed it was more important to terrorize these alleged terrorists than to live up to our nation's promise of innocence until proven guilty, but according to U.S. anti-torture laws and the U.N. Convention Against Torture, the actions are considered a form of torture and are illegal.
Guess what else is considered a form of torture according to U.S. anti-torture laws and the U.N. Convention Against Torture? High-jacking planes and using them as massive bombs to devastate targets of national importance. But we already knew that. We just never like to equate our own actions with those of our enemies, even if we are just as terrible.
Maybe it's a numbers thing. Maybe we've decided that it's okay to torture and kill a few people but not three thousand. No? Well then maybe it's a race thing. Most of the people who died on 9/11 were probably white, so killing white people is a sin that requires a war of retribution, but it's fine to torture and kill an Arab. No?
While a surprisingly sad number of you probably actually agree with the statements I made above (and it is still your right to believe what you want; the previous administration never did find a way to restrict thought) the reality is that Bush and Cheney took it upon themselves this past decade to make the world more amenable to American interests, and this is the important part, by whatever means they could get away with.
Bush and Cheney were obviously angry about the attacks on September 11, 2001, and knew that our nation needed to retaliate in some way so that we would not be weak. But instead of looking for, finding and punishing those responsible, this dynamic duo took it a few steps further. They decided that they wanted to take on an entire ideology called terrorism.
By no means am I a supporter of terrorism. But I am a supporter of equality, and what Bush and Cheney decided to do was to take on a certain sect of terrorists, because, in reality, terrorism is so big that the entirety of it cannot be defeated in just a few short years by just a few noble nations. Terrorism, in reality, isn't even warfare. Warfare is simply its mechanism. Terrorism is a mindset, and thus the only way to defeat it is to attack it at its root: the minds of future generations.
As you may guess, however, there are a few problems with attempting to eradicate terrorism by teaching children something other than terrorism.
First of all, you need to make sure that future generations are given the chance to get an education at all, which didn't happen for many women in places like Afghanistan until it was liberated by the United States. This first step is one Bush and Cheney seemed to recognize, even if they were blind to the rest.
Secondly, even if every child has a chance at being educated, the sheer magnitude of educating the world's children would be overwhelming. The U.S. can't even sufficiently educate its own children, let alone try to help other nations.
This is where the concept of simply getting rid of today's generation of terrorists comes in. The idea is that anything else is too difficult, so we can just fight the enemy that is easy to pick out because it carries guns around, not a well-disguised thought forming in the mind of a child or adult. But this concept has gotten us into a lot of trouble because our nation's leaders forgot one fundamental thing: Terrorists are people, too.
In the United States, we give noncitizens awaiting trial the same basic rights that we give to citizens. The Constitution applies to everyone. Thus, the idea that prisoners in Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo were ever "harshly" interrogated is a direct violation of the 8th Amendment and, depending on which legal scholar you ask, also the 5th Amendment.
His presidency is new, his politics are different, and he doesn't want to start a huge argument. So President Obama said early on this term that he was simply going to let the past be when it came to what happened in interrogation sessions in prisons far away. Apparently, for Obama, it isn't important to examine our flaws in order to better us. For Obama, we can just ban torture and think everything is great again.
I say, not so fast. Not looking back to examine what happened during the days of Bush and Cheney at our military prisons is like deciding it's unimportant to teach kids about slavery and the Holocaust, because, after all, they're over. Thank god Obama has come to the realization that his initial thinking on this issue was flawed and has been a big enough person to fix his mistake.
The likelihood of Bush or Cheney ever actually paying any retribution for the torture that occurred under their watches is slim, but the fact remains that for the rest of us, there are lessons to be learned and humility to be sought. As a nation, we are only as great as our weakest action. Hopefully we've risen above simple terrorist tactics of torture.
(C) 2008 Daily Nebraskan via UWIRE

Load-Date: August 28, 2009


End of Document