Column: Perpetuating fear in America
University Wire
February 6, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Rebel Yell via U-Wire
Length: 1130 words
Byline: By Sharief Ali, The Rebel Yell; SOURCE: UNLV
Dateline: LAS VEGAS 
Body


To be an American is to love what this country stands for, and what it stands for is freedom and liberty. However, our freedoms and liberties are under constant attack from extremists on both sides of the political spectrum. Today in America, one would think that we are living in perhaps the most dangerous time in our world's history, but this assertion could not be further from the truth. Yet this is not what certain people want us to believe. Many within our society want us to live in fear, and as is evident by popular sentiment, it is working.A perfect example of this is the current controversy over a Dunkin Donuts ad in which popular chef and celebrity Rachael Ray appeared. 
To the average person Ray looked fine, dawning a v-neck shirt and a seemingly fashionable scarf. But according to people like ultra-conservative editorialist Michelle Malkin, the scarf was subliminal "hate-couture" that made Ray appear sympathetic toward Islamic terrorism. According to Malkin, the scarf Ray wore to the photo shoot was no ordinary scarf, but a kaffiyah. A kaffiyah is a traditional Middle Eastern scarf worn mostly by Palestinian men. This article of clothing is traditionally Arab and dates back centuries. It has no political symbolism because it is simply a traditional scarf. The scarf Ray wore was not a kaffiyeh, but since it resembled one, Malkin equated this with Islamic extremism. In Malkin's diatribe, she claims that the scarf was popularized by Muslim terrorists in beheading and kidnapping videos and has now come to symbolize terrorism. Therefore, Malkin implies that in a post 9/11 world, it is the duty of all Americans to be suspicious of anything that resembles terrorism. Malkin went even further, comparing the scarf to the white hood worn by the Ku Klux Klan. On the surface it may seem that Malkin is being patriotic in her vigilance against anything remotely resembling terrorism. In reality, this is a sad display of anti-Arab racism. To compare the hood of the KKK to a traditional Arab scarf is simply ignorant and anyone who buys into this rhetoric needs to think about what country he or she is living in. This is the United States of America, the most powerful democracy in the world and a beacon of hope and freedom. People like Malkin want Americans to be afraid of the rest of the world and consider the whole world a threat to American security. However, according to research published in the cover story from the May 12th edition of Newsweek magazine titled, "The Post-American World" by Fareed Zakaria, this is perhaps the safest time in human history. That's right, as crazy as it sounds; we are all living in "the most peaceful time of our species' existence," according to Harvard Professor Steven Pinker. The article documents research conducted by a team of scholars at the University of Maryland, which tracked deaths caused by organized violence. The data in the article shows that wars of all kinds have been declining since the mid-1980s and that we are at the lowest levels of global violence since the 1950s. Reported deaths from terrorism have risen, but 80 percent of them occurred in Iraq and Afghanistan, which are essentially war zones. If this is truly the case, why does the notion of the "most peaceful time of our species' existence" sound so crazy to most Americans? The answer is quite simple - the age of information in which we are currently living excessively covers and magnifies every single instance of violence in the world. As violence in the world continues to decrease, coverage of violent acts increases. Today, the mainstream media dominates American society. 24-hour news networks constantly revolve around and perpetuate the same reports of violence all day long for several days. There was no news coverage of the massacre of Jews by Nazis in the 1930s and 40s. There was no coverage of massacres by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia in the 1970s, and very little coverage of the atrocities in Rwanda in the 1990s until after the fact. However, given the explosion of information that has taken place and is taking place in the current decade, any bomb or any rocket that is fired anywhere in the world can be easily documented by someone either by video, cell phone or even video phone. It is then relayed across the world almost instantaneously. Add terrorist attacks to the mix and viewers at home think to themselves, "That could've been me." This creates a sense of great fear in our society, as explained in the article by Zakaria. According to the article, the chances of an American being killed in a terrorist attack are smaller than drowning in a bathtub. But does it really feel like that? Of course it doesn't. By creating an environment of fear in our society, the media convinces Americans that they are in great danger and need security. The problem is that security is not free in terms of money or in terms of liberty. Fear is not being sold to Americans; it is being jammed down their throats everyday by the mainstream media. It is security that is being sold, and because many Americans are convinced that the threats are real so the fear is justified, they are willing to pay any price to keep safe. But what price is too great? A paraphrase attributed to Benjamin Franklin states "those who would sacrifice liberty for security deserve neither." The world we are living in is dangerous, but it is not as dangerous as the environment of fear in which Americans are currently living. The true enemies of American freedom, like Michelle Malkin as well as other ultra-conservative thinkers, should realize that their paranoia is not keeping us more vigilant or more secure. Instead, it is a way of stealing our liberties and freedoms from behind our backs. Hopefully Americans can see through the rhetoric of people like Malkin and realize that the mainstream media is all about getting high ratings and not about being fair and balanced. Fear sells and there is great profit to be made by those who benefit from keeping Americans scared. Higher television ratings mean higher rates for advertisers on television networks. Fear always justifies war for security, and this translates to great profits for the military industrial complex as well. This axis of elites and war profiteers want us all to be afraid because our fear creates big profits for their industries. And we all better believe that the world we live in is not about good versus evil, but about making capital and nothing else. It's time for us to wake up and see through the propaganda because America's values are being threatened from within more than anywhere else. Hopefully the same people who have a problem with Rachael Ray's scarf won't boycott hummus for sounding too much like Hamas. (C) 2008 The Rebel Yell via UWIRE

Load-Date: June 3, 2008


End of Document