Column: Having privacy revoked is not new
The Shorthorn: University of Texas-Arlington
June 18, 2013 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 488 words
Body


We signed up for PRISM, a secret government program which went into effect in 2007. According to a Gizmodo article, whistle-blower Edward Snowden, former employee of National Security Agency, let the world know that Americans no longer have any privacy.
We are the generation of technology, but we never checked the fine print. This is not new. It's been happening since 9/11. The majority of Americans supported the Patriot Act, which allowed the government to track anyone "affiliated" with terrorism.
The bill didn't even take two days to pass through Congress. The bill is so broad that the government has a right to go into public libraries and see what books you've checked out.
And this "patriotic" thing that Americans were so gung-ho about is so unclear that you could be a terrorist and not even know it.
According to the Constitutional Rights Foundations, the Patriot Act defines domestic terrorism and three broad categories: "To intimidate or coerce a civilian population, to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion, or to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination or kidnapping."
According to U.S. Government Info, an About.com website, the bill makes us all a suspect. The first definition states: "You need not be a member of a terrorist group to be considered a terrorist."
The bill continues to say that if you raise money for a charity that is in a terrorist controlled area, you may be charged with terrorism.
This stands even if you were unaware that those "terrorists" controlled the area. Even the members of a "terrorist's" family can be considered and treated like terrorists themselves unless they satisfy the Justice Departments criteria of being unaware of any "terroristic" activity.
Thomas Drake, a NSA whistle-blower who the government attempted to charge with Espionage in 2010, was a senior executive of the NSA when he exposed the Trailblazer Project.
Much like The Patriot Act and PRISM, focusing on tracking entities via communication methods like email and cellphones. However,it ran over budget and ended in cancellation.
The one thing Snowden failed to mention is that every American who ever signed a contract with companies like Apple, Microsoft, Facebook, YouTube agreed to this.
Each time we have ever clicked "I Agree," we've essentially said 'take my privacy, please.'
We have no right to be shocked or angry. Anyone who ever supported the Patriot Act said that it's OK to watch 'the Muslims' should have known that, if it's OK to watch the Muslims, then it's probably OK to watch everyone.
It isn't just Muslims anymore, and that's the only uproar. If this nation is truly united, free and great, then why is the policy 'It's okay as long as they're Muslims', or rather, it's 'innocent until proven Muslim.'
It's time for America to start being more American. We are about equality and justice for all, no one has the right to be angry about PRISM.

Load-Date: September 17, 2013


End of Document