Combine to win
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 7, 1985, Thursday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Editorial; Pg. 17
Length: 461 words
Body


FRANCE and West Germany are to be commended for joining forces - as they have done this week - to combat terrorism. As the recent spate of terrorist incidents in Western Europe indicates, terrorism is an international challenge and must be dealt with through a concerted global approach.
Indeed, the more the democratic governments of the world community join to shape an antiterrorist program, the more difficult it will be for terrorists to operate. What is needed is firm, intelligent action to prevent terrorist incidents before they occur. What would be particularly unfortunate would be for Western nations, frustrated by such incidents, to themselves engage in a policy of rash or belligerent acts - such as indiscriminate preemptive or retaliatory strikes - that would lead to an unnecessary loss of life and injury.
Fostering a balanced policy of firmness and intelligent action is an admittedly difficult challenge when dealing with persons and groups whose identity is more often than not unknown and whose grievances, real or imaginary, often span centuries of misunderstanding and conflict. As pointed out by antiterrorism expert Paul Wilkinson recently, there is much that can be done by democratic nations to combat terrorism: ''The rule-of-law approach; firm political will; no concessions or deals with terrorists; professionalism in policing and intelligence work; skillful and precise use of legal measures; these are the methods we should continue to use.''
The decision by the French and West Germans to form a common front to combat terrorism would surely fit into this approach.  The two nations will set up a telecommunication link to stay in close contact. A joint working group will be created. Specialists will meet frequently.
Recent terrorist incidents in Europe, several of them directed against NATO military installations, suggest that terrorist groups have now linked together.
The United States for its part must continue to upgrade its embassies to make them more ''terrorist proof.'' Yet, these steps must be taken in such a way that diplomats are not cut off from the citizens of the country they are stationed in, nor that actions taken contribute to a sense of public fear. A low-keyed policy is necessary: That means developing better architectural designs for official buildings; erecting physical barriers around entrances; ensuring security training for personnel. Private businesses abroad should also undertake precautions.
What needs to be remembered constantly while taking all such intelligent steps is that it is in an adherence to a larger sense of the ''rule of law'' - the recognition of the interrelationship of the true family of nations under God - wherein is to be found the security of all mankind from terrorist acts.


End of Document