Comedian, civil rights activist Dick Gregory dies at 84
Charleston Gazette-Mail
August 21, 2017, Monday


Copyright 2017 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P10B
Length: 286 words
Byline: Albert Aji and Bassem Mroue The Associated Press
Body


DAMASCUS, Syria Syrian President Bashar Assad on Sunday refused any security cooperation with Western nations or the reopening of their embassies, until they cut ties with opposition and insurgent groups.
Shortly after Assad gave his speech, a shell hit the first international fair in the country since the war began six years ago, killing and wounding several people.
Assads defiant comments come at a time when his troops and pro-Iranian militiamen are gaining ground across the country under the cover of Russian airstrikes. Many countries have ceased calling for him to step down.
Speaking before dozens of Syrian diplomats in Damascus, Assad praised Russia, Iran, China and Lebanons Hezbollah for supporting his government during the conflict.
He said Syria will look east when it comes to political, economic and cultural relations.
The direct support of our friends, politically, economically and militarily, made our advance on the ground greater and the losses of war less. Therefore, they are our partners in these achievements on the road to crush terrorism, Assad said.
Lets be clear. There will be no security cooperation nor opening of embassies or even a role for some countries that say that they want to play a role in ending the crisis in Syria before they clearly and frankly cut their relations with terrorism, Assad said. At that point maybe we can speak about opening embassies.
Following months of steady military advances, Syrias government has sought to portray itself as the victor in a war that is winding down, and is looking ahead to reconstruction.
The Syrian president said his countrys economy is turning to growth again at a very slow pace, although we are under an almost complete embargo.

Load-Date: August 21, 2017


End of Document