COMMUNITY COLLEGE OFFERS COURSE ON TERRORISM
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
September 10, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: MAIN; Pg. A-1
Length: 694 words
Byline: ERIKA DAVILA
Body


It's no secret the American public's interest in such issues as security, terrorism and international politics has increased as a result of Sept. 11.
So, thought retired Col. Pete Gray, why not bring all those topics to the most ideal setting for learning?
Thus, a course on international terrorism was born at Santa Fe Community College.
Gray, who also has a passion for teaching, proposed the course earlier this year and it's being offered for the first time this semester at the college as a social-science credit.
Gray is the former chairman of SFCC's criminal-justice program, and during his career in the military, he worked in several counterterrorism operations. For him, the topic is not a new one. But in the last year, he's seen a transformation.
"The average person prior to 9/11 had never heard of al-Qaida," Gray said. "The public awareness has gone from almost nothing to people becoming aware. I think there's a recognition now that we in the United States are extremely vulnerable."
And people want to know why, Gray said. Eleven students are taking the class this semester.
But, Gray emphasized, the idea of the class is not to change student opinions about terrorism, but to make students think and become educated about events in the United States and abroad. "Students are going to be required to do a lot of digging on their own, a lot of homework and a lot of research," Gray said.
The course begins with the history of terrorism and will also explore such issues as what makes a modern terrorist, security in the United States, the vulnerability of the United States and the Constitutional rights of Americans.
But unlike most classes, this one won't have textbooks.
Students are being required to read three books in specific areas, Gray said. For example, a student might be required to read a book on terrorism in the Middle East.
Joe Gallagher, chairman of the newly created legal- and public-services department at the college, said the course was a way to take the "pulse" of the community on the issue.
The college might or might not continue the course, depending on response, he said.
At New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, both the government and criminal-justice departments now offer classes on terrorism. And while none are new courses, officials there have seen interest in the topics rise among students.
The course offerings at NMSU range from intelligence analysis to security technology.
For the first time, all four classes in NMSU's criminal-justice department relating to the topic are full this fall, said Peter Gregware, head of the department.
Currently, the classes are electives, but there have been conversations about establishing a minor, Gregware said.
The university currently has a minor in security technology and is looking at developing the courses it offers, so they might fall under the same minor or a minor in a related issue.
But to make it a legitimate minor, Gregware said, he believes the institution needs to beef up its course offerings in the field.
"If they want us to expand those (course offerings), then giving us some basic resources to hire faculty to teach those courses would be pretty important," Gregware said.
However, not all institutions believe such a program is legitimate.
Following the Sept. 11 attacks, a now-former adjunct faculty member at The University of New Mexico had proposed a degree program in intelligence studies. However, the idea never came to fruition.
"There may be some great ideas, but not every great idea becomes curriculum," said Nancy Uscher, associate provost for academic affairs.
Despite Sept. 11, UNM's faculty didn't see a need for such a program at this time, said Uscher, who oversees curriculum and instruction at the institution.
She said the university has had several political-science majors who have gone on to join the FBI and the CIA, and often "people do well in those agencies after having had a broad education."
Because the institution doesn't want such a curriculum at this time, it doesn't mean UNM is not being responsive to society's interest in the area, she said.
UNM is still looking for research opportunities in the area of security, she added.

Load-Date: September 24, 2002


End of Document