Commentary: Peace prize recognizes change
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
October 13, 2009


Copyright 2009 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 363 words
Byline: Martin Cantor
Body


It's important for America that President Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. It signifies that a respected international organization recognizes the United States changing its foreign policy. They expressed, given that President Obama was nominated in the first 11 days of his presidency, their hope that the United States would seek peaceful discussions before military action.
The United States shouldn't change its policy of protecting our homeland from terrorism because our president received the Nobel Peace Prize, but the Nobel Committee sent a clear message to America, hoping that we will seek peace rather than war.
While many may criticize the awarding of the peace prize to Obama by asking what he has done to earn it, his accomplishments in fact should be questioned. Do his accomplishments after only nine months in office achieve the gravity of those of previous awardees?
Comparison with other awardees is justified: President Theodore Roosevelt resolved the Sino-Japanese War; President Woodrow Wilson crafted the League of Nations (the predecessor of the United Nations). Awardee President Carter was recognized for his quarter-century of work toward peace. Add former Secretaries of State Elias Root (1912-1918 peace efforts), General George Marshall (rebuilding Europe after WWII) and Henry Kissinger (Ending Vietnam).
Nobody will argue that President Obama's accomplishments can hold a candle to those whose have made peace their life's work. To his credit, his humility in accepting the award has indicated as much.
But hope for peace, nuclear nonproliferation, talking before we go to war, and communicating to the world that terrorism impacts the world and should be a global responsibility was enough for the Nobel Committee to acknowledge that there was an important change in American foreign policy with the election of Barack Obama.
Hope is a real commodity. Protecting liberty is a global concern and should be borne by all nations in the global community. Americans agreed, displayed by electing Barack Obama president. The Nobel Committee affirmed as much by giving a high five to the American electorate in their seeking a peaceful path for America.

Load-Date: October 14, 2009


End of Document