Commentary: Welcome to the election season
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
February 8, 2008


Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 382 words
Byline: Martin Cantor
Body


The attendees of the Jan. 25 roundtable at the Long Island Economic and Social Policy Institute at Dowling College called the unfolding primary events right. Their opinions in a survey conducted after a debate between supporters of Sens. Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama and John McCain, Mayor Guiliani and Gov. Romney where unmistakable. McCain was favored by 28 percent, with Guiliani lagging behind at 16 percent. That foretold the results of most of the Republican primaries to date. Romney received very little attention, and for Giuliani, who tried to build momentum in Florida, it was far too little and way too late.
For McCain, it was a rebound that nobody ever expected, proving wrong the throngs who thought his best days were behind him. If all goes as anticipated, McCain will lead his party in November against the Democrats.
The Democrats are another story. Their race is very spirited and totally unexpected. Most thought it would be a cakewalk for Clinton, with few thinking that she would have to campaign so hard for the nomination. However, that wasn't the case, with Obama and Clinton tied at 17 percent, according to the roundtable responses.
They saw a very tight race, and that is just what is happening. After years of ho-hum presidential races, we are witnessing a feisty race filled with differing opinions and personality clashes. The race is so hot that it's an afterthought that the Democrats are making history, with the eventual presidential nominee being either the first African-American or woman. Most important is that gender and race, while obvious, is being rejected as a campaign issue, as it should be.
The survey also indicated that the top three concerns are health care, education, and tied for third, the economy and terrorism/national security.
However, when respondents ranked the concerns on level of importance to them, the economy was first, followed by terrorism/national security, health care with education fourth.
Interesting how illegal immigration failed to make the top four as issues of importance. The flash point of government officials during this past year has been put on the back burner by the attendees.
So the election game is afoot, with the outcome still in doubt. The one certainty is that road to November once again will be exciting.

Load-Date: February 9, 2008


End of Document