COMMUNITY COLLEGES TAKING THE LEAD IN TERRORISM COURSES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 11, 2004 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: TABS,
Length: 530 words
Byline: JASON STRAZIUSO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body


With classes like Terrorism Risk Assessment and Radioactive Materials already in course catalogs, community colleges are stepping up efforts even further to cement their position as the country's homeland security education leader.
 Almost unheard of even five years ago, homeland security classes are now offered nationwide. Surging interest after Sept. 11, 2001, has fueled new degree programs and a building spree of homeland security training centers.
About 20 community college presidents from around the nation gathered recently in Washington, D.C., to develop a long-term strategy and national standards for such classes.
 Leaders say their schools are filling a need for homeland security education in an era of terrorism marked most recently by ricin and anthrax scares.
 "Five years ago if you wanted to take a course on terrorism you basically had to go to the military," said Dan Snyder, president of Lehigh Carbon Community College in Schnecksville, 60 miles north of Philadelphia. "Today I think you're seeing a lot more training, and the facilities that are necessary to provide that high-level training."
 Community colleges, which educate more than 80 percent of the country's fire, police and emergency medical personnel, teach port security in Miami and border security in south Texas. New courses focus on agriculture, bank, and computer security. And many subject matters -- a course on structural collapse, for instance -- now focus on terrorism-related causes instead of natural ones.
 Outside experts see community colleges playing an increasing role in national security. Ellen Gordon, Iowa's Homeland Security Adviser and a member of the Senior Advisory Council for the Department of Homeland Security, said Iowa has embraced community colleges' security education.
 "I see within the next 20 to 25 years that the community colleges are going to be the base for training and education for all the different areas within our homeland security," she said.
 The role community colleges are playing in homeland defense education is being embraced by many in Congress, Gordon said. Rep. James C. Greenwood, R-Pa., for instance, met recently with leaders of Bucks County Community College, north of Philadelphia, to discuss plans for a new emergency services/terrorism center.
 Thomas Flynn, president of Monroe Community College and a member of the American Association of Community Colleges security task force meeting this weekend, said the federal government needs to embrace community colleges even more for security training. "No one can do it better," he said. "We've proven that."
 A snapshot from Bucks County shows a skyrocketing interest. Attendance at hazardous materials classes rose 50 percent after 9/11, from 1,000 to 1,500 students, and new terrorism courses brought in another 250 students, school records show.
 College leaders say first responders still aren't uniformly prepared to deal with another large terrorist attack, but that in several years community schools will have them ready.
 "We're not looking at this as a business decisions," said Dr. Paul Unger, provost of Owens Community College in Toledo, Ohio. "We're looking at this as a duty."

Notes

EDUCATION PLANNING GUIDE

Load-Date: February 12, 2004


End of Document