Community Safety: What to Know in Today's Changing Times
The Collegio: Pittsburg State University
February 29, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 399 words
Body


(StatePoint) Older generations may recall a time when doors were left unlocked. While that practice may no longer seem wise alongside today's headline news, you should have an expectation of safety and security in your community.
In these changing times, here are some things to know and consider about your family's safety.
Work and School Safety
Does your place of work have a safety plan? Does your child's school? No one wants to live in fear of the day that a worst case scenario will occur, but thinking about these matters can help protect workers and students in the event of emergency. Consider being part of efforts to create or amend actionable safety plans for the places your family spends time.
The Department of Homeland security offers free safety resources and tips for employers, workers, schools, parents and students.
Neighborhood Safety
If you're not already friendly with your neighbors, it's a good idea to develop a rapport with those who live nearby. Beyond the social benefits of having friends a stone's throw from your front door, neighbors are a natural safety net. They can keep an eye on your home when you're not home, noticing any unfamiliar vehicles or people on your property.
On a more formal level, consider forming or joining a neighborhood watch organization. A collective stake in the community can serve as an effective crime deterrent.
National and Global Safety
Individuals may not feel like they have strong roles when it comes to safety at the national and global level, but having a deeper understanding of the associated issues can alleviate anxieties and provide a nuanced look at the factors behind such threats.
For example, those interested in global terrorism can seek out new books like "Demand by Terror," the second book by Abayomi Nurain Mumuni, a fellow at the American Society of Criminology. Mumuni's second book focuses on terrorist demands. He uses case studies to build an argument in favor of negotiation strategies.
More broadly, Mumuni's books seek to raise awareness and understanding of what terrorism is and the extent of its existence. "Terrorism will not stay away from any part of the world simply because prospective victims do not know about it," he says.
Your family's safety is likely of the utmost importance to you. Take time to consider the ways you can stay safe at home and wherever you go.
Photo Credit: (c) william87 - Fotolia.com

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Document