Commentary: Surveillance without limit, part two
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
August 13, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 787 words
Byline: Scott Forsyth
Body


Both houses of Congress and President George W. Bush recently signed off on revisions to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which minimally increase oversight but leave all past practices - legal or not - under a veil of secrecy.
Telecommunication companies that might have been involved in illegal activity now are immune from civil suits. Such suits would have shed light on what the Bush administration has been up to: According to sworn statements of former telecommunication workers, some surveillance activity occurred before Sept. 11, 2001.
Presidential candidate Barack Obama, who previously has indicated he would lead a filibuster to block FISA revision legislation if it contained immunity, ultimately voted in favor of the bill. Only 23 Democratic senators voted against it. Obama apparently calculated that, during an election year, he did not want to be accused of being "soft on terrorism. "
Some Obama supporters are very disappointed by his capitulation to realpolitik and hope that, if and when he achieves the presidency, remedial actions will be taken, including a thorough investigation of what has transpired in the past seven years in violation of constitutional safeguards. After this is exposed, appropriate legal actions should be taken and new and constitutional FISA legislation enacted.
Convinced the FISA revisions are unconstitutional, the ACLU has filed a lawsuit, joined by a number of other institutions and individuals such as The Nation magazine, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Global Fund for Women, PEN America Center, International Defense Lawyers Association, Washington Office on Latin America and the Service Employees International Union. Some of the many individuals include writers Naomi Klein, Chris Hedgers and attorneys Scott McKay and David Nevin.
"The administration has argued that the law is necessary to address the threat of terrorism but the truth is that the law sweeps much more broadly and implicates all kinds of communications that have nothing to do with terrorism or criminal activity of any kind," said Jamaal Jaffer, director of ACLU's National Security Project.
In the words of Naomi Klein: "As a journalist, my job requires communications with people in all parts of the world - from Iraq to Argentina. If the U.S. Government is given unchecked surveillance power to monitor reporter's confidential conversations my ability to do this work will be seriously compromised. Unchecked surveillance is extremely vulnerable to abuse. That abuse can put almost anyone in great jeopardy and I cannot accept that my conversations with foreign nationals will put them at such risk. "
World-renowned author Chris Hedges concurs:?"When privacy and free speech are diminished, our democratic institutions crumble. I believe that the majority of my international communications will be intercepted by the government without any meaningful oversights or checks on that intrusive because of this law. This law is using terrorism as a red herring to permit wholesale spying. It is being used to thwart reporting that shines alight on aspects of U.S. policy that those in power find inconvenient and seek to keep secret. This law removes our constitutional right, indeed our duty, to expose deceit and lies, to inform the American public and to protect democratic dissent. We cannot be paralyzed by fear. We will be stripped, if we do not resist, of our few remaining rights. To resist, while there is still time, is the highest form of patriotism. "
The real results of the changes, if they stand, will be a heavy cloud over international communications that are entirely legal and appropriate. A journalist's ability to gather information will be hindered. The assumption that the government is listening will cast a chilling pall over every communication and stifle the frank passing of information of a personal, commercial or technical nature. And to what purpose, perhaps some false sense of security for being "tough on terrorism?" Already assuming the capability of American communication-monitoring technology, terrorist organizations simply could find other ways to pass critical information.
The potential for abuse of executive power within the legislation also cannot be underestimated. The ability to spy, with little or no supervision, easily can move from the "war on terror" to snooping on the political opposition. History teaches us unfettered surveillance is one of the most prominent features of totalitarian governments.
America must avoid any more movement in that direction.
Scott Forsyth is a partner in Forsyth & Forsyth and serves as counsel to the local chapter of the ACLU. He may be contacted at (585) 262-3400 or scott@forsythlawfirm.com

Load-Date: August 14, 2008


End of Document