Community Calendar
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
June 25, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 8
Length: 587 words
Byline: Community Calendar
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


n GOLF OUTING: The Hempfield Area Democratic Committee and the Lancaster County Democratic Committee will hold a golf outing Friday, July 26, at Four Seasons Golf Course and Banquet Center, 949 Church St., Landisville.
The format will be a four-person scramble, with registration at noon and a 1 p.m. shotgun start. There will be a dinner at 5:30.
Golfers will have an opportunity to enter individual and team competitions. Individual and team skill prizes will be awarded.
Cost is $85 for golf, cart and dinner. Cost for dinner only is $30.
To register, visit lancasterdems.com. Deadline is July 17.
For information about hole sponsorships, contact Martin Dees at 951-4687 or 25791113@comcast.net
All proceeds will support "Get-out-the-Vote" efforts, registration drives, county and district candidates, and the HADC Scholarship Fund.
n TERRORISM DISCUSSION: "Engaging Terrorism: A Public Discussion after the Boston Bombing" will be held Sunday at 4 p.m. at Rohrerstown Mennonite Church, 601 Rohrerstown Road.
Featured speakers will be Tarek Abuata, coordinator of Christian Peacemaker Team in Palestine and Israel, and the Rev. Sam Wanjau, pastor of African Community Church of Lancaster.
This event is sponsored by www.1040forPeace.org, which seeks creative ways to respond to the impact terrorism is having on our society.
Attendees should bring a sack lunch and eat together at 5:30. Cold and hot drinks will be provided. An offering will be taken to defray expenses.
For more information, contact H.A. Penner at 859-3529.
n CONCERT: New Found Grass will be appearing Sunday at 7 p.m. in the Music in the Grove concert series at St. John Center Lutheran Church, 599 Reading Road, East Earl.
New Found Grass plays traditional bluegrass and bluegrass gospel music.
The program is held outdoors, so those planning to attend should bring lawn chairs.
Food and refreshments will be available, and an offering will be received.
For more information, call 445-5505.
n DANCE: The Dutchland Polkateers will host a polka and variety dance Saturday from 7 to 11 p.m. in the social hall of St. James Catholic Church, 505 Woodcrest Ave., Lititz.
Featured group will be the Shoreliners.
Cost is $15 per person, which includes refreshments.
For more information, call Ed Zychal, 656-2476.
n CHICKEN BARBECUE: A chicken barbecue to benefit the Denver Fair will be held Saturday, July 20, from 9 a.m. until sold out.
Cost for half chicken is $5. Pickup sites are Donnie's Ice Cream/Turkey Hill, Main Street, Denver; Eagle Rental, 1327 N. Reading Road, Stevens; and Green Lawn Garage, 39 Lancaster Ave., Denver.
Redner's receipts and/or "moo caps" also will help support the fair.
For more information, call John at 336-0342 visit thedenverfair.com.
n MOVIE: Aaron's Acres will present a Sensory-Sensitive Cinema Day at Penn Cinema, 541 Airport Road, Lititz, on Saturday, July 20, at 10 a.m.
Disney-Pixar's "Monsters University" will be featured. Lights and sound will be adjusted to accommodate sensory-sensitive concerns. Families may bring their own snacks and beverages. Concessions also will be offered for sale.
Movie-goers may purchase tickets at Penn Cinema on the day of the movie. Cost is $8.
This is not a fundraiser for Aaron's Acres, but it is a community awareness event. Information will be available in the lobby about Aaron's Acres, which offers individuals with special needs ages 5 to 21 year-round therapeutically based, age-appropriate recreational programs.
For more information, contact Lori B. Donofrio-Galley at 413-2604 or ldg@aaronsacres.org

Load-Date: June 25, 2013


End of Document