Commuter plane crashes in N.C., killing all 21 aboard;
FBI: No immediate indication of terrorism
 Philadelphia Daily News
January 9, 2003 Thursday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 06
Length: 482 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: CHARLOTTE, N.C.
Body


A commuter plane taking off in clear weather yesterday veered sharply back toward the airport, hit a hangar and crashed in flames, killing all 21 people aboard.
The cause of the nation's first deadly airline accident in more than a year was not immediately clear. Aviation officials said that just before the crash, the pilot reported an unspecified emergency to the tower.
US Airways Express Flight 5481 hit the corner of the hangar at full throttle moments after leaving Charlotte-Douglas International Airport for Greer, S.C., officials said. No one on the ground was injured.
Dee Addison, who works at an airport business 500 yards away, ran outside after hearing a boom.
"It was like a frenzy. People were running out of the [hangar]," she said. "At the time we didn't know a plane had actually crashed. It didn't even look like a plane. It was totally demolished."
Heavy smoke poured from the wreckage for hours, so thick "you could taste it in your mouth," Addison said. The US Airways hangar was scorched and battered.
The Beech 1900 twin-engine turboprop was carrying 19 passengers - one from the Philadelphia area - and two crew members. It took off to the south, then cut back, airport director Jerry Orr said.
The pilot, Capt. Katie Leslie, contacted the tower to report an emergency, said Greg Martin, a Federal Aviation Administration spokesman. But the transmission was cut short and the emergency wasn't identified, he said.
The flight-data recorder and cockpit voice recorder were recovered and are being analyzed, said John Goglia, a National Transportation Safety Board member.
The FBI said there were no immediate indications of terrorism.
Goglia said, however, that investigators would consider every possible cause. "At this point, nothing is out of the question," he said.
Goglia also said bolts and small pieces of debris were found on the runway after the crash, but the NTSB hasn't determined if they were from the plane.
The weather was clear at the time, with winds of 8 mph, said a National Weather Service meteor-ologist.
The flight originated in Lynchburg, Va., and was bound for the Greenville-Spartanburg airport in Greer, 80 miles away from Charlotte.
Goglia said that victims' bodies were being recovered from the site last night and that families were starting to arrive in Charlotte.
The airline listed a Michael Otto Sullivan of Philadelphia as being on the flight. No further information was givenm and attempts last night to verify his identity were unsuccessful.
The plane, built in 1996, was operated by Mesa Air Lines under the US Airways Express name. It had flown 15,000 hours and had performed 21,000 takeoffs and landings.
The crash came after a year in which there were no deaths aboard a passenger or cargo airliner in the United States. The last previous crash was that of an American Airlines jetliner in New York City on Nov. 12, 2001, in which 265 people died.

Load-Date: January 9, 2003


End of Document