Commonwealth of ex-Soviet states is needed, Putin says He tells group it has role fighting terrorism, bringing peace
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 9, 2005 Monday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 446 words
Byline: BY HENRY MEYER The Associated Press
Dateline: MOSCOW 
Body


Russian President Vladimir Putin told leaders of the troubled Commonwealth of Independent States on Sunday that their grouping of ex-Soviet republics remains relevant today and urged them to defend its existence.
At a summit held the day before commemorations of the 60th anniversary of the defeat of Nazi Germany, Putin said the grouping of 12 of the 15 former Soviet republics has a key role in combating the spread of terrorism, extremism and xenophobia and fostering peace.
"For all of us, it is obvious that Nazism, extremism and terrorism are threats feeding on a single ideological source, a terrible threat, against which we are obliged to defend our unique and peaceful commonwealth," Putin said.
"The new generation of our citizens should know the truth about the events of those days. To know that truth means having an internal immunity to the propaganda of extremism and xenophobia, national and religious incitement. In the final analysis, it means to protect the world from a repeat of conflicts and wars based on genocide, national and racial superiority.
"I'm convinced that the CIS is capable of becoming an effective instrument of such . . . work," he said.
The meeting convened amid growing questions about the viability of the commonwealth, which brings reformist leaders together with entrenched Soviet-era autocrats in the wake of popular uprisings against regimes in Georgia, Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan.
The commonwealth was born in the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union, and its advocates hoped it would foster closer integration among the newly independent countries. But many of its initiatives have foundered. They include plans to remove trade barriers that have dominated the group's agenda since its creation -- and it has long been criticized for being little more than a talking shop.
Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova, where the government is also looking West, are aiming for membership in the EU and NATO, and they have forged close ties within a rival organization that does not include Russia as they seek to throw off Moscow's influence.
Inside the meeting, the tension ran high as Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko, who led his country's Orange Revolution, and Belarus' leader Alexander Lukashenko, dubbed the "last dictator in Europe," stared stonily at each other.
But Kyrgyzstan's acting president, who was brought to power by a popular uprising in March, predicted that commonwealth states ultimately would have to embrace democracy.
"I think the CIS has no other choice -- the whole world is developing on the basis of democratic principles and the CIS has to go in that direction, too," Kurmanbek Bakiyev said at a news conference before the summit.

Load-Date: May 9, 2005


End of Document