Complacency may raise risk of nuclear terrorism
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
April 13, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 1040 words
Byline: Robert Burns And Charles Hanley Associated Press
Body


 WASHINGTON ? President Barack Obama optimistically opened a 47-nation nuclear summit Monday, boosted by Ukraine's announcement that it will give up its weapons-grade uranium. More sobering: The White House counterterror chief warned that al-Qaida is vigorously pursuing ingredients and expertise for a bomb. International nuclear experts meeting at a "parallel summit" said too many governments around the world don't believe terrorists can "go nuclear" and that complacency is slowing efforts to lock down the makings of atomic bombs. 
"There are a number of people inclined to think that maybe concerns about nuclear terrorism are alarmist, that terrorists could never make a functioning nuclear weapon," said former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans, co-chairman of an international nuclear study commission. Evans and others, who staged the unofficial parallel "summit" of more than 200 specialists from dozens of countries, said they believe a crude nuclear weapon is within the capabilities of al-Qaida and other groups. "It is possible, plausible and, over time, probable" that a "determined and well-financed" terrorist group will set off a nuclear blast somewhere, said U.S. nonproliferation expert and ex-ambassador Robert Gallucci. The assembled scientists, arms negotiators, policy scholars and others applauded Obama's hosting of the two-day summit of leaders of almost 50 nations, to rally support for his goal of securing all vulnerable nuclear materials worldwide within four years. But the experts said the job would require a long-term commitment and leadership by the U.S. In particular, they urged the U.S. to ratify a 2005 treaty amendment requiring protection of its domestic nuclear materials. "It's a remarkable fact that the host of this nuclear security summit hasn't gotten around to ratifying this amendment," said Harvard University's Matthew Bunn. "It's a little embarrassing." On the summit's sidelines, Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao sought agreement on potential sanctions to discourage Iran's efforts to come up with its own nuclear weapon. White House national security aide Jeff Bader said Obama and Hu agreed that a set of potential sanctions should make clear to Iran the cost of continued nuclear defiance. Yet there was no breakthrough, and Chinese spokesman Ma Zhaoxu did not mention sanctions in his more-general statement on the meeting. "China and the United States share the same overall goal on the Iranian nuclear issue," the Chinese statement said. Ukraine's decision to give up its weapons-grade uranium dovetailed with Obama's goal of securing all vulnerable nuclear materials worldwide within four years ? an objective that the White House hopes will be endorsed by all summit countries at a closing session today, even if the means to accomplish it are unclear. The fear is that terrorists or a nation other than the major nuclear powers could obtain crucial ingredients and inflict horrendous damage. Before formally opening the summit with a reception and working dinner, Obama held a series of one-on-one meetings with leaders from China, Jordan, Ukraine, Armenia and Malaysia. Presidential aides billed the summit as the largest gathering of world leaders hosted by an American president since the 1945 conference in San Francisco that founded the United Nations. In a brief exchange with reporters at the White House, Obama said of the summit: "It's impressive. I think it's an indication of how deeply concerned everybody should be with the possibilities of nuclear traffic, and I think at the end of this we're going to see some very specific, concrete actions that each nation is taking that will make the world a little bit safer." The talks are a centerpiece of Obama's broader agenda for ridding the world of nuclear weapons, a long-term process that he says should include gradual disarmament by the nuclear powers, stronger steps to head off a nuclear arms race and more urgent action to lock down tons of plutonium and highly enriched uranium that are the key building blocks of atomic weapons. According to Harvard's Belfer Center, there are about 3.5 million pounds of highly enriched uranium and half a million pounds of bomb-grade plutonium in the world. Combined, they could be used to build as many as 200,0000 nuclear weapons, or about 81/2 times the world's current total of 23,360 warheads. Not all countries share Obama's view that the nuclear-materials problem is a priority. Some think the bigger emphasis should be on disarmament, particularly by the United States and Russia, which despite recent reductions still possess 90 percent of the world's nuclear arms. Seeking to highlight the urgency of the threat posed by terrorists in pursuit of a nuclear bomb, John Brennan, the White House's counterterrorism chief, told reporters that al-Qaida is actively in search of the key ingredients for a bomb and the expertise to assemble it. He said such an improvised device could be obtained through criminal gangs or by infiltrating nuclear labs in Pakistan or other nuclear nations. Iran's U.N. Ambassador Mohammad Khazee on Monday declared Obama's new nuclear policy, which excludes Iran from a U.S. pledge not to use nuclear weapons against countries that do not have them, an act of "state terrorism" because it threatens nations with weapons of mass destruction. "This policy of nuclear blackmail and terror" runs counter to international law and the U.N. Charter and "must be denounced by the international community and all peace-loving nations," Khazee told a General Assembly committee considering a draft Comprehensive Convention on Terrorism. Ukraine, which gave a major boost to arms control in 1994 when it agreed to surrender the nuclear weapons it inherited in the collapse of the Soviet Union, agreed to get rid of its weapons-grade fuel by 2012, according to the White House. Some details are yet to be worked out, including how and where the fuel will be disposed of, White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said. Gibbs said the material could be sent to the U.S. or Russia. He declined to specify the amount, other than to say it was enough to make several nuclear weapons. Contributing: Julie Pace, Anne Gearan and Edith M. Lederer 

Load-Date: April 13, 2010


End of Document