Compromise Called Possible On Interrogation Techniques
The New York Times
September 18, 2006 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 840 words
Byline: By DAVID E. SANGER; Adam Nagourney contributed reporting from Concord, N.H.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 
Body


President Bush's national security adviser signaled on Sunday that he was seeking a compromise with the Republican senators who are rebelling against the administration's proposal to explicitly permit certain severe interrogation practices against terrorism suspects. 
  The adviser, Stephen J. Hadley, is negotiating with Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and other Senate leaders over the administration's proposal, which would give the C.I.A. permission to use ''alternative'' techniques when interrogating terrorism suspects.
Appearing on the ABC News program ''This Week,'' just two days after Mr. Bush declared he would end all interrogation of terrorism suspects unless Congress defined the techniques the way the administration believes necessary, Mr. Hadley struck a more moderate tone.
  Asked if he believed compromise was possible, Mr. Hadley said, ''I do.'' He said it was essential that ''we continue to have this terribly important program for protecting the country, as the president requires, that gives the men and women who carry out this program clear guidance and clear Congressional support, and also achieves Senator McCain's requirement that we don't amend or change Common Article 3,'' referring to the Geneva Conventions. 
  ''We need to find a way through that obstacle course,'' he added. ''And I think we can.''
  Mr. McCain has said that redefining the practices allowed under Common Article 3, which outlaws ''outrages upon personal dignity'' and ''humiliating and degrading treatment,'' would ultimately harm captured American soldiers and further undercut the United States image abroad. Mr. Hadley repeated on Sunday the administration's position that the White House wanted to clarify how the provision applied to Qaeda prisoners and others termed ''unlawful combatants.'' 
  Other administration officials said it became clear over the weekend that the administration was going to have to give ground. ''I don't think anyone anticipated the avalanche of opinion that would be assembled on the other side of what seemed like a pretty abstruse legal issue,'' one official said, speaking on condition of anonymity as he was not authorized to discuss the issue with a reporter.
  In New Hampshire, where he was appearing at a Nascar race and a reception for supporters, Mr. McCain said he had seen Mr. Hadley briefly on Sunday morning before they appeared, separately, on the ABC program, but he said they had not discussed a compromise. ''He said all of us realize that it is in the country's interest that we try to reach an agreement,'' Mr. McCain said. ''And I said we've had many conversations, and I look forward to continuing our conversations. 
  Asked what he thought Mr. Hadley was signaling with his comments on the show, Mr. McCain said: ''I don't know. It can't be anything but good.''
  Then, adding to the administration's pain on the issue, he said: ''By the way, I forgot to mention this: George Schultz said I could say that he strongly favors our position.'' Mr. Schultz was President Ronald Reagan's secretary of state, and his endorsement would add another powerful Republican voice in opposition to Mr. Bush, along with that of former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell. 
  At his Rose Garden news conference on Friday, Mr. Bush said Congress must provide ''clarity'' to C.I.A. interrogators seeking to extract information about future attacks from ''enemy combatants.'' 
  But Mr. Bush and Mr. Hadley have declined to say what kind of ''alternative interrogation practices'' they want to make explicitly legal, so interrogators do not have to fear prosecution under the War Crimes Act for violating the Geneva Conventions. Common Article 3 does not define exactly what constitutes violations of personal dignity or degrading treatment. 
  In June, the Supreme Court ruled that the article applied to all interrogations of terror suspects. That has led to concerns within the Central Intelligence Agency and among military officers that techniques used since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks could be viewed as illegal. Mr. Bush's amendment would legalize all but ''serious violations'' and give retroactive immunity to interrogators charged with going over the line.
  In a second television appearance, on ''Late Edition'' on CNN, Mr. Hadley gave no ground on another point of dispute: whether to share with terrorism suspects classified information that is used against them.
  Mr. McCain and Senators Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and John W. Warner of Virginia, both Republicans, have proposed letting a judge make determinations about the evidence and, if need be, dismiss the charges if there is no way for the defendant to respond. 
  Mr. Hadley said, ''The challenge is to be able to continue to prosecute and bring to justice terrorists where a lot of the evidence is classified evidence.'' He said the administration had addressed the issue by making sure the evidence was provided to the suspect's lawyer and, where possible, by giving the accused a declassified summary of information.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 18, 2006


End of Document