Complex goals in terrorism fight put Bush on tightrope;
Iraq is not an end in itself, but one battle in a larger, unprecedented war that is being invented step by step.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
March 23, 2003 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. C03
Length: 1095 words
Byline: By David Von Drehle; Washington Post
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It was a new kind of beginning for a new kind of war. The television cameras scanned the Baghdad skies Thursday at dawn, searching for the starbursts of a massive bombardment. But instead of "shock and awe" on that first day, there was only strike and wait, poke and jab.
To understand the war in Iraq, you have to understand certain convictions of President Bush, according to several of his advisers. It is a new kind of war for a new historical epoch. "This is not a war against a people. It is not a war against a country. It is most certainly not a war against a religion," Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said Thursday. "It is a war against a regime." Beyond regime change in Baghdad, its purpose is to send a message - ultimately, to shake up the way the world thinks.
And so, as bombers carefully calibrate target lists in Iraq, other critical targets are spread around the world. American actions in Iraq are designed to hit them right between the ears.
Bush has a different message for different audiences. He wants to intimidate dictators who might consort with terrorists. He hopes to steer failing Middle East autocrats toward progressive change. He aims to catalyze optimism in Iraqis, and create a sense throughout the Muslim world that friendship with the United States is possible, but that to make America an enemy is fatal.
Iraq is, for Bush, not an end in itself, but one battle fraught with implications for a larger, unprecedented war that is being invented step by step.
"The struggle against global terrorism is different from any other war in our history," the Bush administration's new National Security Strategy declared last fall. "It will be fought on many fronts against a particularly elusive enemy over an extended period of time. Progress will come through the persistent accumulation of successes - some seen, some unseen."
War as a mode of persuasion - much less as an advertisement for the United States - is a novel idea. Worldwide protests last week suggest that it might not work. Victory may require far more bloodshed. But more bloodshed could cloud the message, intimidating dictators but doing nothing to catalyze optimism in the Arab streets.
But if the Iraq war seems unprecedented to some critics of Bush, he answers that precedent collapsed on Sept. 11, 2001. "Americans should not expect one battle," he told Congress after the attacks, "but a lengthy campaign unlike any other we have ever seen."
One Bush watcher in the Senate noted last week that Bush did not have to define the al-Qaeda attacks as an act of war. "He could have addressed them essentially as a police action: catching and punishing the bad guys." This would have kept the administration's focus squarely on Osama bin Laden and his followers, and on the Taliban government in Afghanistan. The thorny questions of rogue states, Middle East democracy, and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction might have been addressed on separate tracks using such familiar tools as containment and deterrence.
After Sept. 11, 2001, however, Bush fastened on the principle that America is engaged in a new war against a new kind of enemy - and that new strategies are necessary. It was a transformative moment for one who had preached the value of humility abroad in his presidential campaign. On Sept. 12, 2001, he said the "deadly attacks which were carried out against our country were more than acts of terror; they were acts of war… . We're facing a different enemy than we have ever faced… . [and] will use all our resources to conquer this enemy."
His conception of that war was not humble but audacious, targeting not just terrorists but sovereign nations that "harbor" terrorists. A year later, he broadened the strategy further, declaring "America will hold to account nations that are compromised by terror" - without defining "compromised."
As the initial shock of Sept. 11 has subsided, some Americans - and many more people elsewhere - are questioning the notion that everything changed that day. Commentators in Europe and elsewhere have noted that terrorism is an old thorn to them, whether London pub bombings or Parisians killed in Algiers or Spaniards blown up by militant Basques.
None of these led to anything like the war in Iraq, they note.
But those who struck Sept. 11 were different, say Bush and his allies, for two reasons. First, as British Prime Minister Tony Blair put it last week, "What was shocking about 11 September was not just the slaughter of the innocent, but the knowledge that had the terrorists been able to, there would have been not 3,000 innocent dead, but 30,000 or 300,000, and the more the suffering, the greater the terrorists' rejoicing."
That leads to the second difference: If the point of this terror is to maximize the body count, then terrorists must be prevented from getting their hands on more lethal weapons.
"The greatest danger our nation faces lies at the crossroads of radicalism and technology," the Bush administration explained in December. "Our enemies have openly declared that they are seeking weapons of mass destruction… . The United States will not allow these efforts to succeed."
Thus, the linkage was made between a stateless network such as al-Qaeda and rogue states such as Iraq.
But the goals of the United States in its war against terrorism are more complex than just disarming rogue states. Bush also aims, says one adviser, to "drain away a certain toxicity, the anti-Americanism" rampant in parts of the Middle East. He wants to expose the gap between the goals of rogue-state tyrants and their people's more humane aspirations. How better to accomplish that than to have Hussein toppled from within with U.S. support?
This is a very thin tightrope to walk, between too little force and too much. Thomas Carothers of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that it is not the only tightrope Bush is walking in his new war. He finds himself extolling the healing powers of democracy even as he depends on help from dictators in Pakistan, Kazakstan, Malaysia and elsewhere, Carothers has written. He finds himself promoting liberty abroad, while curtailing certain liberties at home.
But the Cold War was also a tightrope, in which some dictators were allies and others foes, some countries urgent priorities and others just forgotten.
Some critics of Bush say he put himself on the tightrope. In recent speeches, he has presented himself as a reluctant warrior, forced to fight by duty and danger. However he got there, it is a perilous crossing, to a destination well out of sight.

Load-Date: March 23, 2003


End of Document