Companies await passage of terrorism-related bill
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
December 23, 2001, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 524 words
Body


The events of Sept. 11 have affected many areas of the insurance industry, including a large increase in life insurance inquiries. What may be a more expensive question, though, is whether Congress can get a bill to President Bush regarding terrorism reinsurance.
 Most local insurance companies buy reinsurance to help pay for potential claims caused by terrorism. But in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks, reinsurance companies are indicating that they will not provide that coverage. If that happens, the smaller companies will be unable to afford to be the sole insurer.
That threat has local companies worried. The state's Insurance Department recently denied about 60 requests from insurance companies to exclude terrorism damage from their coverage.
 The denial, though, comes with a caveat. If Congress passes legislation on the matter, then the reinsurance companies will have some federal support and will provide the coverage to insurance companies.
 When Congress will take care of the matter, though, is a huge question.
 'We're waiting for Congress to provide some assistance so insurers know what type of risk they will have,' said state Insurance Commissioner Jim Poolman. 'It's impossible to price the risk for possible attack.'
 Approximately 70 percent of the reinsurance contracts expire Jan. 1 and the rest shortly after that.
 'We disapproved those filings because we thought it was premature to exclude it with legislation pending,' Poolman said. 'If it passes, then the reinsurers will provide the coverage. Insurance companies cannot go without reinsurance. Either Congress has to pass that type of bill, or the consumers will go without coverage.'
 For now, there's no help from Congress. The House passed a bill, but the Senate was still mulling over three versions of legislation late last week. And the House adjourned for the year Thursday afternoon, making it virtually impossible for legislation to pass. The only way something can happen is if the Senate approves the House version without a change, which isn't likely to happen.
 'It wasn't a pretty ending,' said Rep. Earl Pomeroy, D-N.D. 'There were an awful lot of things that should have been done that didn't get done, including terrorism reinsurance. I'm very disappointed.'
 The terrorism damage coverage is mainly on commercial policies.
 Poolman said his office will have to review the exclusion requests again and 'potentially start approving them. Our main concern is the solvency of the insurance companies.'
 Congress doesn't kick off the new legislative year until Jan. 21.
 The longer the issue drags on, the more uncertainty it will carry. As Poolman and Pomeroy said, banks aren't likely to lend money for the construction of a large commercial building without terrorism coverage.
 'We're living in a different world, where terrorism is a real threat,' Poolman said. 'Are banks willing to loan money to build a new World Trade Center or a new power plant in North Dakota if they don't know if it's going to be covered?'
 Pomeroy said the coverage can be put back into a policy once Congress passes legislation, but it's not known how long that will take.

Load-Date: December 24, 2001


End of Document