COMPROMISE TERRORISM BILL PUT ON CONGRESS' FAST TRACK
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 16, 1996, Tuesday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: GENERAL,; (ljb)
Length: 674 words
Byline: Mark Johnson; Media General News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Republican congressional leaders presented a compromise $ 1 billion anti-terrorism bill yesterday that they hope to rush through Congress by Friday, the anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing.
The bill, which doesn't go as far as Democrats wanted, gives new authority to law enforcement, tightens laws against suspected terrorists and restricts death row appeals.
Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., who helped craft the bill, called it a ''silver bullet that strikes at the heart of terrorism in America.''
Surrounded by families who lost relatives in the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building one year ago, GOP leaders said the legislation enables law enforcement to ''catch up with the technology, catch up with the threat'' of terrorism.
Sen. Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said he expects Clinton to sign the bill.
After wrestling with such legislation for a year, Republicans included:
* $ 1 billion over four years for federal and state anti-terrorism efforts;
* a prohibition on fund-raising by suspected terrorist groups and authority to quickly expel suspected terrorists;
* requiring microscopic identifying tags in plastic explosives to make them traceable;
* reducing the number and time of appeals available to death row inmates.
Rep. Charles E. Schumer, D-N.Y., an original sponsor of anti-terrorism legislation, said he was inclined to ''sadly but reluctantly support'' the bill.
''(It) should be called the Barely Better than Nothing Anti-Terrorism Bill,'' Schumer said.
An anti-terrorism bill already was working its way through Congress last year when the Oklahoma City bombing came, killing 168 people.  After that attack, the Clinton administration, working through Schumer and other Democrats, strengthened the provisions of that bill.
Democrats sought measures such as expanded wiretapping and investigative authority for the FBI, as well as microscopic identifying tags in all explosives. Those items were cut out of the bill under pressure from an odd coalition that included the National Rifle Association and the American Civil Liberties Union.
The family members of terrorism victims who attended yesterday's announcement sounded satisfied with the legislation.
''I can't understand why our congressmen can't get this bill passed,'' said 8-year-old Clint Seidl, whose mother, Kathy, was killed in the Oklahoma City blast while she worked at the Secret Service office.
Diane Leonard, the widow of Secret Service agent Don Leonard, said the nation reached out to Oklahoma in the aftermath of the bombing.
''We are asking that our politicians now do the same'' and pass the bill, she said.
Republicans stressed the reform of the death row appeals process, an overhaul GOP legislators have pushed for years. It also is the only provision in the bill that directly affects the Oklahoma City case. None of the preventive measures in the legislation could have stopped that bombing, but the bomber or bombers could be sentenced to death.
''We are about to curb those endless, frivolous appeals of death sentences,'' Hatch said. He and others cited death row cases that stretched 10 and 15 years before the sentence was carried out.
After inmates have exhausted their appeals in state courts, they would have only one year to file a federal appeal, and on a limited range of issues, under the bill.
While some Democrats and civil liberties groups warn of executing innocent men and women, Hatch said President Clinton told him in a telephone conversation that he would not veto the bill over the appeals reform.
The big loser in the bill was the FBI, which asked for greater wiretapping authority, such as tapping multiple cellular phones when criminals use several car phones to avoid detection. Tap the person, not the phone, agents said.
Republicans said law enforcement needs help catching up with technology but not by throwing money or new, broad authority at the problem. Barr said GOP leaders want a solution that manages a balance between ''civil liberties, government accountability and law enforcement needs.''

Load-Date: April 17, 1996


End of Document