COMPANY C JOINS WAR ON TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 5, 2002 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-2; BRIEFLY
Length: 564 words
Byline: Collected From Wire Services and Times-Dispatch Resources
Body


HARRISONBURG - Members of Company C, which traces its fighting roots to D-Day, marched through town Sunday as they took the first step in joining the war on terrorism.
The National Guard unit was scheduled to begin its one-year deployment at Fort Bragg, N.C., and then to points unknown as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Charlie Company, part of the 116th Infantry Regiment, has been called up before in time of war. In the summer of 1944, the 116th Infantry Regiment formed part of the third wave of the D-Day invasion of Normandy's Omaha Beach.
This tradition was on display as Company C marched through town for a photo on the steps of Court Square, just as the company did in 1941.
WEST VIRGINIA DOCTORS PLAN MOVE TO VIRGINIA
BLUEFIELD, W.Va.  - A majority of Bluefield Regional Medical Center doctors have decided to look for a place in Virginia where they can practice.
"We want to serve the area. We want to serve our West Virginia patients as well as our Virginia patients. Some of us have made the decision we can't stay in West Virginia," Dr. Frederick Barker said last week. "It was unanimous support for moving to Virginia."
Among the options the physicians are pursuing are an affiliation with the University of Virginia to develop a comprehensive cancer center in Bluefield, Va., an affiliation with Virginia Tech, or an ambulatory surgical center and obesity-management service in Bluefield, Va.
Barker cited West Virginia's "miserable malpractice environment," the state's 2 percent provider tax and workers' compensation laws among the problems physicians face.
"Patients don't recognize borders," said Dr. Naeem A. Qazi, chief of the hospital's medical staff. "The catalyst for all this is the malpractice problem, but the impetus for taking action is the desire to serve patients."
VDOT TO CLOSE LANES OF BRIDGE FOR REPAIRS
GLOUCESTER - All four lanes of the Coleman Bridge on U.S. 17 in York and Gloucester counties will close for repairs on Sunday from about midnight to 6 a.m.
The bridge will close four times for about an hour each, the Virginia Department of Transportation said yesterday.mon> Between the closings, the bridge will reopen to traffic in one northbound lane and both southbound lanes.
VDOT crews will repair a damaged leaf in the bridge swing span discovered during a recent inspection.
ORGANIZATION TO SELL AUTOGRAPHED GUITARS
BRISTOL - A nonprofit organization formed to honor Bristol's role in the birth of country music is auctioning three autographed guitars to raise funds.
The group, the Birthplace of Country Music Alliance, hopes to raise as much as $30,000 from the auction of the Martin guitars, which have been signed by more than 30 country musicians. The first guitar was listed for sale on Friday morning on the Web site eBay.com. The guitars - all new instruments bought at a local music store - have retail values from $3,729 to $5,399.
The alliance is working to memorialize a series of recording sessions in Bristol in 1927 that introduced artists such as the Carter Family, Jimmie Rodgers and the Stonemans to a national audience.
Autographs on the guitars include those of June Carter Cash, Carlene Carter, Patsy and Roni Stoneman, Charlie Daniels, Loretta Lynn, Earl Scruggs and Little Jimmy Dickens.
Proceeds from the auction will be used to pay for the alliance's operating costs, including the cost of running its museum at Bristol Mall.

Load-Date: November 7, 2002


End of Document