Company to offer terrorism cover; Insurers, reinsurers form unit to insure property in Europe
Business Insurance
April 8, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 429 words
Byline: EDWIN UNSWORTH
Body


LUXEMBOURG-Six leading insurance and reinsurance companies have formed a company in Luxembourg to provide property coverage for acts of terrorism in Europe.
The new company, Special Risk Insurance & Reinsurance Luxembourg S.A., has total committed capital of 500 million euros ($438.5 million), according to a statement. The insurer, which will cover property damage resulting directly from acts of terrorism, will limit coverage to 275 million euros ($241.2 million) within a given 600-meter area to prevent aggregation of losses. SRIR will not insure either business interruption or liability losses.
Subject to approval by Luxembourg regulators, SRIR plans to begin underwriting in the second quarter of 2002.  It will accept business through insurance and reinsurance companies, insurance and reinsurance brokers and banks.
SRIR's investors are: Allianz A.G. Holding of Munich, Germany; Zurich Financial Services Group and Swiss Reinsurance Co., both of Zurich, Switzerland; Bermuda-based XL Capital Ltd.; and Hannover Re Group of Hannover, Germany-each of which has roughly an 18.2% stake-and SCOR S.A. of Paris, which holds 9.1%.
A spokesman for Hannover Re said SRIR will be an independent company, with none of the participating investors having control. It will have its own management board, which has not yet been named. Decisions about which risks to insure will be made by this board, he added.
The formation of SRIR is not intended in any way to undermine insurers' efforts to encourage governments to participate in providing terrorism coverage, the spokesman added. He said that SRIR's coverage limits and area underwriting restrictions mean there is still a need for government involvement.
Echoing that sentiment is the U.K. Assn. of Insurance & Risk Managers, which welcomed the formation of SRIR. AIRMIC previously has expressed disappointment with the slow progress in addressing the lack of adequate and affordable terrorism coverage since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. The association has sought an expansion of the limited coverage offered by U.K. terrorism reinsurer Pool Re.
''AIRMIC welcomes this move. Hopefully, it will encourage further participation from insurers and reinsurers, but it does not remove the need for a government-backed insurer of last resort, such as Pool Re,'' said David Gamble, AIRMIC's executive director. ''AIRMIC is still calling for the extension of Pool Re beyond the areas it currently covers.''
An AIRMIC spokesman said that AIRMIC would like, in particular, to see Pool Re cover business interruption and liability risks.

Load-Date: April 12, 2002


End of Document