Compromise elusive on anti-terrorism package; 'Slow pace': Negotiators for Justice Department, Senate are unable to reach a final deal
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 3, 2001 Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 388 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senate and Justice Department negotiators failed on Tuesday to reach a final compromise on the Bush administration's anti-terrorism package, one day after House leaders announced their package was ready for passage.
Attorney General John Ashcroft and Republicans immediately turned up the pressure on Senate Democrats and Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt.
"I'm deeply concerned about the rather slow pace," Ashcroft told reporters at the Capitol, flanked by GOP Sens. Orrin Hatch, of Utah, Trent Lott, of Mississippi, and Richard Shelby, of Alabama.
Hatch, the top Republican on the Judiciary Committee, said if there wasn't a compromise deal by Friday, he would introduce Ashcroft's language verbatim and senators would have to fight it out in committee and on the floor.
"I don't care how we do it, I just want it done," Hatch said. "It's always nice to go through the committee, but if we aren't going to get it done, I think we ought to go to the floor with it."
Ashcroft proposed new terrorism laws in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks by hijacked airliners on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and he and President Bush have prodded Congress to act. But some of his proposals sparked opposition from liberals and conservatives alike who said they would infringe on civil liberties.
Senate Democrats say they probably would have had a deal Tuesday if the White House had not backed out of an agreement on sharing normally secret grand-jury information with intelligence agencies, federal officials and law-enforcement officials.
"We were literally within two or three hours of wrapping up the package and this morning the attorney general told me that apparently last night the White House changed its mind," Leahy said.
Most of the other provisions of the bill are close to being complete, Leahy said.
"If we go back to what the White House agreed to, I suspect we're a matter of hours away before we can give a package to (Senate Majority Leader Thomas) Daschle and Senator Lott," Leahy said.
The House Judiciary Committee already has introduced a compromise package agreed to by the chambers' Republicans and Democrats, and expects to send that bill to the full House today.
But in a setback for the administration, many of the key provisions of the bill would expire in little more than two years, on Dec. 31, 2003.

Load-Date: October 4, 2001


End of Document