Compromise is price of cooperation on world terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
July 21, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Ideas; PERSPECTIVES; Column; Pg. 21
Length: 962 words
Byline: RUSHWORTH M. KIDDER
Body


The daughters of Leon Klinghoffer are outraged.
Their father, a retired New York businessman, was the only passenger murdered by Palestinian terrorists on the hijacked Italian cruise liner, Achille Lauro, last October. Yet earlier this month, a court in Genoa, Italy, sentenced Magid Molqi - who confessed in November to Klinghoffer's murder - not to death nor even to life imprisonment, but to 30 years in prison. Two co-defendants were given 24- and 15-year terms.
So lenient do these sentences seem by American standards that even the US State Department has objected. The Klinghoffer daughters, whose mother died in February, have called on President Reagan to extradite the terrorists.
The Klinghoffers may seem to have a valid point. But what's at stake here is far more than the outcome of a single trial. What's being tested is the future of counterterrorist cooperation among Western nations.
Two months ago, at the Tokyo summit, that cooperation seemed well launched. A tough anti-terrorism statement by the heads of the seven major democracies (including Italy and the United States) promised both ''improved extradition procedures'' and closer international cooperation among anti-terrorist authorities.
The Achille Lauro case, as perhaps the first major test of that statement, reminds us of two central points: how very different the legal systems are in different nations, and how any genuine cooperation will require concessions to those differences.
In this case, such concessions must begin by recognizing different traditions of sentencing. As terrorism expert Paul Wilkinson of the Unversity of Aberdeen in Scotland points out, the Achille Lauro sentencing ''has to be seen in the context of the Italian experience.''
That ''experience,'' for one thing, does not include the death penalty. No such sentence is possible in Italy. ''Life (imprisonment) is theoretically the death penalty,'' says Italian terrorism expert and former intelligence officer Franco Ferracuti, who does not see the sentences as particularly lenient in the Italian context. Another difference: Under Italy's anti-terrorism laws, there is no provision for early release. So a 30-year term in Italy could, in fact, be stiffer than an American life sentence ending in parole.
Unless, of course, the imprisoned terrorists were traded for hostages taken in some future incident. The more important the convicted terrorist, the greater the the threat of such retaliatory hostage-taking. All of
this raises another aspect of the Achille Lauro case that is even more troubling than the sentencing.
That aspect concerns Muhammad Abbas - or Abul Abbas, as the chief of the Palestinian Liberation Front is known. Mr. Abbas was on the Egyptair plane carrying the Achille Lauro hijackers to presumed safety last October when it was diverted by US fighters and forced to land in Sicily.
The Italians impounded the hijackers, but let Abbas go free. American officials, suspecting Abbas of complicity in the hijacking, were dumbfounded at the move: Abbas himself later admitted to a television interviewer that he had masterminded the Achille Lauro incident. The Genoa court, as though to atone for past foibles, sentenced him and two associates to life impris
onment - in absentia, and with very little prospect of ever catching them.
Why this curious treatment of Abbas? ''I suspect that (the Italians) were simply nervous about holding someone who is known to be so senior in the Palestinian organization,'' says Professor Wilkinson. Unfortunately, he notes, there is a ''tradition of that kind of appeasement of Palestinian terrorists'' in Italy.
Such appeasement is apt to strike Americans as reprehensible - although, in context, it has its own weird logic. The decision to free Abbas was taken by Italian foreign minister Giulio Andreotti, chief orchestrator of that country's policy of sympathy for the Palestinians and a five-time prime minister who, earlier this month, was yet again asked to form a new government. Italy, as Professor Ferracuti explains, is geographically very close to the Middle East - ''a position,'' he notes wryly, ''that makes you consider all sides of the (Arab-Israeli) question.''
The judge in the Genoa trial, in fact, explained the relatively light sentencing on the grounds of what he called the ''tragic conditions'' in which the Palestinian hijackers grew up.
That argument - which in effect excuses deliberate, cold-blooded, symbolic murder on the grounds of social deprivation - is sadly counterproductive. It simply reinforces the notion that the murder of innocent civilians is an inevitable, and therefore socially acceptable, response to oppression. Equally counterproductive is the policy of freeing known and dangerous gunmen.
So one can understand the depth of feeling as the Klinghoffers call for extradition. Having suffered mightily at the hands of terrorists, they have felt less than satisfied at the hands of the court. But there is a larger issue here: the need for international cooperation. And that involves compromises. If the very first test of the spirit of Tokyo results in the rejection of Genoa - if, in other words, there is no willingness among nations to trust one another's legal systems - then cooperation remains little more than a nice-sounding theory, and terrorism itself has won another victory.
The Italians, to their credit, have been successful in quashing their own Red Brigades terrorism through the courts. They have vastly more experience in this area, in fact, than the Americans. The public prosecutor in Genoa has already launched an appeal, arguing for tougher sentences. The system, it seems, is working. It needs to be allowed to keep working - to the advantage of cooperation and to the detriment of terrorism.
A Monday column

Graphic

 
Picture 1, Court of Justice in Genoa, Italy, during trial of Achille Lauro hijackers; defendants were sentenced this month, FILE PHOTO/AP; Picture 2, Abul Abbas: sentenced to life imprisonment in absentia, FILE PHOTO/AP


End of Document