COMPANY CO-DIRECTOR: TAKE ALERTS OFF INTERNET
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 20, 2010 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 338 words
Byline: Ron Todt, The Associated Press
Body


The co-director of a Pennsylvania company that provided intelligence bulletins to the state that outraged Gov. Ed Rendell and prompted his apologies to peaceful protest groups says that posting the bulletins online increases the risk of harm to potential targets.
In a memo obtained by The Associated Press, Michael Perelman of the Philadelphia-based Institute of Terrorism Research and Response expresses concern that the state's release of the bulletins last week "has increased the threat to Pennsylvania's infrastructure -- including its most vulnerable component, students studying abroad."
The bulletins were posted Friday night on the state Homeland Security website after requests for copies of them were filed by various news organizations, including the AP.
Mr. Perelman's memo, sent to Pennsylvania Homeland Security Director James Powers Jr., urges Mr. Powers to pull the PA Intelligence Bulletin issues off the Internet "until they can be carefully reviewed and redacted of all information that provides intelligence to those who would do harm to American citizens, the Commonwealth, and its people."
Mr. Perelman told the AP on Sunday that he did not authorize distribution of the memo but he confirmed its contents.
"I'm very uncomfortable about the unredacted posting of intelligence bulletins," Mr. Perelman said.
Maria Finn, spokeswoman for the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, which oversees the Homeland Security Office, could not be reached for comment.
The bulletins were initially distributed privately through Mr. Powers' office. Mr. Rendell learned of the bulletins Tuesday, and apologized to groups whose peaceful protests or events, from an animal rights demonstration to a gay and lesbian festival, were the subject of regular anti-terrorism bulletins.
The governor said the information was useless to law enforcement agencies and that distributing it was tantamount to trampling on constitutional rights. He ordered an end to the $125,000 contract with Mr. Perelman's company, which expires in October.

Load-Date: September 20, 2010


End of Document