Compromise sought on terrorism insurance bill
Daily Journal of Commerce (Portland, OR)
October 22, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 711 words
Byline: Aimee Curl
Body


There may soon be a short-term answer to the terrorism insurance conundrum -- how do you put a dollar amount on coverage when the potential for claims can be catastrophic?
Before the U.S. House and Senate adjourned last week, a conference committee reached consensus on legislation that would provide a government backstop for insurance claims from future terrorist attacks.
The bill, which should see a vote when legislators return to Washington in November, would require the government to pay 90 percent of damages after the backstop is triggered.
The measure would activate federal funds for the insurance industry after $10 billion in damages incurred in the first year, $12.5 in the second year and $15 billion in the third year.
The move is welcome news in both the commercial real estate and insurance industries, which have been running scared since the attacks last year.
Insurance liability for building owners has gone up 40 to 80 percent since Sept. 11.
Karen Penafiel, assistant vice president of advocacy for Building Owners and Managers Association International, said after surveying its members, BOMA found the highest insurance increase was 200 percent for a structure within five blocks of the John Hancock building in Chicago.
"It's been extremely difficult for BOMA members to get adequate levels of terrorism insurance," Penafiel said. "Prior to 9-11, it was included in liability insurance. Today, if they can get it, it's very expensive with caps on damages and high deductibles, and it often doesn't cover biological or chemical terrorism."
She said BOMA is satisfied with the bill as it stands now.
"We're optimistic this will rectify the current problem," Penafiel said. "People should still expect to see an increase in cost, but hopefully (terrorism insurance) will be more readily available and the prices will reflect what's actually happening, not just an across the board increase."
Wanda Aguirre, an assistant to an agent at Fullerton & Co. Insurance, said the problem in a nutshell is not being able to calculate risk.
"Insurance premiums are based on numbers and data," she said. "We have no data. The industry's kind of thrashing around right now. It's a work in progress."
A quick search on Aguirre's computer brought up terrorism coverage with premiums ranging from $25,000 to $100,000 annually.
Traditionally, Aguirre said insurance policies have excluded acts of war because it would be impossible to pay damages if everyone had claims.
"Right now the game's changing every day," she said.
One of the biggest changes is with lending institutions, which often require terrorism insurance before financing large projects.
"What we've seen, by and large, is that all lenders are worried about terrorism insurance. They don't want to take a risk that a terrorism event causes damage that cannot be paid," said John Petersen, director of L.J. Melody and Co.
Petersen said terrorism insurance is now required on a "commercially reasonable basis," meaning that the cost should not exceed 100 to 200 percent of a business' current premium.
"The fear is, we're OK now, but if an event happens, the insurers are going to change their position, so basically, you're covered for one event. If it doesn't happen to your property, you'll have to start all over," Petersen said.
Cushman & Wakefield's Gary Griff said lack of terrorism insurance has sidetracked millions of dollars worth of commercial real estate deals in major metropolitan areas.
"Things are on hold," he said. "Terrorism insurance is often not available at any price."
While the "trophy" buildings aren't found in the Portland area, Cushman & Wakefield's Managing Director Terry Shanley said, the risk is still at the top of local building owners' minds.
"If insurance companies are responsible for 100 percent of liability, as their premiums double or triple, it will have a serious impact on their tenants," he said. "It's going to be a very big deal. The bill in Congress should help."
Robin White, executive vice president of Portland BOMA, said before 9-11, earthquake insurance topped building owners' concerns.
"For Portland, we can't rule out the possibility of terrorism," she said. "Although we're not exactly high on the scale of where al Qaeda might hit, terrorism could be anything."

Load-Date: November 19, 2002


End of Document