Companies urged to address terrorism exposures; Awareness and planning are crucial, security experts advise
Business Insurance
December 6, 1999, Monday


Copyright 1999 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 28L
Length: 816 words
Byline: MICHAEL PRINCE
Body


When it comes to protecting themselves from terrorism, businesses should not depend on the government as their only defense, two security experts say.
Although law enforcement agencies aggressively investigate terrorist threats, companies still need to take precautions to protect themselves against the rising number of terrorist acts committed in the United States each year, the experts said at a seminar at the CPCU Society's 55th Annual Meeting, held in October in Boston.
Terrorists want to shock the public with their acts, said Daniel Hopwood, vp-risk control strategies for Marsh Inc. in La Jolla, Calif. Terrorists try "to grab our attention. To derail processes. To derail governments," Mr. Hopwood said.
Recent years have seen several particularly heinous acts, such as the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 and the bombing of two U.S. embassies in 1998. But, Mr. Hopwood said, interest in terrorism peaks shortly after an event and, unfortunately, then subsides, as does attention to anti-terrorism efforts.
"The further away we are from an event, the less likely we will be prepared," he said.
This is not wise, though, given the number of terrorist bombings in the United States, most of which don't receive big headlines, said Leonard Cross, director of business development for International Security Systems in Peabody, Mass. From 1991 through 1997, 18,998 bombings occurred in the United States. These caused 369 deaths, 3,500 injuries and $663 million in total property damage, of which $500 million stemmed from the World Trade Center bombing, said Mr. Cross.
A bombing is the most common type of terrorist act, but nuclear, biological or chemical attacks also may occur, said Mr. Hopwood.
And the types of threats are changing. For example, "cyber-terror" is a new threat that the FBI and some companies have begun to focus on, he said. Moreover, in the past, a terrorist would commit an act to make a specific statement. Increasingly, though, the acts are performed to create massive destruction and loss of life.
To see the future of terrorism, Mr. Cross said, one should look overseas. Terrorists' strategies tend to start in Europe and the Middle East and then migrate to the United States. The large-scale bombings in Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center were the first of that type in the United States, but similar explosions had occurred previously elsewhere, he said.
In trying to protect against a terrorist act, it is important to keep in mind that terrorists are intelligent and know how to cause significant damage using small explosives, Mr. Cross said.
"They do their homework," he said.
To illustrate his point, Mr. Cross, a former FBI agent, showed a notebook created by an anti-corporate terrorist group in the early 1980s. The book details the location, operations and vulnerable areas of numerous corporate headquarters in the United States. Such details could help a terrorist group infiltrate a building and identify the place to detonate an explosive device that would cause maximum damage.
To demonstrate the power contained in a conventional explosive device, Mr. Cross displayed a section of the foot-thick concrete floor from the parking garage under the World Trade Center. The car bomb ripped through a half-dozen such floors. Five people were killed, and about 1,000 were injured, he said.
The terrorists' goal, he said, was to crash one of the center's towers into the other, toppling both onto nearby Wall Street.
But companies are not helpless. For a start, Mr. Cross recommended that an organization turn a watchful eye toward its Web site. Many sites contain information, such as floor plans, that is helpful to potential terrorists. A terrorist "can do a lot of preliminary surveillance work" over the Internet, Mr. Cross said. Removing that information may help prevent them from doing so, he said.
"Marketing needs to talk to loss prevention" to eliminate from the Web site any information that may be of use to terrorists, he said.
Also, it is vital to be aware of who might pose a threat to an organization. A company that is self-aware has an advantage over others, Mr. Hopwood said.
Each organization must recognize where threats might originate and assess their validity. A company should ask itself whether it faces any threat from "a group out there that has a bone to pick," he said.
Having a plan to safely evacuate a building when a bomb threat has been made is essential, Mr. Cross said. For example, he said that during one bomb threat, a company's employees were evacuated through the stairwell that contained the bomb. This, of course, should be avoided, he said.
Mr. Cross noted that pre-employment screening also is important to identify potential terrorists.
In addition, he said, restricting access to areas of the building to only certain employees is another strategy a company may want to employ.

Load-Date: December 10, 1999


End of Document