CONCERN RISING ON HOMEGROWN TERRORISM; RECENT INCIDENTS HAVE EXPERTS RETHINKING IF AMERICAN MUSLIMS ARE VULNERABLE TO IT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 12, 2009 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-5
Length: 1002 words
Byline: Scott Shane, The New York Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- As the years passed after Sept. 11, 2001, without another major attack on American soil and no sign of hidden terrorist cells, many counterterrorism specialists reached a comforting conclusion: Muslims in the United States were not very vulnerable to radicalization.
American Muslims, the reasoning went, were well assimilated in diverse communities with room for advancement. They showed little of the alienation often on display among their European counterparts, let alone attraction to extremist violence.
But with a rash of recent cases in which Americans have been drawn into terrorist scheming, the Fort Hood rampage last month and now the alarming account of five Virginia men who went to Pakistan allegedly seeking jihad, the notion that the United States has some immunity against homegrown terrorists is coming under new scrutiny.
It is a concern that President Barack Obama noted in passing in his address outlining the decision to send 30,000 more U.S. troops to Afghanistan, and one that has grown as the Afghan war and the hunt for fighters from al-Qaida and the Taliban in Pakistan intensifies.
"These events certainly call the consensus into question," said Robert S. Leiken, who studies terrorism at the Nixon Center in Washington and wrote the forthcoming book, "Europe's Angry Muslims."
"The notion of a difference between Europe and United States remains relevant," Mr. Leiken said. But he said the continuing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the U.S. operations like drone strikes in Pakistan, are fueling radicalization at home.
Concern over the recent cases has profoundly affected Muslim organizations in the United States, which have renewed pledges to campaign against the extremist thinking.
"Among leaders, there's a recognition that there's a challenge within our community that needs to be addressed," said Alejandro J. Beutel, government liaison at the Muslim Public Affairs Council in Washington and main author of a council report on radicalization and how to combat it.
Mr. Beutel, a Muslim convert from New Jersey, said the council had launched a grassroots counter-radicalization effort in 2005, but acknowledged that "for a while it was on the back burner." He said, "Now, we're going to revive it."
FBI investigators yesterday were in Pakistan questioning the five Virginia men. But it remained unclear whether the men would be deported to the United States, or whether they had broken any laws in either Pakistan or the United States
At a news conference yesterday at the small Virginia mosque where the men had been youth group regulars, mosque officials expressed bewilderment at claims that the men want to join the jihad against U.S. troops in Afghanistan. "I never observed any extreme behavior from them," said Mustafa Maryam, who runs the youth group and said he has known the young men since 2006. "They were fun-loving, career-focused children. They had a bright future before them."
Also at the press briefing, asked about reports that the five men had contacted a Pakistani militant via the Web, Mahdi Bray, head of the Freedom Foundation of the Muslim American Society, told reporters that YouTube and social networking sites have become a dangerous recruiting tool for militants.
"We are determined not to let religious extremists exploit the vulnerability of our children through this slick seductive propaganda on the Internet," said Mr. Bray, who is organizing a youth summit later this month in Chicago to address the issue. "Silence in cyberspace is not an option for us."
The detention of the Virginia men -- ranging from their late teens to mid-20s -- would have prompted soul-searching no matter when it occurred. But it comes after a series of disturbing cases that already had terror experts speculating about a trend.
There were the November shootings that took 13 lives at Fort Hood, with murder charges pending against Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, a U.S.-born Muslim and an Army psychiatrist.
There was the arrest of Najibullah Zazi, born in Afghanistan but the seeming model of the striving immigrant as a popular Manhattan coffee vendor, accused of going to Pakistan for explosives training with the intent of an attack in the United States.
There was David Coleman Headley, a Pakistani-American living in Chicago, accused of helping plan the killing spree in Mumbai last year as well as plotting attacks in Denmark.
There was Bryant Neal Vinas, a Muslim convert from Long Island who allegedly participated in a rocket attack on U.S. troops in Afghanistan and used his knowledge of commuter trains in New York to advise al-Qaida about potential targets.
There were the Somali-Americans from Minnesota who had traveled to Somalia to join a violent Islamist movement.
And there were cases of would-be terrorists who plotted attacks in Texas, Illinois and North Carolina with conspirators who turned out to be FBI informants.
Bruce Hoffman, who studies terrorism at Georgetown University, said the recent cases only confirmed that it was "myopic" to believe that "we could insulate ourselves from the currents affecting young Muslims everywhere else."
A few analysts, in fact, argue that Mr. Obama's decision to send more troops to Afghanistan -- intended to prevent a terrorist haven there -- could backfire.
University of Chicago political scientist Robert A. Pape contends that suicide attacks are almost always prompted by resentment of foreign troops, and that escalation in Afghanistan will fuel more plots. "This new deployment increases the risk of the next 9/11," he said. "It will not make this country safer."
Yet amid the concern about the five Virginia men and the impact of the wars on Muslim opinion, Audrey Kurth Cronin of the National War College in Washington said she found something to take comfort in.
"To me, the most interesting thing about the five guys is that it was their parents that went immediately to the FBI," she said. "It was members of the American Muslim community that put a stop to whatever those men may have been planning."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Haraz N. Ghanbari/Associated Press: Mahdi Bray, executive director of the Muslim American Society, pauses while speaking to reporters at the Islamic Circle of North America Mosque, in Alexandria, Va., yesterday. "We are determined not to let religious extremists exploit the vulnerability of our children ..."

Load-Date: December 14, 2009


End of Document