Concerns over health care
Chicago Daily Herald
April 9, 2010 Friday
M1 Edition


Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 334 words
Byline: By Russell Lissau , rlissau@dailyherald.com
Body


More than 100 people packed into an American Legion post in Wauconda on Thursday night to vent their concerns about the new health care reform law.
They peppered a three-member panel consisting of two doctors and a local business owner with questions about the high cost of medical insurance, the law's potential impact on veterans' medical services and related subjects.
The event was put together by Republican congressional candidate Joe Walsh, who's challenging Democratic U.S. Rep. Melissa Bean for the 8th District seat. Walsh, of Winnetka, mostly served as a moderator for the discussion, running a microphone from audience member to audience member. He fielded few questions himself, including some specifically directed to him.
Rather, he let the panelists — Dr. Arie Friedman, a pediatrician who unsuccessfully ran for the Republican nomination in the neighboring 10th District this year, Dr. George W. Christy and business owner Joe Fehsenfeld — answer most of the questions. All three men opposed the health care law and backed Walsh's campaign.
Walsh also has opposed the health care law and on Thursday repeated his promise to repeal the law if elected to the House.
"It can be repealed," he said. "It can be defunded."
The discussion wasn't limited to health care. People complained about the federal economic stimulus program and illegal immigration, and they talked about the war on terrorism and other matters.
One audience member asked Walsh how he would work with Republican U.S. Senate candidate Mark Kirk, whose political views generally are more moderate than Walsh's, if they're both elected in November.
Walsh admitted he didn't support Kirk in the GOP primary but said he backs him now because he's the party's nominee.
The evening took a surprise turn when Lake County Sheriff Mark Curran, a Republican who is seeking re-election this year, stepped out of the audience, took the microphone and talked about illegal immigration and the war on terrorism.
He also endorsed Walsh's campaign.

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document