CONCERNS OVER TERRORISM INCREASE AFTER A SERIES OF ATTACKS IN PARIS
The New York Times
August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 868 words
Byline: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 14
Body


In the Marais, Paris's Jewish quarter since the Middle Ages, the mood in the narrow streets and appealingly worn buildings is apprehensive.
Knots of people stand outside Jo Goldenberg's shuttered restaurant, where an attack on Monday left six people dead.  But the fears and worries of terrorism have gone far beyond France's 700,000 Jews. The wave of attacks - the one on the restaurant was only one of eight incidents in Paris in just two weeks - has touched Jews and non-Jews alike and has left the country nervous and clamoring for action. In yet another incident, a fire set early today by an arsonist damaged a hall used for Jewish prayer meetings.
Fear of terrorism is spreading in FranceLeaders Join in Call for Action
The call for action has been made by virtually every French leader, including union officials, as talk of the bombings has dominated both the news and private conversation.
Tighter security measures have already been instituted throughout Paris and President Francois Mitterrand has scheduled a special session of his advisers next Tuesday, to be followed by an unusual television interview.
''The French people want the President of the Republic to act and not just talk,'' said Bernard Pons, an opposition politician. ''The President of the Republic decided to address Frenchwomen and Frenchmen because he, like everyone, sensed the extent to which public opinion was distressed and traumatized by the appearance and spread of terrorism in France.''
The attacks against Jews have also rekindled a debate about French anti-Semitism. The discussions include references to the false conviction of Alfred Dreyfus, the French Jewish soldier, in 1894. A fresher image is that of Jews being rounded up by the police for shipment to German death camps during World War II.
''The French are anti-Semitic by nature,'' said Andre Journo, the 38-year-old proprietor of a combined liquor store, nut store and delicatessen in the neighborhood. ''I wouldn't like to be in Mitterrand's place now.''
The more fiery Jewish spokesmen have called for self-protection, a view that has a number of emotional supporters. But most Jews have taken pains to try to defuse the bitterness, arguing that incidents such as the one at Goldenberg's reflect the local effects of international terrorism.
''The magnificent reaction of the people of France - all political opinions merged - demonstrates that the situation is quite different from that of 1937-38 when a municipal counselor of Paris was able to be elected on a platform saying 'I am an anti-Semite,' '' said Rene Sirat, the Grand Rabbi of France, in a newspaper interview. ''Those times are finished.''
And while many Jews are prepared to believe that a climate for attacks on Jews exists, few cite French anti-Semitism as the direct cause. Indeed, the group believed responsible, Abu Nidal, named for a Palestinian guerrilla, has also been held responsible for attacks on leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization, its bitter foe.
 
Poor Security of Borders Blamed
''I blame the security of the borders of France,'' said Alain Sarfati, a Jew who came here 20 years ago from Algeria. ''This is just a big demonstration to say, 'We are good killers and killed people in the right place.' ''
From its perch on the Rue des Rosiers, the Goldenberg restaurant represented a center of Jewish life.  But at the same time, the Marais is becoming gentrified and non-Jewish. Although effective, the shooting and killing were indiscriminate, according to witnesses. Only two or three of the six persons killed were Jews.
''This is a unique neighborhood where racial harmony prevails, even though Jews and Arabs live here,'' said Ronan Magill, a British pianist. ''Goldenberg's is a place where everybody goes.''
Partly as a result of such realizations, France has begun to debate its longstanding role as a home for refugees, a role that has left it the field on which political grievances - not just involving the Middle East - are being played out. Armenians, Corsicans, Basques and other groups have all made violent statements.
 
Express Train Bombed in March
The recognition that the perils had spread to people of varying religion and background began to take hold last March when five passengers on a Paris-Toulouse express were killed in a bombing. A few days later, a bomb exploded outside an Iraqi newspaper office in the Rue Marbeuf.
''The average Frenchman is genuinely upset,'' said a foreign diplomat. ''Law and order has become quite a popular issue.'' The debate over police powers and police effectiveness has become so intense that French officials let it be known on Friday that a special antiter@rorist staff would be created. 
For French Jews, such sensitivities have been compounded by the strong opposition in the country to the invasion of Lebanon by Israel. Lebanon was controlled by France for three decades after World War I, and strong linguistic and cultural ties exist with the Lebanese Christians.
The French anger at the Israeli attack has been particularly noticeable because of its contrast with earlier efforts by Mr.Mitterrand to improve relations with Israel, an effort that included the first trip ever made to Israel by a French President.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of arson damage at Jewish prayer hall in Paris


End of Document