Condi becomes Bush's latest sacrifical lamb
University Wire
April 8, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 The Easterner via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 360 words
Byline: By Rae-Lynn Conger, The Easterner; SOURCE: Eastern Washington U.
Dateline: CHENEY, Wash. 
Body


There are many unanswered questions regarding exactly what was known by both the Clinton and Bush administrations leading to the 9/11 attacks.
One issue of grave concern is the role that Condoleeza Rice, Bush's National Security Advisor, played in the sequence of events. Due to enormous public pressure and in an effort to provide answers to these questions, the White House will allow Rice to testify publicly under oath to the commission reviewing the attacks.
According to The New York Times, the commission wants Rice to clear up conflicting statements made not only by her, but by Richard Clarke as well. Clarke, who worked for the Clinton and the Bush administrations as counter terrorism chief, sent a memo to Rice in January 2001 following the attack on the U.S.S. Cole. In it he stated that imperative action should be taken against al-Qaeda and that we should begin to help the Northern Alliance currently fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan.
According to Clarke, Rice decided not to act on this because "a Clinton holdover plan on terrorism was not an urgent priority."
Rice has said that the Clarke memo, approved by the Bush administration on Sept. 4, 2001, was only a "set of ideas." Blame for the alleged failure to prevent the attacks should nonetheless be spread across administration and party lines. The first Bush administration can be said to have created the mind frame with which terrorism threats were examined and approached. The seemingly never-ending eight years that Clinton was in office could have been plenty of time to handle the matter. I for one don't remember hearing anything about prevalent threats of terrorism during those days. And Bush Jr., under whose administration the attack took place, should not be able to wash his hands clean of the whole affair.
Nonetheless, people should not forget, especially the 9/11 Commission, that hundreds of lives are being lost in the name of terrorism, and it will be difficult to change the harsh reality in which we live. Perhaps our focus should shift to effective preventive measures. We have had enough with the terrorism alerts on every news channel.
(C) 2003 The Easterner via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 8, 2004


End of Document