Condi's Shocking Speech
The Forward
October 20, 2006


Copyright 2006 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A9
Length: 928 words
Body


I've heard and read many speeches  on the Arab-Israeli conflict. Those  made by well-known, hostile critics  of Israel always caused me great pain  by their use of hyperbole, absurd analogy  and falsehoods. But I was not prepared  for a speech by an American secretary of  state with those very attributes, such as  the keynote address delivered last week  by Condoleezza Rice to the gala dinner  of the American Task Force on Palestine  in Washington.
Secretary Rice stated that there could  be no greater legacy for America than  to help to bring into being a Palestinian  state. Really? What type of legacy would  it be to reward the Palestinians, who are  among the most pro-terrorist societies in  the world, with statehood? Despite Rice's  claims about moderate Palestinians,  their own polls show that Palestinians consistently  approve of suicide bombings and  terrorism (57% and 61% in two September  polls), rocket attacks on Israel (63% in  September) and the kidnapping of Israeli  soldiers (75% in September). An August  2006 poll showed that 97% of Palestinians  supported Hezbollah's actions. Successive  Palestinian polls over recent years always  show high levels of support for the socalled  right of return.
Rice also drew an analogy between  Palestinian dreams for statehood and the  American struggle for independence. This  not only implies an odious comparison of  Yasser Arafat and Hamas leaders to George
Washington and Thomas Jefferson; it also  ignores the Palestinians' promotion of  Israel's destruction and their hatred and  murder of Jews. The Palestinians' real  goals are made clear by the incitement  in the speeches of their leaders and in  the media, mosques, schools and youth  camps under the control of the Palestinian  Authority. P.A. maps, atlases and textbooks  display no country called Israel.  They name streets, schools and sports  teams after suicide bombers. America's  founding fathers didn't want to destroy  England and its civilians; they simply  wanted independence.
Under current circumstances, a  Palestinian state would simply be another  terrorist state. Especially now, with  the rise to power of Hamas, it is simply  wrong to even discuss the possibility of  a Palestinian state. Statehood would give  Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist  groups greater power and opportunity  to promote their terrorist agenda; it would  not moderate them. Iranians, Syrians and  North Koreans have their own sovereign  states. This has not made them peaceloving  societies. Sovereignty does not  transform the society; to the contrary, it  only strengthens the ability to promote  the values of that society, however hateful.  And would creating a state really be  a greater legacy for America than ending  Islamic terrorism or preventing North  Korea and Iran from becoming nuclear  powers?
By echoing Palestinian propaganda  statements, such as her reference to the  daily humiliation of occupation, Rice  ignored the fact that Judea, Samaria and  Gaza are not occupied territory but disputed  territory  territory, in fact, to  which Israel's religious, political and  historical claims are far stronger than  Arab claims. Rice didn't acknowledge  that these lands had been illegally occupied  by Jordan and Egypt from 1948 to  1967 before coming under Israeli control  in the 1967 war of self-defense. She also  ignored that Israel ceded half of Judea  and Samaria and all of Gaza, lands in  which 98% of the Palestinian Arab population  resides. Therefore, how can it be  said that Palestinians are occupied?
Palestinians themselves have repeatedly  rejected statehood as proposed by  the 1937 Peel Commission, the 1947  United Nations partition plan and Ehud  Barak's 2000 peace plan, preferring war  and terrorism in pursuit of their goal to  destroy Israel. The issue has never been  about land or statehood, only about  Israel's elimination. Moreover, Israeli  security measures such as checkpoints,  road-blocks and curfews have only been  employed because of Israel's need to  protect itself from Palestinian terrorism  against Jews. No Arab terrorism  no  Israeli checkpoints.
Throughout this speech, Rice repeatedly  pledged her support for P.A. President  Mahmoud Abbas, calling him a moderate  leader. But is he a moderate leader?  He co-founded the terrorist group Fatah  with Yasser Arafat and was his deputy for  40 years. He funded the Munich massacre.  He wrote a Ph.D. thesis and a book denying  the Holocaust. As president of the  P.A., Abbas said it is our duty to implement  the principles of Yasser Arafat.  He refers to terrorists as heroes fighting  for freedom. He rebuffed President  Bush's call at the 2005 Aqaba summit to  accept Israel publicly as a Jewish state.  He declared that neither Fatah nor Hamas  need to recognize Israel. He approved  legislation mandating financial benefits  to be paid to families of Palestinian shahids   that is, dead terrorists. He praised  the Lebanese terror group Hezbollah and  endorsed the so-called Prisoners' Plan,  which supports terrorism, does not accept  Israel's legitimacy as a Jewish state, abrogates  Palestinian obligations under past  agreements and insists on the right of  return.
But Secretary Rice ignored all of this and  delivered the most pro-Palestinian speech  in memory by a senior U.S. administration  official. This speech is surely at  odds with an administration that claims  to be the best friend Israel ever had. If  the president does not subscribe to the  themes in her speech, he should publicly  distance himself from it immediately.

Load-Date: October 19, 2006


End of Document