CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Security;
U.S. TAKES STEPS TO CURB TERRORISM
The New York Times
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk; Column 1;
Length: 865 words
Byline: By JAMES BARRON

By JAMES BARRON
Body


The Federal Bureau of Investigation has been ordered to track down as many as 3,000 Iraqis in this country whose visas have expired, the Justice Department said yesterday.
The announcement came as security precautions were tightened throughout the United States. From financial exchanges in lower Manhattan to cloakrooms in Washington and homeless shelters in California, unfamiliar rituals were the order of the day. In many cities, identification badges were being given close scrutiny in office buildings that used to be open to anyone.
Concerns about terrorist attack disrupted other daily routines as well. No fast-food deliveries are being allowed at the New York Stock Exchange. And metal detectors at the Los Angeles International Airport were fine-tuned until they were so sensitive that "even your keys will set it off," the airport manager said. Airport officials in Dallas said the Federal Aviation Administration had ordered them to post uniformed guards near ticket counters.
There were new precautions at many levels of government. A larger than usual complement of Secret Service agents is on duty at the White House, and marines at the Twentynine Palms training base in California were advised to drive with their car windows rolled up and not to go jogging alone.
 
Potential Schemes Uncovered
 Law-enforcement officials said they had found no evidence that terrorist groups had chosen specific targets in New York. But in Washington, a high-ranking official said more than five potential schemes that could result in terrorist acts had been uncovered since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Each of these involved people who appeared to be "lone zealots" acting independently of groups allied with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, the official said. He would not provide further details.
Only one person has been arrested in these incidents, but the investigations are continuing. Some of the suspects have left the country, one official said. But he refused to say who they were or why they were allowed to go.
Foreigners who remain in the United States after the expiration of their visas are subject to immediate expulsion, but a senior official in the Justice Department said the purpose of having the F.B.I. track down Iraqis whose visas had expired was to determine "who is here, where they are and why they stayed."
As the hours ticked by and the United Nations deadline for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait neared and then passed, with no evidence of terrorist actions, fear outpaced reality. Some New Yorkers filled their bathtubs with water and stocked up on powdered milk. And some decided to stay close to home. Jonathan Bond, president of the Kirshenbaum & Bond advertising agency in SoHo, canceled plans to fly to Toronto today to make a presentation to a new client.
"New York is a terrorist target," he said. "It's the first day of a war and I'm not going near an airport. Anything that needs to be done we can do by fax machine."
In Washington there was increased security and alertness, even though the Government seemed to be trying to avoid giving the impression that the nation was on the brink of war.
At the Pentagon, security guards were jittery after an unattended package was found early yesterday near an entrance to the Metro subway system. The package turned out to be be harmless, but officials canceled most tours of the Pentagon later in the day.
 
More Security at Capitols
 The Secret Service would not talk about the precise steps being taken to increase security for high-ranking officials. "We're redefining and testing out systems and trying to be prepared," said K. David Homes, a spokesman for the Secret Service.
Access to some state capitols has also been tightened. State troopers were stationed at entrances to the Louisiana Statehouse and at the Governor's Mansion in Baton Rouge.
In Albany, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo ordered the state police to stay in constant communication with the F.B.I., although he said that "there is no threat that I'm aware of anywhere in the state."
The New York City Police Department received 54 calls about bombs yesterday, nearly four times the normal number, said Sgt. Peter Berry, a police spokesman. But he said no bombs were found, and most of the reports turned out to be unattended packages or lost luggage.
That was also a concern at airports around the country. At Logan International Airport in Boston, the public address system crackled with caution. "Please be advised," one warning said. "Any luggage left unattended will be immediately ticketed and towed."
The no-nonsense mood extended to non-passengers. A state police officer stopped a reporter from questioning a guard at Logan, saying it was "a breach of the security guard's contract" to talk about anti-terrorism precautions.
"Times are tough and we really can't trust anybody," said the officer, who declined to give his name.
In Dallas, airport officials said the F.A.A. had raised the level of security by one step under the agency's five-step security plan. Managers at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport and Love Field said they were operating at level 2-A, the middle step and the first at which an airport is required to post uniformed guards at ticket counters.

Graphic

 
Photo: Secret Service agents on guard duty outside the Iraqi Embassy yesterday in Washington. Security precautions were being taken around the country as the deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait neared. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

Load-Date: January 16, 1991


End of Document