CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Bush Suggests Iraqis Might Prevent Attack by Starting to Withdraw
The New York Times
January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Part 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Part 1;; Column 1;
Length: 922 words
Byline: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12
Body


President Bush said today that he was inclined to order military action against Iraq "sooner rather than later," but suggested that he might hold back if President Saddam Hussein began a large-scale withdrawal from occupied Kuwait before Tuesday.
"At this moment, I'm not sure that it's logistically possible to fully comply" with the United Nations resolution demanding complete Iraqi withdrawal by Tuesday, Mr. Bush said after returning from his Camp David retreat to the White House to mark a Congressional vote giving him authority to use force against Iraq.
But he said, "If he started now to do what he should have done weeks ago, clearly that would make a difference, and I'm talking about a rapid, massive withdrawal from Kuwait."
 
A Change in Emphasis
 Mr. Bush added, "You might say an instant commencement of a large-scale removal of troops with no condition, no concession and just heading out could well be the best and only way to avert war."
Although Mr. Bush said he was anxious not to display any flexibility three days before the deadline expires, his comments today marked at least a change in emphasis. The United States and the United Nations have been saying that Iraq must withdraw entirely from Kuwait by midnight on Tuesday.
After Mr. Bush spoke, the White House released the text of the letter that Mr. Bush sent to President Saddam Hussein last week, but which the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Tariq Aziz, refused to accept from Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d at their meeting in Geneva. Mr. Aziz called the letter rude and inappropriate for a communication between heads of state.
In it, Mr. Bush used blunter language toward the Iraqi leader than he has in public. Striking an uncompromising tone, he said "the future of Iraq" was at stake and vowed not to negotiate on any of the United Nations demands. "Iraq cannot and will not be able to hold on to Kuwait or exact a price for leaving," Mr. Bush said.
 
Some Iraqis Ordered Out
 He added, "However, by its full compliance, Iraqi will gain the opportunity to rejoin the international community. More immediately, the Iraqi military establishment will escape destruction."
The State Department turned up the diplomatic heat on Iraq today by ordering its Ambassador, Mohammed al-Mashat, to reduce his embassy staff to four people by Tuesday.
The State Department, which called in the Ambassador to receive the order, said it had taken the action "to reduce Iraq's capability to orchestrate terrorism" in the event of gulf hostilities. The last American diplomats left Baghdad today, but the Bush Administration said it was still not formally breaking diplomatic relations with Baghdad.
 
Bush Discusses Terrorism
 Mr. Bush himself mentioned the possibility of terrorism in his news conference, saying he would "hold Saddam Hussein directly responsible for any terrorist action that is taken against U.S. citizens, against citizens of others in the coalition."
Before Mr. Bush arrived, about 2,000 protesters assembled outside the White House. Ranging from teenagers pounding on garbage cans and hubcaps to gray-haired Unitarians, they waved banners and chanted, "No blood for oil!" Three protestors who crossed police lines were arrested.
The President repeated that he was prepared to use force "sooner rather than later" if necessary and considered the Congressional approval of a resolution authorizing such action to be a "clear signal of our determination."
The President expressed his gratitude toward lawmakers who supported his policy in the gulf and said he could "empathize" with those who voted against him.
He said he would "absolutely not" compromise on United Nations demands that Iraq withdraw from Kuwait without concession. But he insisted that he had not made a final decision to order an attack on Iraq.
"We did not plan for war, nor did we seek war," he said, adding, "Peace is everyone's goal. Peace is in everyone's prayers, but it is for Iraq to decide."
 
Tuesday 'a Real Deadline'
 Mr. Bush said that the vote in Congress did not mean that war was inevitable. "I have felt that a statement of this nature from both houses of the United States Congress was at this late date the best chance for peace," Mr. Bush said. "And so let us hope that that message will get through to Saddam Hussein."
He called Tuesday's deadline for Iraq to leave Kuwait a "real deadline" but said, "I can't tell you I know what I'll do at midnight" on that day.
"If a determination was made to use force," he said, "to signal when you might be inclined to act, that would in my view put the lives of coalition forces needlessly at risk."
Mr. Bush refused to endorse any of the proposals for giving Mr. Hussein a face-saving way of getting out of Kuwait that have floated in diplomatic circles in recent days.
"I don't want to give any indication that we will be interested in anything that looks like delay or trying to claim victory," he said. "It isn't a question of winning or losing. It's a question of his getting out of Kuwait rapidly and without concession."
Mr. Bush added that he would not accept a solution in which Mr. Hussein simply returned to Iraq with his armies intact. "Saddam Hussein would not simply be able to go back to square one if he started that today," Mr. Bush said.
The President explained that he wanted to enforce other United Nations resolutions, including ones demanding the payment of reparations to Kuwait, and supported the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force to insure the stability of the region after Iraq withdrew from Kuwait.

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush speaking at a news conference at the White House after Congress approved the use of force in the Persian Gulf. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times)

Load-Date: January 13, 1991


End of Document