Confronting terrorism Bill Jewett Willow Street
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
November 24, 2007 Saturday


Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 281 words
Byline: Lancaster New Era Staff
Series: LETTERS
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Editor, New Era:
Congress is pushing hard for a quick end to the war in Iraq, where the new democratic government is threatened by an insurgency that has teamed with Islamic extremists from far and wide. The terrorists want to destroy the new government and to kill all infidels. The threat is limited now, to be sure, but that will change dramatically when they acquire biological or nuclear weapons, which they will surely do at some point.
In a much different context, our situation is reminiscent of the early 1930s when Hitler was seen as a curiosity. For seven years, one person warned repeatedly of the Nazi menace and urged a reversal of disarmament policies. Few listened and some laughed. That voice in the wilderness was Winston Churchill.
Instead of facing the problem while it was manageable, a foolish policy of appeasement was adopted ("Peace in our time!") which produced WW II in 1939 with its 62 million deaths.
Hitler's "Mein Kampf," written years earlier, detailed his plan, but few paid attention. Similarly, interpretations of Islamic law (fatwas) were issued in the 1990s, calling for the murder of Americans anywhere as the duty of every Muslim. Few listened. The author was Osama bin Laden. In a TV interview, he said, "You are the worst civilization witnessed by the history of mankind ... If the present injustices continue ... it will inevitably move the battle to American soil," which it did on 9/11/01. Missile strikes in the 1990s on his training facilities in Afghanistan had little effect.
We must not shrink from our confrontation with the terrorists! The philosopher, Santayana, once observed, "Those who do not remember the past are destined to repeat it."

Load-Date: November 25, 2007


End of Document