CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Egypt Raises Its Guard Against Iraqi Terrorism
The New York Times
September 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 719 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: CAIRO, Sept. 16
Body


The Egyptian authorities have begun to register concern that the Persian Gulf conflict could spill over here in the form of Iraqi-sponsored terrorism, Western diplomats said today.
The authorities were reported on Saturday to have introduced visa regulations that could severely limit the number of Iraqi, Kuwaiti and Palestinian travelers arriving here, the diplomats said. In addition, the Egyptian riot police have stationed a reinforced guard outside Iraq's Embassy here while plainclothesmen, some armed with pistols, mingle among the 15,000 Kuwaitis who taken refuge here since Iraq's invasion of their country on Aug. 2.
Travelers arriving in Cairo also reported over the weekend that Egyptair, the national carrier, had increased the number of security personnel on its flights in Arab countries.
Previously, Egypt permitted Iraqi nationals to enter the country without visas under the terms of an alliance, the Arab Cooperation Council, that grouped Cairo with Iraq, Yemen and Jordan in a pact that has crumbled as a result of the invasion. Kuwaiti nationals were able to get visas at the port of entry, as were many Palestinians.
Henceforth, diplomats and officials said, Iraqis, Kuwaitis and Palestinians will be required to secure visas in other countries before they travel here. The restriction on Kuwaiti passport holders has been imposed because Iraq's occupation forces there have taken over the passport office there and, it is feared, could issue bogus documents to terrorists.
 
Help to His Friends
Egypt, with Saudi Arabia, is at the forefront of Arab governments supporting and contributing to the United States-led military buildup against Iraq.
The Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, backs several Palestinian extremist figures now in Baghdad who have long experience in terrorist tactics.
They are thought to include Abul Abbas, who took responsibility for both the 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro and an unsuccessful attempt to land seaborne commandoes in Israel earlier this year, the diplomats said.
Some reports have suggested that Abu Nidal, the nom de guerre of Sabry al-Banna, a mastermind of terror attacks in Europe and the Middle East, may also have set up headquarters in the Iraqi capital, Behind Cairo's concerns is a history of foreign conflicts spilling over here as well as home-grown terrorism by Muslim fundamentalists that took the life of one President - Anwar el-Sadat in 1981 -and almost resulted in the death of another - Gamal Abdel Nasser, in an assassination attempt in 1954.
 
Some History of Violence
In the 1970's, a harsh feud between Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization led to the assassination here of Wasfi Tel, then Jordan's Prime Minister. Egypt's 1979 peace with Israel, which contributed to the causes of President Sadat's assassination two years later, also led to the creation of a clandestine group called Egypt's Revolution that targeted Americans and Israelis living here.
Last February, a Muslim group in Lebanon took responsibility for attacking a busload of Israeli tourists on the desert highway outside Cairo, killing nine of them. No arrests were reported after the attack.
United States and Israeli Embassy officials here refused to say whether they had introduced increased security measures as a result of the Persian Gulf crisis, but diplomats from other countries said it was almost certain that they had. When the United States suspended discussions with the Palestine Liberation Organization in June, American diplomats reactivated a warning system linking their homes in case of terrorist attack.
Egyptian officials generally seek to play down measures that might reinforce an association between this country and terrorism - mindful that such a link damages tourism, a major source of needed hard currency. Many tour operators have canceled visits here because of the Persian Gulf crisis, despite Egypt's distance both from Iraqi soil and from the American troop buildup in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf.
Closer to home, Egyptian newspapers, both for and against the Government of President Hosni Mubarak, have been reporting for several days that Iraq has supplied missiles and planes to Egypt's southern neighbor, the Sudan, for use in areas within range both of southern Egypt and of Saudi Arabia, across the Red Sea.


End of Document