Conferees agree on $ 16.4 billion in cuts;
'95 budget to boost relief for disasters and fight terrorism
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 17, 1995, Wednesday,
REGION EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 616 words
Byline: Jim Abrams, The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


House and Senate negotiators agreed yesterday on a package to slice $16.4 billion from the 1995 budget while providing extra funding for disaster relief and counter-terrorism activities.
Public housing, job training programs, airport improvements and federal construction are among the hardest hit by the cutbacks, which also affect such programs as the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, NASA and new federal building construction.
To become law, the package that cuts back on previously approved spending would have to be passed by the House and Senate and signed by President Clinton. The White House left open the possibility of a presidential veto.
Press Secretary Mike McCurry said the negotiators had done nothing to improve the bill and ''if anything, probably made it worse.''
''The president is determined to work with the Congress to meet deficit reduction targets, but he is deeply troubled by the cuts that they have made'' in education, youth training and other programs, McCurry said.
The administration's dilemma is that it also wants the bill's supplemental funding: $ 6.7 billion in aid for the 1994 California earthquake and disasters in 31 other states, $ 275 million of the debt relief the administration sought for Jordan and $ 240 million, more than the president requested, for counter-terrorism activities and the rebuilding of the bombed Oklahoma City federal building.
House Appropriations Committee Chairman Bob Livingston, R-La., urged Clinton to support the legislation, saying, ''We can't afford to let this important savings package go down the drain.''
The spending-cuts package, while affecting only about 1 percent of this year's $ 1.5 trillion budget, has been a high priority for Congress' new Republican leadership as it tries to show its seriousness about deficit reduction and balancing the budget.
Congress already has passed a $ 3.9 billion reduction in the 1995 defense budget. Together, they constitute the highest spending cuts ever to an already enacted budget, surpassing a $ 14.3 billion package passed in 1981 during the Reagan administration.
Nearly half the cutbacks come from $ 6 billion trimmed from public housing and rental assistance and $ 2 billion taken from airport and airway improvements. The Environmental Protection Agency lost $ 1.5 billion, most from a drinking water program.
Among other cuts were $ 236 million from a school anti-drug program, $ 872 million from summer youth jobs, $ 580 million from federal building construction, $ 210 million from Clinton's national service program, $ 92 million from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, $ 138 million from NASA and $ 25 million from aid to the former Soviet states.
Labor Secretary Robert Reich criticized the cuts that would include a $ 12.5 million reduction in the fledgling school-to-work program that trains noncollege-bound youths for specific job openings.
The negotiators agreed to cut $ 319 million from the Low Income Home Energy Assistance program. The original House bill would have eliminated all $ 1.3 billion budgeted for the program.
The conference concluded after the negotiators worked out language on enforcement of Clean Air Act emissions standards. Rep. Tom Delay, R-Texas, objected to imposing the same standards all over the country, and a compromise was reached when the Environmental Protection Agency agreed to review data concerning alternative plans for emissions controls.
Negotiators had removed another roadblock Monday by agreeing to drop language inserted in the House bill that would have blocked Clinton's executive order forbidding federal contractors from permanently replacing striking workers. The administration strongly opposed the provision.

Load-Date: May 18, 1995


End of Document