CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Leftist Palestinian Leaders Rally Arab Support for Iraq
The New York Times
September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 941 words
Byline: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan, Sept. 15
Body


They were greeted like rock stars as they strode into the crowded hall. But the radical Palestinian leaders George Habash and Nayef Hawatmeh today offered a packed convention of supporters little advice that seemed likely to help pull the Palestinian cause out of its current difficulty.
They denounced and threatened violence against the United States and Israel.
But in the end, in interviews, both Dr. Habash, who leads the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the second-largest faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Mr. Hawatmeh, head of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the third-largest group, readily acknowledged that Palestinian support for Iraq had set back their attempts to gain wider support for their cause.
Thrust 'In a Shadow'
''This gulf crisis has put us in a shadow,'' Mr. Hawatmeh said.
''It's true we are not understood,'' Dr. Habash, the more radical of the two, said as he sat on the edge of his bed in Amman's Jerusalem Hotel. Crowds of courtiers waited outside for the chance to kiss him. ''This is a sad fact,'' he went on. ''But we are hoping this conference will be the very beginning of bringing understanding.''
But so far, the three-day conference of Arab leftists and radicals, under way here to rally Arab support for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, appears instead to have shown how isolated the Palestinians, Jordanians and other Arab leaders who support Iraq are from some other countries in the divided Arab world.
Syria, for many years Dr. Habash's patron, would not allow him to fly from Damascus to get here; he was forced to drive. Other Syrians interested in attending the conference were forbidden to leave the country at all.
Egypt, too, refused to let several radical politicians attend. They sent a message expressing support, read at the opening session.
 
Solution Linked to Gulf
But still, about 3,000 people, mostly Jordanians and Palestinians, came to hear the P.L.O. leaders and others speak at the Royal Cultural Center. The speakers' principal message was one of disappointment that has crystallized into one clear demand: Any solution in the gulf must be linked to a solution of the Palestinian problem.
Again and again, leaders in the P.L.O. and others expressed outrage that President Bush had refused to do that in his meeting in Helsinki with the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, a week ago.
''Why don't the Americans blockade the Israeli coast too?'' Dr. Habash demanded. ''When the United States says it is working for international legitimacy, Arabs just laugh. Where was their enthusiasm for the Palestinian cause?''
The United States has charged that Arab radicals, possibly including Dr. Habash, have joined forces with President Hussein to begin a campaign of terrorism against American targets in the region. Mr. Hawatmeh vigorously denied that, saying: ''We don't have any military power or presence in the gulf. There will be no military attempts against Americans. Any military resistance will be against Israelis.''
A moment later he insisted he was interested in attacking only Israeli military targets. Still, over the last 18 months he has consistently refused to accept Yasir Arafat's renunciation of terrorism, saying that the statement did not apply to the Democratic Front. Mr. Arafat is the chairman of the P.L.O. and leader of its largest component, the faction Al Fatah.
 
'We Feel Cheated'
Dr. Habash, whose Popular Front has been responsible over the years for several major hijackings and other terrorist acts, would not entertain a question on the subject of terrorism. Asked about his tactics in the present circumstance, he said: ''All the Arab masses now are feeling that they have to fight for their just cause. We feel cheated. But please be sure that we will fight.''
Addressing the conference, he sounded much like the Iraqi President when he thundered: ''We are meeting here to tell the American Administration: Leave us alone, or the Arab world will be a graveyard for your soldiers.
''We are living in a world run by power. Anyone who wants to win his legitimate rights, he has to take them with power.''
Neither Dr. Habash nor Mr. Hawatmeh had set foot in Jordan for 20 years before Friday night. They were banished in September 1970, when King Hussein expelled the P.L.O. after fierce fighting in which 5,000 died.
But now, Jordan and Iraq seem to be just about the only countries where the Palestinian groups are welcomed. The King is said to be prepared to meet the two men during their stay here, while President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, who has sent forces to Saudia Arabia to square off against the Iraqis, would clearly be happy if Dr. Habash and his people left Syria for good.
 
Arafat Visiting Baghdad
As a result, Dr. Habash is believed to be moving his headquarters to Baghdad, and Mr. Arafat is visiting in the Iraqi capital now ''on the invitation of the President,'' a P.L.O. official said.
Mr. Hawatmeh, who used to have his headquarters in Damascus, says he is now staying in Algeria and has no intention of leaving for Baghdad.
For his part, Mr. Hawatmeh says he believes that the gulf crisis will solve the Palestinian problem too, no matter what the United States and the rest of the world think of their cause just now.
''This gulf crisis is expected to explode all the states in the Middle East,'' he said. ''War will not be limited to the gulf area. We estimate that the Israelis will interfere in this, and may try to occupy some territory in Jordan. If that occurs, we will ask for a compreshensive peace in the gulf area, an international conference that combines the Palestinians and the gulf.''


End of Document