CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
 BALKANS NOTEBOOK;
 Congressman: Serbs claim KLA terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 23, 1999, Friday,
Metro Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 8A
Length: 592 words
Byline: From staff and wire reports
Body

Rep. James Saxton (R-N.J.), who spent three days in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, this week even as U.S. bombs were dropping, says Serb officials justify their military actions in Kosovo as a crackdown on terrorism.
"I have never been all that enthusiastic about this war. . . . I think we have to realize that the Yugoslav people are suffering as well," Saxton said.
He said his invitation came through contacts he has made as chairman of the House Task Force on Terrorism and Unconventional Warfare. "The Yugoslav government essentially invited me to come for the purpose of understanding their side of the story," Saxton said.
Constitution
He said the Serb officials alleged that the Kosovo Liberation Army has ties to terrorist elements in Iran and to suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden.
Saxton said he finds at least part of that credible. "Our studies of terrorism led me to the belief that there were trained terrorists in the KLA before I went there," he said.

EU to ban shipments of oil to Yugoslavia
The European Union is set to ban all shipments of oil and oil products to Yugoslavia to choke off fuel supplies for President Slobodan Milosevic's war machine and factories. The EU is appealing to Cyprus and 11 Eastern European nations due to join the economic bloc --- especially those countries that border Yugoslavia --- to join the embargo. Final approval will come at an EU foreign ministers meeting in Luxembourg on Monday, and the ban is to be in place by Wednesday, said EU spokesman Nigel Gardner. The ban will cover Serbia and Montenegro, the two republics that make up Yugoslavia. But the EU planned to make special aid available to Montenegro, whose government has distanced itself from Serbia's policy on Kosovo.

Princess Diana fund to assist children
The Princess Diana memorial fund will donate more than $ 720,000 to help children forced to flee their homes in Kosovo. The money will be used to assist children under age 18 who are seeking refuge in Britain. "It is right that one part of this program . . . should help some of the most vulnerable and traumatized people driven out of the Kosovo region," said Andrew Purkis, head of the fund. The fund will give $ 460,000 to Albanian Youth Action and $ 271,000 to the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture for young refugees. The first wave of about 120 Kosovo refugees to be taken in temporarily by Britain is expected to arrive in the next few days.
Fayette-based group working in Albania
An international Christian mission with its U.S. office in Fayette County has a team permanently based in Albania and is working among refugees there. Operation Mobilization, with food, clothing and medical supplies donated by other aid organizations and the government of Finland, is helping to feed 35, 000 people each day. The organization has 2,800 workers around the world, with 500 of them reporting to the Fayette home base. Tax-deductible contributions can be sent to Operation Mobilization, P.O. Box 444, Tyrone, GA 30290.

Both sides in conflict receiving CARE's help
Even through the NATO air strikes, Atlanta-based CARE has continued to provide aid in Yugoslavia to more than 35,000 Serb refugees from Bosnia and Croatia. Because CARE, an international relief and development agency, is not a political organization, it is helping refugees on both sides of the conflict. In recent weeks, CARE has supplied 237 metric tons of fresh food and about 400,000 eggs to refugees throughout Serbia and Montenegro. CARE also is helping Kosovar refugees in Albania and Macedonia.

Graphic

 
Photo
James Saxton

Load-Date: April 23, 1999


End of Document