CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Assad Assures Baker of Support in Gulf
The New York Times
September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 1192 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria, Sept. 14
Body


President Hafez al-Assad assured Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that Syria was prepared to keep sending forces to protect Saudi Arabia from Iraq. But he urged Washington to continue to seek a political rather than a military solution in the Persian Gulf.
Officials said that Mr. Baker asked President Assad, who is traveling to Teheran on Saturday, to use his influence to persuade the Iranians to abide by the United Nations sanctions against Iraq and to stifle their calls for a ''holy war'' against the American presence in the Gulf.
The Secretary of State and the Syrian President met for almost four and a half hours, two more than scheduled, in Mr. Assad's downtown office. Mr. Baker was accompanied only by Edward P. Djerejian, the United States Ambassador, and the State Department translator. President Assad was joined by his Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
Baker Fills In Bush
Their meeting was the first between a senior American official and the Syrian President since the December 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which United States intelligence agencies widely believe was carried out by a Syrian-sponsored Palestinian organization. Mr. Baker telephoned President Bush in Washington shortly after the meeting with Mr. Assad to brief him on the results.
Mr. Baker also made what was probably the toughest statement yet by a Bush Administration official on terrorism, which apparently occupied a significant portion of the Baker-Assad meeting. He asked Syria to expel terrorists; Mr. Sharaa said this would be done if there was sufficient evidence.
At a press briefing, Mr. Sharaa stressed that President Assad believed that ''it is very important for everyone to pursue a political solution to the gulf crisis. Not a military one. For the time being, we believe that the adherence to the Security Council resolution is very important to achieve a political solution.''
The fact that the Syrian leadership forcefully urged the United States to seek a diplomatic solution at this time probably reflects a concern that the Assad regime's opposition to the Iraqi invasion is not entirely popular at home.
 
Fear of Recolonization
Western diplomats here say that the Syrian public is largely ambivalent about the gulf situation - uncomfortable with Iraq's invasion, but having little sympathy for the Kuwaitis, who they consider arrogant and unresponsive to previous Syrian aid requests.
Moreover, the presence of so many Western troops in the gulf region has raised suspicions among many Syrians that the West is looking for an opportunity to re-colonize the Middle East.
The main purpose of Mr. Baker's visit, American officials insisted, was symbolic. By meeting with President Assad, Mr. Baker sought to draw attention, particularly in the Arab world, to the fact that one of the most hard-line Arab nationalist regimes is joining the American-led multinational coalition against Iraq.
Syria's participation legitimizes that coalition in Arab eyes in a way that no other country could, American officials say. The Administration has been worried from the start that President Saddam Hussein would break out of the boycott by convincing the Arab public that he is really fighting the Americans and just a few Arab ''lackeys.''
Mr. Baker used his news conference after the meeting with Mr. Sharaa to insure the symbolism of his visit was not lost. After Mr. Sharaa expressed his desire for a political solution, the Secretary interjected:
''We talked as well about the importance of this being an Arab solution. And one thing I think which is demonstrated, if I may say so, by the fact of my presence here today is that this is indeed a largely Arab solution that we are trying to implement.''
 
'Arabs at the Forefront'
Egypt is contributing forces, Mr. Baker noted, all of the Persian Gulf nations are contributing their forces, Morocco is contributing forces and Syria is contributing forces.
''There are Moslem nations that are non-Arab who are contributing forces,'' he added. ''So I think it is important for people, particularly in this part of the world, to realize that Arabs are at the forefront of the solution to this problem.''
The Syrians have already dispatched 3,000 men to Saudi Arabia and 1,000 to the United Arab Emirates, and today Mr. Sharaa declared that ''Saudi Arabia can ask for Syrian troops and we said that we will respond to any Saudi request.''
''There was no ceiling on the number of troops, which was very much the desire of the Saudis,'' he continued, ''and we will respond positively to any request.''
American officials say that for now the Syrians are prepared to send an armored division of up to 15,000 men and 300 tanks and armored vehicles. But so far the Syrian pledge has not been carried out, in part because of a lack of transportation ships and planes, and there was no prediction on when the Syrian troops might move. There were rumors in Damascus that the Soviets would provide the transport, but they could not be confirmed.
The Saudis and Kuwaitis have promised Damascus a multibillion-dollar aid package in return for the Syrian troop deployment, and the Syrians are also hoping for backing from the European Economic Community and Japan.
 
Baker Cites 'Terrorism'
After some muted comments earlier in the week about Syria's involvement with terrorism, Mr. Baker, with Mr. Sharaa standing by his side, told Syrian and Western reporters:
''We share a common purpose with respect to problems in the gulf. But we make no secret about the fact that there are still problems revolving around this question of terrorism. Our policy cannot and never will be amoral. We can have close relations only with countries that share our fundamental values.''
Mr. Baker renewed Washington's request that Mr. Assad expel from Syria the Damascus-based Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, headed by Ahmed Jabril.
The group is believed to have carried out the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 on a contract from Iran and with the knowledge of Syria.
He said that Syrian-American relations could not be normalized until such action takes place. Mr. Sharaa responded: ''We made it very clear that if there was hard evidence to link any person or group staying in Syria with any terrorist acts then those responsible will be placed on trial.''
The Central Intelligence Agency and West German intelligence have amassed more than circumstantial evidence linking the P.F.L.P.-G.C. with the Pan Am bombing. As Mr. Baker tersely put it, ''there is a disagreement between us on the sufficiency of the evidence.''
One of the surprises of the news conference was the ease with which the Syrians seemed to sign on, in public, to the Bush Administration's insistence that there be no linkage of a settlement of the gulf conflict and a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Otherwise, Washington argues, President Hussein would be able to claim that his invasion produced at least a diplomatic gain for the Arabs.
''Let me make it clear to you,'' Mr. Sharaa told reporters, ''that I don't believe there is a linkage between the two questions. We are not linking the gulf crisis with the Arab-Israeli crisis at all.''

Graphic

 
Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who was assured yesterday by President Hafez al-Assad of Syria that his country would keep sending forces to protect Saudi Arabia. Mr. Baker spoke at a news conference at Damascus Airport with Farouk al-Sharaa, the Foreign Minister of Syria, left. (Associated Press)


End of Document