Congress works late to finish security legislation
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 30, 2006 Saturday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A26
Length: 463 words
Byline: By Andrew Taylor THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON Congress wrapped up work Friday on legislation focused on national defense, Iraq, terrorism and illegal immigration as Republicans pinned their hopes for keeping control of the House and Senate on making national security the theme of the Nov. 7 election.
The House and Senate both worked late-night sessions to finish up bills to set defense policy and improve port security. The Pentagon budget -- including $70 billion for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan -- cleared the Senate, as did legislation to build a 700-mile fence along the U.S.-Mexico border and a $34.8 billion homeland security budget.
Legislation to convene military trials to prosecute terrorism suspects cleared its final hurdle in the House.
But plenty of work was left undone: expiring tax cuts, ethics measures and spending bills to fund the domestic side of the budget ledger.
Legislation validating President George W. Bush's warrantless wiretapping program will have to wait for a postelection lame-duck session colored by election results. So will a bill to open the Outer Continental Shelf to oil and gas rigs.
In the defense budget was stopgap spending to keep agencies open through Nov. 17 if their funding bills haven't passed. Those include measures funding veterans' health care, education, health research and anti-crime programs, among others.
Friday opened with the Senate sending Bush the Pentagon budget by a 100-0 vote. The president signed the legislation the same day.
The bill provides $378 billion for core Pentagon programs, about a 5 percent increase, though slightly less than Bush sought. The $70 billion for Iraq and Afghanistan brings to $507 billion the total spent for Iraq, Afghanistan and anti-terrorism efforts since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. 
On Thursday night, House-Senate negotiators reached agreement on a companion defense policy bill including a 2.2 percent military pay raise and setting policy on weapons spending and research programs considered vital to national security. The House passed the bill Friday by a 398-23 vote.
The House on Friday evening overwhelmingly passed, 412-6, a homeland security spending bill containing $1.2 billion to begin construction of fences and other barriers along the U.S.-Mexican border, plus money for jails to detain illegal immigrants and hire 1,500 more border agents. The Senate cleared the bill late Friday by voice vote.
Late Friday, the Senate cleared by a 80-19 vote a bill authorizing but not paying for fences along one-third of the nearly 2,000-mile border with Mexico.
Meanwhile, negotiators finalized a bill outlining steps to protect the nation's 361 ports from what could be catastrophic attacks from chemical, biological or nuclear devices. It passed the Senate by voice vote and was sure to clear the House.

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document