Congress backs fund to bolster terrorism risk insurance
The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)
November 23, 2001 Friday


Copyright 2001 Dolan Media Newswires
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 466 words
Byline: Michael Barbella
Body


The federal government is about to insure the nation's future.
Republican and Democratic members of Congress--after very little wrangling--have reached an agreement to create a federally backed fund to insure against future acts of terrorism. The move would ensure the continuation of terrorism risk insurance coverage for the next two years.
"This measure can help seal cracks in our economic foundation that might occur in the event of future terrorist attacks," said Sen. Chris Dodd, D-Conn. "It acts as a 'homeland security' defense for our economy, and is definitely one 'policy' our nation should be willing to underwrite."
Under legislation drafted and passed by the U.S. Senate Banking Committee, the federal government would share the risk of future terrorist attacks with the insurance industry for two years.
The secretary of the Treasury could extend the shared risk period for an additional year because the program--dubbed Terrorism Insured Loss Shared Compensation program--would fall within the jurisdiction of the Treasury Department.
To participate in the program, insurance companies would be required to offer terrorism coverage in all property or casualty policies.
State regulation of insurance companies would continue uninterrupted, though the senate legislation would define the term "terrorist act." States would be required to allow rate changes to take effect immediately during the first year of the program.
A bill adopted by the House Financial Services Committee in early November would require the insurance industry to cover the first $1 billion in losses resulting from a future terrorist attack. The government would then cover 90 percent of any additional claims up to $20 billion, but insurance companies would have to repay the money based on a formula that assesses 10 percent of their capital surplus and 10 percent of the premiums they collect.
Lawmakers are hoping to take a vote on the proposals by the end of the year.
"Under our plan, we enter into a partnership with the industry to share the risk against insurance attacks, but all of the funds in the program would go directly to assist Americans who might become victims of terrorism," Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, said. "With this program, business in America can go on, without interruption from terrorist threats."
Business in America couldn't go on without terrorism risk insurance, real estate and insurance industry representatives claim. After plane crashes destroyed the World Trade Center in New York on Sept. 11, insurance companies warned that they would no longer provide coverage for future terrorist acts because reinsurance firms were refusing to underwrite such coverage.
And without terrorism risk insurance, the real estate industry's ability to finance, buy or sell properties would be at risk.

Load-Date: May 26, 2005


End of Document