Congress not funding safety study study
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
October 06, 2000, Friday friday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P07A P07A
Length: 411 words
Byline: Ken Ward Jr.  jr.
Body


kward@wvgazette.com  
Last year, Congress blocked environmental regulators from publishing detailed information about chemical plant safety on the Internet.
Lawmakers said that the information could make plants easy targets for terrorists. Congress told the U.S. Department of Justice to make sure plants take adequate precautions to avoid terrorist attacks.  attacks.
But this year, lawmakers are ignoring requests from the Justice Department to fund the agency's anti-terrorism study.
The Senate has not included the money in the 2001 budget bill for the department, environmental organizations complained Thursday.
"The Senate's inaction confirms that Congress is more interested in protecting the chemical industry than in protecting public safety," said Paul Orum, spokesman for the Working Group on Community Right-to-Know in Washington, D.C.
Jeremiah Baumann, spokesman for the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, said, "After blindfolding the public about chemical hazards at the behest of the chemical manufacturers, the Senate is now failing to even fund studies of those same hazards."
Orum and Baumann questioned why Congress restricted the public's access to chemical safety information last year, but won't fund a study to improve chemical plant safety this year.
Environmental, labor and public health organizations have long advocated safer technologies that reduce chemical plant dangers to workers and communities.
In 1990, Congress listened. Lawmakers required companies to prepare worst-case scenario reports that outlined potential accidents at their plants.
Last year, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency planned to publish those reports on the Internet.
But Congress - at the behest of chemical companies and the Justice Department - blocked EPA from doing so.
At the same time, Congress told Justice to prepare a study of how well plants guard themselves against terrorism.
In August, the Justice Department published rules restricting public access to worst-case scenario reports. But the agency has yet to start its terrorism study.
Justice Department officials said they needed money for the study. Initially, they asked for $ 7 million. More recently, the agency said it would need just $ 750,000.
The Senate has not set either amount aside.
"On chemical safety, this looks like a know-nothing, do-nothing Congress - no right to know and no action to reduce hazards," Orum said.
To contact staff writer Ken Ward Jr., use e-mail or call 348-1702.  1702.

Load-Date: October 7, 2000


End of Document