CONGRESS READY FOR TOUGH FIGHT ON BEIRUT FORCE
The New York Times
January 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 752 words
Byline: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23
Body


As Congress returned to work today after a two-month recess, Democratic leaders said they would move swiftly on legislation to reduce the time limit Congress imposed on the use of Marines in Lebanon.
But, some Republican leaders and the Reagan Administration repeated today their belief that the Marine mission in Lebanon was necessary to bring stability to the Middle East and face down ''international terrorism.''
On the first day of the second session of the 98th Congress, leaders from both parties predicted that the lawmakers' year would be short, unproductive and marked by partisan disputes.
 
Effects of Presidential Politics
''This is a Presidential election year,'' Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the Republican leader, reminded the Senate today, ''and the conventional wisdom is that Congress always shuns controversy and long sessions in these years.''
Democratic leaders in Congress say they will move swiftly on legislation to reduce time limit Congress imposed on use of Marines in Lebanon in spite of Pres Reagan's belief that Marine mission is necessary to bring stability to Middle East and face down 'international terrorism' (M)
In press briefings today, the leaders indicated that their priority lists included revision of the immigration laws, a package of crime-fighting measures, and efforts to reduce the soaring cost of hospital care.
There was a lot of talk about budget deficits, but the chances are slim for significant deficit-reduction measures. Some lawmakers say Congress may even have trouble agreeing on a budget this year and adopting the normal appropriation bills before the scheduled end of the session Oct. 4.
With six major recesses built into the schedule, the lawmakers might not meet for more than a hundred days the entire year.
But the Congressional debate over Lebanon is likely to be sharp and angry, in part because foreign policy looms as a major issue in the coming election.
When Congress invoked the War Powers Resolution in Lebanon in the fall, it authorized the President to keep the marines in the Beirut area for 18 more months, a time period that runs out in the spring of 1985. But today, Democrats said rising discontent among voters would force Congress to alter that authorization.
''I think the pressure is increasing to bring the marines out,'' said Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, the ranking Democrat on the Foreign Affairs Committee. ''It's a question of when you do it and under what circumstances. I expect them to come out sooner rather than later. What is clear is that members want a reassessment, they're not willing to live with the 18- month resolution we passed last year.''
But Senator Baker, the Republican leader, said the Republican-controlled Senate would stand behind the Reagan Administration.
 
Change Termed Unlikely
''Barring unforeseen circumstances,'' Mr. Baker told reporters, ''I think we are not likely to change the current resolution.'' He added that if Congress moved on its own to withdraw the troops, they would be ''putting the stamp of approval on international terrorism.''
Whether Congress and the White House are capable of reaching a compromise on the Lebanon issue remains to be seen. For all their harsh language, Democrats are reluctant to force a showdown with the President on a foreign policy issue.
Representative Dante B. Fascell of Florida, who is scheduled to replace the late Clement J. Zablocki as chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee this week, said his panel would hold hearings on the Lebanon situation early next month and move ''as rapidly as we can'' to craft legislation on the issue. The most likely change, he said, would be to shorten the 18-month time period.
In the Senate, a resolution is pending in the Foreign Relations Committee that would force the withdrawal of the troops by the end of February. But Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the panel, said the Republican majority would probably approve a ''fuzzy'' resolution calling on the President to remove the troops ''at the earliest opportunity''.
 
Problem of Budget Deficits
On domestic policy, many lawmakers from both parties stressed the problem of budget deficits, which could approach $200 billion in the current fiscal year. But the budget issue seemed just as entangled in political maneuvering as foreign measures, and most of the statements followed partisan lines.
Accordingly, few members believe Congress will make a major effort to reduce the deficit, either by raising taxes or cutting spending.

Graphic

 
photo of Howard Baker Jr. and Robert Byrd (page A6)


End of Document