CONGRESS UNLIKELY TO ACT QUICKLY;
ANTI-TERRORISM PACKAGE AT ISSUE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 26, 2001 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-11
Length: 406 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft is finding the Bush administration's anti-terrorism legislation a tough sell on Capitol Hill.
Two days of intense lobbying have lawmakers still talking about passing only the package's noncontroversial portions and leaving the rest for later.
Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt. told Ashcroft he agreed with several portions of the attorney general's proposal and is working to pass legislation containing those items.
But he said the disagreements over other, more complex pieces of the package could take weeks, or even months, to resolve. Leahy also plans to introduce his own anti-terrorism legislation.
Lawmakers have questioned whether some of the provisions are constitutional or would have too great an impact on Americans' civil liberties.
The administration is looking for expanded police powers for the FBI to fight the terrorism threat. President Bush lobbied for the legislation yesterday during a visit to the FBI.
"We're at war, a war we're going to win, and in order to win the war, we must make sure the law enforcement men and women have got the tools necessary within the Constitution to defeat the enemy," Bush said.
The White House would like something the president can sign by the end of next week, Vice President Dick Cheney told Republicans during their weekly policy luncheon.
But that timeline for the administration's full package seems unlikely.
The Senate Judiciary Committee asked Ashcroft back for more questioning, though Leahy said work will continue in the meantime. He set a second hearing on terrorism legislation for next Tuesday, although it was not immediately clear whether Ashcroft would attend.
"We have a lot of Republicans and Democrats who have further questions for him," Leahy said. "When he comes back, we can speed it up."
And the House Judiciary Committee does not plan action on the bill until next Wednesday at the earliest. House Judiciary Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., had planned a vote yesterday but rescheduled after committee members expressed concerns.
"While some limited noncontroversial provisions may be expedited, we do not believe we will be serving law enforcement, the intelligence community or the American public if we move as quickly as we are being urged by the department," a bipartisan group of House Judiciary members, including Reps. Bob Barr, R-Ga., and Robert C. Scott, D-Va, wrote in a letter to House leadership.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 28, 2001


End of Document