CONGRESS LAUNCHES LOOK AT MISUSES OF PATRIOT ACT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 5, 2005 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 563 words
Byline: Bob Dart, Cox News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


With five state legislatures in revolt against the Patriot Act, Congress begins reconsideration of the sweeping anti-terrorism legislation today amid clamor for changes from the political right and left.
 Last week, Montana joined four other states -- Vermont, Maine, Hawaii and Alaska --that have passed resolutions urging Congress to curb the new powers hastily granted to federal law enforcement agencies six weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
 A coalition to rein in the Patriot Act is headed by former Rep. Bob Barr, a conservative Georgia Republican, and has members ranging from the American Civil Liberties Union on the ideological left to Americans For Tax Reform on the right.
Portions of the act will expire at the end of this year if Congress does not renew them, as President Bush has asked. Attorney General Alberto Gonzales will begin making the administration case to Congress this week, testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee today and the House Judiciary Committee tomorrow. Hearings are likely to continue into the summer.
 "I expect these national hearings to be very thorough, and I'm certain there will be probing questions from senators on both sides of the aisle," said Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Arlen Specter, R-Pa.
 The Patriot Act gave the federal government greater powers of surveillance, investigation and prosecution to use against suspected terrorists and their enablers. But foes said it has also been used to bypass the constitutional requirements for "probable cause" in issuing warrants in ordinary criminal investigations and other matters unrelated to terrorism.
 "Despite the secrecy that permeates the Patriot Act, it's clear that it has been abused and misused," ACLU Executive Director Anthony D. Romero said in a letter sent yesterday to Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., a Judiciary Committee member. "The government has committed these transgressions without apology or regret and has simultaneously sought to expand the powers granted under the Patriot Act."
 The ACLU letter said the act had been used to carry out a secret search of the home of Brandon Mayfield, a Muslim attorney in Portland, Ore., wrongly suspected of complicity in the 2004 terrorist bombing of a train in Madrid, Spain. The ACLU also charged abuse or misuse of the act in keeping Tariq Ramadan, a "widely respected Muslim scholar," from entering the United States and for prosecuting Sami al-Hussayen, a Muslim student in Idaho, for posting Internet links to materials the Justice Department deemed "objectionable."
 Sens. Larry Craig, R-Idaho, and Richard Durbin, D-Ill., plan today to introduce the "Safety and Freedom Enforcement," or SAFE, Act, aimed at eliminating some Patriot Act provisions that foes view as most extreme. It would deal with the so-called "sneak and peek" provision, which lets federal agents secretly search people's homes and businesses without a deadline on notice that the intrusion occurred.
 The measure would also curb part of the Patriot Act that lets federal agents collect personal data on ordinary Americans -- such as their medical history, library books they check out and goods they purchase -- without evidence that the citizen is connected to terrorism. And it modifies a section that foes say defines "terrorism" too broadly, making law-abiding critics of federal policy subject to investigation.

Load-Date: April 6, 2005


End of Document