Congress;
THE WAR ON TERRORISM, FROM TRIPOLI TO BELFAST
The New York Times
April 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 915 words
Byline: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 29
Body


One of the unexpected ripple effects of the confrontation this month with Libya may be Senate approval of a treaty that would make it easier for the United States to send suspected terrorists from Northern Ireland back to face British prosecution.
An updated British-American extradition treaty, languishing for months in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has taken on new life and may come to a committee vote as early as Thursday.
The treaty, signed by the two Governments 10 months ago, would substantially limit the circumstances under which acts of violence may be treated as ''political offenses'' exempt from extradition. The current extradition treaty with Britain, like treaties in force between the United States and dozens of other countries, bars extradition for offenses of a ''political character.''
The updated treaty has been blocked by Democrats on the Foreign Relations Committee who question the state of civil liberties in Northern Ireland and argue that the new treaty could make the United States a party to suppressing political dissent in that bloodily contested region.
''One person's terrorist is someone else's freedom fighter,'' Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts observed at a hearing on the treaty last summer.
 
The Theme of the Moment
But the battle against terrorism is the theme of the moment on Capitol Hill.
The treaty opponents' public stance has not changed, although some Democratic aides admit privately that it is politically awkward these days to stand in the way of a measure portrayed as a weapon in the war against terrorism.
Just as defeating the treaty has become a cause celebre in some Irish-American communities, its approval has received the highest priority from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
In a radio interview Sunday with the BBC, Mrs. Thatcher said that the aid Britain provided for the American mission against Libya gave the United States a particular obligation to help Britain in its fight against ''Irish terrorism.''
''If you're fighting terrorism, you can't fight it just on one front and not another,'' the Prime Minister said.
Echoing that theme, a State Department spokesman, Charles Redman, urged the Senate on Monday to reciprocate for Britain's allowing American planes to take off from bases in England by ''demonstrating our willingness to support the British on an issue of terrorism of primary importance to them.''
The fate of the treaty is by no means certain; even if it clears the Foreign Relations Committee, it needs a two-thirds vote of approval by the entire Senate.
But the explicit link with the Libyan situation has given the treaty a new momentum, as one of its strongest opponents, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, somewhat ruefully conceded today.
Mrs. Thatcher's remarks ''enhance to some degree the politics of the British appeal,'' Mr. Biden said in an interview. ''It's one of those things that people will use.''
Mark Helmke, a spokesman for Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican who heads the Foreign Relations Committee and supports the treaty, said, ''This issue was a sleeper for a long time.''
''It looked easy to kill when no one was looking,'' Mr. Helmke said. ''All of a sudden, people are starting to pay attention. Suddenly it's bigger than ethnic politics.''
The outlook is complicated by several factors, including an escalation of the time-honored Congressional practice of holding one measure hostage to another.
The treaty has become entwined with a $250 million aid package for industrial development in Northern Ireland proposed by the Reagan Administration and adopted last month in an enhanced form by the House of Representatives.
A few weeks ago, Senator Lugar introduced a substitute aid package providing that the money could be released only upon approval of the extradition treaty.
The move infuriated the Democrats, who protested that an aid bill, subject to majority vote in both houses, should not be linked to a treaty, subject to a two-thirds vote in the Senate alone.
Led by Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, the ranking Democrat on the committee, the Democrats drafted an alternative extradition treaty in which they more narrowly defined the crimes that would fall outside the definition of ''political offense.''
The Democratic alternative has acquired tentative support from an unlikely ally, Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican.
A spokesman says Mr. Helms views the negotiated treaty as setting a precedent that would make it too easy to allow the extradition of ''freedom fighters'' struggling against right-wing regimes in Latin American, Afghanistan or elsewhere.
 
Philosophical Considerations
A further complication is that the debate over the treaty is as philosophical as it is political.
This country has always protected perpetrators of political offenses against extradition, and the treaty would carve out a new definition for application to the United Kingdom alone. The treaty's opponents, which include the American Civil Liberties Union among other organizations, view it as a precipitous step in a new and dangerous direction.
''The principle of political asylum has been an extremely important part of our history for 200 years,'' Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat who is a leading foe of the treaty, said today in an interview.
''It has protected people of every color and stripe. Once you start picking among groups and deciding who you like and who you don't like, you'll never get out of that morass.''

Graphic

 
Photo of Senator Richard Lugar (Agence France-Presse); Photo of Senator Joseph Biden (UPI)


End of Document