Congressional Report Warns Of Complicated South Asia Policy
RTT News (United States)
January 9, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 336 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A Congressional report has said the November 26 Mumbai terrorist attacks could further complicate America&apos;s South Asia policy.
The report, "Terrorist Attacks in Mumbai, India and Implications for U.S. Interests," prepared mid-December by the Congressional Research Service for circulation among lawmakers, the 111th Congress in particular, was released Wednesday. It came just less than two weeks before Barack Obama takes charge as the next president of the U.S.
"Fallout from the Mumbai terrorist attacks could further complicate U.S. policy in South Asia and the administration of President-elect Barack Obama may seek to increase U.S. diplomatic efforts aimed at resolving conflict between India and Pakistan," said the report.
The 19-page report, reiterates the basic U.S. position that links of the Mumbai terror-attack go back to the Islamic terrorist outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), whose leaders have had patronage of the Pakistani establishment, the ISI in particular.
"Potential issues for the 111th Congress with regard to India include legislation that would foster greater U.S.-India counter-terrorism relations," it said.
With regard to Pakistan, Congressional attention is likely to remain focused on programming and potential, further conditioning of U.S. foreign assistance, including that related to security and counter-terrorism, it said.
In seeking to evolve a new foreign policy for South Asia, President-elect Barack Obama and his advisors may face a key central question: Are conflictual relations between the region&apos;s two largest states primarily an India-Pakistan problem or are they mainly a Pakistan problem alone.
The report warned the incoming Obama administration should stay away from any "high-visibility" focus on the Kashmir issue as it would likely evoke Indian resistance and risk fuelling Pakistani expectations of a settlement favoring Islamabad.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document