CONGRESS, TOO
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 24, 2004 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 531 words
Body


Much of the attention regarding the nation's approach to terrorism, particularly as employed by Islamic extremists, focuses on the Executive Branch. Successive administrations, Republican and Democrat alike, have received just criticism. The institutional shortcomings and policy mistakes in various federal agencies have been detailed - and lamented. Yet as the 9/11 Commission's report proves beyond a reasonable doubt, Congress bears a significant share of the blame.
The legislature neither appreciated the realities of the post-Cold War world nor adequately, or even minimally, addressed Islamofascism's specific threats. The 9/11 report says:
Congress as a whole, like the Executive Branch, adjusted slowly to the rise of transnational terrorism as a threat to national security. In particular, the growing threat and capabilities of bin Laden were not understood in Congress. As the most representative branch of the federal government, Congress closely tracks trends in what public opinion and the electorate identify as key issues. In the years before September 11, terrorism seldom registered as important. To the extent that terrorism did break through and engage the attention of the Congress as a whole, it would briefly com mand attention after a specific incident, and then return to a lower rung on the public policy agenda…
Although individual Representatives and Senators took significant steps, the overall level of attention in the Congress to the terrorist threat was low. We examined the number of hearings on terrorism from January, 1998, to September, 2001. The Senate Armed Services Committee held nine - four related to the at tack on the USS Cole. The House Armed Services Committee also held nine, six of them by a special oversight panel on terrorism. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee and its House counterpart both held four. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, in addition to its annual worldwide threat hearing, held eight; its House counterpart held perhaps two exclusively devoted to counterterrorism, plus the briefings by its terrorist working group. The Senate and House intelligence panels did not raise public and congressional attention on bin Laden and al-Qaeda prior to the joint inquiry into the attacks of September 11, perhaps in part because of the classified nature of the work. Yet in the context of committees that each hold scores of hearings every year on issues in their jurisdiction, this list is not impressive. Terrorism was a second- or third-order priority within the committees of Congress responsible for national security.
The 9/11 panel does not draw partisan conclusions, probably because there are none to be drawn. Although Republicans Richard Lugar and Sam Brownback stand as admirable exceptions, neither party displayed collective leadership. Both lacked vision and vigor. The scant emphasis placed on Islamist terrorism during the 2000 national campaigns reflects bipartisan deficiencies. The record shows that in the crucial years leading to 9/11 the membership of the essential Senate committees included not only John Kerry but also such presumed heavyweights as Edward Kennedy, John McCain, and John Warner.

Graphic

 
Photo

Load-Date: August 27, 2004


End of Document