Congress: Pass Anti-Terrorism Legislation
University Wire
November 20, 1998


Copyright 1998 Columbia Daily Spectator via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 873 words
Byline: By Michael Ricci, Columbia Daily Spectator
Dateline: New York, N.Y
Body


With the election process over, financial prosperity at home, and peace abroad, the 535 members of the United States Congress can now set their sights on having an effective 106th session. With Newt Gingrich about to step aside, Al D'Amato ready to learn how to mow his lawn again, and Ken Starr still chatting with Congress about the President's sex life, we can look forward to a new Congress that will be composed of new leadership with new goals and new ideas. The people made their message clear on the third of this month: get to work and pass some real legislation, or else.
An example of such timely legislation is Senate Resolution 2536, the International Crime and Anti-Terrorism Act of 1998. The bill, sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch (R-UT), is the most comprehensive counter-terrorism legislation that has been brought to the floor since the World Trade Center bombing took place in February of 1993. For the sake of the safety of American citizens at home and abroad, this bill must become law.
Columbia U.
The act's prelude reads: "To protect the safety of United States nationals and the interests of the United States at home and aboard, to improve global cooperation and responsiveness to international crime and terrorism, and to more effectively deter international crime and acts of violence." As compelling as that is, it is particularly striking that the bill's passage in the House is not at all secure.
You see, Congress has a problem with passing laws that work to fight against terrorism. Constituents at home continually call their representatives, saying they prefer to retain the full extent of their freedoms rather than give up some of those freedoms to fight the tide of terrorism. To many Americans, terrorism is a grievous wrong that we must stop dead in its tracks, but to others, it is the inevitable result of political disagreement.
Phrases like "wiretapping," "heaving of vessels," and "airport checking points" scare a nation of citizens consumed by the fear of martial law. The idea of "wiretapping" is one that disturbs many of us because of the sheer ease with which the government can do it. They have the technology to track the movements and personal communications of any person that they wish. If they have your personal information, the government could watch your every action without you even knowing it. We can be secure, however, in knowing that a federal judge must authorize all wiretapping, and only on concrete grounds.
Thus, we have arrived at the eternal question on the function of government: Is the government's duty to protect the freedoms of the people, or must it secure order whenever possible for in order to have a healthy and well-balanced society? Different governments have answered the question in different ways. While our government does everything it can to balance the two sides and avoid a constitutional crisis, in the end, security and stability must reign. That's the choice we've made countless times in our history when deciding to limit the freedoms of our citizens in and out of wartime, and the nation is still standing today.
All of this discussion and debate has stopped effective legislation from becoming law. In 1993, after the tragedy at the World Trade Center, anti-terrorism legislation was flatly rejected. In 1995, after the heinous bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building, anti-terrorism legislation did get through, but not before the language of 'wiretapping' was gutted. Now, in 1998, after the terrible scene that took place at our embassy in Northern Africa over the summer, we stand at yet another precipice, forced to decide on the safety of the world around us.
This legislation solves all of these conflicts. It effectively punishes violent crimes against United States nationals abroad, makes entering the country a more difficult process, promotes global cooperation, and speeds up the process of prosecuting international criminals. The idea of making entering the country a more difficult process means to many that this is a right-wing anti-immigration sentiment that has been inserted into the legislation by a Republican Congress. This case would makes sense, considering the fact that the immigration process would become tougher than ever and might wind up denying entrance to worthy citizens. It is, however, worth noting that the process would become more difficult for those who are attempting to enter the country without valid identification, with a criminal record in their home country, and who are carrying suspect cargo.
We all value our freedoms and constitutional rights, but the wave of terror that has swept over us during this decade must come to an end. We must support the passage of Resolution 2536 in the House and encourage the President to sign it into law. We must think of the workers who died that day at the World Trade Center, the children who lost their lives in Oklahoma City, and the international spirit of peace that was obliterated at the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Bombing. In the end, when the law is passed and our world is more secure, we will be thankful for the decosoveness and assertiveness with which our 106th Congress acted.
(C) 1999 Columbia Daily Spectator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 8, 1999


End of Document