Congress OKs step toward Orwellian thought-crime law
University Wire
January 15, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 830 words
Byline: By William Helvestine, Daily Trojan; SOURCE: USC
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


For the living martyrs are awakening And Kuffars world soon to be shaking We stand firm to our belief Knowing with Allah is only relief
This is the poetry of Samina Malik, a 23-year-old from the United Kingdom known as the "Lyrical Terrorist."
In December 2007, she was the first woman to be convicted and sentenced under Britain's Terrorism Act of 2000. According to the court, her poems were "documents likely to be used for terrorism," the possession of which is prohibited in the United Kingdom.
"Merely possessing this material is a serious criminal offense," one police commissioner said.
In the United States, the Senate is currently deliberating over House Resolution 1955, a conscience-shocking bill that passed quietly through the House in October and received no major media attention along the way.
Otherwise known as the Violent Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act of 2007, H.R. 1955 addresses the problem of "homegrown terrorists" (i.e., American citizens).
Homegrown terrorism is certainly a legitimate concern, but, in true post-9/11 fashion, our legislators went completely overboard with H.R. 1955 in the name of "national security."
H.R. 1955 would create a commission to investigate Americans who "adopt or promote an extremist belief system" for the purpose of "planning or threatening the use of force" in order to advance "political, religious or social change."
In other words, you don't actually have to commit a crime in order to fall under the Act's purview. Merely thinking about committing a future crime, combined with your adoption of an ideology that falls outside the mainstream, makes you a target.
The introduction of H.R. 1955, surprisingly, hardly caused a stir in Washington. The House of Representatives passed the measure by a vote of 404 to 6.
But let's not mince words: H.R. 1955 sets the stage for the passage of Orwellian thought-crime laws. As with most government bureaucracies, the commission created by H.R. 1955 will exaggerate the extent of the homegrown threat in order to ensure future funding, and its recommendations will be used to justify laws prohibiting Americans from engaging in what is deemed to be radical or extremist political dissent.
Most frightening is the measure's ambiguous and incredibly broad language. Through all its fear mongering, H.R. 1955 fails to define the extremist belief system that is the very basis for its authority.
Do the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals or perhaps the Hare Krishnas "promote an extremist belief system?"
Conceivably, the Act's language would encompass all members of the congregation of a mosque and, as Samina Malik discovered, even a 23-year-old girl who writes poetry about terrorism.
It also doesn't define the term "force," which could be interpreted to encompass non-violent protests, strikes, sit-ins or marches.
As for free speech and First Amendment concerns, surely there's no reason to be afraid: Under H.R. 1955, all civil liberties disputes will be dealt with internally by the Department of Homeland Security. Sleep tight!
H.R. 1955 is an abomination of a bill that seeks to discourage political dissent and keep a watchful eye on political troublemakers.
We might as well call the new committee by its old name: the House Committee on Un-American Activities (which, interestingly enough, was eventually renamed the House Committee on Internal Security).
Frankly, it's hard to tell what's scarier: the bill itself, or the fact that 404 congressman were clueless enough to sign their names to it.
Of the 13 presidential candidates, only two ­- Congressmen Ron Paul and Dennis Kucinich ­-- have been vocal in their opposition to H.R. 1955.
Kucinich was straightforward in his criticism of what he calls the "thought crime bill," noting dryly, "We have freedom of speech. Thoughts, sometimes, precede speech. There is usually a unity in thought, word and deed."
Paul expressed his concern that the Act, which singles out the Internet as a conduit for "terrorist-related propaganda," might be an early step toward government regulation of the Internet.
They are both right. Without question, domestic terrorists do exist, but do we really need another government bureaucracy addressing the issue when another agency already handles such matters?
Criminalizing the mere adoption of an unpopular belief system will only create an oppressive atmosphere that is conducive to radicalism.
Here we have a bill that deals with the planned or threatened use of force in furtherance of political or social objectives.
By any reading, this implies that the American Revolutionaries were themselves terrorists: Washington, Madison, Jefferson -- all violent criminals against the State. Now more than ever, one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.
But now, it's 2008 and the Senate appears primed to pass H.R. 1955 with hardly a debate. Wondering if it's time for another revolution? For your own sake, don't even think about it.
(C) 2008 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 15, 2008


End of Document