Congress extends Patriot Act powers for another month
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 23, 2005 Friday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 697 words
Byline: By Mary Dalrymple THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Body


Congress gave the Bush administration's anti-terrorism powers one more month of life Thursday, with work finished by a lone senator sitting in the virtually empty Senate chamber.
Congress also finalized a defense spending bill that funnels extra money to the Gulf Coast and Iraq. The GOP-run Congress completed the two bills in a scramble to finish a year complicated by standoffs with Democrats and disagreements among Republicans. The defense bill keeps the Pentagon running, while also channeling $29 billion in hurricane aid to the Gulf Coast and $50 billion more to military action in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The Patriot Act extension keeps anti-terrorism laws that were due to expire Dec. 31 in place until Feb. 3. It allows the FBI to continue to investigate terrorism cases using powers granted in 2001, including roving wiretaps and the authority to intercept wire, spoken and electronic communications relating to terrorism.
"The Patriot Act has helped us disrupt terrorist plots and break up cells here in the United States," President George W. Bush said in a statement the White House released after he left for Camp David for the holiday. "I will work closely with the House and Senate to make sure that we are not without this crucial law for even a day."
Congress completed the legislation even though most lawmakers had already headed home for the holidays. Congressional rules allow bills to pass without a recorded vote as long as no lawmaker objects.
House approval sent the defense bill to the president, including its $3.8 billion for bird flu preparedness and liability protections for flu drug manufacturers. The $29 billion for the Gulf Coast included $11.5 billion for community grants to spur economic development, along with aid for schools and money to start shoring up New Orleans' levees.
Bush applauded Congress' passage of the troop-funding bill and said he looks forward to signing it.
"This funding will help us continue to hunt down the terrorists, pursue our strategy for victory in Iraq and make America more secure," he said in a statement.
But it will not be the Christmas present the administration wished for after Republicans earlier lost a quarter-century campaign to open Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling.
That drilling authority was stripped out of the bill. The change also eliminated roughly $2 billion in emergency aid for low-income families facing high heating bills this winter.
Lawmakers also could find themselves debating the Patriot Act anew next month after putting the law on a short leash, extending it to Feb. 3, instead of the six months originally planned.
Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., said he didn't trust the Senate to act swiftly no matter how long the extension, so he pushed for one as short as possible. He said the White House and House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., concurred.
Bush and Republican leaders had insisted that the law be permanently extended before its scheduled expiration, but they were stymied by a Senate filibuster and criticism that the legislation failed to protect the civil liberties of innocent Americans.
House and Senate Democrats said they had no problem with the shorter extension, and opponents of the law signaled that they would not back down.
"No one should make the mistake of thinking that a shorter extension will make it possible to jam the unacceptable conference report through the Congress," said Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., who led the Senate filibuster. "That bill is dead and cannot be revived."
The White House also will get an empty budget stocking from the GOP-controlled Congress this year as Republican leaders were forced to postpone completion of a promised deficit-reduction package curbing the growth of federal programs such as Medicare and Medicaid.
Republicans worked on the deficit reduction measure all year, and conservatives saw it as a chance to re-establish the GOP's fiscal credentials. But it sparked a political firestorm from Democrats.
It passed in the Senate with Vice President Dick Cheney casting a tie-breaking vote. But Senate Democrats maneuvered to make minor changes in the bill, forcing it back to the House for another vote.

Graphic

 
<NONE>

Load-Date: December 23, 2005


End of Document