Congress Seeks To Extend Free-Speech Protections to Libel Cases Overseas
The Forward
May 23, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 1
Length: 1184 words
Body


An American author who has faced lawsuits  for her writings about terrorism  financing has sparked a burgeoning legal  movement in the United States.
In recent weeks, there has been a flurry of  legislative activity taking aim at the growing  number of libel lawsuits filed against  American authors in foreign courts. Bills  have been introduced in both the House  and Senate aimed at combatting what critics  label libel tourism, and last month  New York State signed into law the Libel  Terrorism Protection Act.
The legislative push is the result of a legal  battle waged on both sides of the Atlantic  by Israeli-born American author Rachel  Ehrenfeld and Saudi billionaire Khalid bin  Mahfouz over Ehrenfeld's claim that the  Saudi financed terrorist groups including  Al Qaeda.
In broader terms, the clash is pitting  the American bedrock belief in the First  Amendment against a more aggressive legal  posture adopted by some Arab individuals  who feel their names have been sullied as a  result of the debate over global terrorism.
The legal dispute between Khalid bin  Mahfouz and Rachel Ehrenfeld concerning  the issue of libel represents a clash of  values, said Eric Gander, an associate professor  in the department of communication  studies at New York's Baruch College.  England today appears to place a high  value on protecting the 'good name' of  those who deservedly possess one, by seeing  to it that individuals who make statements  about another take responsibility  to ensure that those statements are true.  Current American libel law appears to reflect  the judgment that protecting free speech  is worth the risk of undeserved injury to a  person's good name.
The main battleground has been Britain,  where defamation plaintiffs from around  the world have taken their cases because  English law places the burden of proof  on defendants. While such celebrities as  Cameron Diaz and Roman Polanski have  been the main users of Britain's more liberal  laws  suing publications that have  reported on their contretemps  moguls  from Eastern Europe and the Gulf have used  British courts to fight allegations of corruption  or terrorism financing. Such efforts have  been bolstered by the globalization of the  publishing industry through the Internet  and online book sales, which has allowed  plaintiffs to sue for material not even published  on British soil.
One of those plaintiffs is bin Mahfouz,  a prominent Saudi banker. In the book  Funding Evil: How Terrorism Is Financed  and How To Stop It, Rachel Ehrenfeld  identified bin Mahfouz as a funder of terrorism,  mostly through charities reportedly  tied to Al Qaeda. After she refused  demands from his lawyers that she retract  her allegations, bin Mahfouz sued her in  2004 for libel in a British court. Although  the book was published only in the United  States, the British court accepted jurisdiction  on the grounds that 23 copies of the  book had been bought in Britain via the  Internet. After Ehrenfeld declined to appear  before a London tribunal, a default judgment  against her was issued, asking that she  declare her writings about bin Mahfouz to  be false, publish a correction and an apology,  and pay some $225,000 in damages. She
refused, and then she countersued in an  American court, arguing that the British  libel law violated the First Amendment.  In court she also asked that bin Mahfouz  be submitted to personal jurisdiction in  America. Her suit was rejected in 2006 on  jurisdictional grounds, a decision affirmed  on appeal last year.
As the New York State Court of Appeals  heard arguments in the case late last year,  a lawyer affiliated with The David Project,  Elizabeth Samson, published an article in The  New York Jewish Week on Ehrenfeld's situation.  The next day, Samson got a call from  New York Assemblyman Rory Lancman,  who said that he was interested in introducing  legislation to address the problem.  Lancman and Senate Deputy Majority Leader  Dean Skelos sponsored the Libel Terrorism  Protection Act, known as Rachel's Law.
New York State passed the bill, which was  signed into law April 30 by Governor David  Paterson. It grants writers legal protection in  local courts if they are sued for libel in foreign  countries and prohibits the enforcement of  a foreign libel judgment unless a local court  determines that it satisfies the free-speech  and free-press protections guaranteed by the  First Amendment and the New York State  Constitution. No other state has passed such  legislation, but advocates are hoping that the  New York bill will ignite a nationwide legislative  effort to protect free speech.
On May 7, senators Arlen Specter and Joseph  Lieberman announced the introduction of the  Free Speech Protection Act of 2008, following  the introduction of a similar bill in the House  by New York Representative Peter King.
Some critics are concerned that the new legislation  would extend American jurisdiction to  a point that violates notions of due process.
I am sure if the libel plaintiff comes here to  challenge the lawsuit, the issue of due process  will be raised, said Slade Metcalf, an attorney  with Hogan & Hartson in New York.
But First Amendment advocates have said  it is the right move.
Legislation of the sort passed by the New  York legislature  is exactly the right response  to make to the increasingly dangerous tendency  of foreign courts  particularly English  courts  in punishing the speech of American  citizens in a manner that cannot begin to comport  with the First Amendment, said Floyd  Abrams, a leading First-Amendment lawyer  based in New York.
Legal experts said that the New York statute  essentially codifies a 1992 decision by a New  York court not to enforce a foreign libel judgment.  In addition, the new law grants loca  courts personal jurisdiction over the foreign  individual who filed for libel abroad.
Bin Mahfouz's lawyers have maintained tha  they never intended to enforce the judgment in  the United States or to collect damages. They  argue that Ehrenfeld has been seeking merely  to vindicate her reputation, and they note tha  she could have challenged the British jurisdiction  on her case but decided against it.
Her supporters counter that British libel  laws have had a chilling effect on the British  media and on foreign publishers, especially  on sensitive topics such as terrorism. The  British subsidiary of Random House, for  instance, decided against publishing the  best-seller House of Bush, House of Saud:  The Secret Relationship Between the World's  Two Most Powerful Dynasties by Vanity Fair  columnist Craig Unger to avoid potential libe  action. Eventually another publisher distributed  the book in the United Kingdom.
While the New York law will protect  Ehrenfeld from having to pay the damages  ordered by the British ruling, legal experts say  it will not allow her to reach her other objective,  which is to force bin Mahfouz to make  a deposition in the United States that would  provide some answers to the allegations over  which both sides have been furiously battling  in the past four years.

Load-Date: May 20, 2008


End of Document