Congress conspired with vote bank of illegal migrants to secure their seats in Assam: PM Modi
The Sentinel
April 11, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 286 words
Body


Guwahati: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday addressing an election rally at Kendukona in Kamrup District blamed the opposition Congress party for their engagement in vote bank politics in the country.

He also blamed Assam Pradesh Congress for conspiring vote bank of illegal migrants who have entered the territory of Assam from Bangladesh.

Addressing the gathering at Kendukona today, PM Modi claimed that the opposition party Congress has never tried to solve the Border issues with neighbouring country Bangladesh and thereby kept the matter on hold for several decades.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also mentioned that not a single infiltrator's name will be included in the National Register of Citizens (NRC), but he also ensured that no genuine citizens will be left out from final NRC.

Speaking about the Assam Accord, PM Modi said that BJP Government is working day and night to implement clause 6 of the historic Assam Accord. "Under clause 6 of the Assam Accord, our Government is trying to provide special status to six indigenous communities of Assam. We have tried to place the bill in Rajya Sabha as well," said Prime Minister Narendra Modi

PM Modi also claimed that the family members of the farmers will be benefitted under PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana after BJP comes back to power.

"Your vote will decide the future of the nation, now you decide what kind of nation you want? Whether we want to live your life like a warrior or like a coward, your vote will decide!" added PM Modi.

Stating about the terrorism, PM Modi clearly said that the BJP Government wouldn't compromise while countering terrorism. "We will not compromise to counter Naxalism in the nation as well," PM Modi added further.

Load-Date: April 12, 2019


End of Document