Congress studies anti-terror tools
USA TODAY
July 30, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 350 words
Byline: Richard Benedetto
Body


White House chief of staff Leon Panetta and a bipartisan group
of 16 congressional leaders meet today to devise a legislative
package providing more tools for U.S. law enforcement agencies
to combat terrorism.
The meeting is a follow-up to Monday's White House session with
President Clinton, who urged them to put political differences
aside and enact more terrorism-fighting provisions.
"When we are attacked . . . we come together," Clinton said.
"We need to move as quickly as we can, do everything we can to
try to strengthen this country's hand against terrorism."
Republican leaders agreed to cooperate, but emerged from the meeting
expressing concern over whether some of Clinton's recommendations,
like broader wiretapping authority, might inhibit individual liberties.
"As much as we want to get the terrorists, we want to do it in
a methodical way that preserves our freedoms," said House Speaker
Newt Gingrich, a Georgia Republican.
Congress leaves this weekend on recess, adding pressure to act
now. Among Clinton's proposals:
-- Expand authority for wiretaps, including so-called "roving
wiretaps" which allow police to monitor all telephone lines used
by suspected terrorists, not just the ones they own.
-- Allow terrorists to be prosecuted under federal racketeering
laws.
-- Increase FBI anti-terrorist funding.
-- Provide money for a six-month study of tagging chemicals,
called "taggants," that can be placed in explosive material
to trace its origin, and expand the study to include black and
smokeless gunpowder, used in making bombs.
The wiretap measure, opposed by civil liberties groups, was dropped
from an anti-terrorism bill Clinton signed April 24. The "taggant"
study passed, but was not funded. The National Rifle Association
and the mining and demolition industries have safety concerns
about adding chemical agents to explosives.
Meanwhile, the United States today will make recommendations to
tighten transportation security at a meeting in Paris with economic
allies and Russia. Proposals include standardizing passenger and
cargo lists and procedures to detect bombs and weapons at airports
and on ships.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Joe Marquette, AP; Call for help: President Clinton asked congressional leaders to devise laws to combat terrorism.

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document