Congress won't escape 9/11 criticism 'They held very few hearings on terrorism,' panel chairman says
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 13, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 991 words
Byline: Chris Mondics Knight Ridder Newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON - It's gone after the CIA, lax border controls and gaps in the nation's air-defense system. Now the independent commission that's investigating the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks is readying what's likely to be a harsh assessment of Congress for failing to grasp the threat that al-Qaida and other terrorist groups posed.
The panel, which is set to issue its final report July 22, is focusing some of its final investigative work on the role Congress played as warning signs of a possible terrorist attack in the United States piled up in the years before 2001.
"Congress is not blameless in this," said former New Jersey Gov. Tom Kean, the panel's chairman. "They held very few hearings on terrorism. You can't just let Congress off the hook."
Kean vowed early in the investigation that the panel would look hard at how Congress supervised the intelligence, immigration and defense agencies charged with protecting the nation. But unlike the performance of executive-branch agencies, the issue of congressional accountability seldom arose during the commission's 12 public hearings.
When the panel has delved into Congress' actions, its findings have suggested that inertia and pressure politics interfered with national security.
That appears to have been the case in 1996 when Congress passed legislation ordering the Immigration and Naturalization Service, whose functions are now part of the Homeland Security Department, to develop a system for tracking foreigners who were in the country on student visas. The law followed the disclosure that one of the plotters in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing had overstayed his student visa.
As the commission detailed in its first staff report Jan. 26, the INS developed an experimental tracking program in Atlanta in 1996 that included flight schools. That was prescient, given that several of the Sept. 11 hijackers would attend flight school.
But the panel said the program drew opposition from "education interests," who complained that the reporting requirements were costly and burdensome for schools with foreign students.
Soon, the manager of the test program was replaced by senior INS management, which also indefinitely deferred instituting a related test program for a foreign-student ID card that was to include physical identifiers such as fingerprints.
"Senators declared an interest in repealing the 1996 law and sought to obstruct further INS funding for it," the commission said.
Thus, when Sept. 11 hijacker pilots Marwan al Shehhi and Mohamed Atta sought to re-enter the country in January 2001, their false claims to INS inspectors that they'd returned to continue their studies went undetected, the panel said, as there was no foreign-student tracking system in place that could have indicated there was no record of them.
The paucity of information about Congress' performance amid the growing terrorist threat hasn't escaped the notice of family members of Sept. 11 victims. They've pushed the panel hard to press the White House for facts and now want to hear more about why Congress seemed to have been caught unaware by the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
The panel's final report - whose projected completion date has been moved up several days so as not to coincide with the Democratic National Convention - will be delivered to President Bush and to Congress.
Without members of Congress seeking to highlight gaps in the nation's defenses, family members point out, the public probably won't push for change.
"You cannot expect the American people to take that up on their own," said Kristen Breitweiser of Middletown, N.J., whose husband, Ronald, was killed at the trade center and who's been a leading Sept. 11 family activist. "What I am saying is we need to find out why all these issues that we apparently have known about for a very long time were not more pressing in Congress."
Panel members say they're trying to fill that gap in the time that remains for the commission with a hard look at the House and Senate Intelligence committees. Members say their final 500- to 600-page report also will examine why congressional oversight committees failed to detect weaknesses in U.S. border-security and air defenses.
Some commission members formerly served in Congress and have firsthand knowledge of how the institution dropped the ball.
Former Sen. Slade Gorton, R-Wash., who's been working on the panel's assessment of Congress, said he'd served on the Senate Intelligence Committee but left it within a year because he rarely obtained any useful information.
"I got off that committee because I couldn't accomplish anything and I never heard anything" in the committee "that I didn't read the day before" in the press, Gorton said. He was in the Senate from 1982 to 2000.
One key question the commission is likely to examine is why Congress didn't push the CIA and other intelligence agencies to confront al-Qaida more aggressively, and why it didn't closely examine the issue in public hearings.
In stinging reports issued in March, the commission disclosed that the CIA didn't get around to officially recognizing the potential threat of al-Qaida until the late 1990s, even though the agency had been steadily acquiring information that it posed a danger.
As late as 1997, CIA documents still were describing Osama bin Laden as a financier of terrorism, not as a terrorist leader who organized attacks. This was the case, the commission said, even as the CIA was acquiring information showing that bin Laden had assembled a major terrorist organization and already had pulled off devastating attacks. Had Congress been doing its job by prodding the CIA, the thinking goes, the agency might have focused harder on al-Qaida.
Kean said members of Congress themselves had indicated to the commission that the House of Representatives and the Senate could have done a much better job.
Said Kean: "Nobody who we have spoken to in Congress is satisfied."

Load-Date: July 14, 2004


End of Document