CONGRESSIONAL ROLL CALL
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
October 22, 2011 Saturday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A2
Length: 438 words
Byline: Thomas Voting Reports Inc.
Body


Here's how members of Wisconsin's U.S. Senate delegation voted on major issues this week. The House was in recess.
Senate
Obama jobs plans: Senators failed, 50-50, to reach 60 votes needed to advance a bill by President Barack Obama providing $35 billion to avert state and local layoffs of teachers, police and firefighters. A yes vote backed a bill (S 1723) paid for by a 0.05 percent surtax on incomes over $1 million.
Voting yes: Herb Kohl, D
Voting no: Ron Johnson, R
GOP repeal bid: Senators failed, 57-43, to reach 60 votes needed to advance a GOP-backed repeal of a law on government contractors. Aimed at tax cheats, the law requires 3 percent of contract sums withheld as a credit against federal taxes. A yes vote was to end a law seen by some as a jobs-killer. (S 1726)
Voting yes: Johnson
Voting no: Kohl
Farm payments to millionaires: Senators voted, 84-15, to reduce from $2.5 million to $1 million the income limit above which active and casual farmers are ineligible for crop subsidies, cash payments, loans and other farm payments. A yes vote was to reduce the limit as part of HR 2112.
Voting yes: Kohl, Johnson
Terrorism trials: Voting 47-52, senators refused to require terrorism suspects linked to al-Qaida to be tried in U.S. military tribunals rather than in federal courts. A yes vote backed the amendment to HR 2112 over arguments federal courts have a long record of successful terror prosecutions.
Voting yes: Johnson
Voting no: Kohl
Commission on Prisons: Senators failed, 57-43, to reach 60 votes needed to advance a proposed national commission to review the U.S. prison system, which now holds 2.3 million inmates. A yes vote backed the measure over arguments it is a federal overreach into state and local affairs. (HR 2112)
Voting yes: Kohl
Voting no: Johnson
Drugs From Canada: Senators refused, 45-55, to make it legal for American consumers to import federally approved, U.S.-made pharmaceuticals from Canada for their own use. A yes vote backed an amendment to allow such imports by mail order, online purchases or in person. (HR 2112)
Voting yes: Kohl
Voting no: Johnson
Commerce secretary: Senators confirmed, 74-26, John E. Bryson as secretary of Commerce. Bryson, 69, has headed the energy firm Edison International and was a founder of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental organization. A yes vote backed Bryson to replace Gary Locke, who became U.S. ambassador to China in July.
Voting yes: Kohl
Voting no: Johnson
KEY VOTES AHEAD
In the week of Oct. 24, the Senate will be in recess, and the House will take up a bill tightening rules for the 2010 health law's state-run insurance exchanges.

Load-Date: October 23, 2011


End of Document