CONGRESS;
BLENDING A CHORUS OF NO'S TO SAUDIS ON ARMS
The New York Times
May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 853 words
Byline: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 18
Body


Senator Slade Gorton, a Washington Republican, generally supports President Reagan on foreign policy matters. But earlier this month he backed a resolution blocking the President's request to sell arms to Saudi Arabia. And if Mr. Reagan keeps his promise to veto that resolution this week, Mr. Gorton says he will vote to override the veto.
''A whole bunch of us are sick and tired of hearing about people who are supposed to be our allies,'' Senator Gorton said. ''The State Department says they use back channels to help us, but of course they have to denounce us publically. A lot of Senators have run out of patience with the Saudis. If they want to be treated like allies, they should act like allies.''
If the ''spirit of Camp David'' is not dead on Capitol Hill, it is barely breathing. The hopefulness spawned by the Egyptian-Israeli agreement of 1978, the feeling that moderate Arab states were ready to step forward and take risks for peace in the Middle East, has all but evaporated. And as Senator Gorton indicated, that is one of the main reasons Mr. Reagan has failed to win Congressional backing for his plan to sell sophisticated missiles worth $354 million to the Saudis.
 
'Something's Happening'
''The feeling of frustration with the Saudis' lack of participation in the peace process is deepening here,'' noted Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat. ''Something's happening that didn't happen before.''
There are, in fact, many things happening that cause this frustration with the Arab world: the deadlock in the peace process, the upsurge of terrorism, the absence of an Arab leader to fill the vast vacuum left by the murder of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt. Moreover, energy conservation and the world oil glut have freed many Americans from the fear of Arab economic retaliation.
Supporters of the arms sale express grave concern about the rise in anti-Arab sentiment on Capitol Hill, and argue that both Israel and the United States would benefit from closer ties between Riyadh and the West. ''We've got to have somebody to talk to other than the Israelis,'' said Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate majority leader.
''Congressmen are in a mind set right now - they don't even want to hear the arguments,'' grumbled a White House official. ''They're lumping all the Arabs together, unfortunately and unfairly. They say the Arabs have not demonstrated enough enthusiasm for the peace process, but that ignores the fact that they have to live over there and protect their flanks.''
To some Administration advocates, the primary obstacle thwarting the Saudi sale is not philosophy, but politics. Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, who will lead the effort to sustain the President's veto, points out that some voters, Jews and non-Jews alike, care deeply about Israel and use Middle East issues as a political litmus test. ''There is no countervailing effectiveness on the other side,'' said Mr. Lugar, who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.
''When I was on the floor trying to win votes for the arms sale,'' he said, ''I heard people say, 'I'm up for re-election; my political survival depends on a vote against the Saudi sale.' There was not too much philosophical reverie about the Arabs and the Middle East.''
But he concedes that the Saudis have helped blur the distinction between moderate and radical Arabs by their own actions, from breaking relations with Egypt to openly supporting the Palestine Liberation Organization. ''The Saudis have not been as helpful as they should have been on a whole list of diplomatic issues,'' said Senator Lugar. ''They could have done a great deal more.''
 
Role of Terrorism
This long-simmering irritation with the Saudis bubbled over after the recent outbreak of terrorism abroad. To many lawmakers, Mr. Reagan probably hurt his own case for the Saudi arms deal with his campaign against Libya and its leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, noted that the President was asking his allies to help fight terrorism at the same time he was asking Congress to sell arms to Saudi Arabia, a country that aids Libya and other nations that have been linked to terrorism. ''The contradiction didn't help the Administration's case,'' said Mr. Dodd.
The distinction between moderate and radical Arabs has been further clouded by the lack of a leader like President Sadat, a visible and compelling figure who many thought embodied the more reasonable and progressive elements in the Arab world.
''There's no Arab leader who comports himself in a way that Americans can relate to,'' said Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. ''Any Arab leader who does that runs a risk at home.''
All these animosities might have been muted when Americans depended on the Arabs for a large share of their oil supply. But for now, ''the pressure is off,'' noted Mr. Aspin, and ''there is less fear of the consequences of voting down the sale.''
In other words, if motorists were waiting on gasoline lines these days, the votes on Capitol Hill might be quite different.

Graphic

 
Photo of Senator Slade Gorton (NYT); Photo of Senator Richard G. Lugar (Agence France-Presse); Photo of Senator Christopher J. Dodd (NYT)


End of Document