Congress Gives USF $30 Million For Studies
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 26, 2006 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 3
Length: 247 words
Byline: ADAM EMERSON, , aemerson@tampatrib.com
Body


MONEY FOR RESEARCH DOWN FROM LAST YEAR
By ADAM EMERSON
aemerson@tampatrib.com
GAINESVILLE - The University of South Florida received nearly $30 million in federal money for defense and transportation research, state university leaders said Wednesday.
The money is about a third of the $90 million provided by Congress to Florida's universities to fund special research projects this fiscal year, a decrease of about $35 million from last year.
Universities had to compete with the rising costs of the war in Iraq, the relief in the Gulf Coast region ravaged by Hurricane Katrina and a growing federal budget deficit, university leaders said. Because of that, less was left for Florida's universities, despite the state's lobbying efforts.
Officials said they were still pleased with the money they got. "This was a very tough year for Congress," USF President Judy Genshaft said.
It wasn't known Wednesday how much USF received in congressional funding last year for special research projects. This year, the $30 million the university received pays for projects such as biomedical engineering and robotics research. USF will lead an $8.5 million state university research effort to fight biological and chemical terrorism.
Statewide, the research money pays for projects including citrus canker research and fighting terrorism.
Reporter Adam Emerson can be reached at (813) 259-8285.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

EDUCATION

Graphic

 
GAINESVILLE - The University of South Florida received nearly $30 million in federal money for defense and transportation research, state university leaders said Wednesday.

Load-Date: January 28, 2006


End of Document