CONGRESS APPROVES NEARLY $80 BILLION FOR WAR, TERRORISM FIGHT;
 EFFORT BY CONSERVATIVES TO PUNISH TURKEY, OTHER NATIONS IS THWARTED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 4, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A12
Length: 495 words
Byline: Alan Fram The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Congress voted overwhelmingly Thursday to give President George W. Bush almost $80 billion for initial costs of the Iraqi war and other anti-terrorism efforts after thwarting conservatives trying to lash out at Turkey and other nations for hindering the U.S. war effort.
Senators approved their measure 93-0, and the House adopted a similar bill by 414-12, underscoring lawmakers' resolve to back U.S. forces in the field. The votes put the two chambers on track to send Bush a final package by his deadline of April 11, which would be uncommonly swift for a Congress that received his request for $74.7 billion only a week ago.
Although lawmakers reined in Bush's request to control most of the funds and added aid for airlines and other items, the vote gave him a welcome victory on Capitol Hill, a week after the Senate voted to cut in half his plan for new tax cuts.
The lopsided votes masked partisan disputes that raged in both chambers over funds for security at home. Both bills contained more than $4 billion for securing potential terrorist targets on America's shores, which Democrats said fell billions short.
"As we support men and women in uniform in Iraq, it's hard to understand how we can underfund the needs of our men and women in uniform in the front lines of homeland defense in America," said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif.
Besides domestic security funds, both bills contained more than $62 billion for the Pentagon and roughly $8 billion for aid to countries supporting U.S. efforts overseas. Included was money for replacing satellite-guided munitions, setting up a tribunal to try Iraqi President Saddam Hussein on war crimes charges and letting state and local agencies bolster security at home.
The House plan came to $77.9 billion; the Senate's neared $80 billion as it grew with amendments. The money is for the next six months and would come from enlarging federal deficits, which could approach $400 billion this year and next.
Although victory loomed, the administration found itself having to lobby legislators to control their anger at U.S. allies who opposed the war effort. The White House says it is reluctant to antagonize any countries that may play a postwar role in Iraq for reconstruction, humanitarian aid or peacekeeping, or in other counterterrorism fights.
The push seemed to bear fruit when the House voted 315-110 to reject an attempt by conservatives to kill $1 billion in aid for Turkey, which refused to serve as a gateway to northern Iraq for a U.S. invasion force.
"The message should be, 'Don't tread on me,'" said chief sponsor Rep. Randy Cunningham, R-Calif. "Someone that is responsible for killing my friends and American soldiers, I just don't feel they should be rewarded."
But conservatives won a voice vote in the House making it harder for companies from France, Germany, Russia or Syria to win U.S. funds for rebuilding Iraq. Critics hinted it was unlikely to survive upcoming House-Senate bargaining.

Notes

AMERICA AT WAR; THE HOME FRONT

Load-Date: April 4, 2003


End of Document