Congress now likely to approve compromise on terrorism bill;
Concerns over violations of privacy and civil liberties had helped slow the proposal.
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 16, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 461 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Congressional leaders, flanked by the families of victims of the Oklahoma City bombing, unveiled compromise legislation Monday to bolster federal powers to fight terrorism and limit appeals by death row inmates.
The House and Senate are expected to give final approval to the plan this week so it can be on President Clinton's desk for signing by Friday, the first anniversary of the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building that killed 168 people.
Clinton has expressed concern about death penalty appeals restrictions, but Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said Clinton, in a phone conversation Sunday evening, indicated he would not veto the bill over that provision. Hatch said he believed Clinton would sign the bill.
An Associated Press Report
Hatch said the bill "adds important tools to the government's fight against terrorism and does so in a temperate manner that is protective of civil liberties."
The legislation has traveled a long, rocky road since the April 19, 1995, bombing and Clinton's subsequent call for Congress to move rapidly to help federal agents combat terrorism.
Conservatives wary of new federal intrusions on privacy and liberals worried about violations of civil liberties joined in attacking it, and the House version passed last month eliminated key provisions making it easier for federal agents to identify and wiretap suspected terrorists.
The final version worked out by House-Senate negotiators restored several of those provisions, including a ban on fundraising in the United States by terrorist-linked organizations and expedited procedures for deporting aliens convicted of felonies.
It allows courts, for national security reasons, to deport suspected terrorists using classified evidence not disclosed to the alien, and provides $ 1 billion over four years for federal and state efforts to fight terrorism.
Left out of the bill was language desired by the administration that would allow for "multipoint" wiretapping of terrorist suspects. Attorney General Janet Reno argued criminals can easily change cellular phones while law enforcement agents must get court orders to wiretap every single phone line.
The death penalty appeals restriction is the only part of the bill that could directly affect the Oklahoma City bombing case.
Under the provision, prisoners would have only one year after their state court appeals are exhausted to file federal appeals, and the subject matter would be limited. In most cases, death sentences would be carried out within two years of final state court action.
The bill also would require convicted criminals to pay restitution to their victims, enable Americans to sue terrorist states in U.S. courts, and bar U.S. aid to countries that provide aid to terrorist nations.

Load-Date: April 18, 1996


End of Document