Congress poised to pass $40B for anti-terrorism
USA TODAY
September 14, 2001, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 670 words
Byline: William M. Welch and Kathy Kiely
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- A united Congress moved swiftly Thursday to approve $ 40 billion to combat terrorism and pay for the recovery from this week's massive terrorist attacks. It also prepared to give President Bush broad authority to mount a military response.
Lawmakers readied the emergency package even as a bomb scare in the late afternoon sent lawmakers scurrying from the Capitol. It was a false alarm.
In a rare show of their determination to put aside partisan differences, Democrats and Republicans traveled together to the Pentagon to inspect the damage caused by a hijacked jet that slammed into the building on Tuesday.
"Unbelievable," a shaken and grim-faced House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., said after his tour.
President Bush initially requested $ 20 billion for recovery efforts, as well as the costs of the investigation and stepped-up airport security. But Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said that would be "only the first installment." Lawmakers later agreed to double that amount.
After meeting with Bush, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., said New York City alone "lost about 150,000 jobs . . .  and 30 million square feet of office space."
The House was expected to approve the $ 40 billion package as early as today, and Senate action was expected to follow quickly. It would end political debate over the shrinking federal budget surplus and require the government to spend Social Security-generated revenue that both parties had pledged to leave alone.
Hastert said Congress then would address legislation giving the president "the power to pursue those people who committed this act."
While awaiting the fine print on both those measures, the House moved ahead on another front. It voted 418-0 to approve an emergency bill granting tax breaks to victims of the terrorist bombings and their families. The package extends to civilians the kind of breaks normally accorded military casualties during conflicts. Among them: reduced estate taxes, no income taxes in the year of death and no taxes on federal emergency-assistance payments and death compensation paid by airlines.
A day earlier, the Senate and House voted to condemn the attacks, praise the heroism of rescuers and pledge retaliation.
"We are working here in the Congress in a completely non-partisan way," House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, D-Mo., said. "We will act as one."
For all the unity, there were some points of disagreement.
Lawmakers initially balked at the spending request sent by the White House, regarded by House and Senate leaders as overly broad. They were negotiating language that would designate where the money would go.
Lawmakers also were trying to reword the White House request for congressional authority to use force against terrorists.
Some voiced concern that they not cede power by giving the president a blank check to conduct war. But lawmakers also said they expected agreement soon on a statement clarifying the president's power to retaliate and combat terrorism.
In both parties, lawmakers said they wanted to avoid a repeat of the Gulf of Tonkin resolution adopted during the Vietnam War. Many felt that pact was too open-ended and put too much power to wage war in the president's hands. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said the model should be resolutions that authorized use of force in the Persian Gulf and Grenada.
One crack in the show of bipartisanship emerged when House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Thomas, R-Calif., said he may push a financial stimulus package as early as next week that would include big tax cuts long sought by the GOP. They include a reduction of the tax on profits, or capital gains, from the sale of stocks, property and other assets.
"If we're in a war, and a war of attrition, one of the most important things we need to do is to keep the economy strong," Thomas said.
Democratic tax aides accused Thomas of using a national tragedy to pursue a long-standing and controversial political agenda.
Contributing: Joan Biskupic, Jonathan Weisman and Jessica Lee

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Kenneth Lambert, AP; Pulling together: Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., left, and Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., discuss anti-terrorism steps.

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document