CONGRESS WORKS ON TERRORISM LEGISLATION
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 15, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. A7
Length: 352 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- A year after the Oklahoma City bombing made anti-terrorism legislation an urgent national priority, Congress is nearly ready to give President Clinton a bill that will leave few involved satisfied.
House-Senate negotiators were preparing to present their compromise plan as early as today in a drive to win approval in both chambers and get it on Clinton's desk by Friday, the first anniversary of the Oklahoma City federal building attack that claimed 168 lives.
On Sunday, Attorney General Janet Reno chided Congress for its failure to act more quickly, and said the administration was unhappy with two items left out of the compromise plan: putting identification markers on explosives and making it easier legally to wiretap suspected terrorists.
Federal agents are not looking for enhanced wiretapping powers, she insisted on NBC's "Meet the Press," but only want the ability "to adapt the laws to modern technology with respect to cellular phones so that if somebody wants to switch phones or switch phone numbers, you don't have to go back into court to get an additional court order."
Wiretapping was one of the sensitive issues that created an odd coalition of anti-government conservatives and liberals.Backed by the National Rifle Association and the American Civil Liberties Union, House Republicans last month managed to remove many key parts of the bill, including the measures on markers and wiretapping.
Clinton charged Saturday that "under pressure from the Washington gun lobby, House Republicans took that bill apart piece by piece."
In House-Senate negotiations, Republicans did restore two provisions the administration wanted -- the ability to ban fund-raising in the United States by foreign groups linked to terrorism and to expedite procedures for deporting known terrorists.
Rep. Bob Barr, a GOP freshman from Georgia who led efforts to narrow the scope of the bill, said Sunday that the compromise being worked out was acceptable because "it will provide government very necessary tools, narrowly crafted tools, but also importantly it will not trample on civil liberties."

Load-Date: April 17, 1996


End of Document