Congress passes balanced anti-terrorism bill
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
October 30, 2001 Tuesday


Copyright 2001 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 384 words
Byline: Nora Jones
Body


The successful vote on new counterterrorism legislation demonstrates bipartisan cooperation -- at least on some issues. The Uniting and Strengthening America Act (USA Act), passed by Congress and signed into law by President George W. Bush last week significantly tightens banking controls aimed at stopping the flow of money between terrorists and supporters, along with broadening search and detainment regulations for law enforcement officials.
In early October, the House of Representatives approved a bill (HR 2975) titled the PATRIOT Act (Provide Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism).
In a similar timeframe, the Senate approved their version of anti-terrorism legislation as the USA Act, (S 1510 -- Uniting and Strengthening America Act).
The final bill distilled key elements of both versions, providing what many consider the best of both houses. The new law strikes a delicate balance between civil liberties and law enforcement's duties to combat terrorism.
Although many of the bill's provisions were scaled back from the earlier versions, the new law will make it easier for the federal government to search homes and trace e-mail and Internet use of all people; tap the telephones of terrorism suspects; and detain them if they are discovered in this country. It also criminalizes possession of biological warfare agents.
Critics of the legislation argue that it goes too far, intruding on civil liberties and privacy. Liberals contend that some of the provisions are designed to permit law enforcement to carry out pre-emptive arrests, pushing the burden to the courts to decide whether the arrests are constitutional.
However, Congress did add a four year limit to provisions that expand electronic surveillance. For example, pen register and trap and trace orders had been restricted to law enforcement's use on outgoing and incoming phone numbers. The anti-terrorist bill extends the authority to routing and addressing information in an "electronic communication."  Although "content" is excluded from the trap and trace order provisions, content is not defined in the context of the statute.
The law permits law enforcement agencies to intercept wire and electronic communications of computer trespassers when asked by the owner of a computer that is under attack.

Load-Date: May 26, 2005


End of Document