Congress must back Bush's pledge to Africa ; Combating AIDS in Africa is not only moral, it is an investment in the war against terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 25, 2003 Friday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a4
Length: 392 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


President Bush made a promise to the suffering people of Africa. Congress should fulfill that promise.
When Bush toured Africa earlier this month, he got a close-up view of the most staggering health crisis since the bubonic plague of the 14th century. Visiting a continent ravaged by AIDS, Bush vowed unprecedented support from the United States - $$ @15 billion over five years. He told African leaders that Americans care deeply about those caught in this pandemic: "You are not alone in this fight. America has decided to act." 
Yet, when it comes to action, Congress - so far - has not followed through.
A House of Representatives subcommittee moved to approve $$ @2 billion instead of the $$ @3 billion Bush requested for 2004 in a global HIV-AIDS act. 
Rep. Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz., chairman of the subcommittee in charge of foreign aid spending, said $$ @3 billion in the first year was unrealistic when the program was just getting off the ground. 
Congress needs an attitude adjustment.
Helping Africa is the humanitarian thing to do. The money could prevent 7 million new infections, treat 2 million infected people and help care for 11 million AIDS orphans.
If the moral basis is not sufficient motivation for Congress, how about self-preservation?
Helping Africa could easily be viewed as part of combating terrorism. The number of orphans could be more than 25 million by the end of this decade. Imagine a nation with so many children, not only parentless, but teacherless. An uneducated, poverty stricken population could experience governmental collapse and chaos. Could there be any more fertile a field for recruiters for terrorism? It would not take much persuasion to get these victims to strike back at the world's most wealthy nation, which could have helped but didn't.
Take it from a former Dubuquer who has seen the AIDS crisis personally. Dan Mozena, a top-ranking official in the U.S. Embassy in Zambia, said to fight AIDS in Africa is to fight terrorism globally. While trying to root out terrorism in all corners of the world, the shocking number of potential recruits in Africa is worthy of American concern.
We must send a message to Congress that anything less than full funding will not do. We must back our president's pledge that, indeed, Americans do care deeply about the plight of Africans - both for their welfare, and for ours.

Load-Date: July 25, 2003


End of Document