Congress Reaches Compromise On Extending Terror Insurance
The New York Times
December 17, 2005 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 303 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16 
Body


A House-Senate agreement reached Friday opened the way for Congress to approve a two-year extension of a post-9/11 law providing federal insurance backup for catastrophic losses suffered in a terrorist attack. 
  Business and insurance groups had pressed Congress to extend the program, known as the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, past its scheduled Dec. 31 expiration, arguing that without it insurers would not offer the terrorism insurance that builders and investors need to initiate construction projects.
 At the urging of the White House, the House-Senate compromise scales back federal guarantees with the objective of eventually ending government participation in the terrorism insurance market. 
  The measure would increase the amount of property and casualty losses that trigger federal payments from $5 million to $50 million in 2006 and $100 million in 2007. It would raise industry deductibles and co-payments and increase the financial stake of insurers. 
  Mandatory repayment for federal aid would go from 25 percent next year to 27.5 percent the following year. 
  The Senate Banking Committee chairman, Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, said the compromise eased the exposure of taxpayers and that he hoped the act would not have to be renewed when it next expired in two years. 
  The House Financial Services Committee chairman, Michael G. Oxley of Ohio, expressed dissatisfaction that the final bill, at the insistence of the Senate and the administration, had left out House language requiring 100 percent payback of any federal assistance, and that other House measures to reform the system had been rejected. 
  Ernie Csiszar, chief executive of the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America, said the agreement would allow the economy to continue to grow as the nation fought the war on terrorism. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 17, 2005


End of Document