Congress, Treasury Weigh Terror-Insurance Delay
The American Banker
April 29, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 20
Length: 411 words
Byline: By MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Though House Republicans and Democrats said Wednesday that the case has already been made to extend the government's terrorism insurance program beyond 2005, a Treasury Department official argued that the decision is premature.
"We don't have enough of a factual basis," said Treasury Assistant Secretary Wayne Abernathy at a House Financial Services Committee hearing. "Right now we have more questions than answers."
Mr. Abernathy said the Treasury would withhold judgment until next year, when it completes an analysis of how the insurance market has adjusted to the new risk of terrorism, before recommending whether Congress should reauthorize the program.
The so-called reinsurance backstop was put in place after the 9/11 attacks on New York and Washington. It was designed as a temporary measure, to give private insurers three years to adjust to the new risk and ensure the availability of terrorism insurance.
It required the federal government to pay 90% of claims over $10 billion stemming from any such acts that might take place last year. The threshold rose to $12.5 billion this year and will be $15 billion next year.
To help lawmakers decide whether to extend the program, the law requires the Treasury to report to Congress by June 30, 2005, on its effectiveness.
A number of House Financial Services members said Congress should renew the program before then, because the industry is not ready to offer terrorism coverage without government support.
Reps. Steve Israel, D-N.Y., and Michael Capuano, D-Mass., announced that they are drafting legislation that would extend the program to December 2006.
A General Accounting Office report released Wednesday concludes that the insurance industry has made "little progress" in developing a reinsurance alternative to the government program, and that most commercial policyholders are not buying the insurance.
Mr. Abernathy said lenders are demanding that borrowers have terrorism coverage only for so-called trophy properties, but not for the majority of projects, which are considered low-risk.
He said his agency will publish today in the Federal Register a request for public comment by May 29 on whether the Treasury secretary should extend the program's "make-available" provision for another year. The provision, which expires at yearend, requires insurers to sell terrorism risk coverage.
 
Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com 

Load-Date: April 28, 2004


End of Document