Congress works to wrap up security legislation Bills include fence on southern border, port protection and military spending.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 30, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A26
Length: 447 words
Byline: By Andrew Taylor THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Lawmakers pushed to finish work Friday on legislation focused on national defense, Iraq, terrorism and illegal immigration as Republicans pinned their hopes for keeping control of Congress on making national security the theme of the Nov. 7 election.
The House and Senate both worked toward late-night sessions to wrap up bills to build a 700-mile fence along the U.S.-Mexico border, set defense policy and improve port security. The Pentagon budget -- including $70 billion for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan -- cleared the Senate.
And legislation to convene military trials to prosecute terrorism suspects cleared its final hurdle in the House.
There was plenty of work left undone: expiring tax cuts, ethics measures and spending bills to fund the domestic side of the budget ledger.
Legislation validating President George W. Bush's warrantless wiretapping program will have to wait for a postelection lame-duck session colored by the November results. So will a bill to open the Outer Continental Shelf to oil and gas rigs.
Included in the defense budget: stopgap spending to keep agencies open through Nov. 17 if their funding bills haven't passed. Those include measures funding veterans' health care, education, health research, anti-crime programs, among many others.
Friday opened with the Senate sending Bush the Pentagon budget by a 100-0 vote. 
The bill provides $378 billion for core Pentagon programs, about a 5 percent increase, though slightly less than Bush asked for. The $70 billion for Iraq and Afghanistan brings to $507 billion the total spent for Iraq, Afghanistan and anti-terrorism efforts since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The House on Friday evening overwhelmingly passed, 412-6, a homeland security spending bill containing $1.2 billion to begin construction of fences and other barriers along the U.S.-Mexican border, plus money for jails to detain illegal immigrants and hire 1,500 more border agents. The Senate was poised to clear the measure later Friday night.
Republicans were hoping to clear a bill authorizing but not paying for fences along one-third of the nearly 2,000-mile border with Mexico. The House passed it two weeks ago and the measure has been on the Senate floor off and on for more than a week as the chamber marked time toward adjournment.
Meanwhile, negotiators sought to finalize a port security bill outlining steps to protect the nation's 361 ports from what could be catastrophic attacks from chemical, biological or nuclear devices. The bill served as a magnet for lawmakers seeking to add unrelated items, including legislation to limit Internet gambling and a court security bill championed by House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill.

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document