CONNECTICUT OPINION;
What Do You Tell Children About Terrorism?
The New York Times
January 15, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 12CN; Page 26, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk
Length: 520 words
Byline: By Carl Bosch; Carl Bosch lives in Oxford.
Body


THE question came directly and clearly, in that way of asking questions that only children possess. It came at breakfast in between orange juice and oatmeal. I should have expected it and kept a more careful watch. ''What is terrorism?'' my 6-year-old daughter asked.
The night before, Pan Am Flight 103 exploded across the Scottish sky, searing the landscape psychologically and physically. Syracuse University students, holiday travelers, military personnel, crew members - all dead at the rumored hand of a terrorist. We kept our daughter, Lindsay, from the television reports, but the radio told all. ''Daddy, what is terrorism?'' she repeated. How could this word come from my child, I thought? In my dreams such words did not exist for children. They could not bring these words into life through utterance. Such words and their accompanying thoughts could be conjured up only by sorcerers or evil magicians. But I saw the look on her face. A new look that never existed a few short months ago when she was less aware of the world and her small space in it. A look that told more than any words, a look of concern and cautious interest nestled in the fear that she had treaded onto a dark and endless path.
My mind raced for answers. A school counselor, I am trained in talking and listening. But the words failed me. How could I make her understand? Why did she have to understand? What I wanted her to ask was, ''Is there really a Santa Claus?'' Was it fair to speak the truth?
Should I have said that there are people who are willing to kill to achieve their goals? For whom life and innocence are not sacred. They would do anything. They would kill anyone, including themselves. They would kill your mother, your 3-year-old sister or even you, my beautiful daughter. Might I have said that nearly a dozen other Connecticut citizens happened to be on that plane? They were traveling home to family and friends, hugs, dinners and smiles. But terrorism said, ''No!'' and tore them from the sky, demanding corpses from their hopes and dreams.
I could not say that. It made no sense. It was impossible. But, of course, it was true.
So I fumbled through an inadequate and incomplete answer, listening more then talking. I clouded the stark truth as we often do for our children.
I know the source of my daughter's concern. This spring we plan to visit the shrine of childhood, Disney World. She has asked more then once if the plane will crash. My wife and I reassure her of its safety, excitement, comfort and speed. She wants to believe us, and in my hidden thoughts I also wonder if the plane will crash.
After the tragedy in Scotland, she said in all earnestness, ''You and mom can take the plane, but I would really rather go on a train.'' I chuckled at the humor to hide the sadness in my heart. The destruction of Flight 103 leaves us all with more crippling wounds than we can see. At its most tyrannical, it conquers sanity and civilization with the deaths of those who can never return home. At its most insidious and personal, it diminishes the childhood of my daughter. That is how the terrorists would want it.

Graphic

 
drawing


End of Document