Constitution doesn't bar torture, Scalia says; He uses ticking-bomb scenario during interview
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 13, 2014 Saturday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 22
Length: 310 words
Byline: MARK SHERMAN

The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Highlight: Scalia says hard to rule out 'extreme measures' in interrogations, if they could save lives
Body


Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia is joining the debate over the Senate's torture report, saying it's hard to rule out the use of extreme measures to extract information if millions of lives are threatened.
He told a Swiss broadcast network that U.S. and European liberals who say such tactics may never be used are being self-righteous.
The 78-year-old justice said he doesn't think it's so clear at all, especially if interrogators are trying to find a ticking nuclear bomb. Scalia has made similar comments in the past, but he renewed his remarks Wednesday in an interview with Radio Television Suisse, a day after the release of the Senate report detailing the CIA's harsh interrogation of terrorism suspects. RTS aired the interview Friday.
Listen, I think it's very facile for people to say, 'Oh, torture is terrible.' You posit the situation where a person that you know for sure knows the location of a nuclear bomb that has been planted in Los Angeles and will kill millions of people. You think it's an easy question? You think it's clear that you cannot use extreme measures to get that information out of that person? Scalia said.
Scalia also said that though there are U.S. laws against torture, nothing in the Constitution appears to prohibit harsh treatment of terrorism suspects. I don't know what article of the Constitution that would contravene, he said. Scalia spent a college semester in Switzerland at the University of Fribourg.
The 30-minute interview touched on a range of topics, including the financing of political campaigns, the death penalty and gay marriage, about which Scalia said he should not comment because it is likely the court soon will have the issue before it.
Asked about money and U.S. elections, Scalia scoffed that women may pay more each year to buy cosmetics than is spent on local, state and federal elections combined.

Load-Date: December 13, 2014


End of Document