Constitution just one factor for a Guantanamo policy; Holding suspected terrorists without charge could have consequences on the world stage.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
February 22, 2007 Thursday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10
Length: 306 words
Body


That the Bush administration may not have run afoul of the Constitution in its handling of suspected terrorists held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, is only somewhat reassuring.
A three-judge federal appeals panel found that noncitizens held on territory that is not considered to be part of the United States do not have a right to plead their innocence before a judge. 
The ruling, which will likely be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, allows the government to detain prisoners taken in the war on terrorism without having to prove anything to a judge. It means the people held at Guantanamo Bay can be incarcerated indefinitely without charge or hearing.
That's the outcome the administration is hoping for. It doesn't want to have to go to court and reveal information it has about terrorist activities that could harm national security. Nor does it want to see suspected terrorists released just because charges against them cannot be provede in court.
From a strictly national security point of view, this can make sense. But the issue is more complicated than that.
High on the list of concerns should be the perception of the United States abroad. In its fight to combat terrorism by, in part, creating free and democratic regimes in the Middle East and elsewhere, the United States has to set an example.
It may be that it is legal to hold suspected terrorists as ''enemy combatants'' until the war on terrorism is concluded, but the administration should make a strong case that its actions are within the bounds of civility.
To the degree that there may be people being held with legitimate claims of innocence, the Bush administration should follow through on plans to have those claims heard by military tribunals.
Done right, such due process does not have to threaten our security and will almost certainly enhance our credibility abroad.

Load-Date: February 22, 2007


End of Document