CONSPIRACIES HAVE CONSEQUENCES
Yellow Sheet Report
November 16, 2020 Monday


Copyright 2020 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 461 words
Byline: hank stephenson
Body


As Republican elected officials continued to spread baseless conspiracies about the election being stolen, their followers doxed Hobbs and her family over the weekend and have sent threats to kill the secretary of state’s family and pets and to burn down her house. On Friday afternoon, Hobbs told our reporter that she had referred several of the threats to law enforcement. “Someone sent me a screenshot of something from Parler where they said ‘Let’s burn her house down and kill her family and teach these fraudsters a lesson,’” Hobbs told our reporter. 
“But quite honestly they’re coming so fast and furious that I don’t even know them all. ” Over the weekend, things took a darker turn as trolls on Parler, which bills itself as a free speech alternative to Twitter, posted her home address and phone number. She said her social media channels have been clogged with threats, complaints and conspiracies. She shut down comments and direct messages on the platforms that allow that, and has been reporting the threatening comments to social media companies, who are “completely unhelpful,” she said. After Republicans urged fellow conspiracy theorists to call her office, she had to re-route the agency’s phone systems to stop the “abusive, harassing phone calls” from reaching staff. “Frankly, as an elected official, you can say that I signed up for this. But none of my staff did,” she said. Murphy Hebert, Hobbs’ spokeswoman, said the office was especially concerned that Hobbs’ personal information was put on Parler  which promotes itself to right-wing trolls that have been kicked off more mainstream social media sites  and said the threats she has seen have been terrifying. “I’m deeply concerned about her safety,” Hebert said. Hebert noted that she has personally referred three threats to the office’s in-house security officer, who has in turn been working with the Arizona Counter Terrorism Information Center. She declined to turn over the communications with law enforcement, saying they’re part of an ongoing investigation and the Counter Terrorism Information Center directed our reporter to Dept of Public Safety, which didn’t immediately answer questions. While Hebert wouldn’t directly call out the Republican elected officials who have been spreading these baseless conspiracies as responsible for the threats, the office clearly believes they’re throwing fuel on the fire. “I think it would be hard to look at what has been publicly posted and legitimately claim you’re trying to resolve the issue and support people gaining trust in the system,” she said. “I think there will definitely be a day when we need to have some serious conversations with these folks about their role. ”
Copyright © 2020 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: November 20, 2020


End of Document