Controversial Mountain Top Watch group resumes recruiting
The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)
November 30, 2020 Monday


Copyright 2020 The Chronicle (Centralia, Wash.)
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 605 words
Byline: James Halpin, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Nov. 30—Organizers of a controversial Mountain Top Watch group have been distributing fliers in recent days in a renewed effort to gather "like-minded and able bodied" lovers of freedom and the Second Amendment.
The group canceled plans for an inaugural meeting in September after police expressed concerns about its aims.
Fliers that were distributed in newspaper tubes and mailboxes last week urged interested parties to send an email to learn the address of a meeting being planned for Thursday afternoon at an unspecified location.
The flier says the effort is being organized "in response to recent threats of demonstrations in Mountain Top by (Black Lives Matter) supporters."
"We agreed that if each of us would individually stand to defend our family and our home, we would be much more effective to join as an organized group to help each other," reads the flier, signed by the "Mountain Top Watch Leadership Team."
A mission statement included with the flier says the group will "not stand idly by and watch as hooligans loot, commit arson as well as commit various other crimes in our community."
The document says the group supports the police "as the primary force to deal with any mob violence or domestic terrorism issues" but that its members will be the "last line of defense" prior to police arriving on scene as well as in the event the police become "seriously outnumbered."
"If confronted by mob violence or domestic terrorism, we see ourselves as an organized but peaceful community reserve force ready to defend our community, if we must," the statement says.
Dorrance Twp. resident Patrick Wills said he found the flier in his newspaper tube on Thursday morning, and that he immediately noticed a number of red flags, including the fact that the meeting location will only be disclosed upon request and that the group application form asks about things such as weapons skills and martial arts training.
"It just sounds very sketchy to me," Wills said. "I don't want an armed civilian group thinking that they can pass some kind of justice in my area. It's just not safe."
Fairview Twp. Police Chief Phil Holbrook said he was aware of at least one resident receiving the flier in his municipality, but said his department was not actively investigating the group.
"They're a private group. They have a right to get together, but we're not affiliated with them," Holbrook said. "If something major were to happen, we would be relying on other local police — county, state, maybe federal law enforcement — to assist us. We're not going to be calling upon the public to get involved."
Reached for comment Monday morning, the group's organizer, Jack Marchese, said he was "in the middle of something" and that he would return the call. Marchese had not called back as of Monday evening.
Marchese's efforts first gained attention in September, when he published a notice in the Mountain Peaks Newspaper seeking people who "love America, God, and the 2nd Amendment" to form the watch group.
Marchese called off the inaugural meeting after police from Wright and Fairview townships contacted him with concerns that what had initially been touted as a crime watch program had begun sounding like a militia.
The people who were working to organize a Black Lives Matter rally on the mountain earlier this fall are recent graduates of Crestwood High School who have said they have no interest in destroying property.
Contact the writer: jhalpin@citizensvoice.com; 570-821-2058
___ (c)2020 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 3, 2020


End of Document