Contextualize terrorism
University Wire
July 11, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 The Daily Iowan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 750 words
Byline: By Lydia Pfaff, The Daily Iowan; SOURCE: U. Iowa
Dateline: IOWA CITY, Iowa 
Body


The July 7 terrorist attacks in London are alarming for a plethora of reasons. The most disquieting aspect of the bombings, like past incidents in New York, Bali, Istanbul, and Madrid, is the sheer impossibility of predicting violence by such a dispersed group of murderers.
While security and intelligence officials must persevere to protect citizens in the short-term, a long-term vision for preventing such security threats from emerging is a dire necessity. The recent aid negotiations at the G-8 summit as well as the Millennium Challenge Account, an innovative United States aid program initiated in 2002, represent a positive movement towards more comprehensive security policies.
If Al Qaeda, as suspected, is responsible for London, this further demonstrates the devolution that has occurred in the organization since the destruction of its base in Afghanistan. Despite the capture of many high-ranking operatives, post-9/11 Qaeda attacks have continued steadily. Although there is evidence that counterterrorism efforts have reduced Al Qaeda's capability to carry out large-scale operations, they have not succeeded in eliminating the threat of smaller, "soft-target" attacks.
It seems as though Al Qaeda has become more nebulous, more of an ideology and a state of mind, than a hierarchical organization. The group now consists of loosely connected, somewhat independently acting cells based in foreign countries with members often fully integrated into society. Because wanton destruction is their primary goal, these cells are encouraged to act spontaneously on their own accord with little instruction from the center.
This is especially problematic for Europe because of its large and diverse Islamic population. Many in the Muslim demographic are well-established and educated, making it nearly impossible for counterterrorism officials to distinguish sinister elements of society from honest citizens.
The obvious reaction is to crackdown on every suspect, which of course would fuel resentment in Muslim constituencies. This is the heart of Al Qaeda's goal, to spark an indiscriminate clash between East and West.
Similarly in the United States, no persons wish to see a decline in their rights and civil liberties, yet the question remains, how can such vulnerable civilian targets best be defended.
In the present, it is imperative to continue with combative and defensive efforts against terror; however, long-term prevention needs to be a priority now as well. Al Qaeda has its roots in Afghanistan during decades of poverty and civil war. Ignorance and misery creates fertile soil for the proliferation of radical thought. Combating human suffering and the lack of education that accompanies such circumstances not only serves humanity but also our own security interests.
Critics of foreign aid have cited the fact that in countries with corrupt regimes, assistance may only serve to hurt the citizens that it is intended to help. Further arguments echo the welfare debate within the domestic realm; handouts will not encourage a country to develop and stand on its own but only entrench neediness.
Recent innovations to foreign aid as manifested in the G-8 Africa Action Plan and the 2002 Millennium Challenge Account seek to amend these hurdles in order to effectively promote the kinds of development that will discourage the fruition of radical terrorist thought.
Because more potential capital is available from private investment than foreign governments could ever provide, both of these funds are oriented toward encouraging internally driven development in order to attract trade and commerce. Such aid is targeted toward promoting the kind of institution building that will enable many faltering states to provide better security and basic services in order to facilitate growth and integration into the global economy on their own.
Governments are held accountable because the aid earmarked in these packages is tied to the progress that poverty-stricken countries make in terminating debilitating armed conflict, fostering growth of state infrastructure, and reforming education systems.
The tragedies of past terrorist attacks highlight the greater tragedy that such evil is allowed to develop in the first place. Richard Perle, the former chairman of the Defense Policy Board, said in 2002 that "terrorism must be decontextualized." This is foolishness. So long as we turn a blind eye to the historical roots of terror, we will never be secure.
(C) 2005 The Daily Iowan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 11, 2005


End of Document