Controversial film sparks discussion
The New Hampshire: University of New Hampshire
March 1, 2007 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2007 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 463 words
Byline: Tara Johnson
Body


The screening of "Obsession: Radical Islam's War Against the West" drew an audience of about 90 students, professors, and community members to the MUB theater Monday night.
The controversial documentary revealed disturbing images of Radical Islamic attacks on numerous occasions all over Europe, Israel, and the United States.
Although the film repeatedly notes that not all Muslims are radical, a popular concern with the screening of the film is that audience members will walk away feeling Anti-Muslim. "You can't deny where most of the radical terrorism stems from today, but we were very careful to try and make the distinction that not all Muslims are in support of terrorism," said Lauren Daigle, President of College Republicans who assured attendees that although the organization sponsored the event there was no political agenda associated with the screening of the film. "Terrorism is not just in Iraq, this is an open wide-spread issue,
"Obsession" Campus Coordinator Karyn Leffel, who has presented the film at over 50 screenings, said to audience members, "'Obsession' was made to give you information." She recommended that anyone interested in seeing the film should do so with an open mind.
The film highlighted clips from Arab television that are rarely shown in the United States media, such as suicide-bomber induction ceremonies and hate speeches against the United States to the Islamic youth. In reply to why Islam has targeted the United States Daigle said, "Its not who we are. It's who we are not." The film centered on religion as the motivation behind radical Islam's terrorist attacks but did not fully address the role of US foreign policy.
After the screening, audience members were invited to an open discussion and given information on how to become involved within their community through campaigns, education projects, and the media.
Ashley Dellaire, a sophomore at UNH said, "I am currently in support of the war, but I think the discussion after the film is a good idea. It opens up more opinions on the issue."
The open dialogue quickly evolved into a heated debate as one audience member argued against the similarities displayed within the film relating to World War II and the Radical Islamic attacks today.
Discussion participant, Nate Campbell said, "Some of the information that was brought out in the movie can be dangerous if not appropriately discussed and processed."
Andrew Dumais of Manchester did well to sum up the issue, regardless of ones opinion on the matter, when he responded, "Terrorism is like cancer, and it's spreading."
Diagle was happy with the discussion which lasted for about twenty-five minutes, "I'm happy with the turnout and the number of people who stayed after. Anything that promotes dialogue is a great success."

Load-Date: January 18, 2018


End of Document