Controversy alive at U. Nebraska 5 years after passage of Patriot Act
University Wire
October 27, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 395 words
Byline: By Chris Rosacker, Daily Nebraskan; SOURCE: U. Nebraska
Dateline: LINCOLN, Neb. 
Body


Thursday marked five years since President George W. Bush signed the USA PATRIOT Act into law.
Five years filled with controversial debate over whether or not provisions in the Patriot Act jeopardize the inalienable rights of American citizens.
"The idea is we're going to protect our county's freedom, but strip our country of those freedoms. ... I think it's ridiculous," said Adam Feser, a senior political science major at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln.
Some critics say that it's not a question of whether or not our liberties are at risk, but whether or not the risk is justified.
"It's a delicate balance between protecting civil liberties and providing for national security," said Rep. Jeff Fortenberry, (R-Neb.) in an e-mail to the Daily Nebraskan.
"I believe Congress struck an appropriate balance in the Patriot Act," he said.
The USA PATRIOT Act (Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism) was originally passed following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the act was overwhelmingly approved by both the Senate and the House.
A sunset clause was attached to the act -- a clause requiring reauthorization -- and was granted when the act was reauthorized earlier this spring. During the reauthorization, the Senate and Congress overwhelmingly supported it before the president signed it into law.
"I voted in support of the reauthorization of the Patriot Act in March 2006 because I believe it helps make America safer. ... (It) continues to play a vital role in our comprehensive security efforts," Fortenberry said.
Some of the more controversial provisions involve the due process of apprehending suspects, surveillance and info gathering on suspects.
Sen. Ben Nelson (D-Neb.), said in an e-mail that many Nebraskans are concerned about their civil liberties and the Patriot Act and have contacted him. He shares their concerns.
"Allowing the Patriot Act to expire would have been a significant risk, given the ongoing threat of terrorism," he said.
With the recent passing of the Military Commissions Act and the Patriot Act, the government has now vastly expanded its authority to enforce fighting terrorism in the United States and abroad.
"If the terrorists' goals were to change our lives," said Feser, "it would seem that they have done that."
(C) 2006 Daily Nebraskan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 27, 2006


End of Document