Convicted ex-CIA chief in Milan has been arrested
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 19, 2013 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 473 words
Byline: from news services
Body


PANAMA CITY • A former CIA base chief convicted in the 2003 abduction of a terrorism suspect from an Italian street has been detained in Panama after Italy requested his arrest in one of the most notorious episodes of the U.S. program known as extraordinary rendition, Italian and Panamanian officials said Thursday.
Robert Seldon Lady, the former CIA chief in Milan, entered Panama, crossed the border into Costa Rica and was sent back to Panama where he was detained, according to an official familiar with Italy's investigation of the rendition of Cleric Osama Moustafa Hassan Nasr. The official, who was not authorized to discuss the case, spoke on condition of anonymity.
A Panamanian National Police official said Lady, 59, had been detained Wednesday on the Costa Rica-Panama border. That official also spoke on condition of anonymity.
The government of Panama, which maintains one of the region's closest relationships with the U.S., was officially silent on the case. Security Minister Jose Raul Mulino told The Associated Press that he was unaware of Lady's detention and the press office of the National Police - which works with Interpol, the international police agency - said it had no information. The CIA also declined to comment.
Nasr, the cleric, also known as Abu Omar, was seized under a procedure known as "extraordinary rendition," in which the CIA secretly detained terrorism suspects abroad and transferred them to third countries for interrogation. He was flown by the CIA to Egypt, where, he says, he was tortured, and released in 2004.
Lady was one of 23 Americans tried for their alleged roles in the operation, all but one of them CIA officers or contractors.
Three other Americans indicted, including Jeffrey Castelli, the former CIA station chief in Rome, were given diplomatic immunity and acquitted in 2009. But this year, a Milan court vacated the acquittals and convicted them in absentia. Castelli, who works for PhaseOne Communications of Los Angeles, was sentenced to seven years in prison and the other two to six years.
In December, Italy's then-justice minister Paola Severino authorized an international warrant for the arrest of Lady, according to the Corriere della Sera newspaper. But warrants were not issued for other CIA operatives convicted in the case because their prison sentences did not meet the minimum for an extradition request.
In April, Italy's president, Giorgio Napolitano, pardoned U.S. Air Force Col. Joseph L. Romano, who had been convicted of involvement in the kidnapping.
Italy's secret services were aided the operation, Italian courts found, and a former intelligence chief was sentenced to 10 years in prison in February. His former deputy got nine years, and three other officials got six years each. In Italy, the men remain free while the verdicts and sentences are appealed.

Load-Date: July 20, 2013


End of Document