Convocation looks at using technology to battle terrorism-and the way Americans think about privacy
The Carletonian: Carleton College
April 1, 2017 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARCHIVE; Pg. 1
Length: 449 words
Body


National Public Radio's Dina Temple-Raston will present the weekly Carleton convocation on Friday, April 7. Entitled "Understanding the Next Threat," Temple-Raston's presentation will examine how technology has changed the battle against terrorism, and the way Americans think about privacy.
Carleton convocations take place from 10:50 to 11:50 a.m. in the Skinner Memorial Chapel. They are free and open to the public; convocations are also recorded and archived for online viewing at go.carleton.edu/convo/.
Temple-Raston is National Public Radio's go-to counter-terrorism correspondent for issues related to national security and the FBI, and her reporting can be heard from all over the world throughout the week on NPR's many news magazines. Since joining NPR in 2007, she has become one of the most recognizable voices on the radio network. Reporting on everything from terrorism to the Muslim experience to racism, Temple-Raston comprehensively covers the issues that affect Americans on a daily basis.
Prior to NPR, Temple-Raston was a longtime foreign correspondent for Bloomberg News in Asia and served as Bloomberg's White House correspondent during the Clinton Administration. She has written four books, including "A Death in Texas" (Henry Holt & Co., 2002), about the aftermath of a white supremacist murder in a small town and the winner of the Barnes & Noble Discover Great New Writers Program Award and also chosen as one of the Washington Post's Best Books of 2002; "Justice on the Grass" (Free Press, 2005), on the roll the radio station Radio Mille Collines played in the 1994 Rwandan Genocide and a Foreign Affairs magazine bestseller; "In Defense of Our America" (William Morrow, 2007), on civil liberties and national security in post-9/11 America; and "The Jihad Next Door: Rough Justice in the Age of Terror" (PublicAffairs, 2007), about the Lackawanna Six terrorism case.
She is a frequent contributor to the PBS Newshour, a regular reviewer of national security books for the Washington Post Book World, and also contributes to the New Yorker, WNYC's Radiolab, the TLS, and the Columbia Journalism Review, among others.
Temple-Raston recently completed a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard University where she studied the intersection of Big Data and intelligence.
She is a graduate of Northwestern University and Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism, and she has an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Manhattanville College.
This event is sponsored by the Carleton College Convocations Committee. For more information, including disability accommodations, call (507) 222-4308. The Skinner Memorial Chapel is located at First and College Streets in Northfield.

Load-Date: April 1, 2017


End of Document