CONVENTIONAL ATTACK BELIEVED MORE LIKELY/ GILMORE SAYS WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION NOT A PROBABLE DANGER
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 13, 2003 Thursday One Star Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-2
Length: 279 words
Byline: Carlos Santos/ Times-Dispatch Staff Writer , Contact Carlos Santos at (434) 295-9542 or csantos@timesdispatch.com,  
Dateline: CHARLOTTESVILLE
Body


Former Gov. Jim Gilmore, who has become an expert on domestic response to terrorism, said yesterday that he still believes weapons of mass destruction are unlikely to be used against the United States.
Gilmore, who heads a national commission on terrorism, spoke at a University of Virginia conference on the dangers of terrorism.
"Weapons of mass destruction are not nearly as probable a danger as a conventional attack - though they can't be ruled out," he said, citing the findings of his commission. "If the enemy gets his hands on biological weapons, that's a real threat."
Gilmore's commission was established by Congress to assess federal, state and local government's capability to respond to the consequences of a terrorist attack.
Gilmore said Sept. 11 changed the culture of the United States and raised issues about how the attack will affect democracy in this country.
"The 9/11 attack was a nation-changing event," he said. "Where are we going now? I don't think we know."
His commission is currently focusing on how the country can maintain its values of freedom while dealing with a terrorist threat.
"What is preparedness?" he asked. "How much is enough? How are we supposed to live?"
Gilmore said the country is coping with questions of individual freedoms and collective security.
"Our interest is to fix the problem. . . . We are an impatient people. How do we get back to living a normal life again?" Gilmore asked. "Or did the enemy take that away from us?"
Gilmore, who practices law in Washington, said he is optimistic the country will overcome the challenges it faces from terrorism.
"We're going to come through this and maintain our critical values," he said./

Load-Date: November 18, 2003


End of Document