Convictions unlikely for 9/11 suspects, so Germany may deport Probe stymied by lax terrorism laws, lack of evidence, judicial rulings

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 13, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 525 words
Byline: THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


HAMBURG, Germany - After three years of failing to hold anyone accountable for the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Germany is preparing to expel accused members of the Hamburg-based cell that led the hijackings to countries with more aggressive records of prosecuting terrorism.
Although two criminal trials are still pending, German officials, legal experts and lawyers involved in the cases said the massive investigation into the al-Qaida cell has been stymied by this country's lax anti-terrorism laws, unfavorable judicial rulings and a lack of evidence, making it increasingly doubtful that anyone here will be convicted.
The state of affairs is apparent at the judicial complex in Hamburg, where one defendant, Mounir Motassadeq, is being tried on more than 3,000 counts of accessory to murder and membership in a terrorist organization. Despite the gravity of the charges, he is a free man, walking alone from his home to the century-old courthouse each morning, unguarded.
Motassadeq was convicted of the charges last year, making him the only person anywhere found guilty of playing a role in the Sept. 11 plot to attack targets in the United States.
But he was freed in April, after an appellate court rejected the verdict as based on flimsy evidence and other legal deficiencies.
A retrial began in August and is scheduled to last at least two more months, but the basis of the prosecution's case has been undermined by its own witnesses, including one whom the presiding judge accused of "fantasizing" during his testimony.
In another sign of the widespread doubts surrounding the investigation, officials in Hamburg filed papers in July to deport Motassadeq and a second suspect, Abdelghani Mzoudi, to their native Morocco, a pre-emptive measure in case they are found not guilty or receive a light sentence.
Bernd-Ruedeger Sonnen, a law professor at the University of Hamburg, said German officials want to minimize any political embarrassment that would result from a failure by kicking the defendants out of the country as quickly as possible.
"It would be an affront to the U.S. population to acquit them," Sonnen said. "The German public is also asking: Why are the judges making it so difficult? Why can't we convict them? That's the huge problem that Germany now faces, and that's why Germany would be very happy to deport them to Morocco to rid themselves of this problem."
When it comes to dealing with Islamic radicals, Germany has some of the most tolerant laws in Europe. Before the Sept. 11 attacks, it was legal in Germany to belong to a foreign terrorist organization such as al-Qaida as long as it was not active inside the country.
Germany has also been slow to prosecute suspected terrorists wanted by other nations.
German legislators have tried to stiffen anti-terrorism laws in recent years and have made it easier to deport immigrants for belonging to Islamic radical groups.
But police and prosecutors complain they remain hampered by a legal code that was drafted after World War II in hopes of reining in Nazi-style abuses and places a greater burden of proof on German investigators than counterparts in other European countries.

Load-Date: December 15, 2004


End of Document