Cool heads on terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
December 2, 1985, Monday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Editorial; Pg. 33
Length: 620 words
Body


WORLD leaders increasingly recognize the importance of combating international terrorism. Now, agreement for a more low-key, deliberate tone regarding terrorist incidents is needed.
Recent incidents such as the Achille Lauro affair, the storming of Colombia's Palace of Justice by left-wing guerrillas, and last week's hijacking of an EgyptAir jet underscore that terrorism is no longer a difficult challenge facing just the Western industrial nations.
In fact, of course, terrorism has never recognized regional boundaries. Terrorism, as it has been practiced in recent years, has been directed against scores of governments. The crucial factor is that although terrorism always appears to be aimed at individuals, as in the TWA and EgyptAir hijackings, it is actually directed against governments or institutions of power. And more often than not, terrorism stems from deep frustrations and grievances on the part of a community, a group of people, or individuals who feel alienated and powerless within the larger community around them.
Many questions continue unresolved in the hijacking of Athens-to-Cairo Flight 648 and the commando raid by Egyptian troops that resulted in a large number of casualties. But surely, the governments of Malta (where the commando raid took place) and Egypt warrant the backing of the world community. That is not to say that commando raids would always be an appropriate response. They are not. In this particular case, however, where the terrorists had already carried out several shootings, including against women, it was apparent to officials that the perpetrators were not amenable to reasonable negotiation.
It is important that the world community have more than just a simple ''policy'' on terrorism.  What is needed is a broad range of strategies, tactical tools, and better diplomatic and intelligence channels to deal with such incidents.
As pointed out by Robert Kupperman, a terrorism expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies at Georgetown University, each incident must be dealt with on its own terms. There may be times to retaliate against terrorists, or to storm a plane. But there are times not to retaliate, not to take any military action. At times, restraint and negotiation are called for.
Two tracks regarding terrorism merit special attention:
* Publicity: The world's response to terrorism needs to be ratcheted downward, particularly by the news media. A studied ''indifference'' - not allowing requisite discussion and reportage to be overwhelmed by emotionalism - should not be confused with inaction, or unconcern for victims. Terrorism thrives in publicity's glare. Terrorists must be made to know that they cannot trifle with the sovereignty of a nation. They cannot be allowed to commandeer the attention of the world. A more temperate response to a terrorist incident allows a government greater freedom to reach a correct course of action - rather than being hurried by public opinion into potentially unwise or rash actions. Although action at times may be called for, governments should not feel compelled to take violent steps to protect their reputations for decisiveness.
* Short-term steps: Security arrangements must continue to be tightened in airports and at other points of travel. Antiterrorist units require more sophisticated training. Terrorists should be quickly brought to trial. Intelligence and diplomatic channels should be bolstered to identify assailants. And nations that deliberately finance or encourage terrorism must be made to feel the opprobrium of the world community.
In showing cool heads during terrorist incidents, nations must work to resolve the long-term disputes that spur terrorism in the first place.


End of Document