Cooperation critical, FBI agent says Speaker says no agency can fight terrorism alone
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 21, 2004, Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8D
Length: 626 words
Byline: GEORGE HOHMANN DAILY MAIL BUSINESS EDITOR
Body


Cooperation is the key to protecting critical infrastructure, several speakers stressed today during a seminar on homeland defense.
"The spectrum of threats is too broad for any one agency to address by itself," Steve Viglianco, a special agent with the FBI, said at a "Teaming for Homeland Defense" seminar at Columbia Gas Transmission Corp.'s auditorium on MacCorkle Avenue.
Viglianco told nearly 100 energy industry leaders and others that since the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the FBI's dual No. 1 priorities are:
n Foreign counter-intelligence, which consists of trying to negate the efforts of other nations to spy in the United States.
n Counter-terrorism, which involves trying to deter and prevent political- or religious-motivated violence that is designed to change political behavior. "Our counter-terrorism mission is very much a team collaborative effort," he said.
Viglianco said there are two categories of terrorism: physical threats, such as bombings, and cyber-terrorism, such as attacks on information systems. Another way to look at it is, there's domestic terrorism, which is homegrown, and there's international terrorism, which may be present but is not native to the United States, he said.
Domestic threats can be classified as coming from right-wing organizations, left-wing organizations and single-issue organizations, he said. Some international threats are state-sponsored, such as government policies adopted by Iran, Syria and Cuba. Other threats come from long-established groups such as the Basque terrorists in Spain. A third classification is al-Qaida and its spin offs, which Viglianco described as a network of organizations that draws its members from across national boundaries.
Viglianco said terrorists are cooperating more than ever and some are actually studying how law enforcement agencies defeated them in past actions. Also, the level of violence has risen in the last decade, he said.
The FBI defines "critical infrastructure" broadly to include anything essential to the operation of government and the economy.
Viglianco said the FBI's strength is in its investigative abilities. The FBI-West Virginia Joint Terrorism Task Force initially investigates concerns about security in West Virginia, he said. The task force's Charleston office can be reached at 346-3232. Viglianco urged those in charge of critical facilities to err on the side of caution and bring concerns to the task force's attention
The FBI's key strength is its ability to quickly deploy specialists and equipment where needed, he said. Last year's Charleston sniper investigation was a perfect illustration of collaboration and the rapid deployment of considerable resources, he said.
Viglianco said the nation is moving in the right direction in homeland defense. "We've made great strides, but we're not yet where we need to be," he said.
Lt. Col. James Hoyer, deputy commander for installations and activities in the West Virginia National Guard, said that Gen. Allen Tackett, head of the West Virginia National Guard, asked him back in 1997 to begin developing a program to deal with terrorist threats.
"The general told me, 'We are a theater of operations in the United States, based on the threats we'll see in the future,'" Hoyer said.
Hoyer said that he has read that West Virginia is rated last in many things, "but I represent the National Guard that has been rated the No. 1 National Guard in the nation for readiness for over 68 months." The statement elicited a round of applause.
The West Virginia Oil and Natural Gas Association, a trade association that represents businesses in all phases of the oil and gas industry, sponsored the seminar.
Writer George Hohmann can be reached at 348-4836 or by e-mail at business@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: April 22, 2004


End of Document