COPS KILL HATCHET MANIAC Finest, bystander hurt in attack
Daily News (New York)
October 24, 2014 Friday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 9
Length: 544 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA, JOSEPH STEPANSKY and THOMAS TRACY NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Caitlin Nolan and Kerry Burke
Body


A HATCHET-WIELDING man who attacked a group of rookie cops on a Queens street, critically injuring one of them, was shot dead by the officers on Thursday afternoon, and a female bystander was hit in the back by an errant round.
Police are investigating the possibility that Zale Thompson, the attacker who made the crazy charge at a pack of four cops in the heart of Jamaica's shopping district - plunging the hatchet into the skull of Officer Kenneth Healey - was motivated by a desire to commit an act of terrorism.
Thompson, 32, who lives in Queens Village and once served in the Navy, had a Facebook conversation recently with a man during which they discussed terrorism, police sources said. That man, Frank Sha Francois, 49, told the Daily News that they did talk about terrorism but denounced it in all its hideous forms. "Any act of violence where innocent lives are spilled, we spoke against that," Francois said.
"He never expressed to me, that I could recall, that he would do anything violent. Yes, he said there were things that needed to be done - nonviolent, collective action .... He said the people can't take up arms against law enforcement; it would be suicide."
His face partially covered by a green parka, Thompson "charged" at Officer Healey and three other cops as they stood on Jamaica Ave. near 160th St. about 2 p.m., Police Commissioner Bill Bratton said.
A surveillance video showed Thompson "cocking the hatchet like it's a baseball bat and starting to swing it," a police source said. The officers, who graduated from the Police Academy in July, had just huddled together to take a photo for a freelance photographer when Thompson attacked.
One of the blows struck Healey in the side of the head, fracturing his skull, the sources said.
"He raised his hand real high and brought it straight down on the officer," Larry Bethune, 44, who was walking down Jamaica Ave. at the time, told The News. He said he thought the blow would prove fatal for Healey. "He went down on his knees and then landed on his face, and I thought he killed him."
Thompson sliced Officer Joseph Meeker, 24, in the right arm as he brought the weapon down on Healey, sources said.
The two other officers then fired 19 rounds, killing Thompson on a sidewalk outside of Conway store, a cop source said. He did not say how many rounds were fired. One of the bullets struck a 29-year-old woman who was innocently standing outside of a store two doors down, police said. Hit in the lower back, the woman was initially in critical condition, but doctors performed surgery and stabilized her.
Healey also underwent surgery at the same facility, Jamaica Hospital, and was listed in critical but stable condition.
Healey is a Queens College graduate who lives on Long Island, likes to surf and comes from a law-enforcement family, a relative said. "It sure is dangerous; it's getting worse every day," his grandfather John Healey, 84, said of his grandson's profession. "It seems to be a sport, attacking police."
An internal NYPD message sent Thursday urged officers to "maintain a heightened level of awareness" in light of the Queens attack and the shooting at the Canadian Parliament on Wednesday. "Please remind your personnel to remain vigilant at all times," the message adds.

Graphic

 
Officer (below) tends to wounded cop after Zale Thompson (in green jacket left and main photo) attacked four rookie cops in Queens and was shot dead.

Load-Date: October 24, 2014


End of Document