COPS KILL HATCHET MANIAC Finest, bystander hurt in attack
Daily News (New York)
October 24, 2014 Friday
SPORTS EXTRA EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 9
Length: 549 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA, JOSEPH STEPANSKY and THOMAS TRACY NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Caitlin Nolan and Kerry Burke
Body


A HATCHET-WIELDING man who attacked a group of rookie cops on a Queens street, critically injuring one of them, was shot dead by the officers on Thursday afternoon, and a female bystander was hit in the back by an errant round.
Police are investigating the possibility that Zale Thompson, the attacker who made the crazy, unprovoked charge at a pack of four cops in the heart of Jamaica's shopping district - plunging the hatchet into the skull of Officer Kenneth Healey - was motivated by a desire to commit an act of terrorism.
Thompson, 32, lived in Queens Village, once served in the Navy, and studied at Teacher's College at Columbia University from 2009-2010 but did not earn a degree. Recently he had a Facebook conversation with a man on the topic of terrorism, police sources said.
That man, Frank Sha Francois, 49, told the Daily News that they did talk about terrorism but denounced it in all its hideous forms. "Any act of violence where innocent lives are spilled, we spoke against that," Francois said.
"He never expressed to me, that I could recall, that he would do anything violent. Yes, he said there were things that needed to be done - nonviolent, collective action .... He said the people can't take up arms against law enforcement; it would be suicide."
At about 2 p.m., Officer Healey, 25, and three cops who also were graduated from the Police Academy in July, posed for a picture with a freelance photographer, Police Commissioner Bill Bratton said. Thompson saw the group and "charged" at them, hatchet in hand and a green parka partially covering his face. As he reached them, according to a surveillance video, Thompson was "cocking the hatchet like it's a baseball bat" and then started to swing it, a cop source said.
One of the blows struck Healey in the side of the head, fracturing his skull, the sources said.
"He raised his hand real high and brought it straight down on the officer," Larry Bethune, 44, who was walking down Jamaica Ave. at the time, told The News. He said he thought the blow would prove fatal for Healey. "He went down on his knees and then landed on his face, and I thought he killed him."
Thompson sliced Officer Joseph Meeker, 24, in the right arm as he chopped at Healey, the sources said.
The two other officers then fired a total of 19 rounds, killing Thompson on a sidewalk outside of a Conway store, a cop source said.
One of the bullets struck a 29-year-old woman who was innocently standing outside of a store two doors down, police said. Hit in the lower back, the woman was initially in critical condition, but doctors performed surgery and stabilized her.
Healey also underwent surgery at the same facility, Jamaica Hospital, and was listed in critical but stable condition.
Healey is a Queens College graduate who lives on Long Island, likes to surf and comes from a law-enforcement family, a relative said.
"It sure is dangerous; it's getting worse every day," his grandfather, John Healey, 84, said of his grandson's profession. "It seems to be a sport - attacking police."
An internal NYPD message sent Thursday urged officers to "maintain a heightened level of awareness" in light of the Queens attack and the shooting at the Canadian Parliament on Wednesday.
"Please remind your personnel to remain vigilant at all times," the message added.

Graphic

 
Officer (below) tends to wounded cop after Zale Thompson (in green jacket left and main photo) attacked four rookie cops in Queens and was shot dead.

Load-Date: October 24, 2014


End of Document