Cordray concerned about terrorism
The Lima News (Ohio)
May 14, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 The Lima News
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 352 words
Byline: Tom Harrison, The Lima News, Ohio
Body


May 14--ADA -- Four and half months into his new job, Ohio Treasurer Richard Cordray said the state might explore ways to invest in new democracies -- when the time is right.
Cordray, the commencement speaker Sunday at Ohio Northern University's College of Law graduation, said he was heartened to see 11 Master of Laws students from Eastern Europe and Central Asia among the graduates.
But as head of the Ohio agency that controls $11 billion in assets, Cordray said the threat of global terror prevents any immediate thoughts about foreign investments in new nations.
But the idea has merit, he said during an interview following the ONU ceremony..
"The emphasis in this General Assembly has been somewhat on the negative -- but I think it's also essential -- which is what are we doing to make sure that Ohio's money is not invested in ways that support terrorism," Cordray said "We found that there was no policy in the treasurer's office to know or monitor."
Cordray has enacted a policy to make sure that Ohio money is not invested in companies with ties to Iran or other governments that support terrorism.
Meanwhile, Ohio Northern's Master of Legal Letters program is exactly what's needed, said Cordray, who speaks with the experience of an international scholar. Before law school, he completed a master's program in England on a British scholarship.
"What Ohio Northern is doing is probably far beyond anything we could do in the treasury because of the human interactions and that firsthand appreciation and respect for our culture, and vice versa," he said.
Cordray, a Democrat, said America has work to do "to repair our image around the world because of recent events. We have work to do to understand what our balance is with the rest of the world."
You can comment on this story at www.limaohio.com.
Copyright (c) 2007, The Lima News, Ohio Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: May 14, 2007


End of Document