Corey Goodnature to be on race car
Albert Lea Tribune (Minnesota)
April 12, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 Albert Lea Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 426 words
Byline: Micah Bader, Albert Lea Tribune, Minn.
Body


April 12--Local auto racing fans might notice a familiar name on Kurt Busch's ride at the Sprint Cup Series in Kansas City, Kan., on April 21.
A decal of Corey Goodnature's name will be displayed on Busch's No. 78 Furniture Row Chevy car during the race.
Corey was a graduate of Albert Lea High School and a decorated U.S. Army Chinook helicopter pilot. On June 28, 2005, he died in a crash on a mission to save a team of Navy SEALs under heavy fire in the mountains of Afghanistan, his father, Don Goodnature, said.
The Corey Goodnature Memorial Golf Event each June in Albert Lea raises money for a scholarship fund in his name.
Corey will be honored at Kansas Speedway as part of an Armed Forces Foundation program that honors fallen heroes.
"It's just a little way of giving back to the men and women who have given so much to our country," an Armed Forces Foundation spokesman said. "We hope to keep it going."
The foundation dedicates each NASCAR race to an American soldier. Soldiers are nominated to the foundation by email, Facebook or Twitter.
Corey's uncle, Jim Partlow of New Jersey, submitted Corey's name to the foundation by email.
"The foundation emailed him back a few days later and said they chose Corey," Don said.
Corey and Don had never been to a NASCAR race. Now, the Goodnature family has been invited to Kansas City to be honored guests.
Don said he is planning the trip with his wife, Deb, his daughter, Amy, and her husband, Ben Purdy.
"We're getting tickets, parking passes, hot passes to get us down in the pits and an opportunity to go to the driver's meeting," Don said. "It should be an exciting deal."
The foundation spokesman also mentioned that the Goodnature family will get to meet Busch and take a photo with the car.
Corey's passing still weighs heavy on the hearts of those in the Goodnature household.
"He was my best friend and just a great guy," Don said.
Corey will be remembered during the national broadcast on Fox at noon April 21. He is survived by his wife, Laurie, and sons Shea and Brennan.
Goodnature's decorations
--The Air Medal
--Senior Army Aviator Badge
--Army Commendation Medal
--Army Achievement Medal
--Army Good Conduct Medal
--National Defense Service Medal
--Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal
--Global War on Terrorism Service Medal
--Korean Defense Service Medal
--Afghanistan Campaign Medal
--Iraq Campaign Medal
--Overseas Service Ribbon
___ (c)2013 the Albert Lea Tribune (Albert Lea, Minn.) Visit the Albert Lea Tribune (Albert Lea, Minn.) at www.albertleatribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 12, 2013


End of Document