CORPORATIONS STRENGTHEN SECURITY IN ANSWER TO TERRORISM
The New York Times
November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk
Length: 1370 words
Byline: By EDWARD HUDSON
Body


A UNIFORMED guard in white gloves, an ex-Marine who was hired by a security firm, mans a security gate on the entrance roadway into Texaco's offices in the town of Harrison, questioning drivers before waving them through. According to the guard, Michael Capeci, for at least 18 months Texaco stationed no guards at the entrance but decided to do so again after the Sept. 26 bombing of a Union Carbide Corporation building in Mount Pleasant.
 Eight miles to the north, in the town of North Castle, a large new concrete security gate and guardhouse are under construction on the entrance road that rises into the International Business Machines headquarters in Armonk. An I.B.M. spokesman, Maxine Yee, confirmed that the company was ''in the process of installing a controlled-access security area'' to its hilltop property.
These are but two of the recent signs that the corporations in Westchester - among which Union Carbide and I.B.M. have been targets of terrorist attacks in the last 23 months - are paying increased attention to security. A radical group calling itself the United Freedom Front has claimed responsibility for three bombings in the county, involving the Union Carbide facility and two I.B.M. buildings in Harrison.
Security measures tightened at corporate headquarters in Westchester County, New York, where several companies have been targets of terrorist attacks in recent months; photo; FBI says joint task force set up by FBI and New York City Police Department is investigating all bombings, although no arrests have been made (M)
Behind the scenes, additional steps to protect corporate employees and buildings have been taken recently, according to law-enforcement officials and corporate security personnel, but they refused to discuss details on the ground that this was tantamount to giving ''a blueprint'' to the people they were trying to keep out.
No one has been seriously injured in any of the three blasts, which occurred at night when the buildings were largely empty and were preceded by telephoned warnings to hotels and newspapers. The bombs were placed outside but caused heavy damage in each case and law-enforcement officials point to the potential for serious injury.
Kenneth P. Walton, deputy assistant director of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said that the United Freedom Front, a group opposed to United States business dealings in South Africa and Central America, was one of four possibly related groups responsible for a series of 15 bombings since December 1982 in Washington and the New York City area.
The targets have included United States military installations, an F.B.I. office and the Capitol in Washington. In that series the first targets, on Dec. 16, 1982, were an I.B.M. building in Harrison and a South African Airlines building in Elmont, L.I.
According to Mr. Walton, the United Freedom Front, the Revolutionary Fighting Group, the Armed Resistance Unit and the Red Guerrilla Resistance may all be one, merely changing names ''to confuse law enforcement and to give the impression to the public this is a widespread gathering.''
The F.B.I. official said the Joint Terrorist Task Force, set up by the F.B.I. and the New York City Police Department, has been actively investigating all the bombings. He said his agency was also working closely with ''other police agencies affected,'' exchanging data and giving some training in bombing investigations.
So far no one has been arrested in connection with the bombings, Mr. Walton said.
On the Westchester scene, county and local police authorities have been increasing their efforts to deal with the terrorist threat. County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke offered the county's help to corporations after the explosion in September at Union Carbide's Silicone Building near Tarrytown in Mount Pleasant.
Mr. O'Rourke indicated then that the county would work with directors of security of county-based corporations that wanted its help in improving their security. He said that ways might be suggested for corporations to improve their outdoor lighting, to remove shrubbery near their buildings and to put guards on random schedules.
''We'll talk to them about how we can each help to make the whole county a less-likely target,'' he said.
Since then, however, the county has apparently decided to maintain a low profile on the subject. It has been giving out very little information. One of the exceptions was a recent announcement that its Department of Public Safety would give permanent status to a unit responsible for gathering information on suspected terrorists. The three-man intelligence unit was created to help with security during the four-month Brink's trial, which was held in White Plains and ended in June. The trial prompted some extraordinary security measures around the County Courthouse.
The unit has been reactivated, according to Westchester's Public Safety Commissoner, Anthony M. Mosca, for the purpose of working with Federal and state law-enforcement officials and ''amassing'' information.
Deputy Public Safety Commissoner Thomas J. Sweeney, who heads the County Police Division, was reluctant to discuss the matter of corporate security and what is being done about it, but confirmed that his department was working with both the corporations and the F.B.I. His division maintains the County Bomb Squad, which earlier this year acquired a $23,000 robot to be used for bomb disposal. The county staged a demonstration of the robot's capabilities for the press and local police chiefs recently in an effort to advertise its effectiveness.
Some local police departments have been heavily involved in security measures. In Harrison, the police began a series of monthly seminars last spring, according to Chief of Police William P. Harris, with subjects ranging from car theft to ''what to do in case of a bomb.''
''Terrorism is a tough thing to defend against,'' he said. ''There are so many different buildings we have here there is no way you can watch all of them all of the time. We try to get them in the spirit of being aware that there are terrorists and they should be suspicious of people who are on the premises.''
Chief Harris, whose town has a number of large corporate offices, two of which have been targets of the United Freedom Front bombs, said his department's primary job was ''to make sure nobody gets hurt, to clear the buildings out and, if we find any suspects in the area, grab them.''
According to James E. Bayreuther, president of Eagle Security Associates, a professional security firm in Yonkers, major corporations such as I.B.M. are ''very security conscious and have been for years'' but ''if somebody is determined enough to do something, they're going to find a way to do it. You do your best to cover all possible situations, but you can't cover them all without creating a Fort Knox situation.''
Many of the corporate office buildings that have been built in the last few decades sit in open space reflecting suburban values - plenty of grass and shrubs and trees and no fences. What guards there are seem to keep discreetly out of view. Some of that is now changing, obviously. The question is how far the corporations can go without altering the image they have worked to create, one that fosters a sense of openness and friendliness.
One of the things they are doing, according to Mr. Bayreuther, who is second vice chairman of the Westchester chapter of the American Society of Industrial Security, is installing ''card-access systems'' that require employees to insert ID cards into machines to gain entry to buildings and building areas.
He mentioned closed-circuit television, better lighting and special sensors that detect people walking in the area as being among devices to help improve security outside a building.
Corporate executives charged with security generally were reluctant to discuss their efforts.
''I think we're all taking a look at what we've got, and doing some things generic to our operation.'' said Richard G. Mohr, security director for Ciba-Geigy, but he declined to say more.
''Anything we might be doing different, we really don't want to advertise it,'' said Edward Van Den Ameele, a Union Carbide spokesman..

Graphic

 
photo of armed guard in front of Texaco headquarters in Harrison


End of Document