CORRIGAN, ANTI-TERROR PRO
Daily News (New York)
July 8, 2011 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 34
Length: 298 words
Byline: By Daniel Prendergast
Body


THOMAS CORRIGAN, a retired NYPD detective who worked on high-profile terrorist investigations, died of leukemia Monday. He was 53.
"Only he would choose to go on the Fourth of July," said his wife, Colleen. "He was a true American."
Corrigan served in the NYPD and FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force. He worked on investigations into the TWA Flight 800 explosion and the Blind Sheikh case - which led to the conviction of the plotter in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
"He was the smartest man I have ever known," his wife said. "I remember he used to sit for hours watching tapes during some of the cases, trying to decipher what was being said by terrorists. He absolutely loved what he did for a living."
Corrigan lived most of his life in the Rego Park and Middle Village neighborhoods of Queens. He and his wife moved to East Quogue, L.I., 13 years ago.
The former Finest loved knowing what was going on in the world, and would read several newspapers each day.
He also served as a guru to several authors who wrote books on the subject of terrorism, including "The Cell" by John Miller and Michael Stone, and "Jihad Joe" by J.M. Berger.
Corrigan spent his free time watching documentaries and World War II movies. He especially loved the series "Band of Brothers."
"I remember I used to ask him, 'How many times are you going to watch that show?' " his wife said. "He had a real love of that era."
Besides his wife, Thomas Corrigan is survived by four children, Thomas, Michael, Brian and Caroline; and his sister, Patricia.
A wake will take place today from 2 to 4 p.m. and from 7 to 9 p.m. at R.J. O'Shea Funeral Home in Hampton Bays, L.I. A funeral Mass will be celebrated at Rosalie's Catholic Church tomorrow at 10:30 a.m. Corrigan will be buried at Sacred Hearts Cemetery in Southampton.

Load-Date: July 8, 2011


End of Document