Corruption, terrorism and fraud - Oh my!
The Panther: Chapman University
October 23, 2015 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: A-E; Pg. 1
Length: 1128 words
Body


When John McDonagh sees a rat his heart starts to beat a little bit faster. They're his biggest fear.
"It's such an irrational fear, but they just crawl everywhere and they're very aggressive," the sophomore business marketing major said. "I can't help it, the fight or flight response just kicks in."
But McDonagh is not alone in his fear. The second wave of the Chapman University Survey of American Fears - a comprehensive survey of over 1,500 Americans that ranked 88 different fears - 13 percent of respondents said they were afraid of mammals of some sort, such as dogs or rats; but people's biggest fears had to do with the government.
America's Top Fears
The fear of corruption of government officials topped the list, with 58 percent of the individuals reported they were either afraid or very afraid of this fear domain. Immediately following were fears of cyber-terrorism, terrorist attacks and the government tracking of personal information - with 44.8 percent, 44.4 percent and 41.4 percent being afraid or very afraid, respectively.
For Fred Smoller, a professor of political science at Wilkinson College of Humanities and Social Sciences, these results didn't come as much of a surprise. Smoller said he believes that recent instances of government expansion, police brutality, terrorism and the general distrust of officials have contributed to this growing fear of the government in America.
"It's just a number of things coming together," Smoller said. "There's always been a healthy skepticism in government and disagreement about the proper role of government since the beginning of the nation, but I think it's really been heightened since 9/11."
Domains of Fear
Although government and technology-related fears topped the list, the survey also revealed American's worries about hate crimes, unemployment and even zombies. The survey was sent out via email to randomly selected participants and were divided into 10 sections - or domains of fear. The domains ranged from topics of environment to personal anxieties and each contained questions that related to those fears, in which the respondent would mark their answers on different scales depending on the question.
The 10 domains were an expansion from the original survey conducted in spring of 2014. Christopher Bader, a professor of sociology at Wilkinson College of Humanities and Social Sciences taught an interterm class called The Sociology of Fear that allowed his students to contribute to the development of the study through the creation of these new domains and new fear-related questions.
Throughout the course, the students split themselves into groups and each explored a domain of fear, then interviewed people to develop questions for the survey. The information they gathered during the class and the data from the previous survey were used to develop the most recent one.
Otniel Pavia, a senior sociology major, was enrolled in the course last interterm, and helped to create the judgement of others fear domain. While the questions in this domain received the lowest average fear score overall, they revealed that some Americans do fear judgement based on their appearance, age, and weight.
"I chose judgement because it was something I was very interested in it," Pavia said. "One of my classmates brought up the fact that our reaction to judgement makes us change ourselves, or act in different manners, which I thought was really true."
Purpose of the Study
While this second round of the survey yielded some surprising results, the true purpose in repeating the study is to observe any trends in how fears develop and change.  
"Our goal is to find out, over time, if fears change or what kind of fears tend to be really stable," Bader said. "We want to try different blocks of questions to find out what predicts fear, what are the outcomes of fear, what it does to people and how it changes their beliefs and their attitudes and their behaviors."
In order to observe these possible fear changes and patterns, the Chapman Survey of American Fears is expected to continue as an annual study with results being collected in April or May of each year.
Difference in Results
The results from this year's survey were significantly different from last year. According to a press release from Chapman University, last year's top fears included walking alone at night, internet safety and public speaking, which are entirely different from the technology and government related fears that topped this year's list.
Bader said that the difference in results wasn't necessarily due to a change in the public's fears, but a change in the questions that were asked in the survey. The original wave only included a few questions about technology, but investigators decided to add more when questions about technology seemed to resonate with the people taking the survey - which Bader doesn't think is a coincidence.
"We learned from the first wave, when we asked about a smaller number of (technology) items, that these (fears) were resonating with people," Bader said. "So we asked more survey items about technology in the second wave and those showed up at the top of the list. I wouldn't really want to say that Americans have become more afraid of technology in the last year, but instead I want to say that we have gotten better at asking about it."
A Wake Up Call
This year's survey also went further into depth on matters of both natural and man-made disasters. A plague was the most feared of the natural disasters - ranking as No. 14 on the list, with 34 percent of Americans saying they were afraid or very afraid of one occurring. Tornadoes and drought followed shortly behind with fear levels of 31 and 29 percent, respectively.
  The results showed that Americans have a real fear of the occurrence of natural disasters but it also showed that many people are doing little to prepare. Ann Gordon, associate dean of the Wilkinson College of Humanities and Social Sciences and the primary investigator of natural disaster-related fears for the survey, found the disconnect between the fear levels and preparedness levels relatively shocking.
"(The survey) shows that we need a disaster wake-up call," Gordon said.
More than half of the Americans surveyed believe they would experience some sort of natural or man-made disaster in their lifetimes. Yet, the results show that people seem reluctant to take the steps they think are necessary to be prepared for such catastrophes. The survey also reported that 86 percent of people surveyed thought that an emergency kit containing essential supplies such as food, water and medical supplies would improve chances of surviving either a natural or man-made disaster, but only 28 percent of those people actually have an emergency kit in their household.

Load-Date: October 23, 2015


End of Document