Correspondent of the Day; Correspondent of the Day, September 5, 2020: Honor the 9/11 fallen by helping heal the nation
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 5, 2020 Saturday
2 Edition


Copyright 2020 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; Pg. 16A
Length: 308 words
Body


Honor the 9/11 fallen by helping heal the nation
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 As we approach the 19th anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, we never should forget the loss of 2,977 innocent American lives. Many simply were at their work desks and had no idea that Sept. 11 would be their last day on earth, while others - such as brave first responders and the "Let's Roll" passengers and crew of Flight 93 - willingly sacrificed their lives so others might live.
 Sept. 11 brought us together as a nation against the common foe of terrorism. Unfortunately, as we approach this November's election, our nation is torn asunder by political strife, petty bickering and partisanship, none of which contributes to moving our great nation forward.
 I lost 27 good friends and co-workers in the Pentagon, and I think of and pray for them and their families every day. They made the ultimate sacrifice, proving with their lives that freedom truly is not free. Many of them had spent years away from their families on extended six- to eight-month deployments at sea, and their tour in the Navy Command Center was going to be their last assignment before a well-deserved retirement and time spent with their families.
 Did my "shipmates" in the Pentagon sacrifice their lives for the political morass and gridlock that has gripped this nation for the past three years? I sincerely hope and pray every day that their sacrifice was not in vain.
 On the anniversary of this horrific event, let us try to put aside our differences, if only for a day, and work together to find common ground for the good of the nation. Honor their death and always remember this day because we have a duty to those who died. Our duty is one day to bring America back to unity, life and liberty.
 James R. Poplar III,
 Captain, U.S. Navy (retired).Quicksburg.

Load-Date: September 5, 2020


End of Document