Cost of Arab Bank's Liability in Terrorism Suit Is Hard to Assess
The New York Times
September 24, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 749 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE CLIFFORD
Body


With a landmark judgment on Monday declaring Arab Bank liable for knowingly supporting terrorism, the case now turns to another complicated calculation: the cost of that liability.
The 297 plaintiffs in the case, all Americans, have not asked for a specific amount. And since it was the first civil case against a bank to go to trial under the Anti-Terrorism Act, there are no precise points of comparison.
Even so, legal experts said many factors suggested that Arab Bank, which is challenging the federal jury's verdict in the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, may be asked to pay a judgment near or exceeding $1 billion.
The Anti-Terrorism Act, for one, automatically triples any jury damages, a significant multiplier considering the sheer number of plaintiffs, who include people who were injured and those whose family members died, or the estates of those who died.
The nature of the case also hurts Arab Bank; the jury, in a separate trial on damages, will not be asked to consider the bank's culpability. They will be told the bank has been found liable, and in deciding damages, they can expect to hear from victims describing how they were injured, or how they lost a spouse or child in terrorist attacks.
''If the finding of liability stands, which is open,'' said John C. Coffee Jr., a professor at Columbia Law School, ''the damages could go into the billions.''
''Their best hope will be appealing to the Second Circuit,'' he said of the bank.
Plaintiffs accused the bank of knowingly handling finances for Hamas terrorists, leading to 24 attacks in Israel and the Palestinian Territories in the early 2000s. The bank maintained that it had followed standard compliance procedures and properly checked to see that transactions were not for terrorists.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs said they were considering a number of cases in preparing for the damages phase, which had not yet been scheduled.
In a case called Morris v. Khadr, a 15-year-old boy named Omar Khadr, an Al Qaeda member, threw a grenade at American soldiers in Afghanistan. One soldier was killed, and one seriously injured. The surviving soldier and the deceased soldier's family then sued Omar's father for damages under the Anti-Terrorism Act. The judge awarded the wife and children of the dead soldier $20 million, and the injured soldier $2.7 million. Both figures were then tripled.
In another case, family members of a couple killed by Hamas members in Israel as the couple drove home from a wedding sued the Palestinian Authority. A judge awarded the couple's two sons a little over $10 million, the mother and father of the dead husband $5 million and the siblings $2.5 million each; all figures were then tripled.
And in a case brought against a number of Islamic charities including the Holy Land Foundation, sued for aiding Hamas in causing the death of a 17-year-old American, David Boim, a jury awarded his parents $52 million in damages, a judgment that was then tripled.
However, Arab Bank can fight back in a number of ways.
The bank may argue that since it did not plan or carry out the attacks, it should bear just a portion of the responsibility for the damages.
Further, the bank may argue that some of the victims have already received compensation for their injuries from the State of Israel, and that the amount should serve as a guideline. And some of the same plaintiffs are pursuing cases against other banks for the same attacks, meaning that Arab Bank can argue that plaintiffs should not receive damages in full from each for the same incident.
In the damages trial, the plaintiffs plan to describe, in sometimes graphic detail, the effects of the 24 attacks in question. Plaintiffs will ''ensure that the jury has a full and complete sense of the physical and emotional toll caused when a suicide bomber detonates explosives packed with nails and bolts that rip through a crowded commuter bus or cafe,'' Gary Osen, a plaintiffs' lawyer, said in an email.
''Those stories that the jury didn't hear'' in the liability portion ''are going to be very moving,'' said Mark S. Werbner, also a plaintiffs' lawyer. He mentioned as an example a father who took his daughter out on the night before her wedding; both were killed by a suicide bomber.
The bank is in an especially difficult position because aggressively cross-examining such witnesses would probably be perceived as callous, Mr. Coffee said.
''I don't think you want to tell parents that they didn't mourn the loss of their children,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/24/nyregion/24arabbank.html

Load-Date: September 24, 2014


End of Document