COST OF FIGHTING TERRORISM IS $60 BILLION SINCE ATTACKS;
 THAT IS ABOUT FIVE TIMES THE AMOUNT THAT CONGRESS OK'D FOR PREVIOUS YEAR;
 AND BUSH WILL SEEK BILLIONS MORE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 7, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 312 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Congress has provided more than $60 billion since September to combat terrorism at home and abroad and to rebuild from the attacks on New York and Washington. That's roughly five times what the nation spent to fight terrorism in the previous year.
Some costs are one-time expenses and will diminish in coming years, such as helping communities recover from the attacks, but other anti-terrorism programs are sure to grow.
President George W. Bush's budget for next fiscal year is expected to include billions more for the military's $345 billion wartime budget, plus a hefty increase for anti-terrorism efforts. Fiscal 2003 begins Oct. 1.
Republican aides on the House Budget Committee estimate that so-called homeland security programs alone - such as hiring FBI agents and stopping bioterrorists - will grow by $150 billion over the next decade.
Not all of the $60 billion Congress approved will be spent this year. Precise amounts are unclear because of disagreements - sometimes fueled by politics - over what exactly constitutes anti-terrorism spending, and because such activities are often included within broader programs and are not distinct.
Though but a sliver of the federal budget, $60 billion exceeds the revenue in fiscal 2000 of all but the dozen largest U.S. corporations. The amount would buy 3 million cars at $20,000 apiece. It is also five times the $12 billion total for all federal anti-terrorism spending in fiscal 2001, according to a White House report in August.
Beefing up security at home and hunting Osama bin Laden are hugely popular with the public and members of both parties. But that hasn't stopped political warfare from erupting.
Bush and congressional Democrats clashed in the fall over how to divide the first round of spending between defense and domestic programs. With a return of federal deficits imminent, more fights are brewing this year.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: January 7, 2002


End of Document