Cost of terrorism: $38.1B
University Wire
November 17, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 The Daily Universe via U-Wire
Length: 981 words
Byline: By Nicholas Bender, The Daily Universe; SOURCE: Brigham Young U.
Dateline: PROVO, Utah 
Body


Sept. 11 victims and their families received an unprecedented $38.1 billion in compensation, according to a recently published report. The report raises questions about the rationale behind the payout, explores the compensation methods for future victims of terrorism and mentions the fledgling market for terrorism insurance.
Researchers with the RAND Institute for Civil Justice, the nonprofit independent research organization responsible for the study, interviewed insurance industry insiders and compiled data to approximate the total victim payout.
"Our report marks the first effort to comprehensively estimate the financial compensation made from all sources to the individuals and businesses who were victims of the attacks," said Lloyd Dixon, a RAND senior economist.
According to the report, civilians killed or seriously injured in the attacks received a total of $8.7 billion, averaging about $3.1 million per recipient.
Insurance companies collectively paid approximately 51 percent of the total cost of recovery from the attacks; the government footed 42 percent of the bill and various charities picked up the remaining 7 percent.
The federal government covered such a large portion of the recovery to avoid the avalanche of liability claims that would have glutted the court system, increasing the financial blow of the attacks. It did so through the Victim Compensation Fund. Administrators of the fund determined the financial award for each victim based on a complex and controversial formula that included a modified calculation of future yearly earnings.
However, the fairness of the compensation payments has been disputed.
For example, emergency responders with similar economic losses as their civilian counterparts received on average $1.1 million more per person. Though most of the difference can be attributed to charitable donations, many were angered over the implication that some lives appeared to be worth more than others. The formula also limited yearly earnings to $231,000, though some victims earned more.
Still, researchers have found that past terrorism victims have received relatively little in comparison.
"This was a complete departure from what's normally done," Dixon said. "There was nothing like [Sept. 11 compensation payments] for Oklahoma City or for the Washington-area sniper attacks."
Even the families of servicemen and women killed in action receive a relatively small sum in comparison. They typically receive a death benefit of $250,000, according to Lt. Col. Joe Richard, a press officer with the Department of Defense.
Because of criticism associated with the Victim Compensation Fund, the study encourages policy makers to develop appropriate compensation systems now to better cope with future attacks.
One of the issues Dixon said he is concerned about is whether people killed in terrorist attacks should receive greater benefits than those killed in other crimes.
"There may be a rationale for that," he said. "But we as the policy community and congress people need to address [if] terrorism justifies a whole different kind of response than we have for losses in other settings."
Dixon said a leading factor contributing to the sizeable payout was because the Victim Compensation Fund was meant to replace what victims and their families could have received through the legal system. The fund considered economic losses such as wage loss and non-economic losses. This includes pain and suffering, with the latter traditionally accounting for large cash awards in court.
Terror expert Jerrold Post said he thinks the notoriety of the attacks contributed to the substantial compensation.
"The pathos of the victims and the high-profile nature of the case certainly led to that," he said. "It seems to be a function of this first, extraordinary attack on American soil and how many victims there were and the massive international publicity concerning it."
The government compensation provided through the VCF also reassured investors, said Scott Duncan, public affairs director with Property Casualty Insurers Association of America, a consortium of 1,000 insurance companies.
"A lot of people don't understand the role that insurance plays in the economy," he said. "The only way people are going to invest in projects and continue taking risks, when it comes to capitalism, is if they can have some level of insurance."
Before Sept. 11, most life insurance policies covered terrorism-related deaths, though not expressly stated. But the financial losses caused by the attacks prompted many insurance companies to drop the implied terrorism coverage from their policies. Some companies opted to offer a separate terrorism policy and others have avoided that type of coverage altogether.
"Because of the enormous costs that September 11 brought, companies are very shy to offer terrorism insurance," Duncan said. "The whole basis of the insurance industry is being able to quantify risk. There is no risk model for terrorism insurance."
Partly to encourage insurance companies to offer terrorism coverage, Congress passed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act in 2002, which provided a backstop for insurers. Under the act, the government picks up the cost of a terrorist attack if insurance company losses exceed a certain level. However, the law will expire in January 2005. Without an extension of this government safeguard, insurance companies that currently offer some sort of terrorism policy will refrain from doing so in the future, Duncan said.
"Most of the companies are not going to be willing to offer terrorism insurance because it has the potential to bankrupt them," he said. "So we're trying to send the message to legislators in Congress that this legislation needs to be extended. If people can't get insurance policies to cover [terrorist attacks], the economy is going to absolutely tank."
(C) 2003 The Daily Universe via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 17, 2004


End of Document