COUNTRY'S HISTORY IS STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
MARCH 16, 1994, WEDNESDAY,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 312 words
Byline: ELLEN PERLMUTTER
Body


Ireland's dominant, historical theme revolves around its struggle for national freedom against the domination of a foreign power.
For 7 1/2 centuries, Ireland struggled against England -- from the coming of the Normans in about 1170 to the establishment in 1922 of the Irish Free State, which granted virtual independence to 26 of Ireland's 32 counties.
Catholics in Northern Ireland have long claimed that Protestants have violated their civil rights and discriminated against them in jobs and other areas.
For more than 300 years, this part of the old province of Ulster has experienced religious intolerance and sectarian conflict.
Although most of the people of Northern Ireland look forward to the day when they can live and work without the threat of violence, terrorism and sectarian fighting has prevented this from being more than a dream.
That is why it was significant earlier this month when President Clinton invited British Prime Minister John Major to visit Pittsburgh, where Major's grandfather was a master bricklayer in the Andrew Carnegie steel mills in the late 1800s.
Clinton chose the appearance as the occasion to applaud the ''political courage and vision'' of Major and Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds in forging a declaration in principles for peace in Northern Ireland.
Clinton also was making amends to the British for granting a 48-hour visa to New York City for a one-day peace conference in February to Gerry Adams, president of the Sinn Fein, the political arm of Northern Ireland's outlawed Irish Republican Army.
A visa for Adams was blocked at least eight times over the past two decades because of British objections and U.S. policy requiring a special waiver for leaders of organizations known or suspected of supporting terrorism.
The question is whether, in his role as peacemaker, Adams can help disarm the people of violence on both sides.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Gerry Adams/Sinn Fein leader

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document