County residents answer call to help victims of terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
September 13, 2001, Thursday Lake


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 366 words
Byline: Madhu Krishnamurthy Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


An outpouring of generosity is surfacing in Lake County as local residents mobilized fund-raisers and blood donations to help East Coast terrorism victims.  
United Way of Lake County has set up a September 11th Fund for victims and families affected in Tuesday's terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C.  
"The United Way system has been immediate in their response to help those affected by these horrific events," said Douglas Weber, president and CEO of United Way.  
The September 11th Fund was created by United Way and The New York Community Trust to receive financial donations from across the country.  
Proceeds will be distributed by the two organizations to the affected cities. The effort is supported by the Council on Foundations. Donations can be made by check or money order to United Way of Lake County, 2020 O'Plaine Road, Green Oaks, IL 60048.  
The fund also will support emergency assistance agencies like the American Red Cross. For information, call United Way of Lake County at (847) 816-0063.  
Another group collecting money was Mundelein MainStreet. Proceeds from the group's Classic Car Cruise Night event will go to the Red Cross.  
LifeSource Blood Service is working with several local groups to deliver emergency blood supplies to injured survivors.  
The most immediate one, in conjunction with Lake Forest Hospital, is Friday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. at the hospital's Health Education Center, 660 N. Westmoreland Road. For information, call LifeSource at (847) 803-7943.  
LifeSource donor centers have received a tremendous response from the community, officials said. The wait time to donate blood at most centers is about four hours.  
LifeSource's Gurnee center is not accepting appointments because the walk-in response has been high, officials said.  
Other groups also are coordinating drives.  
The Hawthorn Elementary District in Vernon Hills will host a LifeSource blood drive Saturday at Hawthorn Elementary North, 430 Aspen Drive.  
Wauconda Fire Department's blood drive is Saturday at Long Grove Community Center, and Sunday at Quentin Bible Church in Wauconda.  
Quentin Road Bible Baptist Church's blood drive is Sunday at the church in Lake Zurich.

Load-Date: September 13, 2001


End of Document