County wants boat for terrorism protection
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
January 2, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 478 words
Byline: ELISABETH HULETTE ERIN COX

Staff Writers
Body


A new boat that can detect biological or chemical attacks and respond to nuclear explosions may begin patrolling Anne Arundel County waterways.
The county's Office of Emergency Management recently got a go-ahead from the County Council to apply for $670,000 in federal funds to buy a terrorism prevention and response boat.
"We are located in an area that has a lot of terrorism targets," explained Division Chief Michael Cox, a spokesman for the county Fire Department. "We feel it would be prudent of us to have a boat like this."
Those targets could include the port of Baltimore, the Bay Bridge, the Naval Academy, the National Security Agency, Fort George G. Meade and shipping and cruise ship routes around Baltimore and Washington, he said.
"It's post-9/11," he said. "We have to think about these things now."
Technically, the boat would be a Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear Explosion (CBRNE) Response and Prevention Boat, equipped with sensors and other equipment to respond to terrorism threats.
It also could be used for putting out fires along waterways and for law enforcement, Chief Cox said.
Cathy Vitale, chairman of the council, said the boat would benefit the county.
The council passed a resolution Dec. 17 giving the county's Office of Emergency Management permission to apply for funding for the boat from the Maryland Emergency Management Agency. The money was given to the state from the Department of Homeland Security through the 2007 federal Homeland Security Grant Program.
The grant is for $670,000, and if it goes through, the department will look for a boat at or under that price, Chief Cox said.
The county already has one fire boat, called the Lady Anne. It is 43 feet long, carries about 350 gallons of fuel and has 1160 horsepower. And with a speed of at 37 knots, it moves quickly, Chief Cox said. It is kept at Sandy Point State Park and patrols during major events like fireworks, sailboat races and the Bay Bridge swim.
It also is used for medical emergencies and as a dive platform when the fire department does "bounce dives," chasing targets found with sonar and GPS.
This summer, Baltimore City christened a larger version of the kind of boat the county is interested in buying.
Chief Kevin Cartwright of the Baltimore City Police Department said the city's Regional Response Watercraft and Fireboat - named the John R. Frazier - was bought to protect and defend the Baltimore region, which includes Anne Arundel County and Annapolis.
The 87-foot, $6.25 million watercraft was purchased with federal grants from the Department of Homeland Security.
The county's grant application would seek funds from a similar program.
The county's boat would be smaller than the Lady Anne, and significantly smaller than Baltimore City's boat, Chief Cox said.
The boat only will be purchased if the federal government approves the grant application.

Load-Date: January 3, 2008


End of Document