Counterterror expert; centenarian actress
Chicago Daily Herald
August 5, 2018 Sunday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 11
Length: 841 words
Byline: Daily Herald news services
Body


Michael A. Sheehan, who led counterterrorism efforts around the globe with the United Nations, State Department and New York City Police Department and who as a top Defense Department official directed the country's Special Forces units and drone programs, died Monday at a military hospital in Bethesda, Maryland. He was 63. The cause was multiple myeloma, said his wife, Sita Graham Vasan. Sheehan, who began his career as an Army Ranger, helped investigate the 1993 "Black Hawk Down" incident in Somalia, in which two U.S. helicopters were shot down, killing 18 service members. In 2000, Sheehan raised alarms about Osama bin Laden and the dangers of al-Qaida. 
"What's it going to take to get them to hit al-Qaida?" he reportedly asked at the time. "Does al-Qaida have to attack the Pentagon?" After the Sept. 11 attacks, Sheehan spent two years as an assistant secretary-general of the U.N., coordinating anti-terror efforts around the world. In 2003, he joined the New York City police as a deputy commissioner and directed what was widely recognized as one of the country's foremost counterterrorism units. He trained thousands of police officers in how to deal with potential threats, from car bombs to nuclear weapons. His 2008 book, "Crush the Cell: How to Defeat Terrorism Without Terrorizing Ourselves," spelled out his sometimes unorthodox theories of fighting terrorism. He believed the most effective way to prevent terrorist cells from attacking the United States and other countries was to stop them from forming in the first place, through diplomacy and what he called a "small-footprint" and low-cost presence in countries that gave rise to militants. He recommended that U.S. spy services and military forces "drain the swamps" through strategic operations to eliminate training camps for terrorists. "It is important to understand that terrorism is an instrument of the weak," he said in 2008, "and that the terrorist depends on a psychological overreaction to an attack on an innocent civilian target." From 2011 to 2013, Sheehan was able to put his ideas into practice as the assistant secretary of defense for Special Operations and low intensity conflict. In that role, he directed all Special Operations branches of the military, including the Army Rangers and Navy SEALs, as well as the drone strikes that targeted terrorist leaders overseas. In 2000, Sheehan was asked by USA Today how the country could best confront the threat of terrorism. "What works," he said, is "sustained diplomatic pressure, political will and courage." * A Quebec model known for his head-to-toe tattoos and participation in the Lady Gaga music video "Born This Way," has died at age 32. His talent agency confirmed the death of Rick Genest, better known as Zombie Boy, on Thursday. Lady Gaga said on her official Twitter account Thursday night that "the suicide of friend Rick Genest, Zombie Boy is beyond devastating." The American singer added: "We have to work harder to change the culture, bring Mental Health to the forefront and erase the stigma that we can't talk about it." According to his website, Genest holds the Guinness World Book of Records for the most insects tattooed on a human body (178), as well as the most bones inked on a human body, at 138. * Mary Carlisle, a Hollywood actress who enjoyed popularity in the 1930s as a wholesome ingénue in musical comedies opposite singer Bing Crosby, died Wednesday at a retirement community in Los Angeles. She was believed to be 104 but never confirmed her real age, even to her family. A prolific if little-heralded actress, Carlisle appeared in more than 60 films in a career that lasted about a dozen years. * Ron Dellums, a fiery anti-war activist who championed social justice as Northern California's first black congressman, died Monday from cancer, according to a longtime adviser. He was 82. A former Marine who got his start in politics on the city council of the liberal enclave of Berkeley, he defeated a labor-backed Democrat to win his first election to Congress in 1970. He retired in 1998 and was later elected mayor of his native Oakland in 2006. A self-identified democratic socialist, Dellums was at the center of most major liberal movements of the 1970s and 1980s. He led the drive to sanction South Africa during apartheid, challenged U.S. entry into wars, opposed increased military spending and helped start the Congressional Black Caucus. * Josip Peruzovic, the former pro wrestler known for playing beloved villain Nikolai Volkoff, has died at age 70, his wife confirmed July 29. Lynn Peruzovic said he has had heart problems. * The fun-loving, fade-hitting 13-time PGA Tour winner whose lack of a practice regime spawned an often-told spoiled banana story died July 28 of brain cancer. Bruce Lietzke was 67. Lietzke told caddie Al Hansen at the final event of 1984 that he wouldn't touch his clubs again until the 1985 opener. An unbelieving Hansen put a banana in Lietzke's golf bag as a test, only to discover the rotten fruit still there in January.

Graphic

 
Rick GenestRon Dellums

Load-Date: August 6, 2018


End of Document