Counter-terrorism task force holds drill at Dutch Wonderland
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 18, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 292 words
Body


The screams emanating from Dutch Wonderland Thursday afternoon were not the results of roller coasters or water slides.
Instead, more than 70 student volunteers ran screaming from the Lincoln Highway amusement park's diving arena as a simulated chlorine gas leak spewed smoke into the air.
#DRILL.HOLN08#Another 30 students stayed behind, pretending they were among the injured.
As firefighters rushed to the scene, one fell in mock distress as he feigned being overwhelmed bythe fumes. Then the popping of firecrackers could be heard, simulating gunfire and yet another emergency. Before long, word leaked to the press that the "shooters" had taken "hostages."
Between 300 and 400 people participated in the full-scale mass casualty exercise, organized by the Lancaster County Counter-Terrorism Task Force.
Duane Hagelgans, battalion chief for the city fire department, said community groups, churches, county government employees and, of course, local emergency responders all combined to make more than four years of planning a successful reality.
"We started planning this back in early 1999," Hagelgans said.  "We've been meeting about it every month since and, for the last four months, every other week."
Ambulance companies from all over the county, as well as the city's firefighters, police patrol officers, bicycle patrol officers and horseback patrol officers, were among the drill's first responders.
State police and police from East and West Lampeter townships also got in on the act. Local hazardous materials teams and at least eight area fire departments were part of the drill, too, Hagelgans said.
More than 150 students from Lancaster Mennonite High School, Lampeter Strasburg High School and Conestoga Valley High School portrayed victims.

Load-Date: April 19, 2003


End of Document