Council Juggles Counterterror, Human Rights
New York Sun (Archive)
March 4, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FOREIGN; Pg. 6
Length: 367 words
Byline: By BENNY AVNI, Special to the Sun
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body


As the United Nations Security Council tries to intensify the combat against global terrorism, human rights groups are cautioning against overreach.
"Anybody who watches human rights after September 11 can see that counterterrorism is one of the most significant factors on the human rights scene," Joanna Wechsler of Human Rights Watch told The New York Sun.
Alluding to measures like those taken by the Bush administration, she added, "There are situations in legislation around the world where human rights are being violated under the label of fighting terrorism."
The New York-based Human Rights Watch is specifically concerned about an upcoming Security Council resolution that is meant to strengthen the Counterterrorism Committee it established in October 2001.
In its meeting today, the Council is expected to start contemplating a new mechanism that will answer directly to the Council and would work with governments to combat terrorism.
Such a body, Ms. Wechsler said, "must include human rights experts to advise governments on how to protect human rights while tackling terrorism."
"Any single time they come to us we try to listen to them," Spanish Ambassador Inocencio Arias, who heads the Terror Committee, told the Sun, referring to human rights organizations. But he scoffed at including human rights experts in the work of the committee.
"We should be careful what we do with terrorism about human rights," he said. "But be represented? What do they mean?"
The work of the committee known as the CTC, which was first headed by Britain, has met a few stumbling blocks. It received reports from U.N. members on antiterrorism measures, but some of the reports were deemed incomplete.
Nations such as Syria, which just ended a stint as a member of the Council, were able to declare that their report to the CTC showed they were part of the global war against terror at the same time that Washington kept them on its list of states that support terrorists.
And while the Council has been constantly urged to avoid rights violations in measures such as tightening monetary transactions and following global movements of Al Qaeda terrorists, it was still unable to unite around a definition of terrorism.

Load-Date: March 4, 2004


End of Document