Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School observes 51st Raising Day in Mizoram- Sentinelassam
The Sentinel
May 2, 2020 Saturday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 293 words
Byline: Sentinel Digital Desk
Body


Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School in Vairengte (CIJWS), Mizoram observed its 51st Raising Day on Friday
Mizoram: The Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School in Vairengte, Mizoram observed its 51st Raising Day on Friday. Maj Gen Ajai Verma, Commandant, CIJW School complimented all ranks of the CIJW School for their commitment and professionalism. He encouraged them to strictly practice the protocols of COVID-19 and emerge victorious from the threat of the dreaded diseases.
The CIJW was established on May 1, 1970 to train personnel of the armed forces, para military forces and other armies from friendly foreign countries. Over the years, the CIJW School has grown in strength and stature to become a premier institute of international repute. The CIJW School has trained personnel from 49 countries in counter insurgency and counter-terrorism operations. Due to this international recognition, the school has put Mizoram on the world map.
Since its inception, the school has constantly evolved in stature and strength, in keeping with the changing dynamics of insurgency and terrorism in the country. Its relevance has grown manifold with the mushrooming of small and big insurgent/terrorist groups in the country and worldwide. With its vast expertise in counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism training, it has truly come into its own as a centre of excellence in such operations.
The school has continuously incorporated all the lessons learnt during such operations and has painstakingly kept its training curriculum contemporary. It presently trains over 7,000 officers and soldiers every year. Its scope and mandate has increased with para military forces, police, services and foreign component adding to the numbers and compositions.

Load-Date: May 7, 2020


End of Document