County unveils terrorism plan
The Capital (Annapolis, MD.)
August 16, 1998, Sunday


Copyright 1998 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Arundel; Pg. D1
Length: 573 words
Byline: By SARA MARSH, Staff Writer
Body


With this month's bombings of American embassies in Nairobi and Kenya still fresh in their minds, Anne Arundel County officials will introduce a new terrorism planning program on Tuesday.
Designed to heighten aware ness among county emergency personnel and train them to re spond to the threat of terrorist weapons of mass destruction, the program will be introduced in conjunction with the official opening of the Fire Department's new Emergency Operations Center, set for 3 p.m. Tuesday in Millersville.
A terrorist attack "can really happen anywhere," said county Battalion Chief John M. Scholz. He said adding the new program had been in the planning stages before the recent African bomb ings.
Anne Arundel County is par ticularly vulnerable to such an attack because of its proximity to Washington, D.C., and Baltimore. The county also is vulnerable because of the num ber of military installations and related facilities _ including the Naval Academy and the National Security Agency _ located within the county, local officials said.
"In this day and age, particu larly this close to a major metro politan area, it's something that is a crucial part of being pre pared," Lisa Ritter, spokesman for County Executive John G. Gary Jr., said of the new pro gram.
Under the new program, which was developed by the National Fire Academy and the U.S. Army Chemical and Biologi cal Defense Command, county Fire Department instructors were specially trained by experts to deal with various terrorist scenarios, including attacks with chemical weapons, biological agents and nuclear materials.
The county instructors will pass on their new training to all Fire Department personnel, Chief Scholz said. That training will be targeted to rescue workers' specialties, including first responders, incident com manders, hazardous material technicians and emergency medical services, he said. Local hospital personnel also may re ceive some training.
Several surrounding jurisdic tions also are instituting the terrorism planning program, Chief Scholz said. Federal offic ials have been encouraging states and smaller jurisdictions to develop plans for responding to terrorist incidents, he said.
"A pro-active response to the possible threat of weapons of mass destruction is essential to the pro
tection of citizens in Anne Arundel County," said Chief Stephen D. Halford, fire administrator and di
rector of emergency management for the county.
Along with the introduction of the new terrorism planning pro
gram, county officials next week also will formally open the Fire Department's new, $ 250,000 Emerg
ency Operations Center.
The center, which was moved in February from the Winterrode Building in Crown Point, is now located in the basement of the county Fire Department's Millers
ville headquarters. The new center is more centrally located and offers more up-to-date technical facilities, Ms. Ritter said.
The center is designed for use by rescue and emergency response of
ficials during major events, such as hurricanes, blizzards and hazard
ous materials spills.
The new center includes an oper
ations room for the county execu
tive to use to coordinate rescue and relief efforts, as well as a communi
cations room that provides for wire
less communication with various governmental agencies, including the State Emergency Operations Center.
The center, which has a full-time staff of three, also provides space for amateur radio operators, Chief Scholz said.

Load-Date: August 17, 1998


End of Document