Counter-terrorism symposium offers opportunities for public-private sector cooperation
The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)
December 27, 2001 Thursday


Copyright 2001 Dolan Media Newswires
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 744 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff Business Writer
Body


While it's not unusual for companies in the Baltimore-Washington corridor to thrive on fat government contracts, the opportunities for public-private sector cooperation -- and profit -- have soared dramatically since Sept. 11.
At a symposium on counter-terrorism held earlier this month in Washington, more than 150 business executives came together to network, meet government procurement and embassy officials, and scope out the opportunities arising from the nation's new security and safety economy.
"Nobody left their seats; nobody left the room, and when it was all over, people stayed and talked," said Shelby Scarbrough, director of the Greater Washington Board of Trade's International Gateway initiative, which co-sponsored the symposium with Patton Boggs LLP, a Washington law firm.
"In every cloud there's a silver lining," said Wally Workman, senior vice president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's international division, who spoke at the symposium. "The tragedy in New York also begets opportunities."
Symposium sponsors say business and government officials are realizing they need each other as never before. They see mutual benefits in cooperating to create and implement counter-terrorism strategies that will make the United States safer and better prepared to respond to emergencies.
"Government agencies know what they have to do to begin to fight terrorism, but aren't very clear about what's in the marketplace or how to go about doing it," said Tim Mills, a partner with Patton Boggs. "They need advice and participation" from the private sector, he says.
Mills added, "Business has worldwide reach and knowledge and is adroit. It adapts readily to changing circumstances. Government, on the other hand, is not so adroit. It's bureaucratic. Yet we're in a situation where government has to become more like business."
The realization has brought a flood of inquiries into government agencies -- including the CIA.
"We've seen a tremendous response since Sept. 11," said Gayle Von Eckartsberg, a spokeswoman with In-Q-Tel, the CIA's own venture capital group. Since that date, the agency has received more than 400 proposals and business plans from technology companies -- more than three-quarters of who have never worked with government before, Von Eckartsberg said.
"We've been working like crazy, reviewing plans and trying to figure out if the needs fit those of [the CIA]," she said.
"People are motivated to do something," Von Eckartsberg said.
Of course, it doesn't hurt that Congress has agreed to fund counter-terrorism at record-breaking levels. Mills estimates that Congress has allocated between $15 billion and $20 billion to various federal agencies to spend on counter-terrorism responses. Some of the money will filter down to the states, which are embarking on their own initiatives, he said.
Technology-driven opportunities are particularly plentiful, Mills said, ranging from the creation of emergency wireless communications systems to protective gear to combat anthrax or other bioterrorist threats.
"It's definitely going to be a developing area of business; there's no doubt about it," said Bernard M. Cook, project manager with Hazmed, a Lanham environmental policy firm.
But it appears there's room for low-tech solutions, as well.
"Let's be realistic here -- nobody ever got infected with anthrax by e-mail," said Workman. He said private companies could work on products and services that strengthen "the concept of defensible space," so that "the approaches to your building or facility are less appetizing for burglars or terrorists.
"You can do a lot of things which are smart, but not necessarily high-tech," Workman said.
One company trawling the symposium for low-tech opportunities was Health Management Resources International, a Landover company that specializes in health education and risk communication aimed at disadvantaged communities.
"A lot of low-income people just haven't gotten the latest information, so maybe there'd be a campaign to educate these folks on what to do in the event of a bioterrorist attack," said Phyllis Shearer Jones, the company's vice president.
Shearer Jones says she envisions her company partnering with either government agencies or private companies on public education.
"It's become very clear in recent months that for small companies, the opportunity to work with a really big, important challenging customer [such as the government] is very valuable for them," said Von Eckartsberg.

Load-Date: May 26, 2005


End of Document