Counterterrorism agent is heading to Washington While in St. Louis, the FBI's Steve Gomez oversaw the Joint Terrorism Task Force.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 14, 2007 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. C4
Length: 632 words
Byline: By Robert Patrick ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Body


Steve Gomez can't really talk much about what he did for 2½ years in St. Louis. But basically, his job was to worry.
As assistant special agent in charge of the national security branch of the FBI office here, he worried about terrorism. And he fretted over whether he worked hard enough, and long enough, to catch all the possibilities.
Gomez is heading for Washington to start worrying on a larger scale. He'll help agencies share counterterrorism information and fill gaps in raw information. His former boss, Special Agent in Charge Roland Corvington, praised Gomez's work here, even if he couldn't reveal exactly what it was.
This much he could say: Gomez oversaw the Joint Terrorism Task Force, responsible for the federal and local officers here who deal with international and domestic terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and counterintelligence.
Gomez, 40, said he often told strangers, and even parents at his child's soccer games, that he worked as an accountant for the federal government.
He acknowledged that St. Louis was not among the nation's largest or most prominent cities, but he said that was not a reason for complacency.
"Does that mean we're not a target?" Gomez asked. "We have locations and venues that are troublesome," he said in an interview before leaving town.
Among them are critical pieces of infrastructure, manufacturers, sports venues, universities, banks and special events such as the World Series. He said lower-profile cities such as St. Louis might in fact be targeted because enemies might think they were less well-protected.
And the mantra is always: "Let's be forward-leaning on pretty much anything that can occur," he said.
The FBI tries to keep a broad perspective. Money raised here could be used to finance a terrorist acting elsewhere.
"Could we have done more with that guy that would have led us to the bomb-thrower?" Gomez asked.
In recent years, the FBI has been criticized for spending more time and money on terrorism than on classic criminal investigations. Gomez acknowledged that priorities had shifted, just as they did in the past from gangs to white-collar fraud.
"By and large, people understand that," he said. Other agencies have "stepped up to the plate," and investigators working on other areas have become more efficient, he added.
More resources would be nice, he said, "but that budget only allows us to do what we can do."
Dr. Gulten Ilhan, vice president of the St. Louis chapter of the Council of American Islamic Relations, has brought Gomez and other FBI agents to a mosque twice for town hall-type meetings and has gone to the FBI office to train agents.
Ilhan credited Gomez for working to improve communications with Muslims. "He was very, very kind," she said. "I feel like I lost a friend from here."
Ilhan said Gomez went out of his way to accommodate her questions, and even called after hearing about a spray-painted threat on a Pakistani man's house in St. Peters.
Gomez got an undergraduate degree in accounting and spent his last two years in school working part time for the Internal Revenue Service, in hopes it would help him reach the FBI. He worked from 1989 to 1990 as a Los Angeles police officer and, once hired by the FBI, spent his first years dealing with LA street gangs.
Gomez is moving to Washington to become section chief of the reports and requirements section. What sounds like the perfect duty for an accountant was set up after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The White House and the director of national intelligence are among the biggest customers, Gomez said, meaning there's a lot of scrutiny of the office. Gomez filled the role on an acting basis in January and February, so he has some experience already.
Corvington said he hoped a replacement for Gomez here would be named within about a month.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Gomez Says city can't be complacent 

Load-Date: May 14, 2007


End of Document