County's mobile command post is ready to roll
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 12, 2012 Sunday
ZWC EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1N
Length: 708 words
Byline: JOY POWELL; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A $261,000 Homeland Security grant paid for the conversion of a motorhome.
Body


The big trailer that Washington County Sheriff's deputies would tow to scenes as their mobile command post had become so old and full of holes that deputies and their equipment would get soaking wet whenever they rode in it if it was raining.
The trailer had served its purpose for 15 years old, but it was outdated.
Deputies needed a more reliable vehicle as their mobile command post -- and one that would not leave them drying off guns, electronic gear and other equipment once they arrived at some of their biggest public-safety incidents.
Thanks to a $261,000 federal Homeland Security grant, they now have a gleaming, newly converted motorhome with the latest communications equipment and plenty more tools for law enforcement and other first-responders to use at major fires, medical disasters, blockades and other emergency scenes.
And it doesn't leak.
"It's going to provide a much better platform for all of the different responders that need to use a vehicle like this in their large incidents, and even small incidents, to perform their necessary duties," said Sheriff's Cmdr. Doug Anschutz.
"There's a lot more room than the old one, and it's laid out a lot better."
Washington County designed its vehicle after visiting departments that already had them, including the Hennepin County Sheriff's Office, Bloomington police and a consortium of public-safety agencies in the Spring Lake Park area, Anschutz said.
During high-risk situations, the vehicle will become the command post for the sheriff's Special Response Team, commonly known as a SWAT team, to plan and carry out tactical operations. Dispatchers would coordinate communications directly from the command post, Anschutz said.
The vehicle gives a commander the room and all the necessary tools right at the scene, he said.
It would, for example, be driven to the aftermaths of tornados, such as the F3 twister that hammered Hugo in 2008, killing a 2-year-old boy and destroying more than 150 buildings that Memorial Day weekend.
Or it might be called for a big fire or medical emergency, or a standoffsuch as one in St. Paul Park last year, where a suspect was shooting out of a window as officers hunkered down behind bushes.
Steve Goodyear, national sales manager for Farber Speciality Vehicles, which built Washington County's vehicle in Columbus, Ohio, said communities use them as an outreach tool, too. They're driven to local football games and other events so the public can get to know their local law enforcement officers, he said.
"It is a vehicle that can be used for police, fire, public works, emergency medical," Anschutz said. "Any of those stakeholders in the county can use it."
He said it also can be shared with authorities in western Wisconsin and elsewhere.
Mobile command posts such as this one should be available in metro areas if there is ever a terrorist strike, according to the agency that administered the grant, the Urban Area Security Initiative (UASI), part of U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
The UASI program provides funds for the "unique planning, organization, equipment, training and exercise needs of high-threat, high-density urban areas, and assists them in building an enhanced and sustainable capacity to prevent, protect against, respond to and recover from acts of terrorism," the agency says on its website.
States are required to ensure that at least a quarter of the UASI-appropriated funds are dedicated to activities that can prevent terrorism.
The vehicle measures 38 1/2 feet long by 8 1/2 feet wide. It has slide-out walls that, with the touch of a button, expand the vehicle's width to 13 1/2 feet, Anschutz said. A retractable roof also can be used.
"We're going to have different communication capabilities in it, including cell repeaters for people inside using it," he added.
It's also equipped with a "smart board" that can be used with laptops and cameras to display information on monitors inside and outside of the vehicle, Anschutz said.
"We could display a map on the smart board. Then, you could go to, say, a disaster area where you wanted to show where the different officers and deputies are going to shut down streets. You could write that right on the smart board and that would show up real time."
Joy Powell - 651-925-5038

Load-Date: February 13, 2012


End of Document