COUNTY NEEDS PUBLIC TO SAVE CAMP BONNEVILLE TERRORISM WINS AGAIN AS AIRPORTS TIGHTEN SCREWS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
August 13, 1995, Sunday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Opinion; Pg. B6
Length: 797 words
Byline: The Columbian
Body


If Clark County ends up with 4,000 acres of mostly undeveloped forest north of Camas, residents with have the Cold War to thank.
Of course, a big new park or recreation area hardly compensates for four decades of nuclear madness. Were it not for the nation's sacred view of all things military that resulted, however, Camp Bonneville probably would have been shut down and subdivided long ago.
As it stands, the big old military training and firing range in the Cascade foothills is one of 89 military installations nationwide and the only one in Washington slated for closure. If Congress approves the list next month as expected, the Pentagon will begin looking for ways to unload the property.
Interested parties are already lining up. The National Guard, which has used Camp Bonneville for training in the past, apparently is a potential customer. So is the county, and this week the Board of County Commissioners visited the camp and met with federal officials to discuss its possible future.
Several futures are possible. One, in which Camp Bonneville is converted into some sort of prison or boot camp for felons, has already come under fire from neighbors of the base who believe they have enough to worry about with the Larch Corrections Center just over the hill.
Much more attractive is the concept sketched by Ron Bergman, the county's public works director. Bergman told Columbian reporter Jeff Mize that turning Camp Bonneville into a regional park would give Clark County a ring of undeveloped areas within easy reach of city residents.
That could prove to be an enormous asset in a community rapidly losing open space to development. Most urban areas of any size could only wish for 4,000 acres of close-by, undisturbed land for wildlife, recreation and sheer enjoyment. In half a century, Camp Bonneville could be as important to Clark County's identity as Forest Park is to Portland's.
Commissioners plan to establish a public-private coalition to consider options for Camp Bonneville. It's important that they do so, and even more important that local residents take every opportunity to get involved and work for preservation of the camp's natural amenities.
The Cold War is over. With luck, there won't be another one. Which means an opportunity like this won't come along again.
Infrequent fliers may not notice much of the latest layer of security laid on by the Federal Administration Administration in response to vague, unexplained terrorist threats.
Ticket agents will be a little nosier, and they may demand picture identification. There will be more uniformed officers hanging around airports, and more of them will be accompanied by variously trained dogs. Baggage will be subject to more thorough searches. The bleeper gates will be recalibrated to detect even smaller bits of metal about the person. Thus the lines at the concourse will get longer and slower as increasingly frustrated travelers and visitors shuffle back and forth through the gates trying to pass the electric muster.
Travel agents will warn their clients to get to the airport a little earlier so as to surmount the system in time to get aboard. Those small changes will require other schedule changes. Traffic patterns will shift. The departure plaza will get even more madly jammed, and the automatic nagger will get more insistent about the penalties awaiting any driver who pauses more than a moment.
The previous bothersome process was more than sufficient to deter terrorism or anything remotely approaching terrorism ever since a man calling himself Dan Cooper jumped out of a plane flying over Clark County. The major effect of all the security is enforced docility everywhere under the umbrella of federal transportation regulation. Anyone so bold as to venture a complaint about the process may be detained as a suspected terrorist.
So what justifies the latest turn of the screw?Transportation Secretary Federico Pea refused to say much about the reasons when he announced the measures on Wednesday, asserting only that they would "prevent or deter possible criminal or terrorist acts (relating to) information provided by federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies which I am not at liberty to discuss."
The ultimate aim of terrorism, to the extent that it has any rational goal, is to make itself felt through social institutions. When society wrenches itself around in response to hints and suppositions and rumors and vague reports, the terrorists win without even firing a shot or planting a bomb or taking a hostage.
We would not wittingly exchange liberty for security on any large, wholesale basis. But we are in the habit of trading away bits and pieces of freedom for small-change safety. We might not even notice when all of our rights and responsibilities are sold off.

Load-Date: August 15, 1995


End of Document