County: Not fully prepared Safety officials say terrorism defense still needs improvement
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
January 24, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. A1
Length: 544 words
Byline: By MELISSA MONTEALEGRE Staff Writer
Body


County public safety officials don't pretend they're fully prepared to protect the public from terrorism threats. They're not.
But since terrorists crashed planes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11, the county has formed a core terrorism-response team, dedicated a police officer to monitor intelligence reports and done what it could to minimize the impact of a potential attack close to home. The changes were detailed last night during a two-hour forum at the Arundel Center in Annapolis. "Are You Safe in Anne Arundel County?" was organized by Leadership Anne Arundel, a group that trains potential leaders and offers exposure to community issues. While a five-member panel fielded questions ranging from mass evacuation plans to personal medication stockpiles, county Fire Chief Roger Simonds warned the audience not to lean solely on public safety agencies.
"Please be prepared to assist yourself, and by assisting yourself, you can help the county officials do their jobs," he said.
Chief Simonds was joined on the panel by County Executive Janet S. Owens, Health Officer Fran Phillips, Police Chief P. Thomas Shanahan and Director of Emergency Management Joseph Byrnes.
As the key local leaders in the wake of the terrorist attacks, the five dealt with some issues they had been trained to handle. In other cases, they were confronted with situations they had never envisioned _ stockpiling Cipro during the anthrax scare, monitoring unusual illnesses in emergency rooms and doctors' offices, and dealing with conflicting news reports.
While federal officials never identified Maryland or Anne Arundel as a target of terrorists, county officals said the high-risk environment highlighted some vulnerabilities. Chief Simonds and Ms. Phillips expressed concern that the county doesn't have "surge capacity," or the ability to deal with a sudden increase in service, particularly at its two hospitals. Chief Simonds said the county has four extra paramedic units to deal with service needs, but hospital regulators must be willing to pay for standby costs, such as more beds. Chief Shanahan characterized the police communications system as "in a crisis," with 58 dead spots within a quarter-mile of cellular towers. The spots prevent public safety personnel from using their radios.
One of the biggest new challenges is disseminating information to county residents efficiently. During the anthrax scare, Mrs. Phillips said, the county set up counseling telephone lines. "We found county residents turned to us for a local, reliable source of information," Mrs. Phillips said. "Getting information to residents is not only mass media _ it's listening to people, and sometimes that can take a long time."
Patricia O'Brien Boarman, a community activist living in Selby on the Bay, said she came to the forum wondering why the county didn't get a portion of federal terrorism funding signed into law last week. Although she didn't submit her question, Ms. O'Brien Boarman said it's important for individual communities to establish their own emergency plans. "I think the public is still concerned," she said. "I think the county has been working behind the scenes doing some of this and now they've stepped it up."
___mmontealegre@capitalgazette.com  

Load-Date: January 24, 2002


End of Document