COUNTY OFFICIALS FACE 'PAPER TERRORISM'
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
June 15, 1997, Sunday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. 8
Length: 529 words
Byline: By JENNIFER BROWN ; Associated Press writer
Body


PHILADELPHIA -- County clerk Karen Mathews has bulletproof glass in her office, and her staff has panic buttons with direct lines to 911 hidden under their desks.
It's been that way since Mathews, who now carries a gun, was beaten and stabbed in 1994 for refusing to file bogus documents from an angry tax protester.
Although such an attack is rare, officials are worried about people who use public offices to take revenge on judges, politicians and others.
So-called paper terrorism is increasingly being used by anti-government factions seeking to advance a cause and individuals who want to make someone's life miserable. Document recorders who spot and reject the bogus documents are sometimes targets as well.
"At first I was perplexed. Who'd want to threaten a recorder?" said Mathews, the elected clerk-recorder in Stanislaus County, Calif. "But recorders all over the country have become targets of groups with misguided patriotism."
Mathews spoke recently at a seminar on bogus liens at Philadelphia's International Association of Clerks, Recorders, Election Officials and Treasurers.
Most paper terrorism involves the filing of phony documents making a claim on someone's property because of an alleged debt.
Victims of fake liens sometimes don't find out for years, and it can cause headaches.
In most cases a person cannot obtain bank loans or sell property until the filings are removed by a judge, which takes time and can cost money.
"About 75 percent are anti-government protests. The rest are lone-wolf types. For them, it's a personal vendetta," said Ray Speece, a Houston attorney who helped initiate a Texas law increasing the punishment for filing fake liens.
Recent incidents:
n A weeklong standoff last month between members of the separatist Republic of Texas and federal agents was triggered partly by two outstanding arrest warrants for secessionist-group leader Richard McLaren, one accusing him of filing bogus liens.
n A Philadelphia man filed property liens against 10 Pennsylvania judges, some for up to $ 800 million each, as retaliation for having to serve a year in jail on an assault conviction that was later overturned. The liens were removed six years later.
n Fifteen Missouri men were convicted of filing $ 10.8 million in bogus liens against a judge who refused to overturn a speeding ticket.
n An Oklahoma City couple wanted for $ 75,000 in back taxes was arrested last year for filing $ 7 million in bogus liens against IRS agents assigned to their case.
In Texas, it's often hard to spot false documents in the thousands of daily filings, Speece said. California officials catch about one bogus lien a month, Ms. Mathews said. Telltale signs can alert recorders.
"There's always a word or phrase that tips it off as fake," Speece said.
Among them are no zip codes in an address, "united states" in lower-case, frequent use of Latin phrases or a comma between the first and last name "because they believe the surname is the slave name the government uses to label people," Speece said.
Legislation is pending to increase penalties for filing false liens in several Western states, including Wyoming, Colorado, Oklahoma, South Dakota and California.

Load-Date: June 16, 1997


End of Document