COUNTER-TERRIBLE;
THE HOUSE KILLS TROUBLING SECTIONS OF A BILL ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 16, 1996, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 570 words
Body


A bipartisan coalition of House conservatives and civil libertarians properly has scuttled the key provisions of an ''anti-terrorism'' bill that needlessly would have endangered the constitutional rights of American citizens.
The vote this week was a defeat for President Clinton and Republican congressional leaders, but a victory for constitutional democracy.
Terrorism, both internal and external, is a real danger that must be combatted. Federal law-enforcement agencies need adequate weapons to battle terrorism. But this measure, while it contained some sensible provisions, tilted too far in favor of expanding government police powers.
The White House and Congress introduced Draconian anti-terrorism legislation following the deadly bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building last April 19.
After the Senate hastily passed an anti-terrorism bill last June, the House Judiciary Committee approved a similar measure that same month. But the House panel deleted some objectionable provisions of the Senate version, including the authorization of ''roving'' wiretaps that would have permitted federal agents to tap not just a suspect's phone but any phone the suspect used without separate court orders.
The committee also deleted a provision that would have authorized the use of military forces to assist civilian police in cases involving the use of chemical and biological weapons.
Even so, other troubling provisions remained. Such diverse and usually antagonistic organizations as the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Rifle Association and the Gun Owners of America joined forces to oppose the bill.
Before approving the bill Thursday, the House killed provisions that would have made it easier for prosecutors to use illegally obtained wiretaps and to convict people for gun sales. Also deleted were provisions that:
* Gave the secretary of state the broad power to designate foreign groups and their domestic affiliates as terrorists, making it a crime for Americans to support the groups' activities, even if they are perfectly legal.
* Gave the attorney general sweeping authority to designate virtually every serious crime committed inside or outside the country as an act of terrorism, subject to severe penalties including death.
* Permitted the government to deport aliens suspected of terrorism, whether permanent residents or visitors, based on secret evidence in the form of classified information.
* Gave the FBI powers to obtain phone and travel records without having to establish that a suspect seemed to be engaging in criminal activity.
Unfortunately, the bill's so-called ''habeas corpus reform'' provisions were retained. These would limit condemned federal and state inmates - all inmates, not just terrorists - to only one appeal in a federal court. The appeal would have to be filed within a year of conviction.
We continue to support efforts to expedite death-sentence appeals, which now average 10 years. But this legislation is too sweeping. Habeas corpus reform should be considered separately and thoughtfully.
The House does not have the final word. Its bill now goes to a conference committee where differences with the Senate version will be negotiated.
In that forum lawmakers should resist efforts to restore provisions that would upset the balance between government power and individual liberty. That balance, we believe, is the best defense against both tyranny and terrorism.

Load-Date: April 1, 1996


End of Document