Counsul supervisor gave suspect visa
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
March 26, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 357 words
Byline: The Washington Post
Body


A U.S. consular official originally denied terrorism suspect Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab a visa to enter the United States in 2004 after finding false information on his application, but that official was overruled by a supervisor, according to senior government sources. 
Because the 2004 situation was considered resolved, it was not revisited in 2008, when Abdulmutallab received a second visa, which allowed him to board a Detroit-bound airliner on Dec. 25, officials acknowledged. A senior Republican lawmaker said the reversal of the 2004 decision was a missed opportunity to keep him out of the country. 
The decision to overrule the visa denial was one of a series of events that preceded Abdulmutallab's arrest in connection with an alleged Christmas Day attempt to destroy the plane with a bomb. In January, the Obama administration released a review of the case that outlined a number of missteps but did not include any reference to the visa denial. 
An official said the incident was left out because the move to overturn the initial decision did not seem out of the ordinary. That official and others said that, in reversing the initial decision and granting Abdulmutallab a visa, consular officials took into account that his father was a prominent Nigerian banker with strong ties to his community. There was no derogatory information or suggestion that he had ties to Islamist terrorism. 
Some officials agreed to speak about the case on the condition of anonymity because details from individual visa applications are considered private information. 
Abdulmutallab first applied for a visa in Lome, Togo, but was told that he needed to apply closer to his place of residence in Nigeria. He returned to Lagos and filed an application that stated incorrectly that he had never been denied a visa, leading a consular official to deny him one. 
"It's kind of outrageous that the consular officer overturned this denial in the first place," Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, said in an interview. "The second thing is, if you go back to his first coming to this country, he could have been denied because he had lied on a previous application." 

Load-Date: March 26, 2010


End of Document