Council looks to the future
Business Insurance 
Print Version
November 26, 2012


Copyright 2012 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. NaN
Length: 735 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


Andrew G. Cassidy is 2013 chairman of the Washington-based Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers. Mr. Cassidy, who also is executive vice president of brokerage and risk management firm Early, Cassidy & Schilling Inc., in Rockville, Md., recently spoke with Senior Editor Mark A. Hofmann about the council's priorities and the state of the insurance brokerage industry.
Q: What are the biggest challenges facing the council, its members and the insurance brokerage industry?
The council is in a great place. In terms of the council, we have great leadership, and the senior leadership's been in place for quite some time - Ken (Crerar) and company. They know our business. We have strong membership.
Health care reform is probably the biggest issue facing the commercial broking industry. We don't know what it is that we're facing. The membership of the council doesn't have a problem with anything that's on the table. They're not worried about competition from exchanges - everybody will do a great job. The problem is we don't know what all the rules are. Half of the states haven't done anything in regard to the exchanges.
Those that are doing something with the exchanges are not communicating very effectively.
The rules and (regulations) that are coming out from Health and Human Services are still somewhat baffling and certainly not finalized. Our job is to communicate that to our customers and help them understand what their options are. It's very difficult. We've certainly spent time and resources on making sure that we're at least as much at the table with regard to what's happening as anybody else is.
Q: Looking ahead, what are the council's legislative and regulatory goals, and is there anything in particular that you're doing to achieve them?
I think (extension) of the government terrorism insurance backstop is a large concern. We really should be doing something about it right now. We've dealt with this problem before. If the government is going to stay involved with it, it would be helpful to have, again, some idea as to what their plan is. Come Jan. 1, we will start renewing policies that go into 2014. Congress has shown no interest in taking up certain legislation until the eleventh hour, and it's not going to work here.
We haven't heard much from the carrier side what their capabilities are if the program is not extended, and I know that it is still a concern with regard to the carriers in certain big areas - Washington, New York, Los Angeles, Chicago. It might not be as big a problem in other parts of the country, but we still have lots of underwriting questions with regard to location and number of people when we're placing business in downtown D.C. And that's not going to change. It's problematic to lose part of that market, to say the least. I think (the extension of the federal terrorism risk insurance program) is a big question mark - I don't know if it's a problem.
We'd love to see the work that we've done on surplus lines legislation move forward. Again, uncertainty throughout the process is what the problem is there.
Q: Any nonlegislative initiatives the council is undertaking?
It's our 100th anniversary. The association has been in business 100 years in 2013. We have plans throughout the year to keep the association and the industry, if we can, in the forefront of things. We have a plan to put out each month information about the real game changers in the industry in the last 100 years. It's done an awful lot for people.
We are involved in education. We work to attract and cultivate talent. We put a huge focus on recruiting young talent. The Foundation for Agency Management Excellence is a big part of attracting young people to the industry. We've given more than 130 scholarships in six years.
It's a great business, but it doesn't get the best rap. It's a fascinating business. The brokerage business is a marathon; it's not a sprint.
Q: Any advice for someone considering entering the brokerage industry?
Don't get discouraged - it can be tough at first - and work hard. You do have to work hard; you've got to be better than the competition. You have to know your competition, you have to be better than your competition, and you have to know your business. But don't get discouraged. It doesn't necessarily happen rapidly, but after five, six, seven years, you realize, "I've got a book of business, I've got customers - things are coming along."

Load-Date: November 29, 2012


End of Document