Court Ruling Strains Anglo-Irish Relations
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 10, 1990, Tuesday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 4
Length: 542 words
Byline: Alf McCreary, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: BELFAST
Body


THE refusal by the Irish Supreme Court in Dublin to return a suspected terrorist to Northern Ireland has placed a new strain on Anglo-Irish relations.  The ruling raises questions about the process of extradition, under which a suspect can be sent back to stand trial for offenses allegedly committed in Northern Ireland.
On April 6, the Irish Supreme Court released Owen Carron, who had been a member of Parliament for Fermanagh and South Tyrone from 1981 to 1983. Before that, Mr. Carron had been a close associate of Bobby Sands, an Irish Republican Army hunger striker and MP who died in prison near Belfast in 1981.
In 1985, Carron and James Maguire were arrested in Northern Ireland and charged with firearms offenses. Carron was given bail and fled to the Irish Republic, where he was arrested in 1988. His extradition was ordered by an Irish District Court and his subsequent appeal was rejected by the Irish High Court.
But the Supreme Court ruled in his favor, on the grounds that the firearms charges that he faces are ''political'' and not liable to extradition. Carron had claimed that a rifle had been placed in his car without his knowledge and that the offense he allegedly committed had a ''political'' motivation.
In the meantime, Mr. Maguire was convicted in Northern Ireland and jailed for the possession of a firearm.
In the Irish Supreme Court, Chief Judge Thomas Finlay said it was clear that Maguire's offenses and Carron's indictment were ''political.'' The judge also said that Carron's extradition warrant, drawn up in 1986, had predated the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, which Ireland signed in 1987.
This latter measure ruled out any defense based on a ''political'' motive.
The unanimous decision by the five-member Irish Supreme Court poses major problems for the British and Irish governments. Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary, said he was ''greatly disturbed'' by the decision and called for an early meeting of the Anglo-Irish Conference. The court decision caused consternation among politicians representing Northern Ireland's 1 million Protestants who wish to retain the link with Britain.
The Rev. Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionists, said that the Anglo-Irish agreement is now a shambles.
Ken Magennis, security spokesman for the Ulster Unionists, denounced the ruling as ''a mandate for murder.''
A spokesman for the Northern Ireland office said, ''It is hard for us to grasp that acts of terrorism which put people's lives at risk are in any way political. We believe that those who are charged with offenses should answer them in court.''
The Supreme Court ruling will make life particularly difficult for Mr. Brooke, who has conducted months of painstaking talks with the political parties in Northern Ireland to try to find agreement.
Three weeks ago, the Irish Supreme Court turned down another British request for extradition and freed two convicted IRA terrorists who had escaped from prison and fled to the south, on the grounds that they would be at risk of assault or injury if they were returned to the north.
Even before the ruling, Northern Ireland Unionist politicians said they had deep misgivings about whether the Irish Republic is a ''safe haven'' for terrorists.


End of Document