Court Rules Gang Crime Falls Short Of Terrorism
The New York Times
December 12, 2012 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 32
Length: 565 words
Byline: By RUSS BUETTNER
Body


New York State's highest court on Tuesday ruled that the Bronx district attorney's office erred in trying to use a state terrorism charge to prosecute street gangs.
The decision by the Court of Appeals overturned the 2007 conviction of Edgar Morales, an admitted Bronx gang member, in a 2002 shooting at a church christening party that killed a 10-year-old girl and paralyzed another victim.
The office of Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx district attorney, had argued that Mr. Morales's gang, the St. James Boys, met the somewhat vague definition of ''terror'' in the state statute because it sought to intimidate or coerce the entire Mexican-American population around St. James Park.
The gang robbed restaurant patrons, fired shots into crowds, beat and harassed strangers and slashed rivals with knives, according to the original indictment.
In a unanimous decision, the six judges on the top court ruled that adopting the prosecution's broad definition would allow other prosecutors to ''invoke the specter of 'terrorism' every time a Blood assaults a Crip or an organized crime family orchestrates the murder of a rival syndicate's soldier.''
''But the concept of terrorism has a unique meaning and its implications risk being trivialized if the terminology is applied loosely in situations that do not match our collective understanding of what constitutes a terrorist act,'' the judges held, in a decision written by Judge Victoria A. Graffeo.
Mr. Morales was the first person charged and convicted under the state terrorism law, which was created after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Most terrorism cases are prosecuted in federal courts. Last week, a Queens man, Ahmed Ferhani, pleaded guilty under the state terrorism statute to plotting to blow up a synagogue in Manhattan.
The case against Mr. Morales stems from a fight that occurred on Aug. 18, 2002, at a christening party at St. Paul's Lutheran Church in the Parkchester section of the Bronx. Shots were fired, and 10-year-old Malenny Mendez was killed. Another victim of the gunfire was paralyzed.
In addition to the terror charges, Mr. Morales was also convicted of manslaughter and attempted murder. He was sentenced to 40 years to life in prison.
An appellate court upheld the nonterror convictions, rejecting Mr. Morales's lawyer's contention that the terror charge allowed prosecutors to introduce evidence of purported other crimes by gang members that may have influenced jurors and would not have been otherwise admissible.
But the higher court supported that argument, and overturned the entire conviction.
Catherine M. Amirfar, a partner at the Debevoise & Plimpton law firm who argued Mr. Morales's appeals pro bono, said the decision would affect future prosecutions under the antiterrorism statute in New York and under similar statutes elsewhere in the country.
''Because New York is considered to be a leader on questions pertaining to terrorism, a unanimous decision from New York's top court will impact the entire country,'' she said.
A spokesman for Mr. Johnson said Mr. Morales will be retried on the nonterror charges, though the office believed the evidence showed that the goals of Mr. Morales's gang went beyond intimidating another gang.
''We knew that the applicability of the terrorism statute was a novel legal issue, and that the statute would not apply to most street crimes,'' said the spokesman, Steven Reed.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/12/nyregion/new-york-states-highest-court-rules-gang-crime-falls-short-of-terrorism.html

Load-Date: December 12, 2012


End of Document