Court curbs terror policies
USA TODAY
June 29, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 505 words
Byline: Joan Biskupic and Toni Locy
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court on Monday struck down Bush administration anti-terrorism policies that have kept detainees locked up without charges or hearings. The two rulings emphasized individual liberty and the court's role in checking presidential power at a time of heightened concern about national security.
"A state of war is not a blank check for the president when it comes to the rights of the nation's citizens," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote in one opinion.
The rulings were a defeat for the administration, which has sought wide latitude in its legal strategies for responding to terrorism. A key tactic has been to keep captured "enemy combatants" incommunicado for what could be years.
By a 6-3 vote, the court ruled that the nearly 600 foreigners in U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, may challenge their detentions in U.S. courts. The justices rejected the administration's argument that because the detainees are outside the USA, American courts do not have jurisdiction.
The ruling, which noted that the naval base in Cuba is controlled by the U.S. government, could result in federal judges facing hundreds of cases brought by Guantanamo detainees. But the justices said hearings could be streamlined.
Voting 8-1, the justices ruled that a U.S. citizen held as an enemy combatant has been denied a fair hearing. They said Yaser Esam Hamdi, who was born in Louisiana, grew up in Saudi Arabia and was captured with Taliban fighters in Afghanistan in late 2001, has a right to be told the facts that led to his detention and to have a judge hear his claim of innocence.
In a third terrorism case Monday, the justices cited a technicality in throwing out a claim by Jose Padilla, another U.S. citizen President Bush designated an enemy combatant. Padilla is suspected of conspiring with al-Qaeda to blow up U.S. apartment buildings. The justices said his case was filed in the wrong court jurisdiction.
Like Hamdi, Padilla -- who is challenging the president's authority to indefinitely hold a U.S. citizen captured in the USA -- is in a military brig in Charleston, S.C.
Monday's rulings were the latest setback for the administration's anti-terrorism efforts. Polls say Americans' support for the war in Iraq is falling, and there are questions about whether U.S. policies allowing aggressive interrogations of terror suspects helped lead to the abuse of Iraqis at Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad.
Administration lawyers say the threat of terrorism justifies presidential authority to detain certain people without oversight by courts or Congress. Monday, White House spokeswoman Claire Buchan said the administration was pleased the court upheld the power to detain enemy combatants. She said officials will address the court's concerns about hearings.
Scott Silliman, a Duke University law professor and former Air Force lawyer, said the rulings should worry the administration "because they signal . . .  (a) more aggressive stance of the high court" toward presidential power in the war on terrorism.

Load-Date: June 29, 2004


End of Document