Course On Cruise Focuses On Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 14, 2005 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: PASCO; Pg. 1
Length: 459 words
Byline: JO-ANN JOHNSTON, , jfjohnston@tampatrib.com
Body


By JO-ANN JOHNSTON
jfjohnston@tampatrib.com
ST. LEO — In April, criminal justice students at Saint Leo University will set sail for the Bahamas.
But the weeklong cruise won’t be a typical vacation: The students will be learning how terrorists think.
While that may seem like an unlikely combination, it seems to work for police and military officers seeking academic credit in national security studies, said Kimberley Glover, a criminologist who teaches the "Exploitable Weaknesses of Terrorist Organizations" course.
Strange as it may sound, a cruise ship course is convenient for students, Glover said. They can squeeze in graduate- or undergraduate-level credits into a week’s vacation. Families or spouses can relax while classes are in session and spend time with students in the evenings and when the ship is in port.
Plus, cruise ship conference rooms make handy classrooms, Glover said.
The course, which Glover taught for the first time in spring 2004, is being from offered April 9-16, when people might normally take spring vacations.
Instructors will cover the psychology and finances of terrorism, rather than tactical skills, such as hand-to-hand combat.
Joe Navarro, a retired FBI agent from Tampa who teaches part of the course, educates students on how terrorists differ from other criminals. For example, Navarro focuses on five traits shared by most terrorists — regardless of whether they are international enemies or domestic threats, such as Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh:
• An "unbending or unyielding" ideology
• Passionate hatred
• Fear a group, movement, or idea, so much so that they seek the company of others with the same fear
• A belief that violence is a "magical solution" to their perceived problems
• Withdrawal from mainstream society
Despite their antisocial tendencies, communication is essential for terrorists.
"They communicate with each other; they send money back and forth. They even write advertisements about their activities or keep journals," Navarro said.
Law enforcement officers need to recognize terrorists’ communication patterns, Glover said.
For many students, the lessons learned on the cruise can prove useful immediately.
Tom Wilder, a major in the Marion County Sheriff’s Office, completed the cruise-ship terrorism course last year. He said the lessons he learned apply to his responsibilities on security details protecting a regional nuclear power plant and other potential targets.
Of course, being on a cruise ship underscores the realities of being tied to a potential terrorist target. "It creates a sense of reality," Wilder said.
Reporter Jo-Ann Johnston can be reached at (352) 521-3062.
Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO
Joe Navarro Retired FBI agent is a teacher in the course.

Load-Date: December 1, 2005


End of Document