Court Papers Offer Details In Terror Case
The New York Times
May 2, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 487 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body


The terrorism case landed on the public docket in Federal District Court in Brooklyn last year like a riddle. Prosecutors charged three foreign men arrested overseas with supporting a Somali terrorist group. They did not reveal details of the allegations against the men, their nationalities or even their connections to the United States.
Then on Wednesday, some details finally emerged in government documents, though much about the case remains to be seen.
The court documents offer a glimpse of the government's rationale for bringing suspects accused of being foreign terrorists into the federal court system -- something that has happened with greater frequency in the last few months, even as the approach has been criticized for not having clearly defined limits.
The men, prosecutors said, participated in attacks against Americans by consorting with others whom the American government believes to be terrorists. These kinds of charges, called material support of terrorism charges, are allowed under America's broad terrorism laws, which allow prosecution of those suspects believed to have associated with accused terrorists.
Some personal information also emerged about them: Madhi Hashi is a British citizen, and Mohamed Yusuf is a Swedish citizen. The nationality of the third man, Ali Yasin Ahmed, was not revealed, but he was assisted by Swedish counsel at a previous hearing. A defense lawyer for Mr. Yusuf, Ephraim Savitt, said that the men were freedom fighters in a cause that had nothing to do with the United States and that the men would offer that defense at trial.
All three, who were arrested in Africa while traveling to Yemen, have pleaded not guilty.
Prosecutors say they traveled to Somalia to join Al Shabab, a United States-designated terrorist group linked to Al Qaeda. In addition, the documents charge that the men were connected to two American citizens from Minnesota's Somali community, Shirwa Ahmed and Farah Mohamed Beledi, suicide bombers who died in recent years in Somalia.
In October 2008, Swedish authorities intercepted phone calls between Ali Yasin Ahmed and Mr. Yusuf, in which the men discussed their plans to travel to Somalia to join Al Shabab and die as martyrs, according to the documents. The conversation came after suicide bombings in two Somali cities targeting the government there, and the two men discussed the attacks. After an attack in Mogadishu in 2009, Ali Yasin Ahmed said during an intercepted phone call that he was an associate of the suicide bomber responsible for that bombing.
Prosecutors then also pointed to the men's suicide bomber training in 2011 in Somalia and association with Mr. Beledi, who prosecutors said bombed a government checkpoint in Mogadishu that year.
None of the bombings -- in Somalia, Burundi and Uganda -- targeted American locations, according to court documents; however, one American was killed in Burundi and several more were injured.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/02/nyregion/court-papers-offer-glimpse-of-government-rationale-in-federal-terror-cases.html

Load-Date: May 2, 2013


End of Document