Court Ruling Limits Scope Of State Law On Terror
The New York Times
November 13, 2010 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 598 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body


After Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx district attorney, successfully used New York State's antiterrorism law to prosecute a gang member who had killed a 10-year-old girl in a gun battle, he said the verdict was significant in determining an appropriate punishment for someone who had ''snuffed out'' the life of an innocent child.
But an appeals court disagreed this week. The defendant ''acted for the purpose of asserting his gang's dominance over its particular criminal adversaries, namely, members of rival gangs,'' a panel of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday. ''Such conduct falls within the category of ordinary street crime, not terrorism.''
The appeals court let stand manslaughter and attempted murder convictions against the gang member, Edgar Morales, who was sentenced to 40 years to life in 2007, but it ordered that Mr. Morales be sentenced again -- excluding the terrorism charges, which will mean a shorter sentence.
The state's antiterrorism law, passed soon after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, has hardly been used. In fact, the court noted that Mr. Morales was the first person to face charges under the law, and the only one ever convicted under it.
Still, Mr. Morales's lawyer, Catherine Amirfar, called the ruling a significant victory. ''What the court did -- in what I would consider a landmark decision -- is what the New York Legislature had in mind,'' she said. ''It undermines all of liberty if prosecutors are allowed to expand their powers by redefining crimes to fit circumstances the Legislature clearly did not envision.''
The Bronx district attorney's office said it was reviewing the ruling and declined to comment further.
The law makes a person guilty of a ''crime of terrorism'' when he commits any violent felony ''with intent to intimidate or coerce a civilian population.'' The additional counts of terrorism, of which a jury convicted Mr. Morales, raised his crimes to more serious felonies, which carry longer prison sentences.
The ruling does not mean that Mr. Morales will be getting out of prison any time soon. First-degree manslaughter and second-degree attempted murder, the most serious charges he was convicted of, each carry a sentence of up to 25 years.
The crime involved took place on Aug. 18, 2002. A fight broke out among members of rival gangs at a christening party at St. Paul's Lutheran Church in the Parkchester neighborhood of the Bronx. Gunshots were fired, and Malenny Mendez, 10, was killed. Another victim, Javier Tochmani, was paralyzed. Mr. Morales, an admitted member of a gang of Mexican-American youth known as the St. James Boys, was ultimately charged with the shootings.
The St. James Boys were a menace to Mexican-Americans and Mexican immigrants in the area around St. James Park. The original indictment said they robbed restaurant patrons, fired shots into crowds, beat and harassed strangers and slashed rivals with knives.
Still, Mr. Johnson's move to charge Mr. Morales under the terrorism law was controversial; civil libertarians on both ends of the political spectrum characterized the legal maneuver as an undue expansion of prosecutorial power.
In the weeks after Sept. 11, 36 states passed laws imposing harsher sentences in terrorism cases. If the ruling on Tuesday withstands a potential appeal, it could circumscribe the way district attorneys across New York are able to use the state's law, possibly cutting off a legal tactic that so far has rarely been used.
''The ruling should help ensure that the antiterrorism law will not be similarly misused in the future,'' Ms. Amirfar said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 13, 2010


End of Document