COURT: IRAN OWES VICTIM'S KIN $247M
 Philadelphia Daily News
MARCH 12, 1998 Thursday PM EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 26
Length: 527 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A federal judge has ordered Iran to pay $247.5 million in damages to the family of an American woman killed in a suicide bombing in Gaza in 1995. "The court is seeking to deter further terrorist actions," said District Court Judge Royce Lamberth.
The ruling yesterday was the first under a new law allowing Americans to sue nations believed to sponsor terrorism for damages caused by such attacks. While the victim's family is unlikely to collect the damage award any time soon, the ruling could complicate tentative efforts to improve relations between the United States and Iran.
"This decision clearly shows that we will . . . hit them hard in the wallet as well," declared Rep. Jim Saxton, R-N.J., who heads the House Task Force on Terrorism.
Iran vehemently denies it has any connections to terrorist groups or attacks.
The two countries have been bitter foes since the 1979 ouster of Shah Reza Mohammed Pahlavi and the taking of U.S. hostages. But since the election last year of a moderate cleric as president of Iran, there have been signs of a possible thaw.
The ruling, made under the Anti-terrorism Act of 1996, would award the money to the family of Alisa Flatow, 20, of West Orange, N.J., who was student at a seminary in Jerusalem when she was killed in an attack on a bus in the Gaza Strip on April 9, 1995. Seven Israeli soldiers also died in the attack for which Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.
The judge agreed with the Flatow family that Islamic Jihad is backed by Iran's Islamic government and that Iran therefore is responsible for her death.
"The lunatics who planted the bomb and drove the van that killed Alisa were not acting alone," said Stephen Flatow, the student's father. "A state sponsor of terrorism such as the Islamic Republic of Iran has to be held to account."
Flatow family lawyers said they plan to go after Iranian assets in the United States and elsewhere.
The United States froze Iranian assets valued at $12 billion in 1979. Most of the funds, however, are controlled by the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal in the Hague, Netherlands, a group of nine judges who decide claims against both Iran and the United States. The United States itself has jurisdiction over only a fraction of the assets, mostly real estate.
Two years ago, the United States agreed to pay $131.8 million in a settlement to families of Iranians killed on a civilian airliner shot down by the U.S. Navy in 1988. All 290 passengers aboard that flight were killed.
Steven Perles, a lawyer for the Flatow family, said the money could come either from the frozen funds or from Iranian assets in other nations that have arrangements with the United States to recognize rulings by each other's courts.
"Iran is a wealthy country with lots of assets, and when you have assets, you have targets," Perles said. "Wherever we can find them, we can go and ask the authorities to attach them on the basis of a binding judgment by a U.S. court."
Similar lawsuits are pending against the Libyan government, its intelligence agency and two of its intelligence officers as a result of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Flatow

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document