COVID-19 INTERRUPT YOUR BUSINESS? THAT MAY NOT BE COVERED BY INSURANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 5, 2020 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2020 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. D-2
Length: 850 words
Byline: Kris B. Mamula Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


The declaration of a state of emergency and the shutting down of all nonessential businesses due to the COVID-19 outbreak might sound like the makings for a business interruption insurance claim.
Think again.
Insurance brokers say that viruses and pandemics are specific exclusions in many such policies, which are often included with standard property and casualty coverage. But whether COVID-19 is the basis for a business interruption claim - like the coronavirus outbreak itself - is still very fluid as government leaders and the plaintiffs' bar wrestle over the issue.
"There's a lot of pressure on insurance companies to pay these claims," said Tom Philbin, director of commercial lines at Downtown-based broker Henderson Brothers Inc. "You don't know where it's going to end."
Business interruption insurance, which dates to the late 1880s, covers the loss of income because of a disaster such as a catastrophic fire.
The idea is to replace the company's revenue stream until the doors can open again.
"It's a fire, it's a windstorm, an explosion," said Michael Barry, spokesman for the Insurance Information Institute, an industry-funded group in New York City. "The reason it was put in there is that a standard policy is triggered by direct physical damage to the business property."
With state governments across the country, including in Pennsylvania, ordering the shuttering of all nonessential businesses during the crisis, a lot of revenue has been derailed.
So, even though the new coronavirus doesn't cause physical damage, that hasn't deterred litigation to force compensation from carriers for COVID-19-related damages.
Thomas Keller, the chef behind the French Laundry and Per Se restaurants, for example, filed a lawsuit in the Superior Court of California against Hartford Fire Insurance Co. in March over financial losses from mandated closures.
And New Orleans seafood restaurant Oceana Grill recently asked a Louisiana court to rule that its insurance policy with Lloyd's of London covered civil authority-ordered closures.
"It is clear that contamination of the insured premises by the coronavirus would be a direct physical loss that needed remediation to clean the surfaces of the establishment," according to the lawsuit.
Insurance trade groups are pushing back. The American Property Casualty Insurance Association estimated that potential continuity losses for small businesses could total $220 billion to $383 billion per month, easily zapping the estimated $800 billion surplus that U.S. insurers have socked away for claims.
"If policymakers force insurers to pay for losses that are not covered under existing insurance policies, the stability of the sector could be impacted, and that could affect the ability of consumers to address everyday risks that are covered by the property casualty industry," David A. Sampson, president and CEO of the association, said in a statement.
In the U.S. House of Representatives, a small bipartisan group recently sent a memo to several insurance trade groups, including the Independent Insurance Agents&Brokers of America, proposing that the insurance industry accept coronavirus-related losses under existing business interruption policies.
Industry groups quickly rejected the idea, according to JD Supra LLC, a Sausalito, Calif.-based legal intelligence publishing platform.
Instead, the property and casualty insurance industry joined with a coalition of other groups in supporting a federal relief fund for businesses and workers affected by the quarantine and travel prohibitions caused by the new coronavirus. A special administrator within the Treasury would manage the fund, which would help businesses keep employees and maintain benefits while paying some operating expenses such as rent.
The birth of terrorism risk insurance following the 9/11 attacks could be a way forward. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program was created in 2002 to cover insured losses resulting from a certified act of terrorism after commercial carriers backed away from writing the policies, fearful of potentially catastrophic losses from claims.
The program allows the federal government to backstop losses from claims that are so big that they risk bankrupting commercial carriers.
In the meantime, Mr. Philbin said, he's fielding inquiries daily from business owners about their interruption coverage, and he's filed some claims on behalf of clients. But it's uncertain whether the claims will get paid.
"We set the expectation based on what the forms say today," Mr. Philbin said. "Government intervention or litigation could change things."
While legislators haggle over ways to help businesses that have been decimated by mandated closures, the Insurance Institute's Mr. Barry said low-interest loans may be the best option for troubled businesses.
"Congress is clearly trying to find a way to get resources out to stressed businesses in the community," Mr. Barry said. "The thing for businesses to look at right now are low-interest loans and other forms of financing" to get through the crisis.
Kris B. Mamula: kmamula@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1699.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Henderson Brothers: Tom Philbin, director of commercial lines at Henderson Brothers, says he fields inquiries daily about business interruption claims due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
PHOTO: Getty Images/iStockphoto: "Sorry we're closed" sign hanging in a window, with a reflection of a car.

Load-Date: April 5, 2020


End of Document