Crackdown, or Rethink
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
October 24, 1994, Monday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18
Length: 483 words
Body


RISING fear between Israelis and Palestinians threatens the
recent peace between the two - a peace that led to the kind of
treaty between Israel and Jordan that President Clinton will
witness in the Middle East tomorrow.
The Hamas sabotage, including a bomb in Tel Aviv, a city never
before penetrated, leaves Israelis wondering what to do. The
bombing was not a strike at a military target but a cold-blooded
killing of innocent civilians. Arabs may argue that Israeli troops
in the occupied territories - and last week in Lebanon - continue
to kill Arab civilians; but this does not excuse such tactics.
Israel has cracked down on Hamas, closing Gaza and the West
Bank, and bombing southern Lebanon, where it says the terror was
planned. Yet this reaction is not a real answer. As Israelis and
the world get over the shock of these acts, there must be a broader
consideration of why they occurred, and what can be done about
them, if peace with justice is to emerge.
Hamas violence, inexcusable as it is, is not a surprising result
of the deal Yasser Arafat, chairman of the PLO, signed with Israel
on Sept. 13, 1993. For Hamas and many others, the treaty that led
to three Nobel prizes is an unjust surrender of the Palestinian
claim for a state. They feel Mr. Arafat was tricked.
Actually, they have a point. When Arafat met Israeli Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin on the White House lawn, the world assumed
he knew what he was doing. Peace was at hand.
Yet as the Declaration of Principles (DOP) he signed was
negotiated, it became clear that Arafat had traded 45 years of
Palestinian aspirations to statehood for administration of a tribal
reservation in Israel. He has no authority, no Jerusalem, no state.
Joel Singer, legal adviser to Mr. Rabin, says, ''The provisions of
the DOP ensure that Israel, through its military government, shall
continue to be the source of authority'' in the territories,
including Gaza and Jericho.
Hamas now represents the only organized resistance to apartheid
conditions that continue in the territories. Arafat's only power is
to police Gaza, and Palestinians see him arresting his people - the
job Israelis used to do. A crackdown and closing of borders by
Israel will feed Hamas's popularity. Is this what Israel wants?
Israelis deserve to be secure. This can't be overstated. Yet
security can't be bought at the cost of the rights of the
Palestinian people.
It is in Israel's interest to rethink the DOP and reinterpret it
- allowing Arafat more room to develop a constituency, hold
elections, develop civil authority, and achieve a state. The
Israeli writer Simha Flapan noted in the 1970s, ''In the long run,
the eradication of terrorism is possible only by eliminating the
condition that breeds it. Palestinian terrorism is a result of
statelessness and a refugee existence. Only a political solution
that offers the prospect of statehood, of a normal economy and a
productive life'' will end it.
Amen.

Load-Date: October 25, 1994


End of Document