CRACK DOWN WITH CARE THE URGE TO GET TOUGH WITH TERRORISTS SHOULDN'T TRAMMEL BASIC AMERICAN LIBERTIES. /
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 26, 1995 Wednesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18; EDITORIAL
Length: 453 words
Body


Last week, the FBI and other crime-fighters rushed to find the mad bombers of Oklahoma City. This week, politicians are rushing to write laws to stop such terroristic attacks in the future.
The speedy reaction by law-enforcement folks was essential, but the fast pace among political leaders is risky. With the public outraged and afraid, there's a real danger that Congress and the President will erode individual rights in a crowd-pleasing crusade to crack down.
Any increase in the government's power to investigate potentially dangerous groups and individuals must be done with great care. The inherent risk to constitutional rights was demonstrated by the FBI's counterintelligence programs in the late 1960s and early 1970s - which included "dirty tricks" and blackmail to weaken dissident groups. Remember, too, that during Watergate, two former attorneys general - John N. Mitchell and Richard G. Kleindienst - were convicted of official crimes, and that former FBI director L. Patrick Gray burned Watergate-related documents in his fireplace.
President Clinton said Sunday that he wanted Congress to give the FBI new power to scrutinize credit-card records, phone bills, hotel records and other data to help stop terrorism. Since he hasn't spelled out his plan, it's hard to evaluate.
The administration is also considering whether to give the FBI greater leeway to investigate and infiltrate groups that it suspects may be planning terroristic activity. These rules governing FBI behavior were relaxed once in the Reagan years, and they may not need further change. They already permit at least preliminary intelligence-gathering on the type of paramilitary groups that have burst into the news recently.
There are sensible initiatives in a bill that President Clinton proposed two months before the Oklahoma bombing: the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act. Complying with a new international treaty, it would require that all plastic explosives include a chemical agent that would help investigators trace their source. The bill would prohibit U.S. fund-raising that supports terrorism overseas.
No change in the law or in law-enforcement practices can guarantee American immunity from terrorism, but there are ways to raise the nation's guard. Mr. Clinton has ordered a review of security at all federal facilities and proposed a new counterterrorism center at the FBI. In the Senate, where two committees begin hearings this week, the Republican proposals include stronger penalties for acts of domestic terrorism.
Congress and the President sound ready to work in a bipartisan fashion to shore up the nation's defenses against terrorism. Both parties must have the patience to do this without trammeling cherished rights.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document