Credit card purchases hint at terrorism link
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 7, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. D1
Length: 485 words
Byline: By HEATHER RATCLIFFE Of the Post-Dispatch
Body


Jeanne Schutte was shopping for shoes when a store clerk handed her a phone to hear some jarring news. Her credit card company had found more than $33,000 in fraudulent charges on her Visa account.
Worse, the identity thief was not following the pattern of buying high-end DVD players and VCRs -- or the $1,500 leather bustiers of TV commercial fame.
It seemed far more sinister: Police uniforms, military electronic parts, surveillance equipment and psychology books purchased from mail order houses on the Internet.
"I'm freaking out," said Schutte, an administrator at a St. Louis nonprofit organization. "What if my money is going to support the next terrorist attack?"
Federal authorities are investigating the case along with Schutte's credit card company, which first spotted the strange purchases.
Although identity theft has become one of the most common crimes in the U.S., authorities said they rarely get cases that seem even remotely connected to terrorist activity.
"I've never heard of identity theft ever being linked to a specific act of terrorism," said Marc Raimondi, a spokesman for the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency.
"But wherever this is a vulnerability for such a thing to occur, it's a concern to law enforcement."
A clerk at a Value City store called the credit card company Wednesday after learning that Schutte's card had been "flagged" for unusual activity. A Visa representative told Schutte about the purchases, which were made within a 24-hour period Tuesday and Wednesday.
The credit card company described for her the purchases and approximate amounts, including:
* $12,000 for uniforms and electronic parts from an online military and police supply store.
* $8,800 for surveillance equipment.
* $70 for laminating machines and other equipment used to make presentations.
- $12,200 for a donation to an organization called Libertatd Living Ministry.
- $50 for psychology books.
Consumers typically bear little or no loss for credit thefts discovered in a timely manner.
Schutte, 35, who lives in St. Louis, was worried about more than that. She got on the Internet to research the companies involved and their products. Then she called the Department of Homeland Security.
"Everyone has got terrorism on their mind," Schutte said. "My head was just spinning, thinking about the possibilities."
The Secret Service, which investigates some financial crimes, is on the case. Thomas Kelly, the special agent in charge at St. Louis, declined to comment.
How Schutte's credit card number fell into dishonest hands remains a mystery. She said she and her husband never lost their cards. They used their Visa to make a donation over the phone to a children's charity last week. They also used it when purchasing a car recently. They never use it to shop online.
"That's what's scary," Schutte said. "I don't know how they got our credit card, or what other information they have about us."

Load-Date: August 8, 2005


End of Document