Cries of Activism and Terrorism in S.U.V. Torching 
 The New York Times
August 31, 2003 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 763 words
Byline:  By NICK MADIGAN
Dateline: WEST COVINA, Calif., Aug. 30  
Body


To some people, Hummers, those mastodons of the highway, are a joyous extravagance -- big, safe and fun to drive.
     To others, they are simply wasteful, toys with testosterone that symbolize the American penchant for self-indulgence. But such detractors do not usually back their objections with fire. 
 A week ago, in the middle of the night, 20 new Hummer H2's worth about $50,000 apiece were set aflame and destroyed at a car dealership here, part of a wave of vandalism in which 50 other vehicles had been damaged at the same dealership and others in the suburbs east of Los Angeles.
To many of the 106,000 in this community near the San Gabriel Mountains, the notion of domestic terrorism at their doorsteps was, at the very least, jarring.
"Whether terrorist act or just vandalism, it was an offense against the community," West Covina's assistant fire chief, Jerry Johnson, said.
Whoever broke into the Clippinger dealership in the early hours of Aug. 22 left behind a calling card in addition to the damage. Many of the vehicles were spray-painted with the words "gross polluter" and "fat, lazy Americans." Some had the letters "ELF" spray-painted on them, and the Earth Liberation Front, a militant environmentalist group, later claimed responsibility.
The group, founded in England a decade ago and shunned by mainstream environmentalist groups, also claimed responsibility for a $50 million fire on Aug. 1 that destroyed a construction site for 1,500 apartments near the campus of the University of California at San Diego. A banner left at the site, signed ELF, said, "You build it -- we burn it."
The car dealership fires have commanded the most attention from the news media, law enforcement agencies and politicians, including one involved in the California recall election.
"What these people are doing isn't activism -- it is vandalism, and I strongly oppose it," said Arianna Huffington, one of the candidates seeking to replace Gov. Gray Davis. "I have nothing against S.U.V. owners; my problem is with Detroit. The automakers have the technology to make more fuel-efficient S.U.V.'s, and that is what consumers deserve."
Ms. Huffington is a former sport utility vehicle owner who turned against the vehicles, claiming in part that by using so much gas they fostered terrorism in the Middle East.
At the Federal Bureau of Investigation office in Los Angeles, technicians were working late this week to enhance images on a surveillance videotape that shows two men spray-painting graffiti on vehicles -- also on the night of Aug. 22 -- at an auto dealership in Duarte, another suburb in the San Gabriel Valley.
"We feel confident we'll have a successful conclusion," Laura Bosley, an F.B.I. spokeswoman, said on Friday. 
Much of the investigation has focused on the Earth Liberation Front.
On its Web site, the group calls itself an "international underground organization that uses direct action in the form of economic sabotage to stop the destruction of the natural environment." Since 1997, members in North America are believed to have caused more than $100 million in damage to real estate developers' offices, houses and construction and logging sites. Before last week, S.U.V.'s had been damaged in Seattle; Eugene, Ore.; Erie, Pa.; and Santa Cruz, Calif.
Norman Hoffman, a lawyer who represents the Clippinger dealership's owner, Ziad Alhassen, said there was no valid reason to single out the Hummer.
"They burn gas -- so what?" he said. "That's not the way to look at it. A lot of people buy these cars because they're safe. A lot of women buy them for that reason. They've got a patriotic feel to them, especially after 9/11."
Mr. Alhassen, who owns five auto dealerships and began selling Hummers only a year ago, said he was "surprised and shocked" at the vandalism. "I'm determined that violent acts, terrorist acts, will not deter me," he said in an interview.
Mr. Alhassen -- whose lawyer said his losses in the fire were covered by insurance -- was back in business almost immediately. The day after the fire, he said, his first two sales were Hummers.
Last Sunday, 22 Hummers, driven by members of the Southern California Hummer Owners' Group, showed up at his dealership to show their opposition to the vandalism.
"They were trying to scare people into not buying them, but it was criminal, and wrong," said Steve Reisman, an insulation contractor from Woodland Hills, Calif., who founded the owners' group about a year ago. "It's one thing to pass out leaflets and to put stickers on cars saying they pollute, but it's another to start setting fire to them."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: A sign left near a fire at a construction site in San Diego said, "You build it -- we burn it." The Earth Liberation Front claimed responsibility.; Twenty new Hummers, worth about $50,000 each, were destroyed by fire on the night of Aug. 22 at a dealership in West Covina, Calif. (Photographs by Associated Press) 

Load-Date: August 31, 2003


End of Document