Crime and police news for Saturday, Aug. 25
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 25, 2012 Saturday
State Edition


Copyright 2012 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. B-02
Length: 507 words
Body


Man sought in Henrico on assault, larceny charges
HENRICO Police are looking for a 22-year-old Richmond man wanted on a slew of charges, including larceny and assault.
Tyrell Eliphues Davis, whose last address was in the 4100 block of North Avenue, is sought in connection with two felony larceny charges, two assault charges, unlawful entry, vandalism, trespassing and obstruction. The charges stem from three incidents at the homes of two women Davis knows, said Lt. Linda Toney, a Henrico Police spokeswoman.
On Jan. 29, police were called to the 3900 block of Elberon Court, where a woman said Davis had pushed her and taken an item.
On May 19, police were called to the 100 block of Engleside Drive, where Davis had allegedly assaulted another woman, stealing an item and preventing the woman from calling police. Davis is also charged with breaking into the Elberon Court home on May 26, vandalizing a door and trespassing.
No serious injuries were reported in any of the incidents. Davis is black, about 5 feet, 11 inches tall and weighs about 195 pounds.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Henrico Police at (804) 501-5000 or Crime Stoppers at (804) 780-1000. You can also text Crime Stoppers at 274637, using the key word "ITip" followed by the tip. Both Crime Stoppers methods are anonymous.
Fire damages house in Montrose Heights
RICHMOND A house was significantly damaged in a fire Friday morning in the Montrose Heights neighborhood of Richmond's East End.
There were no injuries in the fire, which was reported shortly after 10:45 a.m. in the 2000 block of Carlisle Avenue.
Richmond Fire & EMS Lt. Robbie Hagaman said the first units on scene found heavy fire coming from the one-story, wood-frame house. The fire was knocked down quickly and declared under control in about 15 minutes, he said.
Hagaman said the fire appeared to have originated in the rear of the house. The cause was under investigation.
Scams target residents of Dan River Region
DANVILLE Police are receiving more reports of scams targeting Dan River Region residents.
One scam recently reported involves Western Union. In another, said Capt. Dennis Haley of the Danville Police Dept., acaller pretends to be a grandchild calling from a jail in another country. The caller will ask for money to be released as possible.
Guardsman's terrorism charge called unjustified
MARTINSBURG, W.Va. The lawyer for a Virginia National Guard member arrested for running near a school while carrying a training rifle said a terrorism charge against his client is unjustified.
Attorney Kevin Mills said the fact that people felt threatened is subjective and a loose interpretation of the law that he believes a court would reject.
Mills said there's no evidence that 23-year-old Martinsburg resident William Everett Alemar threatened anyone.
Prosecutors said he was drunk when arrested this week.
From staff and wire reports
**********
Illustration: Photo, diagram
Copyright © 2012, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: January 23, 2013


End of Document