Criminal Elements Will Not Occupy Any Part Of Nigeria Buratai
The Will (Nigeria)
August 5, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 The Will Newspaper All Rights Reserved
Length: 347 words
Body


Chief of Army Staff, Lt.-Gen.
 Tukur Buratai SAN FRANCISCO, August 05, (THEWILL)  The Chief of Army Staff, Lieutenant General Tukur Buratai, has vowed not to allow criminal elements occupy any part of Nigeria. Buratai, who was speaking at the 61st passing out parade of the Nigerian Military School, Zaria in Kaduna State, reiterated his commitment to combat all security challenges confronting the nation.
 Represented by the Chief of Policy and Planning, Lieutenant General Lamidi Adeosun, the Army chief, the Federal Government is concerned with the security challenges in parts of the country. He however noted that the military is winning the war against terrorism by stabilising the north-eastern region.
 "I will like to reassure you all that the Nigerian army is committed to the unity and security of this country and will do everything humanly possible to ensure that no part of this country is occupied by criminal elements. "We will continue to support the civil authorities by ensuring that our country men and women are safe and protected in the course of their legitimate activities," he stated.
 Buratai said that the army in collaboration with other security agencies, is doing everything possible to tame the resurgence of the Boko Haram, kidnapping, Armed banditry and other related crimes across the country. One of the achievements recorded in the military operations in the northeast, he stated, is the improvement of economic activities in the affected area.
 "The Nigerian Army in collaboration with other sister services and security agencies has been able to stabilise the situation, especially in the north-eastern part of Nigeria. "Consequently, economic activities of the affected areas are gradually improving as the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) are voluntarily returning to their ancestral homes with farmers going back to their farmlands," he stated.
 While appreciating the efforts of soldiers in the ongoing military operations in the fight against terrorism, the COAS admonished the new grandaunds to be loyal to the Federal Republic of Nigeria. 

Load-Date: August 6, 2019


End of Document