CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
TERRORISM ON TELEVISION: NETWORKS HAVE JOURNALISTIC RESPONSIBILITIES
The New York Times
July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By JOHN CORRY
Body


TERRORISM is unlikely to go away; neither is the argument over how it is reported.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said last week that news organizations should be urged to restrain their coverage of terrorism. Then Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d took her proposal a step further. He said the White House might ask news organizations to adopt a voluntary code of restraint. This is a terrible idea.
John Corry's Critic's Notebook column assesses television's coverage of terrorism; criticizes Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d's suggestion that White House might ask news organization to adopt voluntary code of restraint (S)
It is terrible for several reasons, one of which is that it wouldn't work. Mr. Meese said that news organizations might be asked to accept ''some principles reduced to writing.'' One principle, for example, could be the withholding of ''interviews that might endanger the captives or endanger the successful conclusion of the incident.''
Think about this for a moment. How does one determine which interviews do the endangering? Is it more perilous, for instance, to interview a captive who apologizes for his captors, or a former Secretary of State who calls for a retaliatory strike?
And, for that matter, who makes the determination? It is not realistic to expect competing news organizations to do it; it is chilling to think of the Government doing it for them. Either way, I think, Mr. Meese is onto a bad thing.
Meanwhile, note that although Mr. Meese and Mrs. Thatcher spoke of ''media,'' ''press'' and ''news organizations,'' they were not worried about newspapers or magazines; they were worried about television. Mrs. Thatcher, who had the advantage of a prepared speech (Mr. Meese was responding to questions at a news conference) was more explicit. Democracies, she said, must ''find ways to starve the terrorist and the hijacker of the oxygen of publicity on which they depend.''
Clearly, Mrs. Thatcher was talking about television: instant communication, universal message, global village. The networks decline to recognize there is a problem here. News executives, anchormen, commentators and correspondents skirt the issue. They answer criticism of the way they covered the recent hijacking of a Trans World Airlines jet by saying either that they made no mistakes, or that everyone, including, presumably, terrorists, can manipulate television.
This is disingenuous. Television asserts journalism's prerogatives without meeting its responsibilities. The thoroughly undesirable consequence is that a Prime Minister and an Attorney General now talk about finding ways to meet the responsibilities for it. None of this is necessary. Valid criticisms of television would disappear if it practiced responsible journalism in the first place.
There is nothing arcane about this. Mr. Meese is wrong when he speaks of ''principles reduced to writing''; there are no Ten Commandments. On the other hand, there are rules of journalism. For television, the unbreakable rule when it covers terrorism ought to be that once is enough. The mindless repetition it now practices serves no purpose.
Few critics quarrel with the way television covers breaking news; it does this very well. When T.W.A. Flight 847 landed in Beirut, it was right that cameras and correspondents were there. It was also right that they were around when the hostages were freed. These were news stories. The problem was what television did in between. It did not cover news stories.
It gave us, for example, Nabih Berri, not once but many times, and usually at length. Mr. Berri, the leader of the Shiite Amal militia, was a legitimate news story, but he ought to have appeared only once on each network. Television gave him a platform when he did not have that much to say.
This led anchormen and correspondents to look for nuance. The United States Ambassador to Lebanon, Reginald Bartholomew, who negotiated with Mr. Berri, was looking for nuance, too. The anchormen and correspondents usurped his role. The proper way to cover Mr. Berri would have been to have correspondents interview him. That's what correspondents are for. Assuming Mr. Berri said something newsworthy, the correspondents would then have reported it. That way, an editorial process would have been at work.
Television, however, ignored the editorial process. It surrendered journalistic sovereignty by showing whatever it could whenever it could. It may be permissible to show one news conference held by people who hold hostages; it is irresponsible to show them again and again.
Certainly television correspondents have the right to attend any news conference they choose, but their attendance alone does not legitimize the news conference. News is not just something that happens; it is something that must be weighed, balanced and put into context. If a news conference produces news, correspondents, exercising their own good judgment, are supposed to report it. When there is no news, they are supposed to remain silent.
The news conferences in Beirut did not produce news; they produced film. Invariably, however, the film was shown by the networks. Where was editorial judgment? There was none. The Amal, surrogates for the hijackers, produced its own programs.
Meanwhile, the networks have defended this by saying that in showing us the hostages at the news conferences, they kept us abreast of their well-being. It is a pallid defense. The correspondents could have interviewed the hostages, and then told Dan Rather, Peter Jennings or Roger Mudd. Then they could have told us. As it was, television gave us not journalism but pietism. It pretended to be doing something it was not.
There is no reason for any of this. There is no insurmountable problem. Television must only practice journalism, rather than allowing coverage to run pointlessly and dizzily on. Journalism means making intelligent choices. CBS interrupted its regular programs one day to report that the co-pilot of the hijacked jet had an infected spider bite. Meanwhile, whenever the Amal beckoned, all the networks responded. There was no restraint, and little judgment. Now Mrs. Thatcher and Mr. Meese propose correctives. Perhaps this is inevitable, but it is something that ought never to have happened.


End of Document