Critic's Notebook;
In the Know and Willing to Talk
The New York Times
April 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Cultural Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 22; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Column 4;
Length: 759 words
Byline: By WALTER GOODMAN

By WALTER GOODMAN
Body


All clear, cowed news fans. The assault by television experts has subsided, and for the moment it seems safe to tune in your favorite interview shows. But watch your head; this is likely to be just a Serbian truce.
After the invasion of experts on terrorism set off by the bombing of the World Trade Center, there was only a brief respite before the little war in Waco, Tex., called forth a swarm of experts on cultism. These cadres, swooping straight from producers' Rolodexes onto the nation's screens, were in a thriving television tradition of know-it-alls expatiating at the summons of the evening news on why a catastrophe they never predicted could now easily be foreseen.
The most accomplished of the breed are the foreign-policy pontificators. A nation's destruction can be the making of a reputation. You may not recall any of these people announcing before the event that Communism would collapse or that Yugoslavia would become a killing ground, but once they noticed what was happening, they were ready with policy pronouncements adorned with geopolitical phrases and sometimes delivered in a Middle European or Middle Eastern accent. Is it possible that the accent is adapted to the milieu?
Economists may be the most serviceable experts for television purposes, since they can readily be found on all sides of any issue. They resemble those doctors and engineers who rent themselves out in accident cases, some customarily testifying for the prosecution, others for the defense, a nice example of science accommodating itself to the market.
In like manner, economists have been proving to audiences for years that there is a recession and there is no recession, that it is over and it has hardly begun. Nothing that George F. Will or Sam Donaldson does can divert these practitioners from the incessant promotion of their appointed panaceas.
Psychologists have moved in on the downscale talk-show circuit like an occupying army. Some of the terrorism experts and cult experts came from their discipline, but the psychologists' main attraction for the afternoon believe-it-or-nots lies in sexier areas. The Mia Farrow-Woody Allen free-for-all brought out regiments of them, subspecialists in marriage, child care and celebrityitis. So many had been hired by the principals themselves that shaky New Yorkers faced a therapy shortage.
Unfortunately, descriptions of goings-on in the Farrow-Allen households did not enhance practitioners' pretensions to having bolstered their clients' mental health or emotional stability. And recent allegations that specialists in child abuse, a hot new line, have been coaxing young children to accuse parents or day-care workers of sexual hanky-panky have not added to the profession's luster. For the purposes of television, however, fantasy is at least as useful as fact, so you can count on the performing psychologists to continue to do their acts on all channels.
When the expert industry was young, producers ransacked universities and think tanks for presentable people with credentials and an authoritative manner. They found hurricane experts here and earthquake experts there and raided the ranks of retired generals to give blow-by-blows of the war in the Persian Gulf. But when it comes to terrorism and cultism, my suspicion is that the event creates the experts. After all, what university has an Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini Chair in Hostage-Taking or a Jim Jones School of Bartendry from which producers can draw?
No, it must work the other way. Every news program and talk show must have an emergency facility, where all-purpose pros sit around like fire fighters, playing cards until disaster strikes, the alarm sounds and they speed to the cameras with buckets of jargon. A few appearances on "Nightline" or "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" can do wonders for a reputation; a good performance may bring a book contract, a lecture tour, an invitation to be a senior something-or-other at a think tank, a partnership in a consulting operation, an invitation to contribute to op-ed pages. The new line for academic careerists: perform or perish.
What the experts are peddling, along with the usual mix of unexceptional observations and pop formulations, is themselves. When the terrorism expert tells an interviewer that more money must be invested in security, when the cult expert pleads for more attention to religious eccentrics, when the psychologist leads the wailing about domestic disarray, they are cultivating their gardens. The fertilizer is a blend of real troubles and the usual ingredient.

Load-Date: April 29, 1993


End of Document