CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
The Roots of Terrorism In the Power of Speech
The New York Times
May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Cultural Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 16; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Column 5;; Review
Length: 818 words
Byline: By WALTER GOODMAN

By WALTER GOODMAN
Body


In a typically acidulous mood, H. L. Mencken wrote in 1929: "The danger of free speech does not lie in the menace of ideas, but in the menace of emotions. If words were merely logical devices, no one would fear them. But when they impinge upon a moron they set off his hormones, and so they are justifiably feared. Complete free speech, under democracy, is possible only in a foreign language."
Mencken, as usual, was referring to the Puritanical spirit, mob mentality and generally dim intellectual powers of the booboisie, particularly when joined in prayer, boostership or vigilantism. How he would deal with the issues of liberty and democracy stirred by the Oklahoma City bombing, we can only surmise. But with much concern being voiced these days over the power of words, his own words retain considerable force.
Though always willing to assume the worst about politicians as a class, Mencken could not have resisted doing a job on the politician-hating militia members who have recently been discovered by television. Their comical camouflage, sappy strutting and he-man pretentions, their free-floating charges, rote slogans and bellicose incoherence, all lately displayed on screen, would have been rich grist for a writer who found joy in reviewing the latest vaudeville acts of his countrymen.
The militianiks are a very small bunch, but television interviews in their neighborhoods and the comments of callers to various television and radio programs indicate their ravings are considered worth something by many outside their circle. The ground has been prepared by the ranters of the airwaves. To judge by the popularity and apparent influence of radio and television yakkers, millions of Americans are intellectually deprived or emotionally disadvantaged.
Although President Clinton and Speaker Newt Gingrich may safely inveigh against those whose words may have somehow inspired a terrorist bomber or a mother who killed her children, no politician is likely to suggest in public that the main argument against free speech is the susceptibility of the audience. When an office holder or a campaigner utters the phrase "the American People" (by all odds the most-uttered phrase on the Sunday interview programs) it is in tones of respect shading into reverence. Politicians can teach a thing or two to television producers about pandering to the customer.
Sure there is too much rant, too much hate and of course too much violence on most channels, many radio stations and elsewhere along the ever expanding, mercilessly accessible information highway. The sewage in the flow cannot be good for the national ecology. The legal problem is making the connection between a G. Gordon Liddy instructing his fans on where to shoot a Federal agent and an actual act of terrorism.
But you can't blame television or radio for violence in America; it's as old as the nation. In the past, Americans have by and large resisted the worst rabble-rousers and probably, with outrages like Oklahoma City fresh in mind, will continue to do so. But the times they could be a-changing.
What is new is the reach, impact and audacity of all sorts of what is loosely termed communication, combined today with nervous-making economic difficulties and social strains in big cities and small towns, with the political fragmentation and religious zealotry of the New World Order and with easier ways of making more destructive explosives. The Justice Department would be remiss if it did not take into account the fact that your common run of monomaniac or wishful martyr can build a bomb and be induced to use it.
The stock in trade of the yakkers -- that powerful forces in and out of Government are kicking around just plain folks -- can only agitate receptive hormones. The enduring problem that Mencken so frequently and entertainingly described is the vulnerability of democracy to demagogy, a condition that has been much heightened by the noise explosion. So Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gingrich had better begin worrying more about the audience than about the performers. Whether the fertilizer comes from Oliver North or Oliver Stone or a white separatist or a black nationalist, it seems to find a volatile following.
The current pressure on the yakkers to tone down their agitprop is deserved, but they will assuredly be at it again as long as their shows get the ratings. By comparison, the soap operas they have nudged aside are harmless diversions; the soaps may not do much for the mind, but they do not poison the political air.
It is not for a democratic government to tell people what to listen to or watch. What a reviewer can suggest (how Mencken would have scorned this milk-and-water prescription) is that the welcome being given to the merchants of rant should draw the most urgent attention to the schools that continue not to educate and the conditions that continue to unhinge, with all respect, the American People.

Load-Date: May 31, 1995


End of Document