Critics: Memo suggests Bush seeks gain from 9/11;
A document of 2004 reelection issues starts with war on terrorism and homeland security.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
December 29, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 640 words
Byline: By Ron Fournier; Associated Press
Dateline: CRAWFORD, Texas
Body


An internal White House document outlining President Bush's reelection agenda starts with "War on terrorism (Con't)" and homeland security.
It's the latest sign, critics say, that presidential advisers are seeking political gain from the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
The single-page, sparsely worded document titled "Possible '04 Signature Issues" was discussed this month in a White House meeting chaired by Andrew H. Card Jr., chief of staff, to fine-tune Bush's 2003 legislative agenda, several senior White House officials said.
Dan Bartlett, White House communications director, said the "Signature Issues" list did not portend efforts to make terrorism a political centerpiece in 2004. It simply outlines a complicated set of issues Bush must confront, such as terrorism, or that he wants to put forward, such as Social Security reform, he said.
"The items reflected in this particular document speak to issues in which the country and this administration will be facing in the next few years, including the war on terrorism," Bartlett said. Bush has said the fight against terrorism will take years to win.
But Democrats said the document bolstered their claim that White House officials have methodically worked to politicize the war on terrorism - starting with tactics that helped Republicans make major gains in November's midterm elections.
"It continues to be shocking, but it's not surprising, that this administration will exploit the war on terrorism and national-security issues for their advantage if they can," said Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.), who is seeking the Democratic presidential nomination.
After the midterm shellacking, Democratic leaders vowed to be more critical of Bush's antiterrorism campaign, even at the risk of politicizing the issue themselves.
"The President is going to learn that Democrats have learned from our mistakes," said Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont, a Democratic presidential candidate. He denounced the 2004 issues list as "another attempt to play politics with terrorism."
The document lists 10 issues starting with the "War on terrorism (Con't)" and "Protecting the homeland (Con't)."
There is no elaboration, but the abbreviation for "continued" also is noted with the next four issues: health-care costs and access; legal reform; faith-based services; and education.
Higher education, Social Security reform, tax reform, and immigration reform round out the list.
White House officials said the list was not intended to rank issues in any priority. They said it was produced by a White House aide - whom they would not identify - to make sure the 2003 and 2004 agendas did not conflict.
Democrats scoffed at the explanation.
"It's always been clear what they've been trying to do. You just don't very often find a document that spells it out so clearly," said Joe Lockhart, press secretary in the Clinton White House.
While denying Lockhart's charge, White House officials conceded that the document reflected a growing attentiveness to Bush's reelection prospects. Political strategist Karl Rove will run the campaign from the White House, while top deputy Kenneth Mehlman is likely to head the separate campaign headquarters, aides say.
Bush may begin raising money as early as June or July, they said.
The "Signature Issues" document also reflects many of Bush's well-known priorities for 2003.
It should put to rest speculation that Bush may drop his proposal to give Americans the means to invest portions of their Social Security benefits in the stock market.
White House officials said Bush would make Social Security reform an issue in 2003 and the campaign year.
In his weekly radio address yesterday, Bush outlined his agenda for 2003, starting with the war against terrorism. "We will make certain that terrorists and their supporters are not safe in any cave or corner of the world," the President said.

Load-Date: December 29, 2002


End of Document