CRITICS WORRY ABOUT NEW TOOLS AGAINST TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 24, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. A7
Length: 292 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (AP)-President Clinton wants bold, new tools to combat domestic terrorism, but critics fear he may revive the days when the government spied on activists who committed no crimes.
Through presidential orders and new legislation, Clinton said Sunday he wants "serious threats to our liberties properly investigated."
His chief of staff, Leon Panetta, said the expanded powers would be used to probe paramilitary groups, a focus of the investigation into the Oklahoma City bombing.
Clinton's proposed countermeasures to prevent another similar disaster include:
Legislation to establish a Domestic Counterterrorism Center to be headed by the FBI and create a special fund to be used to infiltrate suspected terrorist organizations.
Legislation for increased FBI authority to comb through hotel and motel registers and search phone logs, and to give the agency greater access to credit card records.
Pressing for passage of the administration's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act, sent to Congress before the bombing. The legislation would give the government more power to fight terrorism and greater authority to protect the confidentiality of sources in official proceedings.
Clinton also directed the heads of the FBI, the Justice Department and the National Security Council to prepare a memo authorizing "any and all further steps necessary to combat terrorism," presidential aide George Stephanopoulos said.
James X. Dempsey, an official of a group specializing in protection of civil liberties, said, "The FBI already has a very active and very aggressive counterterrorism program. The FBI is awash in information. The problem is sifting through what it already gets."
Dempsey is deputy director of Center for National Security Studies., a nonprofit group.

Load-Date: April 25, 1995


End of Document