Croatian president slams 'Bush Doctrine'
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
December 10, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 298 words
Byline: John Heilprin Associated Press
Body


   UNITED NATIONS -- Croatia's president took a swipe at the Bush administration Tuesday, telling the U.N. Security Council that the global fight against terrorism has been "compromised" by Washington's pre-emptive approach.
Stipe Mesic, a staunch opponent of the U.S.-led war in Iraq, said solidarity with the U.S. diminished after it adopted "a kind of exclusive competence of one country, or of a group of countries which it led."
"The fight against terrorism as a global project was also compromised by the way in which it was waged," he said.
Stipe oversaw a 9-hour Security Council session he convened to renew the world's commitment to fighting terrorism. His Balkan country holds the 15-nation council's rotating presidency this month.
Bush defended his pre-emptive "Bush Doctrine" in a speech that coincided with the council session Tuesday. He told cadets at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., that a strong offense was needed to prevent Americans from being attacked again.
"We resolved that we would not wait to be attacked again, and so we went on the offense against the terrorists overseas so we never had to face them here at home," he said.
The council session ended Tuesday night with Mesic reading an unanimous statement condemning terrorism "in all its forms and manifestations" and asserting that "any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivations."
Before exiting the world stage, Bush has been trying to paint his administration as more of a team player. The American-led invasion of Iraq in March 2003, without the blessing of the United Nations, earned him the unilateralist label.
President-elect Barack Obama has resurrected other nations' hopes for closer cooperation between the U.S. and U.N. on international problems.

Load-Date: December 10, 2008


End of Document