Cross Burning Is Act Of Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 14, 2003, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 501 words
Body


A half-century ago, the state of Virginia passed a law making it a felony for any person, with the intent of intimidating another person or group of people, to burn a cross on public property or property belonging to someone else. Moreover, the law said, a burning cross would be prima facie evidence of an intent to intimidate a person or group.
Three defendants in three prosecutions, however, challenged the law as violative of their right of free speech. A divided Virginia Supreme Court then declared the law unconstitutional on its face.
Last week a divided U.S. Supreme Court disagreed with Virginia's high court, saying that states and juries cannot assume that the intent of every cross burner is to intimidate. But seven justices held unconstitutional that portion of the Virginia law allowing jurors to infer intimidation by a cross burner.
"While a burning cross does not inevitably convey a message of intimidation, often the cross burner intends that the recipients of the message fear for their lives," wrote Justice Sandra Day O'Connor for the court. "And when a cross burning is used to intimidate, few if any messages are more powerful."
Indeed, which is why we part company with the reasoning of the majority. We can think of no time, save perhaps a burning cross on a burning church, when a burning cross has any meaning or reason other than to intimidate and cause fear of harm, particularly to black Americans.
The Virginia law, as Justice Clarence Thomas, the court's lone black member, concluded, was passed to prohibit specific conduct, not protected expression.
It may be, as the court points out, that a burning cross did not always symbolize intimidation or terror, but its historical purpose throughout much of the 20th century was to terrorize. The Virginia law was aimed at terrorist activity, not to prohibit even warped political expression that would be protected under the Constitution.
Recall, as Thomas points out, that the act of burning a cross was made a crime at a time when racial segregation was the law of the state.
"It strains credulity to suggest that a state legislature that adopted a litany of segregationist laws self-contradictorily intended to squelch the segregationist message," Thomas wrote. "Even for segregationists, violent and terroristic conduct, the Siamese twin of cross burning, was intolerable. The ban on cross burning with intent to intimidate demonstrates that even segregationists understood the difference between intimidating and terroristic conduct and expressions about race.
"Just as one cannot burn down someone's house to make a political point and then seek refuge in the First Amendment, those who hate cannot terrorize and intimidate to make their point."
Still, the court's ruling means that law enforcement has the power to go after cross burners. Prosecutors will be required, however, to convince juries beyond a reasonable doubt that the intention of those defendants was to intimidate and terrorize and not to make a political point.

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: April 16, 2003


End of Document