CROWD PRESSURES U. CITY COUNCIL FOR MEASURE TO PROTECT CITIZENS' LIBERTIES;
 RESIDENTS FEAR FEDERAL RULES TO FIGHT TERRORISM WILL INFRINGE ON RIGHTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 30, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WEST POST ; Pg. 1
Length: 813 words
Byline: Margaret Gillerman Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


With quotes from the Bill of Rights and Thomas Jefferson, a large and impassioned crowd of residents asked the University City Council Monday night to adopt a resolution protecting civil liberties as the federal government conducts its war on terrorism.
The council heard from at least two dozen residents of diverse ages and races, World War II veterans and retired doctors as well as young parents and students, all supporting a resolution opposing new federal anti-terrorism rules that they said infringed on individual rights.
The council also received a petition signed by more than 200 people urging the council to support civil liberties and oppose the new federal rules.
If University City adopts such a resolution, it would be the first city in Missouri to do so. It would join about 30 other city councils that have adopted similar resolutions across the nation from Cambridge, Mass., to San Francisco.
The council couldn't reach agreement on the wording Monday but will address the issue again on Feb. 10, when it will consider at least two different versions of the statement.
Councilman Robert Wagner, 1st Ward, on Monday presented his own resolution, which omitted specific opposition to the USA Patriot Act but supported civil liberties generally. Wagner said the City Charter required the council to be nonpartisan.
"Any mention of the USA Patriot Act or executive orders of our president can be perceived as politically polarizing," he said.
Wagner added that he had heard from many residents who opposed a resolution specifically criticizing the Patriot Act. Wagner unsuccessfully urged the council to set a date for a public hearing that might give the other side time to organize. He will not be able to attend the meeting Feb. 10.
Matt LeMieux, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Eastern Missouri, said the focus should be on guiding municipal employees such as police on how to react if they were asked by the FBI or other law enforcement authorities to do something that would violate the Bill of Rights.
No one in the audience spoke on behalf of the stricter security measures that have been undertaken since the nation was attacked on Sept. 11, 2001. The USA Patriot Act gives federal investigators expanded ways to investigate terrorism suspects. Congress overwhelmingly approved the Patriot Act to address concerns about a lack of intelligence sharing among agencies and other intelligence failures before the attacks. Polls have indicated that much of the American public supports the tougher security measures.
Opponents of the act say the new security measures allow officials to detain people without due process, easily listen into telephone conversations, gain access to private e-mail and conduct other searches in secret.
One of those speaking, resident Wilma Kennell, said she was concerned about reports that federal investigators had looked at library records in St. Louis.
"Among the many anti-American provisions of the Patriot Act, federal agents can obtain records of what we borrow from the library without judicial oversight," Kennell said. "One of the basic freedoms that has set our country apart from many others is the right of free speech, which includes the right to read whatever we wish to read without fear or h arassment from the government."
Her husband, David Kennell, said: "Instead of the bellicose Joe McCarthy, it's the more genteel John Ashcroft."
Barbara Chicherio told the council: "It sends chills up my spine to think that people can be detained without having charges against them."
Another speaker, Leo Fichtenbaum, was roundly applauded. He described himself as a World War II veteran with a Purple Heart. He said he was "much concerned we will be silent when we should be speaking." Fichtenbaum quoted Jefferson and said, "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty."
The council was asked to adopt a resolution by the Greater St. Louis Bill of Rights Defense Committee. The coalition was started by area activists Leonard Robertson and Bud DeRaps and various members of the Green Party.
The group is asking municipalities to adopt a resolution calling for protection of various rights: the rights of free speech, assembly and privacy; the rights to legal counsel and due process; and the right to protection from unreasonable searches and seizures.
The group's resolution was modified and presented at a work session before the council meeting by Councilman Lawrence Lieberman, 1st Ward. "I honestly feel it's the right thing to do," he said. At that hour-long session, the council members debated the wording, and it became clear they would not agree.
Councilman Wayne Munkel, 2nd Ward, said he doubted the municipality could tell employees not to follow the law or orders of the FBI. He and Councilwoman Cassandra Colquitt, 3rd Ward, intend to submit their own version of a resolution at the next meeting.

Notes

Reporter Margaret Gillerman:; E-mail: mgillerman@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-725-6758  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; PHOTOS BY DAWN MAJORS / POST-DISPATCH; (1) Color Photo - Matt LeMieux (left), executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Eastern Missouri, listens as University City residents voice their opinions about the USA Patriot Act. At right is Mark Fitz of University City.; (2) Color Photo - Fredric Raines, associate professor of economics at Washington University, was among several speakers urging the University City Council to adopt a resolution against federal anti-terrorism rules.; (3) Photo - Wilma Kennell (left) and her husband, David Kennell, were among those who asked for the resolution protecting rights. David Kennell called the USA Patriot Act "an attack on the Bill of Rights."

Load-Date: January 30, 2003


End of Document