Cuban exile linked to terrorism wants haven in U.S.
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 9, 2005 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 20A; Newspaper
Length: 684 words
Byline: DAVID ADAMS
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


After years on the run, a legendary Cuban exile militant linked to several notorious terrorist incidents is seeking to come in from the cold.
Luis Posada Carriles, 77, is in hiding in the Miami area after secretly entering the country last month, according to friends in the Cuban exile community. He plans to seek political asylum or parole as a Cuban refugee as early as next week, according to his Miami attorney.
His clandestine presence in Miami poses a dilemma for the United States government in its global fight against terrorism.
"How do you admit someone with that kind of shadow over him," said Damian Fernandez, director of the Cuban Research Institute at Florida International University. "It's going to take a lot of scrutiny."
Though not charged with crimes in the United States, Posada has been accused over the years of blowing up a Cuban airliner, bombing hotels in the Cuban capital, Havana, and plotting to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
The state-run Cuban newspaper, Granma, last week declared that his asylum request "confirms" the Bush administration's "double standards to measure terrorism."
Posada, who is known by his childhood nickname "Bambi," denies any involvement in terrorist activity. His friends describe him as a Cuban freedom fighter with a long association with covert operations on behalf of the U.S. government.
"I doubt very much that the U.S. will turn its back on him," said his longtime friend, Miami developer Santiago Alvarez. "He has done everything that was asked of him, and more."
Like many Cuban exiles, he was trained in explosives by the CIA as part of the Bay of Pigs operation, his friends say. In the '60s he served with the U.S. Army, earning an honorable discharge with the rank of lieutenant, said Alvarez.
He later engaged in counter-insurgency operations with the secret police in Venezuela, fighting Cuban-backed guerrillas.
He is wanted by Venezuelan authorities for the 1976 bombing of a Cuban passenger jet that had taken off from Caracas. All 73 aboard were killed.
Arrested and jailed in Venezuela, he was found innocent in military and civilian court, Alvarez said. Even so, he was kept in jail for five years, before escaping in 1985 disguised as a policeman.
In the 1980s, Posada reportedly hooked up with Lt. Col. Oliver North's covert operations in Central America, helping provide funding and supplies for the Contra forces fighting Nicaragua's leftist Sandinista regime.
Rather than return to the United States, he went into hiding. It's believed he lived mostly in Central America. In 1990, working as a security adviser in Guatemala City, he was shot in the face in an assassination attempt. He accused Cuban secret agents of being behind the shooting, which shattered his jaw.
In 1997 he was linked to a series of small package bombs set off in and around Cuban hotel lobbies, which killed an Italian tourist. An investigation by Miami Herald reporter Juan Tamayo revealed that the bombings were the work of a ring of armed robbers in El Salvador, directed and financed by Cuban exiles in El Salvador and Miami.
The Herald concluded that Posada "was the key link between El Salvador and the South Florida exiles who raised $15,000 for the operation."
He remained in hiding but was arrested in Panama in November 2000, accused in a bizarre plot to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
Posada was convicted in the Panama plot with three other Cuban-Americans and sentenced to seven years in jail. The Cuban exiles said they were framed by Castro agents who lured them to Panama with a ruse about a top-level general seeking to defect. They were released last year under a presidential amnesty. The three Cuban-Americans returned to Miami. But Posada, who is not a U.S. resident, went his own way.
It's not clear how he entered this country last month. His name was reportedly on an immigration watch list.
His immigration attorney, Eduardo Soto, is expected to file immigration papers next week. It remains unclear when Posada will present himself before authorities.
"There are still some things that need to be sorted out," said Alvarez.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Luis Posada Carriles

Load-Date: April 9, 2005


End of Document