CUBAN MILITANT PRESENTS WHITE HOUSE WITH TOUGH CHOICES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 19, 2005 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 459 words
Byline: CURT ANDERSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


Freedom fighter or terrorist? Illegal alien or persecuted Cuban refugee? The Bush administration faces a tough choice in deciding what to do with Luis Posada Carriles, wanted on suspicion of orchestrating the deadly 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner.
 Posada, a 77-year-old Cuban exile, was being held yesterday at an undisclosed location in the United States, while U.S. immigration officials decided his fate. He was taken into custody Tuesday, two months after he slipped into the United States and asked for asylum.
The Bush administration has at least three choices: extradite Posada to Venezuela, where he is wanted in the airliner bombing that killed 73 people; send him to a third country willing to accept him; or let him stay in the United States.
 Over the past 45 years, the U.S. government has condoned and even backed acts of sabotage against Fidel Castro's communist Cuba, and federal law specifically welcomes anti-Castro exiles. But the United States could find itself accused of a double standard on terrorism if it shelters Posada.
 If Posada is allowed to stay, "it would diminish U.S. standing in the world and significantly undercut our credibility in terms of the war on terrorism," said Wayne Smith, a former U.S. envoy to Cuba who now heads the Cuba program at the Washington-based Center for International Policy. "It would be a serious blow to our war on terrorism."
 Venezuelan Vice President Jose Vicente Rangel said this case "is going to be emblematic, really, to assess exactly what is the final position of the American government -- and, particularly, President Bush -- with respect to terrorism. It seems that, for some, there is a good terrorism and a bad terrorism."
 A decision on whether Posada should be deported must be made under U.S. law by this afternoon. The U.S. government has not said what it will do, but the Homeland Security Department said in a statement that it generally does not deport people to Cuba or countries acting on Cuba's behalf.
 Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, the president's brother, said Posada should not be sent back to Cuba or Venezuela. But he also said: "I'm not sure he's the symbol for the fight for freedom. There are people in political prison in Cuba simply because they've prayed to their God, or they've expressed dissent."
 Venezuela, whose president, Hugo Chavez, is a staunch U.S. critic who has a strained relationship with Washington, has an extradition treaty with the United States and has asked the United States to turn Posada over for a possible retrial in the airliner bombing.
 Castro has repeatedly renounced Cuba's right to try Posada and has instead argued that he should be turned over to Venezuela or an international tribunal. The Cuban president has branded Posada a terrorist.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Luis Posada Carriles

Load-Date: May 20, 2005


End of Document