Cuban Firing Squad Executes Exile
The New York Times
January 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Column 2;
Length: 654 words
Byline: Reuters

Reuters
Dateline: HAVANA, JAN. 20
Body


A Cuban exile convicted of sabotage and terrorism was executed by firing squad today in a warning the Government said was aimed at right-wing exile groups operating from the United States.
 Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, 38 years old, was shot after appeals for clemency were turned down by Cuba's Supreme Court and the ruling Council of State headed by President Fidel Castro.
The official national news agency AIN, quoted by state television, reported the execution in a brief one-paragraph note titled "Sentence against terrorist carried out."
 Mr. Diaz Betancourt went to the firing squad despite pleas for clemency from leaders around the world.
 
 
Convicted of Sabotage
 The execution was approved as Cuba faced mounting international calls for political change and the worst economic crisis in its history, triggered by the breakup of the country's former ally and supplier, the Soviet Union.
 Mr. Diaz Betancourt and two other men were found guilty by a Cuban court 10 days ago of terrorism, sabotage and enemy propaganda.
 The three, who lived in Miami, were captured with arms and explosives on Dec. 29 shortly after landing on Cuba's northern coast in an inflatable dinghy.
 In a partial response to the international calls for clemency, death sentences against the others, Daniel Santovenia Fernandez, 36, and Pedro de la Caridad Alvarez Pedroso, 26, were commuted to 30 years' imprisonment.
 The Council of State, which made the final decision on the execution, made clear in a statement on Sunday that the death sentence for Mr. Diaz Betancourt was intended as a deterrent to future sabotage missions by right-wing Cuban exiles in the United States.
 The death penalty "fulfills a goal of overall prevention, especially when the idea is to stop such loathsome actions from being repeated, to deter others and so to prevent innocent human lives from being endangered in the future," the Council said.
Mr. Diaz Betancourt, who was said to have been the leader of the group, repeatedly confessed in court and on state television that the group's mission had been to plant firebombs in public places like movie theaters and restaurants and to attack economic targets.
 The United States Government strongly denied Cuba's allegations of involvement. State Department officials were not available for comment on Monday after the execution.
 Cuba's Council of State accused the United States authorities of showing "spectacular incompetence" in failing to prosecute Cuban exile leaders who recruited and trained individuals on American territory for attacks against Cuba.
 Entering the country illegally to commit terrorism, sabotage or other serious acts against state security can carry the death penalty. Lawyers during the trial said that the death penalty could be applied even if the accused had not been able to carry out the actions they had planned.
 The Council of State, in ratifying the death sentence against Mr. Diaz Betancourt, had ruled he was the most directly responsible in the charges against the three exiles.
 It said he was motivated by ambition for political power. The Council said he had hoped his planned terrorist activities would create chaos in Cuba and provoke United States intervention to end Communist rule on the island.
 In the past, armed Cuban exiles from the United States caught attempting to infiltrate were usually given long prison sentences.
 It was the most politically significant execution in Cuba since Gen. Arnaldo Ochoa and three other senior officers went to the firing squad in mid-1989 after being found guilty of corruption and involvement in drug trafficking.
 The three exiles were tried and sentenced amid a wave of nationwide anger in Cuba over the Jan. 9 killing of three policemen, two of whom were shot after being tied up, by a group trying to steal a boat to flee the island.
 The five men and two women of the group have been captured and could also face the firing squad if convicted.

Graphic

 
Photo: Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, a Cuban exile convicted of terrorism, was executed by firing squad. Photo was taken on Jan. 19. (Reuters via Cuban television)

Load-Date: January 21, 1992


End of Document