Culprits behind terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 8, 1985, Thursday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Commentary; Pg. 3
Length: 740 words
Byline: By Charles Waterman, Special to The Christian Science Monitor; The writer was a government official for two decades before becoming a consultant on international affairs
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: It's hard to prove a nation's control over terrorists, but this may be key to countering their aggression
Body


The world is groping for ways to fix ultimate responsibility for the actions of small militant states, insurgents, and terrorists.
In confronting one aspect of this dilemma, President Reagan recently branded Libya, Iran, North Korea, Cuba, and Nicaragua as guilty of acts of war because of their support and control of terrorism against the United States.
But the quest to find clear-cut culpability is not an easy one.
In most instances of terrorism, insurgency, and conventional aggression, information on a supporting state's actual role is hard to obtain. Ideological affinities and general policies of material support do not constitute proof of direct involvement in a specific situation or action.
For instance, do the Soviets ''control'' the Vietnamese in Kampuchea, the Syrians in Lebanon, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), or the Cubans in Nicaragua?
Or, does the US control Israel, the Nicaraguan ''contras,'' or Pakistan?
And on a different level, does Iran control the terrorist organization known as Islamic Jihad? Does Libya control the actions of the various terrorist groups it has supported over the years, and does Cuba direct the El Salvador rebels?
Several questions must be examined in deciding whether to hold a government responsible for the action of a smaller state or organization:
* Is there proof that the supporting state ordered and controlled an act of aggression or terrorism? Some Libyan and past Iranian-sponsored terrorism falls into this category.
* Are factions of a supporting state's leadership acting in the name of the entire state, but against the will of other factions? Many feel some current Iranian-inspired terrorism is of this variety.
* If not controlling acts of aggression, is a supporting state providing arms and aid to a client under the assumption that the client will behave in certain ways, even without close supervision? And if so, does such a policy constitute responsibility for resulting actions? Soviet arming of the PLO might fall into this category.
* Does a smaller state or group have enough pressure-points on its sponsor that it can ignore the latter's advice? If it does, is the sponsor excused from responsibility? Many place US-Israeli and Soviet-Syrian relations in this category.
Unfortunately, these questions are posed more often in politically charged rather than in dispassionate circumstances. Accordingly, the answers tend to be less than objective, and often reinforce stereotypes about an opposing state's behavior.
In addition, another rule of thumb may be applied to such deliberations: The degree of control over offending groups is inevitably perceived as far greater for one's opponent than for one's self.
Examples of the nuances abound.
United States and Israel. The US does not ''control'' Israel, yet many Arabs think it does. Latent US influence is indeed great, given Israel's economic dependency on this country ($3.6 billion in aid next year). But domestic US political constituencies, international security require-CULPRITSCULPRITS
ments, and basic political empathy severely inhibit how much power the US can exert over Israel's policies.
Soviet Union and Vietnam. The Soviets spend between $1 billion and $2 billion in economic and military aid to Vietnam, leading many Westerners to say the Soviets ''control'' Vietnamese actions in Indochina. But even here, the Vietnamese have plenty of room to maneuver outside of Soviet influence. Vietnam plays a valuable role for the Soviets by positioning over half a million troops along China's southern border, and by providing naval and air power projection facilities at Cam Ranh Bay. The Soviets are unlikely to squander these benefits by pressuring unduly on mere regional issues.
Iran and the Islamic Jihad. The organization has claimed responsibility for attacks on US marines, diplomats, and civilians in Lebanon, and the US and other countries have correctly placed responsibility for some of its activities at Iran's doorstep. Yet, during the hijacking of TWA Flight 847, high-level Iranian officials dissociated themselves from the action. And some Iranian factions seem capable of sponsoring terrorist acts without consent of more pragmatic elements in the government. So here again, ''control'' and ''responsibility'' are maddeningly elusive concepts.
The search for culprits is not simple. But to ignore its complexities may be just the stuff that mindless escalations of violence are made of.

Graphic

 
Picture, Islamic Jihad took credit for '84 attack on US Embassy in Beirut, but can US blame Iran?, UPI


End of Document