CURBING RIGHTS WON'T CURB TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
April 25, 1995 Tuesday PM EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; Pg. 32; EDITORIAL
Length: 651 words
Body


To the surprise of the anti-government loonies who bombed a building in Oklahoma City, the federal government could actually emerge from this tragedy with increased powers to investigate its citizens.
In an effort to prevent another terrorist attack, President Clinton has called for new laws that would make it easier for the Federal Bureau of Investigation to infiltrate suspected terrorist groups, comb through hotel and motel registers and search phone logs and credit-card records.
Clinton wants a "Domestic Counterterrorism Center," to be headed by the FBI, and he is urging passage of an "Omnibus Counterterrorism Act," which, among other things, would allow confidential sources to give information against suspected terrorists.
But the federal government already has plenty of power. It doesn't need new laws.
What we need is to work on competence, judgment and common sense within the government - and to turn down the volume on political ranting outside the government.
Of course, everyone - from the president on down - wants to make sure the Oklahoma City heartbreak never happens again.
But eroding everybody's individual rights in an effort to snag a potential madman or two - even if it works, which is by no means certain - isn't the answer.
It wasn't the answer when the government was investigating Communists in the '50s or Black Panthers in the '60s or anti-war protesters in the '70s, and it isn't the answer now.
The government already has broad powers to infiltrate and investigate groups suspected of being a threat to U.S. security.
The FBI can install wiretaps and conduct secret break-ins with permission
from a secret federal court - which approves almost every surveillance application. The agency merely needs to prove probable cause that the subject is a member - or even supporter - of an organization that threatens national security.
Unfortunately, these powers weren't used to supervise bombing suspect Timothy McVeigh or his crazed pals.
That's because it's difficult to figure out who's really dangerous and who's just letting off steam by hoisting his overweight carcass into the woods every weekend to play bang-bang in camouflage and face-paint.
After all, these guys are not exactly the paramilitary elite. The Justice Department didn't take them seriously until last week. Daily News staff writer Don Russell, who did a story on the Michigan Militia in December, described them as paranoid, inept and dizzy with vainglorious notions of dying in battle against the federal government, despite a tendency to point their guns at their feet.
The "troops," he wrote, "looked like they would have trouble falling off a bar stool on command."
Most of them appear to be angry white men puzzled by the economic forces that have led to closed factories and foreclosed family farms in their states. They've cooked up a slew of cockamamie theories, based on paranoia and newspaper clippings, to justify their bad fortune.
They think the federal government is going to take away all their weapons and lock them up in giant prison camps - or march them into pits and machine- gun them.
They think the federal raid on David Koresh's compound in Waco, Texas, was an orchestrated plot against gun-owners, when it was really just a bungled raid by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
They see the federal government as the enemy - although, as the Oklahoma City bombing highlighted so tragically, the federal government is really just a collection of Americans like us, who happen to be employed by Uncle Sam.
So how do you infiltrate madness? No law can give the FBI that ability.
It's been said that no one ever gave up a civil right for a bad reason. But once a right is gone, you can never get it back.
Everyone wants revenge for the nightmare in Oklahoma, but the revenge shouldn't begin and end with the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
That would indeed be a victory for the crazies.

Notes

IN OUR OPINION

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document