Cure? Terrorism dilemma

Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 3, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 594 words
Byline: Gzedit
Body


HISTORY has unpredictable phases - and it's odd that the world is suffering the Era of the Human Bomb, a time when young Muslim zealots eagerly throw away their lives to destroy strangers they perceive as spiritual enemies. We can't fathom why this phenomenon became the chief dynamo of the new century.
President Bush's cure is to use military force to kill the zealots. But it makes little sense that he applied it to Iraq, which had no connection to the human bomb trend, yet he won't apply it to Saudi Arabia, the heart of the problem. Fifteen of the 19 suicide "martyrs" of 9/11 came from there.
Regardless, Bush's cure probably won't work. We doubt that nations can kill their way out of terrorism. Israel is a spectacular failure in this regard. Killing merely fans the original hatred, spawning more martyrs.
The only cure, we think, is to change the cultural mentality that drives young people to suicide-murder. That's an exceedingly difficult task, yet it must be pursued by the world community.
Some insight into the dilemma is provided by Mansour al-Nogaidan, a columnist for Saudi Arabia's Al-Riyadh newspaper. In a New York Times commentary, he wrote:
"I cannot but wonder at our officials and pundits who continue to claim that Saudi society loves other nations and wishes them peace, when state-sponsored preachers in some of our largest mosques continue to curse and call for the destruction of all non-Muslims…
"We must be aware that this religious extremism, which has been indoctrinated in several Saudi generations, will be very difficult to defeat. I know because I once espoused it. For 11 years, from the age of 16, I was a Wahhabi extremist. With like-minded companions I set fire to video stores selling Western movies and even burned down a charitable society for widows and orphans in our village because we were convinced it would lead to the liberation of women."
While in prison, he began reading "liberal Muslim philosophers," he said, and "I came to realize that Islam was not only Wahhabism, and that other forms preached love and tolerance." He reversed his life and began writing calls for acceptance of other faiths.
However, his newspaper columns drew a flood of venom and death threats from angry readers. Some filed blasphemy charges against him. He related:
"A week ago yesterday, I was supposed to appear at the Sahafa police station to receive 75 lashes on my back. I had been sentenced by a religious court because of articles I had written calling for freedom of speech and criticizing Wahhabism… At the last minute, I decided not to go to the police station and undergo this most humiliating punishment… The sentence remains pending. I will leave this matter to fate."
The columnist said Saudi Arabia's plan to track down and kill al-Qaida terrorists who committed recent bombings can't succeed in the long run, because the country "is bogged down by deep-rooted Islamic extremism in most schools and mosques, which have become breeding grounds for terrorists."
Killing groups of extremists ends their threat - but it may create twice as many eager recruits to take their place. As long as the "war on terrorism" remains a war fought with rockets and machine guns, it's a formula for endless bloodshed.
How can America and the United Nations change the mind-set of fanatic-ridden cultures? We really don't know. Simply installing democracy probably won't work, because the new voters likely would elect extremist leaders to enforce theocracy. Yet this challenge must be faced by the West, to try to end the Era of the Human Bomb.

Load-Date: December 3, 2003


End of Document