CYBER ATTACKS RATED HIGHER THAN TERRORISM AS SECURITY RISKS, U.S. INTEL EXPERTS SAY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
March 13, 2013 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 906 words
Byline: Ken Dilanian, Los Angeles Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- Cyber attacks and cyber espionage pose a greater potential danger to U.S. national security than al-Qaida and other militants who have dominated America's global focus since Sept. 11, 2001, the nation's top intelligence officials said Tuesday.
For the first time, the growing risk of computer-launched foreign assaults on U.S. infrastructure -- including the power grid and financial networks -- was ranked higher in the U.S. intelligence community's annual review of worldwide threats than worries about terrorism, transnational organized crime and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The startling reappraisal comes a day after President Barack Obama's national security adviser, Tom Donilon, complained of "cyber intrusions emanating from China on an unprecedented scale," and said China-based digital attacks on U.S. businesses and institutions had become "a key point of concern" for the White House. "The international community cannot afford to tolerate such activity from any country," he warned in a speech at The Asia Society in New York. He urged Beijing to "take serious steps to investigate and put a stop to these activities."
Appearing Tuesday before the Senate intelligence committee, James Clapper, director of national security, said Russia and China are unlikely to launch a devastating cyber attack against the United States outside of a military conflict or crisis that they believe threatens their vital interests. But Mr. Clapper's written statement said computer hackers or organized groups "could access some poorly protected U.S. networks that control core functions, such as power generation," although their ability to cause "high-impact, systemic disruptions will probably be limited."
Mr. Clapper testified alongside CIA director John Brennan; FBI director Robert Mueller; Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, who heads the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency; Matthew Olsen, who heads the National Counterterrorism Center; and Philip Goldberg, who heads the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
The downgrading of the terrorist threat came with notable qualifiers. As was clear in the lethal attack last Sept. 11 on U.S. diplomatic and intelligence compounds in Benghazi, Libya, al-Qaida's local affiliates and sympathizers in the Middle East and North Africa still seek to harm U.S. interests. Officials warned that despite setbacks, al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, the affiliate based in Yemen, aims to carry out attacks on U.S. soil, and it "continues to adjust its tactics, techniques and procedures for targeting the West."
But aggressive counter-terrorist operations, including using drone-launched missiles to kill individuals and small groups in northwest Pakistan, "have degraded core al-Qaida so that the group is likely unable to carry out complex, large-scale attacks in the West," Mr. Clapper said.
Al-Qaida and its affiliates played little or no role in the popular uprisings across the Middle East and North Africa in 2011. But the fragile new governments in Egypt, Yemen and Libya, and ongoing unrest in Syria and Mali, "have offered opportunities" for what Mr. Clapper called "unpredictable" attacks by established or aspiring terrorist groups on U.S. facilities and allies.
In response, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., who chairs the committee, noted that "the terrorist threat has receded" because of a broad array of U.S. efforts including criminal prosecutions, noting that 438 people were convicted of terrorism-related charges in U.S. courts between 2001 and 2010.
In a separate hearing at the Senate armed services committee, Gen. Keith Alexander, who heads the Pentagon's new U.S. cyber command, which conducts military operations, as well as the National Security Agency, which carries out digital espionage overseas, said the number of cyber attacks is growing.
"It's getting worse," he said, citing more than 140 attacks on Wall Street over the last six months. Last August, he added, a computer intrusion at Saudi Aramco, the Saudi Arabian national oil and gas company, destroyed data on 30,000 computers. Outside experts blamed the assaults on Iran.
On other fronts, Mr. Clapper warned that congressionally mandated budget cuts under the sequester would create problems for intelligence collection and analysis. The overall budget for the 16 U.S. intelligence agencies, now about $75 billion, is up sharply in the past decade.
Intelligence assessments of most global danger zones changed little from last year.
Iran continues to enrich uranium and is moving closer to being capable of constructing a nuclear weapon, but it has not decided to build one, Mr. Clapper's statement said.
Iran probably cannot divert weapons-grade fissile material without being discovered by United Nations inspectors, who make regular visits to its nuclear facilities, and Western intelligence agencies. Intelligence analysts believe that Iran's leaders are "guided by a cost-benefit approach" that still allows for a diplomatic solution to the standoff with the West.
But Mr. Clapper stepped up his warnings on North Korea. In recent months, leader Kim Jong Un's regime has successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, displayed what appeared to be a mobile intercontinental ballistic missile and placed a small satellite in orbit.
He said North Korea's nuclear arms and missile programs "pose a serious threat to the United States" as well as its East Asian neighbors.

Load-Date: March 14, 2013


End of Document