D.C. incident's motive a mystery; Police say it was neither accident nor terrorism
USA TODAY
October 4, 2013 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 562 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson,, Donna Leinwand Leger, and Doug Stanglin
Body


A fatal shooting that struck a chord of terror for a few tense hours in the nation's capital Thursday has left many unanswered questions about why a driver attempted to ram her luxury car into a security barricade near the White House, prompting a blaze of gunfire from police.
Metropolitan Police say there still is no indication why the woman drove her car wildly around some of the nation's most heavily protected buildings with an infant in the vehicle. The woman was killed by bullets fired from police; the child was in good condition at a local hospital.
The Nissan Infiniti was registered to Miriam Carey, 34, of Stamford, Conn., according to a federal law enforcement official who was not authorized to comment publicly. Investigators believe she was the driver, and authorities were running fingerprint analysis to confirm her identity.
The incident caused a brief lockdown of the Capitol as Congress tried unsuccessfully to end the three-day government shutdown.
"This does not appear to be in any way an accident," Metropolitan Police Chief Cathy Lanier said at an evening news briefing. Lanier said the woman twice tried to breach security barriers and struck a uniformed Secret Service officer near the White House.
U.S. Capitol Police Chief Kim Dine said it "appears to be an isolated, singular matter, with ... no nexus to terrorism."
The chaotic events began at 2:12 p.m. when the driver rammed a temporary barrier at 15th and E Streets NW, hitting the officer, said Secret Service chief Ed Donovan. Other Secret Service officers chased the woman east on Pennsylvania Avenue but did not shoot.
Lanier said Capitol Police officers pursued the speeding car eastbound and tried to stop it  just west of the Capitol lawn. A 23-year-veteran officer suffered non-life-threatening injuries when he crashed into a barrier.
Police had the woman's car surrounded but she escaped, ramming a Secret Service vehicle as she fled. Lanier said. Police then fired  at the suspect.
The driver made her way onto Constitution Avenue before  stopping in the 100 block of Maryland Avenue NE, near the Hart Senate Office Building.
Police then killed the driver after she got out of her vehicle and tried to flee.
Two federal officials told USA TODAY that all shots were fired by law enforcement officers. One official said no gun was recovered from the Infiniti.
Terrance Gainer, the sergeant at arms of the Senate, said the woman's vehicle could not have reached the Capitol  because "there are barricades up all the time."
As the chase unfolded, members of Congress and staff were told by Capitol police to "immediately shelter in place." Less than an hour later, a TV screen in the Senate press gallery flashed an "all clear" message.
Security was heightened at the White House as a precaution, and President Obama was briefed on the incident, White House officials said.
Tim and Jennifer Arnold of Louisville just got out of a pedicab with their two daughters when they noticed a black car speeding past them.
"Then we heard five or six gunshots -- bam, bam, bam, bam, bam," said Tim Arnold, 48, a computer systems programmer. "I said, 'Get on the ground.'"
Jennifer Arnold, 44, a human resources worker, jumped over a row of bushes and lay on the ground with her daughters for several minutes.
"I could smell the gun smoke," she said. "It was like sulfur."
Contributing: Susan Davis; Alan Gomez 

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Frank Pompa, USA TODAY (map)
photo JEWEL SAMAD, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: October 4, 2013


End of Document