Dallas High School student accused of 'cyber terrorism'
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
January 31, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 655 words
Byline: Bob Kalinowski, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Jan. 31--A tenth-grade Dallas High School student is being accused of a "cyber terrorism" attack on the school's computer system last week, but his attorney claims he's innocent.
Dallas administrators suspended the teenager for 10 days, vowed expulsion and threatened a federal investigation after the school's computer server was hacked and infected with a virus on January 23, the boy's attorney said in court documents filed Thursday.
The student's attorney, Gary Michak, on Thursday afternoon asked for a preliminary injunction to block the suspension, saying the allegations and suspension were based on "unsubstantiated suspicions."
Luzerne County Judge David W. Lupas quickly granted the request and allowed to boy to return to school until a hearing can be held on the matter in Luzerne County Court. He scheduled a hearing for Feb. 6 at 1:30 p.m.
The student and his parents are referred to only by initials in court documents, but The Citizens' Voice was able to identify them by analyzing the court documents. A man who answered the door at the family's Kingston Township home on Thursday night said, "I can't comment at this time." A woman then slammed the door shut.
Michak's filing indicates the student's parents were told he "is being investigated as a cyber-terrorist, and that the district was considering referrals to law enforcement, including federal law enforcement."
It was not immediately clear Thursday night if local or federal law enforcement were investigating.
In his ruling, Lupas barred the school district or any or its employees from making public comments on the matter or releasing any confidential materials associated with the case. Dallas Superintendent Frank Galicki did not return a phone call Thursday night.
Michak claims the administrators at Dallas violated the student's rights because he and his attorney were not given a chance to dispute the allegations before a closed meeting district officials had with his parents at the school on Jan. 24 to discuss the allegations and unilaterally impose a punishment.
At the hearing, district officials told the parents the teen is being accused of uploading a virus after hacking into the school's computer system, but members of the school's technology department terminated the attack before the system crashed. The school's director of technology, Bill Gartrell, claimed the student infected the system with files that continually duplicated "over and over" and finally reached 1.5 million records by the time "we stopped his account," the court documents say.
"This would have crashed the servers if we hadn't stopped it," Gartrell said in an email to high school Principal Jeffrey Shaffer.
Michak said the district relied on Gartrell's assumption that his client was the hacker, but never allowed the boy or his attorney to dispute Gartrell's "hearsay statement." Gartrell also suspected the boy of similar hacking incidents last year and during the 2009-2010 school year, which likely played a role in him being accused and suspected this time, Michak claims.
Furthermore, teachers and administrators at Dallas have "circulated rumors and non-public information" about the student, Michak claimed.
Efforts to reach Michak on Thursday night were not successful.
In seeking an injunction, Michak argued more harm would be done to the boy by not allowing him to continue his education than would be done to the district by allowing him to remain in school while the merits of the allegations are further investigated.
"Since January 24, 2014, (the student) has been denied access to his statutory right to education, has been denied the ability to participate in midterm exams, and has been denied access to homework assignments," Michak wrote.
bkalinowski@citizensvoice.com
570-821-2055, @cvbobkal
___ (c)2014 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: January 31, 2014


End of Document