DAM SECURITY BEING STRENGTHENED AS THREAT OF TERRORISM BECOMES ISSUE
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 28, 1997, Friday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. 3
Length: 428 words
Byline: By H. JOSEF HEBERT ; Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Federal officials increasingly are worried that some of the massive dams that dot the West could become tempting targets for terrorists, so the government is stepping up security at the facilities.
The concern was raised Thursday at a news conference by senior officials of the federal Bureau of Reclamation, which manages the 475 federal dams, including 58 large electricity generating dams such as Grand Coulee and Hoover.
Reclamation Commissioner Eluid Martinez emphasized that he was unaware of any specific threats from terrorists to any of the dams, but that he was boosting security and making local officials at the dams aware of the potential problem.
"We're recognizing the potential violence that's out there," Martinez told reporters.
He said the bureau planned to spend an additional $ 15 million for security at the dams over the next three years, including $ 6 million that was being shifted from other programs this year. Martinez also said he would create a new position of security director for the dam system.
In a report to the agency on dam safety, an independent panel recommended that the bureau push ahead with a complete assessment of security at its dams. Martinez said an internal review had been completed at five facilities, but he declined to provide details or identify the dams.
"The vulnerability to sabotage and terrorism at many (of the bureau's) facilities is very high," said the report by the Association of State Dam Safety Officials. The report provided no further assessment of dam security concerns.
Martinez declined to give any detailed explanation of what prompted the renewed focus on security at the federal dams, including some of the world's largest. Martinez acknowledged that the agency has grown increasingly concerned that huge dams such as Hoover and Grand Coulee might become targets.
In October, an FBI agent shot and killed a teen-ager after he threatened to blow up the Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River unless he received $ 15,000. Later, a device the youth had described as a detonator turned out to be a cell phone.
According to an agency source, after the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City in April 1995, the Bureau of Reclamation received an anonymous telephone call that a militia group was planning some action against Hoover Dam on the Arizona-Nevada border. Nothing more materialized, said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
While past security efforts have focused on preventing vandalism, current efforts must also take into account terrorism, bureau officials said.

Load-Date: March 28, 1997


End of Document