DAMASCUS EXPELS 3 BRITISH ENVOYS
The New York Times
May 12, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 1047 words
Byline: By IHSAN A. HIJAZI, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, May 11
Body


Syria said today that it had ordered the expulsion of three British diplomats in retaliation for the ouster by Britain of three Syrian envoys on Saturday.
The three members of the Syrian Embassy ordered ousted by Britain were involved in an investigation into terrorist activities in Britain. The move came after the Syrian Ambassador, Loutof Allah Haydar, refused to waive the envoys' diplomatic immunity. Britain wanted to question the three in connection with an attempt to plant explosives on an Israeli jumbo jet at Heathrow Airport last month and other terrorist acts.
Effect of Tokyo Summit
In London today, a spokesman for the Foreign Office called the Syrian expulsion order ''quite unjustified and regrettable,'' but said Britain was not contemplating further measures.
The Foreign Office added that although the agreement on terrorism reached at the Tokyo economic summit meeting last week had played no direct role in London's decision, the move was representative of the harder line taken by the seven major industrialized nations at the Tokyo parley.
''The summit agreement has nothing to do with the fact that these people were allegedly engaged in planning terrorist activities in Britain, and that is something we would not allow,'' a spokesman said. ''But the speed and determination with which the Government acted in this case does reflect a new mood.''
There was no indication Britain had advised the other nations that attended the Tokyo meeting of its action or that it had sought any concerted action to be taken against the Syrians.
 
Spain Protests to Libya
In Madrid, meanwhile, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said Spain had ordered its Ambassador in Tripoli to lodge a protest with the Libyan Government over terror-related activities by its diplomats.
The Spanish Government expelled the Libyan Consul General on Friday for setting up a meeting between the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and a Spanish Army officer who was purportedly seeking money for a far-right group planning terror attacks in Europe.
''We have photographs and tapes to prove it,'' the spokesman, Inocencio Arias, said. ''It is an extremely grave matter.''
A Syrian Foreign Ministry statement quoted on the Damascus radio said the British Ambassador, William Roger Tomkys, had been summoned to the ministry and told that the three embassy staff members must leave within a week. The Syrians ordered expelled by Britain also were given a week to leave.
The three British diplomats expelled by Syria were the military attache, Col. David Maitland-Titterton; a First Secretary, David Taylor, and a Vice Consul, Andrew Balfour. [The State Department, asked about Britain's expulsion order, said, ''We have nothing to say.'' A senior official noted earlier that Syria remained on an Administration list of countries that support terrorism.] The Syrian expulsions have put relations between London and Damascus under renewed strain. After the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, Damascus broke off diplomatic relations with Britain for a time. In recent years, however, there has been a steady improvement in relations. Last year the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, visited Damascus, and earlier this year his Syrian counterpart, Farouk al-Sharaa, had talks in London.
Earlier today, the Syrian Government newspaper Tishrin accused the British Government of complicity in what it called a campaign against the Arabs orchestrated by the United States and Zionism.
 
Calls for Anti-U.S. Strikes
Another Damascus newspaper, Al Thawra, called for strikes at American interests in the Middle East. ''It is implausible that the United States and its allies should get away with the all-out war they have proclaimed against the Arabs,'' it said, and it accused unnamed Arab governments of indifference toward Washington's policies.
Last month Arab foreign ministers failed to agree on a venue and agenda for an emergency conference by their heads of state. The meeting was called for by Libya to discuss the American air strikes April 15 against Tripoli and Benghazi.
Syria is Libya's closest Arab ally, and its concern over lack of collective Arab counteraction derives from what the Damascus press says is a desire to see the Arabs unite against the United States and Israel.
In a commentary Saturday, the Damascus radio repeated charges that Syria was being set up for an American-backed attack by Israel. The Israeli Prime Minister, Shimon Peres, has denied that his country was planning a military strike against Syria.
In a Cabinet communique today, Israel said that it would do everything in its power to avoid war and that it had no intention of attacking Syria.
''Israel will do all it can to prevent war with Syria,'' the communique said, ''but it is incumbent on the countries of the world to do everything in their power to stop international terrorism and Syria's involvement in that terrorism.''
 
Syrian Calls Reports 'Rubbish'
Foreign Minister Sharaa has dismissed as ''rubbish'' reports that the Syrian Embassy in East Germany provided the explosives used in bombing a West German-Arab friendship society in West Berlin in March. He spoke in an interview with Der Spiegel, the West German magazine, that was quoted on the Damascus radio.
Two Arabs held by the West German police have reportedly testified that they obtained explosives from the Syrian Embassy in East Berlin and used them against a West German-Arab friendship society in the Kreuzberg neighborhood of West Berlin.
In other developments, the Lebanese Government was reported to have expressed concern to members of the European Community for including Lebanon on a list of countries that sponsor terrorism. Beirut's leading daily, An Nahar, said Lebanese ambassadors in Western Europe had made representations to the governments there emphasizing that President Amin Gemayel opposes terrorism and that Lebanon is itself a victim of terror.
An Nahar carried a summary of what it described as a report by the European Community that has been received by the Lebanese Foreign Ministry. The report cited Iran, Libya, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon and Southern Yemen as sponsors of terrorism, the paper said. Syria, Libya, Iraq and Iran were listed as providing logistical help for groups engaged in international terrorism, according to An Nahar.


End of Document