Danger on homefront
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
August 12, 2007 Sunday


Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.   All Rights Reserved   
Section: P; Pg. 2
Length: 584 words
Byline: Editorials
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


editorials
When you heard that an interstate highway bridge had collapsed in Minnesota, did you first think about terrorism?
It would have been a logical speculation.
It also would have been wrong.
What caused the I-35W bridge over the Mississippi River in Minneapolis to pancake into the river seems now to have been a far more prosaic cause: Either poor design or too little maintenance.
Experts are still trying to determine why the bridge fell on Aug. 1, killing at least seven people. The latest theory focuses on the possibility of faulty design in steel plates connecting bridge girders, which, if true, could mean all bridges of similar construction across the country are in similar danger.
Whether or not the steel plates turn out to be the flaw, Americans are indeed endangered by crumbling infrastructure.
It's a danger more immediate than the specter of terrorism, but it's one we've ignored for decades.
Part of this is the fault of our politicians. Fixing old roads, bridges, sewer and water lines and power grids is a priority that can keep being pushed forward - until the bill comes due in the form of lives lost, as in Minneapolis.
And part of it is the fault of taxpayers, who haven't kept up pressure on the politicians to maintain the nation's infrastructure and allowed elected officials to turn a blind eye to the growing problem.
The American Society of Civil Engineers, in a 2005 "report card," graded the United States at an overall "D" in national infrastructure and estimated the cost of making necessary repairs to roads, bridges, power lines, dams, aviation, water and sewer systems, rail and transit at $1.6 trillion.
Too much money? The United States is spending, by some calculations, more than $2 billion a week on the war in Iraq. By contrast, federal estimates show that over the next 20 years, the nation needs $132 billion a year to repair its roads, $390 billion a year for sewer systems and $21.8 billion a year for mass transit.
In Pennsylvania, the state estimates $1.7 billion a year is needed for highways and bridges.
Where should the money come from?
Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell had first proposed that the state lease the Pennsylvania Turnpike to a private operator, with revenues earmarked for roads. But leery of the costs of such a move, the Legislature instead opted to allow the Turnpike Commission to borrow $13 billion over 12 years - with $500 million a year earmarked for road work and $450 million for mass transit - and to repay the loans with higher Turnpike tolls and new tolls on Interstate 80.
Sounds like a plan? Well, two Republican congressmen from central Pennsylvania inserted an amendment into a federal bill that bars tolling I-80.
That amendment likely will be sliced from the final bill by majority Democrats in Congress. But it shows the political stakes of allocating more money for road repairs.
In Congress, a bipartisan bill aimed at identifying and funding infrastructure needs was introduced, ironically, on Aug. 1, the day the I-35 bridge came down.
That catastrophe could be a turning point, if we make it so.
Fighting terrorism has to be a top priority. Yet those who died in the bridge collapse are just as dead as anyone killed by a terrorist.
And if our infrastructure deteriorates, that's just as much a threat to national security and the economy as terrorism.
Why does it seem to take a disaster to spur Americans to action?
Let's bridge the infrastructure gap.
148 DAYS ... left in terms of County Commissioners Shellenberger and Henderson.

Load-Date: August 13, 2007


End of Document