Danish Police Arrest 3 Men Accused in Terrorism Plot
The New York Times
April 28, 2012 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 561 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- The Danish authorities said on Friday that they had arrested three men accused of planning a terrorist operation and of illegal possession of firearms.
The Danish intelligence agency, PET, said the men, seized at two locations, were a 22-year-old Jordanian citizen, and a 23-year-old Turkish citizen, both living in Denmark, and a 21-year-old Dane, who lives in Egypt. The men are to appear in court on Saturday to determine whether they will remain in custody.
The agency gave no further details and did not specify the target or nature of the alleged operation. A Danish tabloid newspaper, Ekstra Bladet, said in its online edition that the police seized three cars in the Copenhagen suburb of Herlev and that other police operations were observed by witnesses in the Valby neighborhood.
The intelligence agency said in a statement that the men had automatic weapons and ammunition when they were arrested and were ''suspected of having been in the process of preparing a terrorist act.'' Investigations would ''establish whether possible terror threats have been addressed and averted by the arrests,'' the statement said.
Officials at the intelligence agency, contacted by telephone, declined to say whether the arrests were linked in any way to a trial of four men on charges of plotting a shooting rampage in late 2010 at a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad. The trial in that case opened in Copenhagen, the capital, two weeks ago.
The publication of the cartoons in 2005 by the paper, Jyllands-Posten, set off a wave of violent protests by Muslims and ignited a debate over freedom of the press and respect for religion around the world.
The senior prosecutor at the trial, Henrik Plaehn, said the defendants had been planning an attack to coincide with an event in the central Copenhagen building where the newspaper has its editorial offices. Crown Prince Frederik had planned to attend but was not the target of the attack, according to Danish news reports.
All four of the suspects on trial lived in Sweden and news reports said that at least three had traveled in Pakistan.
Prosecutors told a district court in a suburb of Copenhagen on Friday that the men intended to carry out the attack on Dec. 29, 2010, but that the plot was foiled that morning by Swedish and Danish intelligence services, which had been monitoring the men for months.
The men -- identified as Munir Awad, Omar Abdalla Aboelazm and Mounir Ben Mohamed Dhahri -- are charged with terrorism offenses. Another man, Sahbi Ben Mohamed Zalouti, is charged with preparing to commit a terrorist act. All four pleaded not guilty.
The cartoons have inspired a series of other episodes in Denmark.
In May 2011 a Chechen-born amateur boxer, Lors Doukayev, 25, was jailed for 12 years for preparing a letter bomb that went off accidentally in a Copenhagen hotel in September 2010. He denied terrorism charges but prosecutors said the device was to have been sent to the Jyllands-Posten newspaper.
In a separate case in February 2011 a Somali citizen, Muhideen Mohammed Geele, was sentenced to nine years in prison for breaking into the home of a Danish cartoonist, Kurt Westergaard, who had drawn one of the 12 images published in Jyllands-Posten in 2005. Mr. Geele was said to have been carrying an ax. Mr. Westergaard, 75, escaped unharmed after hiding in a secure room.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 28, 2012


End of Document