DATA ON TERRORISM UNDER U.S. REVISION
The New York Times
April 24, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 583 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 23
Body


A State Department official said today that Government statistics on international terrorist incidents were being revised to include ''threats'' as well as actual acts of politically motivated violence.
On the eve of Congressional hearings on terrorism, Anthony C.E.  Quainton, director of the department's office for combating terrorism, also indicated that the change would approximately double the number of terrorist ''incidents'' counted by the United States in the last 12 years, although the number of people killed and wounded would remain virtually the same.
Mr. Quainton told a group of reporters at a luncheon that there were 7,000 terrorist incidents in the last 12 years, causing 8,000 ''killed and wounded.'' The Central Intelligence Agency's annual report on international terrorism for 1979 said there were 3,336 ''international terrorist incidents'' from 1968 through 1979, causing 2,689 deaths and 5,955 wounded.
State Department Announces Plans To Revise Statistics On International Terrorist Incidents
Publication of the 1980 C.I.A. report, normally available in April, has been delayed because of disputes among Government agencies as to the nature, extent and gravity of terrorism. An official acquainted with the report said, however, that when and if it was published the inclusion of ''threats'' would probably at least double the number of officially counted incidents in each of the years since 1967 and give a new total of about 7,000.
 
Haig View on Soviet Backed
Mr. Quainton told the reporters that the Reagan Administration was determined to give a ''very much greater interest, priority and intensity'' to the question of terrorism. He also defended the contention by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. that the Soviet Union had given logistical help, training and encouragement to terrorist organizations, saying this was ''amply documented for almost every group.''
Some Democratic members and staff officials of Congress said they feared the statistical revisions were motivated by a Reagan Administration desire to justify a more rigid foreign policy abroad and might also be cited by conservatives to justify increased surreptitious surveillance of political dissidents at home.
The Senate Judiciary's Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism, newly created this year, will hold the first of what is expected to be a sporadic series of hearings on the problem of terrorism tomorrow. Several Republican members of the subcommittee and its majority staff have indicated a belief that counterintelligence agents should be given greater legal latitude than they now have to gather intelligence on groups that may be suspected of being potential terrorists within the United States.
 
Terrorism Held Decreasing
Representative Don Edwards, Democrat of California, chairman of a House subcommittee that oversees the Federal Bureau of Investigation, contended in a telephone interview that ''terrorism is actually decreasing'' and disagreed with the new statistical criteria.
A Senate staff official, meanwhile, reported that the semantic and statistical debate was even more complex. This official, who declined the use of his name, said that C.I.A. analysts were also being ''pushed'' or encouraged to expand the definition of terrorist incidents to include ''all acts of violence intended to impact on a wider audience than the victims of the violence.''
''By that definition,'' said the official, ''the shooting of President Reagan by John Hinckley would be a terrorist act.''


End of Document