David Cameron, Prime Minister of Great Britain - U.N. General Assembly Speech Preview
The New York Times Blogs 
(United Nations General Assembly)
September 21, 2014 Sunday


Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD
Length: 244 words
Byline: Steven Erlanger
Highlight: Prime Minister Cameron has used strong language about the threat of the Islamic State and the potential for terrorism in Britain. Is he prepared to take military action against the Islamic State alongside Washington? 
Body


 Prime Minister David Cameron of Great Britain is scheduled to speak at the United Nations on Wednesday, Sept. 24. Prime Minister Cameron has used strong language about the threat of the Islamic State and the potential for terrorism in Britain. Is he prepared to take military action against the Islamic State alongside Washington? 
Mr. Cameron continues to reiterate that Britain is a strong ally of the United States and is supplying arms to the Kurds, who are fighting the group. But at this point, the British are not bombing alongside the Americans. If he were to give the order to do so, Mr. Cameron is not likely to be inclined to seek Parliament's authorization to take that kind of military action.
 After the NATO summit meeting in Wales this month, how confident is Mr. Cameron that NATO is taking sufficient action to deter Russian action in Ukraine and make credible the commitment to collective defense? NATO has drawn a clear line on Article 5 and collective defense. An attack on one NATO member will be an attack on them all. Of course, the tricky part may come from defining what is an Article 5 attack in this period of "hybrid" warfare and Russian agitation among Russian-speakers abroad. As for Ukraine, NATO is bolstering its military cooperation with Kiev, and its members in the European Union have just joined the United States in ramping up sanctions against Russia for its intervention in Ukraine.
 What about Scotland?Next question, please.

Load-Date: September 24, 2014


End of Document