DE KLERK MUST MAKE SUBSTANTIAL REFORMS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 21, 1989, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 524 words
Byline: Clarence Page
Body


CHICAGO (REST) South African President F.W. de Klerk's declared end to whites-only beaches was dramatic. But it probably holds greater significance for his embattled republic's whites than it does for its increasingly impatient blacks.  Whites who cling to apartheid so petty that it prevents them from sharing surf and sand with anyone whose tan is permanent seem to be a shrinking minority. Recent elections showed about two-thirds of white voters supported either the reforms of de Klerk's ruling National Party or the proposed reforms of liberal parties that think the Nationals are not moving fast enough.  So de Klerk was only acting on his mandate last week when he desegregated the remaining whites-only beaches. By contrast, South Africa's blacks seem less interested in sharing beaches than in sharing ballot boxes. But in the eyes of the world, de Klerk already is winning a public relations bonanza.  With a speed that appears feverish only when compared to the snail-like pace of his predecessors, de Klerk is moving down his checklist: Free a few high-profile political prisoners. Allow anti-apartheid activists to hold mass demonstrations. Welcome coverage by the world's press. Enhance the prospects for black-white negotiations on a new constitution. Hold meetings with nationally known and local activists. Let the press cover that, too.  While prominent black leaders like the imprisoned Nelson Mandela seek a straight one-person, one-vote democracy, De Klerk seeks some form of power-sharing that would allow South Africa's 32 million people of color to vote without overwhelming its 5 million whites.
It is becoming more difficult for South Africa to maintain its moral high ground against communism and terrorism when freedom is breaking out in Eastern Europe and while de Klerk's ostensibly reform-minded government employs state terrorism in the name of anti-terrorism under the state of emergency. An estimated 3,000 political prisoners remain jailed even after de Klerk's recent release of Walter Sisulu and other leaders of the African National Congress and Pan Africanist Congress.  Like the ''disappeared ones'' of Latin America, thousands of black South Africans, including children, have been ''detained'' indefinitely without trial and sometimes without word to their relatives until they turn up dead.  The prosecution of police for those deaths in custody is nonexistent. News media blackouts continue, apart from those events the regime wants the world to see.  De Klerk has promised more important announcements when parliament reconvenes in February. Bishop Desmond Tutu, among others, advises the world to wait until then to see if de Klerk's promises are more substantive and for, say, three months after that to see if good actions follow his good words. If not, it may be time for more international pressure.  In the meantime, human rights abuses continue. Apologists for South Africa's government often voice concerns that a bloodbath could break out if the black majority took over. Perhaps they should voice a little more concern about the bloodbath going on there now.  Copyright 1989 Chicago Tribune

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document