DE-LISTED; NORTH KOREA'S NUCLEAR ACCORD IS BACK ON AGAIN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 15, 2008 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-6
Length: 305 words
Body


The United States has taken a necessary step to let the six-power agreement proceed on dismantling North Korea's nuclear program.
Reached last year, the accord provided that North Korea would terminate its nuclear program and accept international inspections in return for the United States removing it from the list of "state sponsors of terrorism." North Korea wanted to get off that list because the designation is a disincentive to potential international investors, when its battered economy needs help.
North Korea began dismantling its nuclear program, including destroying a cooling tower on June 28. Reflecting differences within the administration of President Bush between those who wanted the agreement and hard-line neo-conservatives still clustered around Vice President Dick Cheney, Washington then failed to take North Korea off the list of bad guys.
North Korea responded by halting the activities of international inspectors and stating that it would resume work on its nuclear program.
Seeing its chief major foreign policy success going down the drain, the Bush administration reversed course and took North Korea off the terrorism list.
North Korea responded by readmitting the international inspectors, clearing the way for the agreement -- involving China, Japan, Russia and South Korea as well as North Korea and the United States -- to once again move forward.
Whether the process will proceed unimpeded -- as it should, given that the world doesn't need a nuclear-armed North Korea and that North Korea desperately needs economic help -- will depend in part on political developments in Pyongyang and Washington.
But the two capitals, at this point, are unpredictable. In Pyongyang there is the question of Kim Jong Il's health. In Washington it is election time with a change in administration three months away.

Load-Date: October 16, 2008


End of Document