Deadly ricin found at S.C. postal site;
Officials say terrorism is not suspected.
A letter with the vial of poison cited truck legislation.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 23, 2003 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A10
Length: 435 words
Byline: Curt Anderson ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A vial containing the deadly poison ricin was found inside an envelope at a South Carolina postal facility, federal officials said yesterday. The FBI was investigating, but terrorism was not suspected.
"Based on the evidence obtained so far, we do not believe this is linked to terrorism but is related to threats criminal in nature," said Brian Roehrkasse, spokesman for the Homeland Security Department.
A letter inside the envelope referenced legislation in Congress involving truckers and included an extortion threat against the government, according to a federal law-enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The envelope carried the typewritten message "caution-Ricin-poison" on the outside, according to a statement issued by the Greenville County Sheriff's Office. It arrived at a Greenville postal facility between 2 and 3 a.m. Oct. 15.
A postal worker noticed the wording and law-enforcement officials were summoned. The letter was sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which determined Tuesday that the vial contained ricin.
Officials declined to say to whom the envelope was addressed or where it was postmarked. The federal law-enforcement official said it was not addressed to a government official.
Postal Service spokesman Gerry McKiernan said tests on the envelope and the outside of the vial showed that none of the ricin had escaped.
William Brown, spokesman for the postal facility in Greenville, said three employees came in contact with the envelope. "We do not feel that there is any risk to the employees," he said.
The worst bioterrorism attack in U.S. history was perpetrated through the mail two years ago. Five people died and 17 were sickened by anthrax-infected letters sent to media companies and the Capitol Hill offices of Democratic Sens. Tom Daschle of South Dakota and Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont.
Ricin is derived from the castor-bean plant, is relatively easy to make, and can be deadly in very small doses. When ricin is inhaled or ingested, fever, cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness and low blood pressure can occur within eight hours. Death can come 36 to 72 hours after exposure. There is no antidote.
The FBI repeatedly has warned police about the possibility that terrorists might use ricin in an attempt to poison people through ventilation systems, through drinking supplies, or in food.
Ricin has been used in crimes in the United States that have no connection to terrorism. Last summer a man in Washington state was convicted of making and possessing about 3 grams of ricin (about a tenth of an ounce), enough to kill 900 people.

Load-Date: August 17, 2005


End of Document