Deal on suspects closes GOP rift; Agreementcovers trials,interrogation
USA TODAY
September 22, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 513 words
Byline: David Jackson and Kathy Kiely
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Bush and Senate Republicans reached a deal Thursday on rules for secret CIA interrogations and military trials for terrorism suspects, defusing a fight over national security that divided the GOP less than seven weeks before Election Day.
Bush said the new proposal preserves a CIA interrogation program that he called the "most potent tool we have in protecting America and foiling terrorist attacks." If approved next week by the House and Senate, it would pave the way for trials of 9/11 and other "high value" terrorism suspects being held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Senate Republicans who opposed Bush's original proposal said new language preserves U.S. obligations under the Geneva Conventions, which require humane treatment for prisoners of war, and defines for the CIA what is not acceptable.
"We're going to do it in a way that won't come back to haunt us if our troops fall into enemy hands in the next war," said Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.
At issue are how CIA agents can get information from terrorism suspects without violating prisoner-treatment rules under the Geneva Conventions and how evidence gathered from those interrogations can be used at trial.
Graham, Senate Armed Services Chairman John Warner of Virginia and Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the key GOP dissidents, said the compromise upholds the Geneva Conventions as they wanted. Bush national security adviser Stephen Hadley said the CIA got the guidelines it needs to continue interrogations, as Bush sought. The president also wanted to allow secret evidence in trials of terrorism suspects, but the deal limits its use, as the senators had insisted.
At least one key Republican, House Armed Services Chairman Duncan Hunter of California, expressed reservations about the restrictions on secret evidence. He said he fears the government won't be able to convict terrorism suspects without it.
Hadley reached the agreement after day-long negotiations with Warner, McCain, Graham and other Republicans. Bush's military trial plan was a response to a decision by the Supreme Court in June that struck down an earlier version.
The deal comes as campaigns heat up for the Nov. 7 elections to decide control of Congress. Bush and GOP candidates are stressing their party's handling of national security and wanted to get the dispute behind them.
"It's good news for the Republicans to have that issue, at least for a while, off the political radar screen," said Sherry Bebitch Jeffe, a political scientist at the University of Southern California.
Democrats appeared likely to back the compromise. "It is time to make the tough and smart decisions to give the American people the real security they deserve," said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada.
Key points
*Defines acceptable treatment of prisoners. Permissible techniques remain classified. Identifies abuses such as rape and maiming as war crimes.
*Bars conviction based on evidence withheld from suspects.
*Bans the use of evidence obtained by torture. Judge decides if coerced testimony can be admitted.
Source: USA TODAY research

Load-Date: September 22, 2006


End of Document