Dealing With Iran
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
October 20, 1994, Thursday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION/ESSAYS; Pg. 18
Length: 629 words
Byline: John Hughes
Body


A REPORT soon to be released from the State Department will
crystallize the debate over how the United States should deal with
Iran. This issue has been unresolved since the Reagan
administration's Iran-contra scandal.
Like its predecessors, the Clinton administration has had tough
words for the Tehran regime. President Clinton pledged to counter
''Iran's involvement in terrorism and its active opposition to the
Middle East peace process.'' Secretary of State Warren Christopher
has branded Iran ''an international outlaw.'' CIA director James
Woolsey has described Iran as ''by far the most active and
dangerous state sponsor'' of terrorism.
Beyond the words, the question is how the US should position
itself toward the Rafsanjani government. Should it pursue dialogue
and compromise - even though the mullahs, clerics, who govern Iran
have shown no desire to respond to such an approach? Or should it
pursue pressure and containment, encouraging those who would
overthrow the mullahs' regime?
The State Department report, done at the behest of Congress,
mainly deals with the People's Mojahedin. This is an opposition
group that wages an active campaign against the Tehran regime in
the world of international lobbying; the group also mounts
guerrilla raids into Iran from Iraq.
The State Department report will cast a negative eye on the
Mojahedin. US officials believe that in the past the Mojahedin have
themselves been guilty of anti-Americanism and terrorism. The State
Department does not like the fact that the Mojahedin receive
sanctuary and support from Saddam Hussein, who has just reemerged
as the boogeyman of the Middle East. US officials charge that the
Mojahedin, in return for Saddam's blessing, may have helped him in
suppressing the Kurdish people.
The Mojahedin, despite the State Department's adamant refusal to
talk with them, maintain a sophisticated lobbying operation in
Washington. They say the State Department is rough on them because
it is afraid of offending Tehran, with which it ultimately hopes to
do business. The Mojahedin claim that the Tehran government has
mounted a vigorous campaign to influence the State Department
report against them - and has sent emissaries to the US to
encourage Americans espousing rapprochement with the mullahs.  The
Mojahedin are not without their own supporters here, including a
slew in Congress who think the State Department ought to be talking
with an organization that is in a war against a regime that is also
the enemy of the US.
The New York Times weighed in with a recent editorial denouncing
the US boycott of the Mojahedin and deploring the fact that the
boycott was treated as a victory by the Iranian mullahs. ''This,''
said the Times, ''comes with special impudence from clergymen who
clamor for the death of the novelist Salman Rushdie, who are
plausibly linked with the murder of Iranian dissidents in France,
Switzerland, and Turkey and whose agents are believed to have
assailed Mr. Rushdie's translators and publishers in Japan, Italy
and Norway.''
But State has stonewalled. Assistant Secretary of State for Near
East Affairs Robert H. Pelletreau told the House Foreign Affairs
Committee earlier this month: ''The argument goes that we cannot
prepare an unbiased report on the Mojahedin as mandated by Congress
without sitting down and talking to its leaders. We believe such
contacts are unnecessary.''
Ironically, Mr. Pelletreau was the first officially sanctioned
US diplomat assigned to deal with the Palestine Liberation
Organization at a time when it was widely reviled and discredited.
If the US can talk with the Irish Republican Army and the North
Koreans and the former military junta of Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras in
Haiti, it is difficult to see why it cannot explore face to face
with the Iranian Mojahedin the accusations against them.

Load-Date: October 21, 1994


End of Document