DEALS & MOVES
Business Insurance 
Print Version
April 8, 2013


Copyright 2013 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 26; Vol. 47
Length: 1198 words
Body


Hiscox counterterrorism team assists risk managers, brokers
Hiscox Ltd. has launched a counterterrorism team for brokers and their risk manager customers, the insurer said.
The risk management facility supplements existing services offered through Hiscox's partnership with Control Risks Group Ltd., a global risk consulting organization focused on managing political and security risks in complex and hostile environments, Hiscox said in a statement.
In addition to his responsibilities as group head of kidnap and ransom, Robert Davies is leading the London-based team as group head of terrorism.
"The world is an increasingly volatile place to do business; threats from war, terrorism and political violence are definitely on the increase," Mr. Davies said in a statement. "It's our business to help clients manage these exposures, and this new team will be able to assess terrorism risks ahead of the curve, enhancing our ability to provide cover in politically unstable regions or where there are unusual risk profiles."
Willis launches alliance with minority-, women-owned groups
Willis North America Inc. has launched a practice group intended to help companies build strategic alliances with minority-owned and women-owned organizations.
Called Willis Open, the initiative has selected several certified minority-owned insurance and consulting firms in the marketplace to advise clients, Willis said.
"We are thrilled to launch a diversity partnership initiative and drive creative solutions to meet market demand," Vic Krauze, chairman and CEO, said in a statement. "With over $100 billion in annual minority business enterprise spend, diversity partnerships have become a major strategic initiative for companies. Given the increasing importance of supplier diversity to firms across all sectors, the Willis model provides a winning platform for clients."
Executive Vice Presidents Kimberly Waller and Phillip Styles will lead Willis Open. They report to Eric Joost, chief executive of Willis North America specialties.
Previously, Ms. Waller was chief operating officer and Mr. Styles was director of supplier diversity and strategic alliances at Aon Cornerstone, a unit of Aon P.L.C.
For additional information, contact Chicago-based Ms. Waller at kim.waller@willis.com or Atlanta-based Mr. Styles at phillip.styles@willis.com
Torus receives approval to launch Lloyd's managing agency
Torus Insurance Holdings Ltd. has received approval to launch a Lloyd's of London managing agency, Torus Underwriting Management Ltd.
London-based Torus announced that effective immediately it would assume the management of multiline Lloyd's syndicate 1301, which it acquired in 2011. Syndicate 1301 was a turnkey syndicate - a syndicate managed by a third party on behalf of a capital provider - managed by Chaucer Holdings P.L.C.
Syndicate 1301 underwrites accident and health, aviation, bloodstock, construction, marine, property schemes, direct and facultative, specie and war and terrorism coverages.
"Forming a Lloyd's managing agency has been a key strategic objective for Torus," Dermot O'Donohoe, CEO of Torus' international operations, said in a statement.
"As the world's foremost specialist insurance market, Lloyd's is a key platform, and having our own managing agency completes the necessary and scalable infrastructure to operate as a leading specialty insurer," he added.
Regulatory approval for the new managing agency was given by both Lloyd's and the Financial Services Authority, the U.K. insurance regulator.
iSelect launches private health benefits exchange
ISelect L.L.C. has launched Michigan's multi- insurer and distributor private health benefits exchange.
In a statement, the Royal Oak, Mich.-based benefits intermediary said its exchange, iSelect Custom Benefits Store, was designed to accommodate primarily midsize and small employers pursuing defined contribution funding strategies for their group health benefit plans.
The Custom Benefits Store will provide employers with access to a range of health and voluntary benefits, including major medical, dental, vision, disability and life insurance plans.
"ISelect levels the benefits playing field for midsized employers," iSelect founder and CEO Denise Christy said in the company's statement. "ISelect gives employers access - through their independent insurance agents - to multiple carriers and a menu of benefit options not available previously in the small and midsized employer market."
The plans available through the exchange will be underwritten by two nonprofit insurers: Detroit-based Health Alliance Plan of Michigan and Grand Rapids, Mich.-based Priority Health Managed Benefits Inc., according to the company's statement.
AIR Worldwide service aimed at public sector
AIR Worldwide has formed a new consulting service for public sector organizations and stakeholders managing catastrophe risk.
John W. Rollins, vice president, will serve as head of public risk services, the catastrophe modeler announced in a statement.
The new unit will keep stakeholders aware of AIR's research, software and consulting activities, educate organizations on the benefits of catastrophe models, and manage an ongoing knowledge center focusing on the role, structure and risk-sharing framework of public risk pools.
"Many public groups, including insurance commissioners, wind and earthquake pools, model evaluation commissions, federal insurance programs, prudential and solvency regulators, and quasi-governmental organizations, are increasingly concerned with the micro and macro impact of disasters," said Mr. Rollins in a statement. "Some are increasingly bearing the risk on behalf of taxpayers. By offering a dedicated service to these important organizations, we're fully committed to better serving the public sector as it manages catastrophe risk."
Burnham Benefits to oen Northern California office
Burnham Benefits Insurance Services Inc. announced the opening its Northern California office.
Michael Michalski has been named equity partner and appointed regional president, the Irvine, Calif.-based broker said.
"The firm has established an extraordinary infrastructure and a corresponding reputation for outstanding service in Southern California," Mr. Michalski said in the statement. "The industry landscape has seen significant consolidation in recent years, and the market exists for a strong, independently controlled, statewide firm that can offer vendor/carrier cost opportunities as well as improved efficiencies in technology, communications and compliance. It's my job to preserve all the things that make Burnham great as I build its Northern California teams to balance company revenue across the state. I look forward to meeting that challenge as well as contributing to setting the tone and direction for the overall growth of the firm."
Previously, Mr. Michalski was founder of Optimum Benefits Co., which eventually merged with Benefits Planning Inc. The company was acquired by Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. in 2003, where he stayed on as president until joining Burnham Benefits on April 1.
The Northern California office is located at 4040 Civic Center Drive, Suite 200 in San Rafael, and can be reached at 415-526-8401.

Load-Date: April 11, 2013


End of Document