Death of bin Laden not expected to raise stand-alone terror rates
Business Insurance
May 9, 2011


Copyright 2011 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 25; Vol. 45
Length: 843 words
Byline: SARAH VEYSEY
Body


Rates for stand-alone terrorism insurance are unlikely to increase due solely to the death of Osama bin Laden, London market experts say.
However, unrelated violence during recent protests in the Middle East and North Africa, coupled with hardening reinsurance rates prompted by heavy reinsurer losses from natural catastrophes this year, already have resulted in some rate increases for terrorism and political violence coverage despite ample capacity, underwriters and brokers say.
In addition, they say any revenge attacks on Western targets by supporters of Mr. bin Laden could affect rates.
It is too early to assess what impact the death of Mr. bin Laden may have on the terrorism and political violence insurance market, particularly given widespread perception that there may be reprisal attacks by al-Qaida or other organizations sympathetic to its cause, said Neil Henderson, global head of counterterrorism in Aon Corp.'s crisis management team in London.
He said clients should ensure they have robust crisis management plans in place should there be such attacks.
"An immediate reaction to the death of Osama bin Laden from the stand-alone terrorism insurance market is unlikely. Capacity remains in plentiful supply, which in turn means that, despite this news, market terms and conditions are likely to remain stable and rates, in the absence of any significant loss, are unlikely to increase," said Stephen Ashwell, London-based head of global response at Hamilton, Bermuda-based insurer Hiscox Ltd.
Mr. bin Laden's death has had no immediate effect on rates for stand-alone terrorism coverage, said Tim Press, head of special risks at London-based brokerage Miller Insurance Services Ltd.
But the recent outbreaks of violence in the Middle East and North Africa have prompted more demand for terrorism coverage and wider political violence insurance, such as war-on-land coverage, Mr. Press said.
Rates for coverage in the Middle East and North Africa had been "generally moving upwards" for political violence coverage, he said.
Because terrorism and related coverages are written on a highly aggregated basis, capacity always is limited for any region, he said.
While there has been much publicity surrounding potential retaliatory attacks after the killing of Mr. bin Laden, most companies that have operations in likely target areas typically already have terrorism insurance, said Kelly Crouch, head of terrorism at London-based brokerage Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group P.L.C.
In areas where risk is highly aggregated-such as Manhattan-rates for terrorism coverage typically are high, she said.
But the violence in the Middle East and North Africa has had a knock-on effect on the marketplace. "We are seeing a slight hardening" of rates for terrorism coverage, Ms. Crouch said.
Losses from events that include the earthquake and tsunami in Japan likely will push up reinsurance rates in many classes of business, which is expected to filter through to result in higher rates for terrorism coverage, she added.
Mr. bin Laden's death and the threat of reprisals serve to heighten the awareness of worldwide terrorism risk, said David Cheales, executive director and head of war and terrorism business at Lockton Cos. L.L.P., a London unit of Kansas City, Mo.-based broker Lockton Cos. L.L.C.
In recent months, rates for terrorism coverage have been flat to slightly higher, due in part to the Middle East and North Africa violence, he said.
In addition, losses suffered by reinsurers from natural catastrophes late last year and early this year mean rates for many types of reinsurance coverage have hardened and this is affecting rates for terrorism insurance, he said.
While there is unlikely to be a knee-jerk hardening of rates as a result of Mr. bin Laden's death, any future events could cause rates to increase, he said.
Rates for stand-alone terrorism insurance have, in general, been softening since 2002 and 2003 when they reached peak levels after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, brokers said.
In 2001, there was about $150 million of capacity for stand-alone terrorism insurance, said Lockton's Mr. Cheales. In 2011, there is worldwide capacity of about $2.5 billion, he said.
An influx of capacity, and the absence of any large insured losses, has meant that rates have been steadily falling in recent years, he said. But rates now are likely at a level where they "can only go up," he said.
The death of Mr. bin Laden enhances the potential for anti-Western violence and terrorism, said Greg McPhee, divisional director for wholesale and facultative business at London-based brokerage BMS Group Ltd.
The terrorism and political violence insurance and reinsurance markets will be watching developments very closely, he said.
Rates for political violence coverage have increased "immeasurably" in the Middle East since the "Arab Spring" protests began, he said, and there has been a great deal of focus from underwriters on wordings for terrorism, political violence and related coverage, such as strike insurance, he said.

Load-Date: May 12, 2011


End of Document