Death of a fighting congressman
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)
August 25, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 The Pantagraph
Section: OPINION; Pg. C2
Length: 620 words
Byline: BARBARA FINDLEY STUART
Body


On Aug. 9 at age 98, my brother, Paul Findley, died. Old age, but far short of Mom’s record of 106! Paul was a congressman from the Springfield area for 22 years in the 1960s and ‘70s. Known for his courage, honesty and kindness, he would today, if alive and able, be asking Congress to cancel the Dickey Amendment so the Centers for Disease Control could at last take on the study of guns and domestic terrorism, just as they did the smoking problem. And he would want violence-prevention training for all children. 
No congressman is asking for these today. 
Paul was a courageous fighter who chose many unpopular causes simply because he understood them and cared. I like to think we, his family, had a small share in his positive effect on agriculture, the economy, and world peace. 
World peace was Paul’s great concern, always. He introduced the also unpopular idea of opening trade doors to China after World War II, on the theory that trade beats war. So when a group of senators — Chuck Percy and Adlai Stevenson III and others — took a pig to China, Paul was part of the group, and ate chicken feet and heads without a qualm. 
He loved to help people. All of our family did. Even when we had only bread and milk, a tramp at the back door got a sandwich. So when a woman asked Paul to get her teacher-son out of a Yemen prison (an ISU graduate), Paul said, “Yes.” We had no diplomatic relations there, so he had to get an introductory letter from Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. With that letter, Carl Sandburg’s biography of Lincoln written in Arabic, and two little busts of Lincoln, Paul set off. He told me later he was never so scared in his life. Fortunately, he was received with courtesy and, to his joy, the young teacher was released. 
The Arab leaders liked and trusted Paul. He even sat down with Yasser Arafat to work out an Israel/Palestine agreement. Wrong timing, said our president. But Paul saw huge refugee camps for Palestinians, with terrible conditions, and he knew the Palestinian side was not understood. He wrote three books so we would know. One, “They Dare to Speak Out,” sold over 300,000 copies. This so offended some of his constituents, he was incorrectly accused of anti-Semitism and narrowly lost his seat in Congress to Dick Durbin. 
Even so, he continued his efforts to bring about peace in the Middle East until he was 92. 
Paul opposed the Vietnam War from the beginning. After several failed attempts to get us to withdraw, he listed all 31,379 killed in Vietnam on 121 pages of the Congressional Record. Every three months he added new names. While this did not end the war, Paul got congressional attention and national interest, too. 
Someone in Congress should borrow Paul’s idea and publish a list of all those killed in mass shootings since Colorado. It would be a steady prod that might get Congress and the president to actually do something. 
Recently, Paul told me he thought violence-prevention skill training is just as important as gun law reform in the war against mass shootings. Since I’ve worked on violence prevention 40 years, he thought I should write a book about it. It has proven almost 100% effective in helping at-risk parents cope with children zero to three, and just as good at reducing hate, anger and mental illness in school children. These skills — empathy, anger management, and problem-solving — are just what the whole world needs. 
In a magic world, we would still have Paul to help us battle mass shootings, domestic terrorism and world terrorism. What we can do in his absence is take a leaf from his book and fight our own battles with courage, honesty, and kindness. 
Stuart is a former member of the McLean County Board. She lives in Normal. 

Graphic

 
Findley

Load-Date: August 27, 2019


End of Document