Death penalty sought in Cuba terrorism case as trial wraps up
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
March 12, 1999, Friday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 02b
Length: 398 words
Byline: Anita Snow
Series: Today's News
Dateline: Havana
Body


Wrapping up courtroom proceedings in the trial of a Salvadoran man accused of a string of bombings, Cuban prosecutors argued the man was paid by Miami-based exiles and recommended he be put to death. The five-member tribunal said after closing arguments Thursday that it would reach a verdict in two to three weeks. Prosecutors sought to show that leaders of the Miami-based Cuban-American National Foundation recruited and paid Salvadoran Raul Ernesto Cruz Leon to plant bombs at six tourist locales. The blasts killed an Italian man and injured 11 people, including seven foreigners. Before closing arguments, prosecutors showed a video from a television interview in which a member of the Cuban group, Luis Posada Carriles, admitted Cruz Leon was contracted by members of the exile organization. Though Posada Carriles originally told journalists the group backed Cruz Leon, he later said he had lied about the involvement of the foundation. He did not deny his own alleged role, however. The foundation repeatedly has denied it funded the bombings, a charge the Cuban government has made since it arrested Cruz Leon 18 months ago. A Guatemalan man, Percy Francisco Alvarado Godoy, also testified Thursday that Cuban exile leaders in Miami recruited him to carry out attacks in Cuba several years before the string of bombings allegedly committed by Cruz Leon. Alvarado, who has lived in Cuba since 1960, told the tribunal that he worked as ''Agent 44'' for a secret military wing of the foundation while also working as an agent for Cuban state security.
Alvarado's testimony failed to show a link, however, between the foundation and Cruz Leon, a man Cuban authorities describe as a U.S.-trained Salvadoran army veteran. Cruz Leon is accused of --- and has admitted to --- planting bombs in five hotels and a restaurant in a plot to scare away tourists and hurt a prime source of income for the Communist island. The prosecution showed a videotape made by the Interior Ministry shortly after Cruz Leon's arrest, with the defendant touring all the sites he bombed, showing exactly how he armed and planted the explosives. Cruz Leon told the tribunal Monday that his motivation had been financial, not political. He allegedly was paid $ 4,500 for each bombing. If convicted, he faces execution by firing squad. All death penalty cases in Cuba are automatically appealed to the Supreme Court.

Load-Date: March 13, 1999


End of Document