DEATH, BY ANY NAME
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 28, 1996, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 838 words
Byline: EDMUND R. HANAUER
Body


President Clinton's condemnation of Hezbollah for rocket attacks that wounded dozens in northern Israel, coupled with his refusal to condemn Israel for killing and wounding hundreds of Lebanese civilians, is a deplorable double standard regarding human lives and terrorism - a fact worth pointing out even in the momentary calm after Friday's cease-fire agreement.
The politically correct line - support Israel and condemn its opponents is adhered to by most politicians and much of the media. Too frequently, Israeli arguments and assumptions pervade public discussion. Even propagandistic Israeli language is taken over unthinkingly by many journalists: Newspapers carry maps with shaded areas of Lebanon termed ''Israeli security zone,'' not ''Israeli-occupied Lebanon;'' Israel is said to attack ''suspected Hezbollah strongholds,'' not ''Lebanese villages.''
Do our politicians and journalists aspire to mirror, for example, Iraqi and Iranian leaders and ''journalists'' who no doubt speak of Hezbollah ''freedom fighters' retaliatory attacks'' on ''Zionist strongholds'' in response to ''Zionist terrorists''?
Syria, we are told, can and should curb Hezbollah. Little mention has been made of whether the United States can or should curb Israel.
White House and State Department spokespersons, along with media commentators, voice concern for the ''security'' of Israelis and understanding for Israel's use of massive force. No notice is given security needs of hundreds of thousands of Lebanese Muslims and Christians forced to flee during Israeli invasions in 1978, 1982, 1993 and now in 1996.
Even criticism of Israel is usually based on the premise that Israel overreacted to Hezbollah (or other Arab) provocation. In reality, Hezbollah rocket attacks on Israel usually follow Israeli attacks on Lebanese civilians. These Israeli attacks, in turn, are a response to Lebanese (and Palestinian) guerrilla attacks on Israeli soldiers in Lebanon.
Most important, Israel's occupation of one-tenth of Lebanon violates 1978 and 1982 United Nations Security Council resolutions which called for unconditional Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon.
Given that occupation inevitably leads to resistance, Hezbollah's resistance to foreign occupation is as understandable as was colonial opposition to the British.
Middle East violence is often summarized as ''Arab terrorism and Israeli retaliation,'' rather than recognizing both sides resort to retaliation and terror. The words ''terrorists'' and ''terrorism'' are reserved for Lebanese and Palestinian opponents of Israel, not for Israel and Israeli actions.
Terrorism is generally understood to mean the threat or use of violence to intimidate civilians or governments. Individuals or groups resorting to terrorism may act on behalf of a governmental authority - state or state-sponsored terrorism - or against the government. (Much hypocrisy accompanies discussion of ''terrorism,'' since one man's ''terrorist'' is another's ''freedom fighter.'')
Israeli state terrorism - bombing and shelling of refugee camps and villages, beatings and shooting of demonstrators, torture, summary executions of suspects by undercover police, and so forth - has killed and maimed far more Arab civilians than the number of Israeli civilians killed and maimed by Arab terrorism.
These (and other) Israeli actions are documented by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, as well as Israeli human rights groups; they violate international law, human rights and treaties signed by Israel and the United States.
Rather than condemn Israeli violence, however, the United State gives Israel $ 10 million daily, enabling Israel to continue its occupation of Lebanese and Palestinian lands.
Terrorism is made possible by chauvinistic sentiments that suggest ''our'' lives are more important than ''theirs.'' And, as George Orwell noted, nationalists do not disapprove of atrocities committed by their own side, indeed, they have ''a remarkable capacity for not even hearing about them.''
Clinton's policies make it impossible for Lebanese and Palestinians to achieve their rights nonviolently, hence the resort to violence by those who suffer Israeli occupation decades after U.N. resolutions called for Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian and Lebanese lands and 30 months after the Arafat-Rabin handshake at the White House.
If the United States condemns terrorism by Lebanese and Palestinians, it should condemn Israeli governmental and settler terrorism and help Lebanese and Palestinians achieve their rights nonviolently. This means diplomatic and economic pressure on Israel to withdraw from Lebanon and grant Palestinians full rights, including a West Bank-Gaza state on all Palestinian land.
Washington needs a policy committed to justice as well as security; only then will the United States be able to help achieve the honorable peace so needed by Israelis, Lebanese and Palestinians.
Edmund R. Hanauer is executive director of Search for Justice and Equality in Palestine/Israel. He wrote this for Newsday.

Graphic

 
DRAWING, DRAWING: By Pancho/LeMonde, Paris

Load-Date: April 30, 1996


End of Document