Debates parallel preschool politics
University Wire
October 13, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Technician via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 988 words
Byline: By Isaac Tripp, Technician; SOURCE: North Carolina State U.
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C. 
Body


The 2004 election and the recent presidential debates have consistently centered around one key theme: Terrorism. Unfortunately, most of the conversation and debate surrounding the subject has been nothing short of empty-headed rhetoric and logic that belongs in preschool.
It is virtually impossible to hold an intelligent discussion on the subject. Dick Cheney has made the claim that terrorists want "to destroy our way of life. They don't agree with our view of the world." Does Cheney honestly believe that the attacks of Sept. 11 occurred because of a difference of world view? President Bush has claimed that they "hate our freedoms." Furthermore, the Bush administration claims that their War on Terror, including the invasion of Iraq, is somehow going to eliminate terrorism forever.
The fact is that terrorism is an incredibly complex subject that has no clear solution and cannot be simplified into media sound bites. If you honestly believe that we were attacked on Sept. 11 because "they hate our freedoms," then you have a pre-school understanding of international politics, and you should most certainly not be president of the United States of America and the leader of the free world.
Terrorism is, by nature, politically motivated. The U.S. code defines an act of terrorism as a crime or act of violence committed with the intent to "influence the policy of a government." Terrorism fueled by anti-American sentiment has not arisen from a hatred of freedom, but from a reaction to American policy.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to discuss U.S. policy and terrorism without being labeled a member of the "blame America first" crowd, so I'd like to explain that I am, in no way, trying to blame America for anything. I am not condoning or rationalizing any terrorist activity, but the truth is that American policy has created a great deal of animosity. This animosity, however misguided it may be, is the cause of much terrorist activity.
So, to continue with the point, what are the reasons for this incredible animosity in the Middle East? They are primarily based around the sentiment that the U.S. is an aggressor in the region. Osama bin Laden claimed that it is "because you attacked us and you continue to attack us" and because "you steal our wealth and oil at paltry prices because of your international influence and military threats." Our bases in Saudi Arabia and our support of the Saudi government are issues that have contributed to widespread animosity.
U.S. policy in Iraq has been a problem for a long time. The economic sanctions against Iraq are believed to have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths while strengthening Saddam's stranglehold over the populace. This has been a key factor in inflaming Arab anger against the U.S.
By and large, the biggest cause of anti-American sentiment in the Arab world is our unquestioning support for Israel. While there is no clear solution to the Israeli issue, blindingly supporting Ariel Sharon while he shirks international law by refusing U.N. investigations into alleged massacres does little to win popularity in the region.
It would be preposterous to say that a single one of these situations caused the attacks by itself, but decades of these foreign policy decisions have helped create the situation out of which the attacks came. To prove this is not just "liberal rambling," even Pat Buchanan has said that "U.S. dominance of the Middle East is not the corrective to terror. It is a cause of terror. We're we not over there, the 9/11 terrorists would not have been over here."
The ignorance surrounding the causes of terrorism also extends to the solutions for terrorism. Again, the Bush administration and most of the populace prefer to take the simpleton's approach rather than really seek to understand the problem. They seem to believe that attacking and killing any possible terrorists will prevent future attacks. However, terrorism is not a tangible thing. It is a concept created by hatred that cannot be defeated by killing as many Arabs as possible while enacting policies that create more hatred and animosity.
The war in Iraq is a classic example of this. By attacking Iraq without any demonstrable threat, the U.S. is simply creating more terrorism by igniting animosity across the Arab world. Since the invasion, Iraq has seen an incredible influx of terrorism. We are, through the war in Iraq, our unending support for Israel, and other policies in the Middle East, helping to fuel a generation of hatred and terror.
To find proof that a simple hard-line stance against terrorism simply does not work, one need look no farther than Israel, where Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has consistently been uncompromising against terror by killing as many terrorists as possible. However, in the ten years before Sharon took office, 1990-2000, there were 120 Israelis killed in terrorist attacks. Since Sept. 2000, in just four years, there have been 989 Israelis killed. Clearly, a policy of exterminating terrorists simply does not work.
The recent elementary school hostage crisis in Chechnya brings to light another example of failed policy against terrorism. Russia has consistently used military force to combat the Chechnyan terrorists, yet little progress has been made. As usual, the terrorism in Chechnya is politically motivated; the Chechnyans believe they are fighting for independence and Russia wishes to retain Chechnya's strategic access to the Caspian Sea, the Black Sea, and a number of important oil and gas pipelines. One cannot help but wonder if this conflict could have continued for so long had Russia simply allowed Chechnya its independence.
I do not claim to have all the answers, and I do not know the solution to this incredible problem, but I do know that terrorism and the means of stopping it is much simpler than "they hate our freedom" and "we'll kill them before they can kill us."
(C) 2003 Technician via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 13, 2004


End of Document