DEBATE RAGES ON CONTROL OF SECRET MILITARY MISSIONS@1990, LOS ANGELES TIMES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 8, 1990, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 690 words
Body


WASHINGTON - An intense battle is raging over whether to grant greater freedomto special military units to gather intelligence, pre-empt terrorism and combat drugs overseas, government sources say.  The armed forces' special forces want to carry out secret missions in other countries without first submitting their plans to what the services consider a cumbersome review process overseen by the CIA director.  Military sources said intelligence shortcomings in the invasion of Panama in December had dramatized the problem of conducting effective secret operations under the current system.  Had the CIA system not imposed strict limits on contacts between U.S. and Panamanian military officers, the sources said, U.S. commanders in Panama may not have been so surprised by the intensity of opposition put up by some units of the Panamanian Defense Forces.  The CIA is extremely protective of human intelligence collection efforts and frequently vetoes person-to-person contacts by other agencies, a number of military officers said.  But critics argue that strict controls over clandestine operations must remain in place to prevent rogue military officers from carrying out unauthorized and dangerous adventures overseas.  The dispute has intensified in recent months as the Soviet threat recedes and the Pentagon seeks to redirect its efforts from traditional military operations to deeper involvement in fighting drugs, terrorism and other threats.  The current flap is part of a long-running battle between America's secret warriors and those in the bureaucracy and Congress who want to keep them on a short leash.
Right now, the bureaucrats and lawyers have the upper hand over the operators, both sides in the dispute agree.  Gen. James J. Lindsay, head of the U.S. Special Operations Command, and other officers are advocating a relaxation of the regulations that have governed secret intelligence-gathering since the widely publicized CIA scandals of the mid-1970s, sources said.  The regulations cover clandestine activities abroad that fall short of long-term intelligence operations or covert actions that require presidential authorization and formal notification of Congress. The clandestine activities include such things as contacts with potential informers, reconnaissance of suspected drug or terrorist operations, and what the armed forces call ''tactical'' or ''foxhole'' intelligence relating to an ongoing or anticipated military operation.  The current rules, known as Director of Central Intelligence Directives, require that all such ''special activities'' be approved by officials within the Defense, State and Justice departments, as well as the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the White House, the CIA and the ambassador in the country involved.  Therefore, it now takes as much as a month for a routine request to wend its way through the bureaucracy, officials said. Even emergency requests take more than 24 hours.  Officials at any of the agencies can delay and even in effect veto proposals for action by raising objections on a variety of grounds, the sources said.  The CIA director holds one-man veto power without any obligation to state the reasons for his objections, and that veto is exercised frequently, military officers complained.  A Pentagon spokesman acknowledged that a review of special operations oversight was under way at the Department of Defense and that the review had sparked considerable debate among intelligence specialists within President George Bush's administration.  James R. Locher, the assistant secretary of defense for special operations, is preparing a report for the Senate Intelligence and Armed Services committees on ''the appropriate balance between effective oversight and the conduct of intelligence activities in support of military special operations,'' the Pentagon spokesman said. The study is due at the end of this month, he said.  One congressional source said there was ''an inherent conflict of interest at the (CIA when it comes to allowing another agency to do something that might jeopardize (intelligence collection. The bureaucratic answer is not to allow it.''

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document