Deceptive Replies At Airport Led To Headley's Arrest
RTT News (United States)
December 9, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 433 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Pakistan-born US national David Headley&apos;s ambiguous answers about his travels abroad aroused the suspicions of airport officials and finally led to his arrest in October, according to the Wall Street Journal.
The Lashker-e-Toiba (LeT) terror suspect, charged with criminal conspiracy in last November&apos;s Mumbai terror attacks, was questioned by a border inspector in August about his travels abroad. His deceptive replies helped Federal authorities to begin unraveling his alleged double life, the Journal reported citing US law enforcement officials.
Headley said he was working for a company called First World Immigration Service, a business run by his associate Tahawwur Hussain Rana.
Following searches of his luggage, agents found it "contained no papers or other documents relating to such a business," the Journal said citing court documents. His tax records also showed no record of income paid by the company.
Federal authorities, already suspicious of Headley, confronted him on return to the United States from a trip to Denmark in which he was scouting potential targets, authorities alleged. US officials said questioning at the airport gave a significant boost to the investigation.
Son of a Pakistani diplomat and an American socialite mother, Headley was charged this week by the FBI and the US Department of Justice (DoJ) on twelve counts with conspiracy to murder and maim in a foreign country, and providing material support to terrorism.
The charges relate to his alleged involvement in the planning of the Mumbai terrorist attacks that killed about 183 people including six American nationals.
Headley is reported to have carried out surveillance on important landmarks in India in advance of the attacks. He is also alleged to have links with the Pakistan-based Jehadi outfit Lashker-e-Toiba, which India accuses of carrying out the Mumbai attacks.
He is also charged with planning an armed assault on a Danish newspaper Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten that published cartoons of the Muslim Prophet Muhammad besides aiding and abetting murder of US citizens in India.
According to US officials, Westerners have largely played a supportive role in terror activities, but Headley&apos;s ability to travel freely on a US passport to Pakistan, India and Denmark made him immensely valuable and allowed him to play a key role in 2008 Mumbai attacks. They also said Headley&apos;s case shows the importance of vigilance and global cooperation to combat terrorism.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 18, 2010


End of Document