DECLARE WAR;
SHOW TERRORISTS THAT AMERICA MEANS BUSINESS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 12, 1996, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 704 words
Byline: CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a major speech last Monday at George Washington University, President Clinton called for strong new measures against terrorism, calling it the successor to Nazism and communism as the great scourge of our time. It was an admirable attempt to mobilize a country's will and resources to fight. But like all such attempts from Clinton and previous presidents, the rhetoric far outran the real measures proposed.
Clinton talked about working with allies, increasing intelligence-gathering, establishing FBI offices in far-flung capitals. He talked about the pious talk emanating from such anti-terrorism ''summits'' as Sharm el-Sheikh, at which countries that wink at terrorism denounced it at our behest for a day.
Most of the president's talk centered on passive measures - hardening the national cocoon the way we have come to harden our homes against rampant street crime. He talked, for example, about increased airport security and chided Congress for refusing to give him increased wiretap authority against terrorists.
Congress ought to be commended for thinking twice about increasing the wiretap authority of any government for any purpose. Why should the first and most dramatic moves against terrorism be self-inflicted limits on civil liberties? In the end, they may be necessary. But passive defense, much of it destructive of our freedoms, cannot be all. What is missing in all the rhetoric about terrorism is a readiness for active measures.
We do a lot of detecting and defusing of terrorism. What is lacking is deterrence. All this effort with wiretapping, bomb-sniffing, intelligence-sharing is aimed at reducing the terrorists' ability to carry out their attacks. What we are not doing is diminishing their will to carry out the attacks.
That is deterrence. And deterrence requires the serious use of force against terrorists and their patrons. We have a pretty good idea who bombed Pan Am 103. Yet the killers are sitting safe in Libya, our puny sanctions notwithstanding.
What kind of message did that send to airline bombers? If we are going to deter future attacks like Pan Am 103 (and TWA Flight 800?), we must make clear that when we determine who did it and what country sponsored it, we will treat the crime as it was intended, as an act of war.
Assuming TWA 800 was a bombing and we find out who sponsored it, the president should come to Congress and say this:
''Five and a half decades ago, after an infamous attack on an American military installation in Hawaii, the president came before Congress and asked for a declaration of war. Today, after an even more wanton attack not on our military but on innocent civilians - an attack we now know was supported by country X - I come to you to ask for a declaration of war on country X.''
Declaring war does not mean that we send the Marines ashore the next morning. It does mean that we commit ourselves to a sustained, unrelenting effort to destroy the regime that is making war on us through terrorism. Declaring war is first of all a declaration of national intent.
Second, declaring war has a psychological purpose. It tells the American people that terrorism is not domestic crime writ large but a form of war by other means.
Third, a declaration of war will make it a lot easier for the international lawyers and text-readers who abound in American government to countenance the forceful military measures required to actually deter state-sponsored terrorism. A declaration of war takes us from being the hand-tied victims of belligerency to acquiring the rights of a belligerent.
What rights? The right to impose on country X a naval blockade, for example.
We would also enjoy the right to attack country X at our choosing. We have the capacity through our stealth weapons to turn out the lights of any capital on Earth. If we discover that some capital was behind the destruction of TWA 800, we should do just that: Turn out the lights, blockade the harbors, declare that we will not rest until the regime has fallen.
Declaring war is a serious step. But war has already been declared - by the terrorists. We can either continue pretending that it hasn't, or we can respond in kind.
Charles Krauthammer is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post.

Load-Date: August 17, 1996


End of Document