Deconstructing the Realities Of Politics and Terrorism
The New York Times
December 9, 2005 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; PT1; Column 5; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 10; FILM REVIEW
Length: 961 words
Byline: By A. O. SCOTT
Body


Originally broadcast as a three-part mini-series on the BBC, ''The Power of Nightmares'' is a sprawling, intellectually ambitious documentary about the political phenomenon usually referred to in journalistic shorthand as the war on terror. The source of the film's novelty -- and of its considerable provocation -- lies in its insistence that the enemy is more of a fantasy than an actual threat. 
  The introduction to each section proposes that, sometime in the recent past, governments (presumably Western democracies, in particular the United States and Britain) lost the ability to inspire their people with hope and so decided to control them by means of fear. To explain the rise of this apparently new political idea, the filmmaker, Adam Curtis, explores the parallel histories of American neoconservatism and radical Islamism, which in his telling manifest striking similarities. Both trace their origins -- at least in Mr. Curtis's account -- to shadowy intellectual godfathers, and both arose in reaction to the failures of liberalism. At a certain point, on or around Sept. 11, 2001, their relationship became symbiotic.
But did it? Mr. Curtis, whose earlier films include ''The Century of the Self,'' a history of psychoanalysis and its cultural consequences, is adept at wringing large implications from the available data. Combining interviews and archival clips -- not only news feeds, but bits of old movies and suggestive stock film -- he produces a dense, fast-moving narrative, propelled by a soundtrack full of portent and a voiceover narration crisp with the intonations of journalistic authority. A lot of fascinating history is unpacked and represented with clarity and balance. The story of Team B, for instance -- a group set up within the American government to counter the C.I.A.'s mid-1970's analysis of the Soviet threat -- is intriguingly told, both by members of the group and by its critics. The internal schisms and rivalries that bedeviled the Islamist resistance to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan are analyzed not only by scholars, but also by former jihadists, whose perspective is valuable and fresh. 
  When it draws closer to the present, however, and when it insists most strenuously on its central conceit, ''The Power of Nightmares'' can feel awfully tendentious. At times Mr. Curtis seems to believe too literally in the notion that neoconservatism and radical Islam are mirror images of each other, creating odd impressions of equivalence and fudging over problems of definition. The second of the three parts, for instance, covers the post-cold-war confusion of the 1990's, when both radical Islam and American conservatism seemed to be losing ground after joining together to drive the Soviets out of Afghanistan. On one side, the result was the ongoing slaughter in Algeria; on the other, the impeachment of Bill Clinton, who is said to serve the right as a transitional demon between Communism and Osama bin Laden. The incommensurability of these two events seems obvious enough -- whatever you think of Kenneth Starr, he never slit anyone's throat -- but Mr. Curtis's rhetorical and visual sleights of hand manage to obscure it.
  And while his film is full of anecdote and detail -- I had no idea that Leo Strauss, the political theorist and supposed guru of the neocons, was a fan of ''Gunsmoke'' and ''Perry Mason'' -- its understanding of politics, geo- and national, can seem curiously thin. It is startling that a three-hour film dealing largely with the history of the Middle East should find no time to mention either the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or the role of oil in the region. And it is more than a little unsatisfying to see the complex history of American conservatism reduced to the dreams and schemes of a handful of intellectuals. Paul Wolfowitz, William Kristol and Richard Perle are certainly influential players (the last two are interviewed on camera), but even they might blush at the credit Mr. Curtis gives them for shaping the world as it is. And his treatment of the role of religion in American politics is predictably dismissive.
  As for the Islamists, the film, having traced their history from the origins of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt through Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran to the mountains of Afghanistan, concludes that they are largely a fantasy conjured up by the neoconservatives and their political minions. Much of the last chapter of the film is spent debunking the notion that Al Qaeda is the global terror network we have been led to believe it is. This debunking has itself been debunked, at length, by Peter Bergen, who assessed the film in the pages of The Nation, a journal not usually associated with neoconservatism. But in any case it is hard to take much comfort in Mr. Curtis's contention that Islamist terrorism is the expression of an ''idea'' affecting young Muslims around the world. The success of Mr. bin Laden has been precisely to combine minimalist organization with a maximalist ideology.
  But comfort is nonetheless what this film, in spite of the spooky music and the scary title, means to provide. To believe that history is driven by cynical conspiracies, and that fear is at bottom the product of fantasy, is more soothing than the alternative, which is that history itself is the nightmare from which we are powerless to awake.

The Power of Nightmares
The Rise of the Politics of Fear
Opens today in Manhattan.

Written and directed by Adam Curtis; produced by Stephen Lambert and Peter Horrocks; released by the Independent Feature Project. At Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: three hourlong episodes -- ''Baby, It's Cold Outside,'' ''The Phantom Victory'' and ''The Shadows in the Cave.'' This film is not rated.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: In ''The Power of Nightmares,'' top, the ideas of neoconservatism (and of Leo Strauss, above) are juxtaposed with those of radical Islamism. (Photographs from IFP Films)

Load-Date: December 9, 2005


End of Document