Defend against terrorism while preserving liberties
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 12, 2000, Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial; Pg. 10A
Length: 545 words
Byline: Staff
Body


Terrorism in the 21st century isn't the out-in-the-open villainy it was when it became a worldwide menace a generation ago, but that doesn't mean it's less dangerous. It just means America needs to adjust to this more insidious reality. That is the hardheaded conclusion of a bipartisan panel of experts in its recent report commissioned by Congress after the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa.CONSTITUTION
Today's terrorist operates deeper in the shadows than ever. He is far less inclined than his 1970s prototype to claim responsibility for his handiwork or belong to an organized structure or have obvious links to so-called rogue regimes.
More troubling, the civilized world has to be on guard for the possibility he will set aside firearms and car bombs in favor of biological, chemical, nuclear or cyber weapons that can create far more havoc. And, more often than not, America is the target of his dreams --- simply because it is the resented symbol of Western military, economic and cultural pre-eminence.
So what must America do beyond the $ 10 billion-a-year program it already has in place to combat terrorism? What the panel proposes are mostly sensible nuts-and-bolts steps to strengthen and better coordinate our counter- terrorism defenses.
Correctly, the panel identifies good intelligence as America's best safeguard and recommends procedural changes to speed information-sharing between the CIA, FBI and National Security Agency.
In that regard, it is dismaying to find the NSA is, in the panel's words, " losing its capability to target and exploit the modern communications systems used by terrorists, seriously weakening (its) ability to warn of possible attacks." Congress should vote the funds to reverse technological slippage at the NSA --- and the CIA and FBI, as well --- and also to remedy a severe shortage of linguists in the intelligence community.
The panel also was right to urge diplomatic efforts to secure international agreements and cooperation to combat cyber-terrorism. The Senate, for its part, needs to ratify an already negotiated treaty to suppress the financing of terrorism and speed legislation essential to the pact's implementation.
The panel did go overboard, however, with two recommendations: 1) that the Department of Defense prepare to assume command authority in the event of an extraordinary terrorist event and 2) that the U.S. government should monitor the status of all foreign students here.
In the first instance, Americans should be wary of any effort to supersede civilian authority with the military. Besides, it is hard to imagine any crisis so great that it couldn't be handled by local police, the FBI, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and National Guardsmen under a governor's control.
As for scrutinizing an estimated half-million foreign students, most of them turn out to be great assets for America, either in careers here or promoting our country in their homelands. To alienate the lot of them on the off-chance of snaring a lone terrorist seems a clumsy idea.
Besides, if the mere threat of terrorism shakes us so much that we consider conferring unconstitutional power on the armed forces and suspect every outsider, haven't the terrorists scored a victory without firing a shot?

Graphic

 
Photo
Rolled-up copy of the U.S. Constitution with a lit fuse attached.  / JOHN MacDONALD / Special

Load-Date: June 12, 2000


End of Document