Defendant Is Released in Detroit Terror Case
The New York Times
October 13, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 558 words
Byline: By DANNY HAKIM
Dateline: DETROIT, Oct. 12 
Body


A federal judge on Tuesday released an immigrant whose terrorism conviction had been thrown out and sent him to a halfway house, the latest chapter in the dissolution of the government's prosecution of what it once called a ''sleeper operational combat cell'' based here. 
   ''I am innocent,'' said the immigrant, Karim Koubriti, a 26-year-old Moroccan, in an interview shortly after the judge, Gerald A. Rosen, said he would not have to return to prison. ''I always say I was innocent. Three years ago I said I was innocent and nobody believed me except these guys,'' he said, referring to his lawyers. Mr. Koubriti was one of four Arab immigrants accused by the government of forming a terrorism cell based in Detroit. He and another defendant were convicted last year of material support of terrorism and document fraud charges. A third man was convicted of document fraud and a fourth was acquitted. Last month, however, Judge Rosen threw out the convictions after an extraordinary request by the government to do so. 
   The government has repudiated the terrorism case and is now investigating the former lead prosecutor, though documents obtained by The New York Times indicate that top Justice Department officials long had doubts about the strength of the case but pushed to bring terrorism charges anyway.
   Mr. Koubriti's lawyers would not permit him to discuss specifics of the case on Tuesday. Asked about his release, he said, ''I'd feel better if it was 3, 6 or 30 months ago.''
   Mr. Koubriti said he had been kept in an isolation cell 23 hours a day for much of his incarceration with a television but no reading material. ''All my time in Wayne County they didn't even let me out to smell air,'' he said, referring to the jail at Wayne County, which encompasses Detroit. He also said he was often verbally abused in prison for being a terrorism suspect, especially in 2001.
   ''It was horrible, especially from some of the deputies -- not all, to be honest with you,'' he said. ''I heard all sorts of stuff -- devil worshiper, monster, go pray to your terrorist god.'' 
   He was first detained Sept. 17, 2001, when seven federal agents raided an apartment where he and two of the other suspects lived. The apartment had once been the home of a man on the terrorism watch list, but he no longer lived there. The agents found false identification papers, crude sketches they came to believe were outlines of possible locations to attack, religious audiotapes and a videotape they said contained surveillance footage. 
   The government's recent rebuke of the case raised questions about much of the evidence.
   ''I thought it was a mistake or something and they would find out the truth,'' Mr. Koubriti said. ''It took them too long to find out the truth.'' .
   Under the terms of his bond, he will have to wear an electronic tether equipped with a global positioning device. Judge Rosen said Tuesday that Mr. Koubriti might also eventually be allowed to look for work.The government did not object to the terms of his release.
   Two of the other original defendants -- Abdel-Ilah Elmardoudi and Ahmed Hannan-- remain in custody. A third, Farouk Ali Haimoud, was acquitted of all charges last year.
   Mr. Koubriti still faces a new trial on document fraud and possible deportation, but said he would prefer to remain in the United States.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Karim Koubriti, released yesterday, still faces a new fraud trial. (Photo by Associated Press)      

Load-Date: October 13, 2004


End of Document