Defending Bush's terrorism strategy;
By testifying, adviser Condoleezza Rice will face challenges to his name - and to hers.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 4, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A06
Length: 989 words
Byline: Ron Hutcheson INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


National security adviser Condoleezza Rice, who once dreamed of becoming a concert pianist, has been performing in public since age 4. Now she is preparing for the role of a lifetime.
The soft-spoken foreign-policy expert will serve as President Bush's chief defender Thursday in a televised appearance before the panel investigating the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Her mission is to rebut allegations that Bush failed to deal with the terrorist threat before Sept. 11, but her own reputation is also on the line.
Former White House counterterrorism adviser Richard Clarke's harsh critique of Bush's performance as commander in chief strikes at the core of his presidency and undermines the theme of his reelection campaign. Bush has been telling Americans for months that he has made them safer. Clarke said Bush failed to take the terrorist threat seriously and worsened the problem by launching a war in Iraq that diverted attention from Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda.
If Clarke is right, some of the blame falls on Rice, Bush's closest foreign-policy adviser. Friends and aides said she was eager to present the administration's side.
Bush bowed to pressure and agreed to let Rice testify in public and under oath after initially vetoing both ideas. In the end, Bush put aside his concern that public testimony would undermine the principle that presidents are entitled to confidential advice from their staff appointees without fear that Congress, or its creations, will make them reveal it.
"She's the best person to present the case," said Republican political consultant Charles Black, an informal White House adviser. "It might not end the discussion, but it will be the trump card that puts Mr. Clarke on the side."
That may be wishful thinking, but there is little doubt that Rice will be ready for battle.
She has personal experience with terrorism, though not by Islamic extremists. In 1963, two girls from her racially segregated neighborhood in Birmingham, Ala., were among the four girls killed when racists bombed the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church there. Rice, then 8, heard the explosion from a few blocks away.
Rice said those memories had flooded back after the Sept. 11 attacks.
"It is a sound that I can still hear today," she told Stanford University students at a 2002 graduation ceremony. "I realize now that it is an experience that I overcame but will never forget. And so it will be for all of us, you and me, who experienced Sept. 11."
Rice, 49, abandoned plans for a career in music during her sophomore year at the University of Denver and turned her attention to foreign policy. She credits Joseph Korbel, one of her professors and the father of former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, with sparking her interest.
Rice went on to become an expert in U.S.-Soviet relations. She ended up at Stanford, first as a professor and later in a top administrative role. Her connections there led to a job in the administration of President George H.W. Bush, the current president's father, as a Soviet expert on the National Security Council.
When the younger Bush decided to seek the White House, Rice traveled to Texas to tutor him on world affairs. They bonded quickly, brought together by a mutual passion for sports and a shared religious commitment.
"When I'm concerned about something, I figure out a plan of action, and then I give it to God. I just ask to be carried through it," Rice told Essence magazine in a 2002 interview. "God's never failed me yet."
Rice was nominally a Democrat until the early 1980s. In 1984, she served as foreign policy adviser to then-Sen. Gary Hart of Colorado in his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination.
"My perception is that she has become more ideological and more hawkish," Hart said in a telephone interview from his Denver office. "She's loyal to her boss. If the boss goes one way, she's going with him."
Hart, however, has some reason to question how seriously Rice and her boss took the terrorism threat before Sept. 11. Shortly after Bush took office in January 2001, Hart and former Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.) briefed top administration officials on the findings of their bipartisan Commission on National Security, which evaluated threats facing the country.
The commission warned of the likelihood of a terrorist attack against the United States and called for creation of a federal homeland security agency.
In May 2001, Bush directed Vice President Cheney to head a task force to look for ways to deal with the terrorist threat. On Sept. 6, five days before the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Hart again stressed the need for action in a face-to-face meeting with Rice.
"Her only response was, 'Well, I'll speak to the vice president about it.' And that was it," Hart recalled. "It was disheartening."
Critics of Rice say she has been no match for Cheney and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld in internal administration disputes. She also has been unwilling or unable to stop the administration from sending conflicting signals on the role of the United Nations in Iraq and U.S. policy on global warming.
Rice views herself as a behind-the-scenes player whose primary job is to present conflicting views to Bush and help him reach decisions.
"Her value to the President, and why he trusts her so much, is that she's been his interpreter," said Charles Pena, director of defense-policy studies at the Libertarian Cato Institute, a research center in Washington. "He gets her candid impressions, interpretations and assessments.
"That's not the same thing as being a forceful shaper of policy. You don't see a Condi Rice stamp of influence on U.S. foreign policy."
But Rice might leave her mark in the debate over Bush's handling of terrorism.
"Richard Clarke had his day in court, so to speak. Condi Rice is going to have hers," Pena said. "She gets the final word."
Contact reporter Ron Hutcheson at 202-383-6101 or rhutcheson@krwashington.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
CHARLES DHARAPAK, Associated Press
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice will serve as President Bush's chief defender Thursday in a televised appearance before the panel investigating the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

Load-Date: August 24, 2005


End of Document