DEFENSE BUDGET DRAWING CRITICISM;
 BYRD SEES NO END TO WAR ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 28, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 693 words
Byline: VERNON LOEB AND BRADLEY GRAHAM, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Leading congressional Democrats took aim yesterday at the Pentagon's $379 billion budget request and its open-ended war on terrorism, voicing their strongest criticism of military operations and a proposed $48 billion increase in defense spending since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
 Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., chairman of the Appropriations Committee, grilled top defense officials at a budget hearing about the lack of an "exit strategy" in Afghanistan, their failure to capture al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden, and a widening global campaign against terrorists that seems to have "no end in sight."
 Such sharp criticism, voiced not only in the Senate but also in the House during a hearing on missile defense, showed Democrats probing for ways to question the war and defense buildup without seeming unpatriotic in an election year.
 Since Sept. 11, Democrats have been loath to criticize either the conduct of the war or the largest proposed increase in defense spending since the Reagan administration, with polls showing that more than 80 percent of Americans approve of the job President Bush is doing, particularly when it comes to the anti-terrorism campaign. The Democrats hope to wrest control of the House from Republicans in fall elections while holding their one-vote margin in the Senate.
Democratic leaders have gone out of their way to avoid criticizing the administration's anti-terrorism efforts, even as they set out their differences with the White House on taxes, spending and other domestic issues. But some lawmakers said that questions about the costs and longterm strategies for the war are being raised with increasing frequency in private, along with grumbles about whether the administration is taking congressional support for granted.
 Byrd and Sen. Ernest Hollings, D-S.C., -- pro-defense mavericks who are staunch defenders of congressional prerogatives in foreign and military affairs -- focused on the open-ended nature of the war and its growing cost.
 "If we expect to kill every terrorist in the world, that's going to keep us going beyond doomsday," Byrd said. "How long can we afford this? We went [to Afghanistan] to hunt down the terrorists. We don't know where Osama bin Laden is or whether he is alive or not. We don't know where Mullah [Mohammad] Omar is hiding. … When will we know we have achieved victory?"
 Byrd said the Pentagon has sent him documents estimating that the war will cost $30 billion in the current fiscal year, which ends Oct. 1, meaning Congress will be asked to provide an extra $12.6 billion in addition to $17.4 billion in supplemental spending approved last fall.
 "We've got a deficit and we know it will exceed $350 billion," Hollings said. The administration, he said, seems to be arguing, "Since we've got a war, we've got to have deficits -- and the war is never going to end."
 Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz assured both Democratic senators that steps are being taken at the Pentagon to save money to simultaneously prosecute the war and modernize the armed forces.
 "You're absolutely right that we have to be concerned about over-committing ourselves," Wolfowitz said. "I can't tell you when we have won. That's something we will only know when the terrorists have stopped. We do know they are out there in large numbers."
 In the House, Democrats took advantage of a hearing with the head of the Pentagon's missile defense program to mount fresh attacks not only on its $7.8 billion price tag but also on a recent administration move to exempt the program from traditional Defense Department oversight controls.
 The administration's $7.8 billion request for missile defense in fiscal 2003 is about the same that Congress approved last year but $2.5 billion more than the Clinton administration received for anti-missile systems in its final year.
 The Congressional Budget Office estimated last month that the ultimate cost of a national missile defense could range from $23 billion for the simplest system of ground-based interceptors to $68 billion for a network of space-based lasers -- and much more if, as Pentagon planners envision, it encompasses various anti-missile weapons.

Load-Date: February 28, 2002


End of Document