DEFENSE SEEKS TO SUPPRESS BUZZWORDS
Tampa Bay Times
March 15, 2014 Saturday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright  2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 309 words
Body


TAMPA
Sami Osmakac is charged with attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction in a South Tampa party district.
But his attorney wants a federal judge to bar prosecutors from exposing jurors to the words "terrorism" or "homegrown terrorist" during Osmakac's May trial in Tampa.
The use of those words is "inflammatory" and "designed to prejudice the defendant and attack his character," defense attorney George E. Tragos wrote in his latest motion to the court.
"The words have no evidentiary value and they are not necessary to prove any of the elements in the case," he wrote.
Earlier in the week, Tragos sought an order to exclude speculative testimony from private international terrorism consultant Evan Kohlmann, or to exclude Kohlmann's testimony altogether. The government expects to respond in opposition to both motions by March 27.
Osmakac, 27, known in the local Muslim community as a democracy-hating extremist, is accused of planning attacks on local bars and bridges as payback for wrongs done to Muslims. No attack was carried out.
He is a naturalized U.S. citizen from Pinellas Park who was born in Kosovo.
* * *
PALM HARBOR
Car burglary suspect may be linked to more
Deputies arrested a 24-year-old man in connection to one of several car burglaries reported recently in Palm Harbor, the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office said.
The first burglary occurred Feb. 11 and the most recent was reported Tuesday. All occurred in an area from Tampa Road to Alderman Road, and from Alt. U.S. 19 to Belcher Road.
The burglarized vehicles had been left unlocked, and, in some cases, the cars were stolen if the keys were inside, sheriff's officials said.
Kyle Jeffrey Lang of Palm Harbor faces a burglary charge in connection to Tuesday's break-in.
Lang was booked into the Pinellas County jail on a burglary charge, where he remained Friday in lieu of $5,000 bail.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Osmakac (Ran Tampa Edition)

Load-Date: March 17, 2014


End of Document