Defense official quits in protest Says terrorism warning before Cole blast ignored
USA TODAY
October 26, 2000, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 406 words
Byline: Andrea Stone, Bill Nichols and Steven Komarow
Body


A Pentagon intelligence specialist on terrorism in the Persian
Gulf resigned in protest one day after the bombing of the USS
Cole because his superiors had ignored his warnings of terrorist
threats in the region this summer, senators disclosed Wednesday.
The warnings by a mid-level, civilian Defense Intelligence Agency
official, whose identity was withheld, were not passed on to military
commanders in the region, Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., said at an
Armed Services Committee hearing.
Senate intelligence committee aides interviewed the official this
week after he sent a letter of complaint to the panel. Roberts
said the official had issued several warnings of terrorist threats
-- most recently in August -- that he said were ignored by higher-ups.
Army Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of U.S. Central Command, told
the armed services panel that he received "no specific threat
information for Yemen or for the port of Aden," where the Cole
was refueling when it was hit on Oct. 12. The blast killed 17
sailors and injured 39. "Had such a warning been received, action
would have been taken," he said.
"There must be a seamless and immediate threat warning between
our intelligence community and operations commanders," Roberts
told USA TODAY. "It's obvious given the tragedy that we did not
have appropriate information or did not analyze it correctly."
At the time of the attack, the Cole was operating on the second-lowest
of four levels of alert for terrorism.
In Aden, Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh said Wednesday that
several senior members of the militant Muslim group Islamic Jihad
were detained in connection with the blast. He also said one of
the two suspected suicide bombers was an Egyptian. Officials say
they believe that two men steered a boat carrying a powerful bomb
next to the Cole and detonated it.
Saleh did not say whether the attackers or detainees had any connection
to hunted Saudi terrorist Osama bin Laden's group, Al-Qaida, which
is based in Afghanistan. "The results will be out soon," he
said.
Other developments:
* A senior defense official said U.S. forces in Bahrain
and Qatar were placed on high alert last weekend in response to
reports of planned terrorist attacks on the U.S. embassies, an
international school in Bahrain and a U.S. military site in Qatar,
The Associated Press said.
* A suspected terrorist is believed to be in custody in
Bahrain in connection with a planned suicide-bomber attack on
U.S. aircraft, ABC News reported.

Load-Date: October 26, 2000


End of Document