DEFENSE CHALLENGES ANTI-TERRORISM LAW
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 15, 1997, Tuesday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8A
Length: 604 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WHEELING - A federal prosecutor admitted a federal anti-terrorism
statute used against a former Clarksburg firefighter is broad but he
said its intent is clear.
Those who provide broad range of resources to someone whose intent is
to commit a terrorist act can be prosecuted, Assistant U.S. Attorney
David Godwin said in U.S. District Court.
A lawyer for one of the seven men charged in an alleged plot to blow
up the FBI center argued Monday that indictments brought under the
statute should be thrown out because it is too vague.
"It gives the government the right to charge anybody with anything,"
said defense lawyer Gary Zimmerman of Pittsburgh.
Zimmerman's client, James "Rich" Rogers, is accused of making
photograph copies of FBI center blueprints that Mountaineer Militia
leader Floyd "Ray" Looker sold for $ 50,000 to fictitious Middle East
terrorists.
Rogers was charged under a 1994 federal law that makes it illegal to
provide resources for use by terroristic organizations.
Those resources identified in the law include money, lodging, false
documents, communication equipment, weapons, explosives,
transportation and "other physical assets."
The case against Looker and Rogers is believed to be the first
prosecution under the law, officials said. The other five defendants
are charged with different violations.
U.S. Magistrate James Seibert expressed reservations about the way
prosecutors have used the law.
"To me, it doesn't seem to fit into these categories," Seibert said.
Zimmerman contended the definition "other physical assets" is so
broad that people must guess its meaning.
He asked whether someone clipping a photo of the U.S. Capitol from a
newspaper and providing it to someone who planned to deface the
building would violate the law.
Seibert used that example and the example of someone providing a road
map to a terrorist.
Godwin acknowledged that in theory the person who supplied the
clipping or map could be charged if the individual knew the items were
going to be used in committing or planning a crime.
Then Zimmerman said the person who provided the materials could be
charged even if the crime was never committed.
"That doesn't make sense to me," Zimmerman said. "I have to go to
jail for 10 years and he goes to the corner pub for a beer."
Seibert did not rule immediately on the motion to dismiss the
indictment or on separate motions to suppress evidence and for Rogers
and Looker to be tried separately.
Zimmerman sought to suppress evidence seized from the Clarksburg fire
hall and Rogers' home in Jane Lew.
FBI agents testified Monday that Rogers told them that they could
search his locker and gym bag at the fire hall even though he refused
to sign a formal release granting permission on Oct. 11.
Rogers testified he was jolted from sleep by agents who swarmed around
his bed about 6:50 a.m.
He said he told the agents they could search the items because he
believed he had no choice and because he thought they were looking
specifically for photographs.
FBI agents seized a number of items, including black powder, an M-80
explosive, books and a blow pipe. Later, they went to his home and
seized a handgun, shotgun and camera.
On the issue of separate trials, the government reversed itself and
said it opposes trying Rogers separately from Looker. Zimmerman
accused the government of an "ambush."
Godwin said the government had changed its position because Looker
decided to let a lawyer represent him. He said that he had been
concerned about Looker's conduct if he represented himself.
Even if Looker has a lawyer, trying the two men in the same room would
be "as far away from due process and fairness as we can be,"
Zimmerman said.

Load-Date: April 16, 1997


End of Document