DEFENDANTS IN JORDAN DENY LINKS TO BIN LADEN;
INDICTMENT IS READ IN COURT OF 28 MEN ACCUSED OF PLOTTING TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 21, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 356 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: AMMAN, JORDAN
Body


A trial opened Thursday for 28 men charged with plotting to attack U.S. and Israeli tourists in Jordan over the New Year's holiday.
The men, who are allegedly linked to accused terrorist Osama bin Laden, "plotted to destabilize public security," a military prosecutor, Lt. Col. Mahmoud Obeidat, told the State Security Court. Reading the indictment, Obeidat said the defendants possessed and manufactured explosives to be used against U.S. and Israeli targets during millennium celebrations.
Fifteen defendants - 13 Jordanians of Palestinian descent, an Iraqi and an Algerian - were in court and have been in custody since December. The others are believed to be outside Jordan and are being tried in absentia. They include Jordanians, Palestinians and a Yemeni.
 
If convicted, the defendants face the death penalty.
Obeidat told the three judges that the suspects were "affiliated with an outlawed group" involved in a "conspiracy to carry out terrorist attacks" in Jordan.
He did not name the group in court. Earlier, though, he told reporters the suspects were linked to al-Qaida - "the base" - a terrorist organization allegedly headed by bin Laden. The Saudi dissident is wanted in connection with the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 224 people.
Jordanian officials have said the 28 suspects planned to attack U.S. and Israeli tourists.
An appointed defense lawyer, Jawad Yunis, said after the hearing that the prosecution's case would not stand up. "The defendants have nothing to do with Osama bin Laden," he said. "The government is sending a message to the Americans and the Israelis that it is protecting them to get help from the world's No. 1 power."
The defendants frequently interrupted the 75-minute hearing with the M uslim cry of "Allahu Akbar," or "God is great." One defendant, Issam Barqawi, 40, shouted: "We are not terrorists as you claim. We are the followers of God and want his Sharia (Islamic) laws to replace those you enforce, which are submissive to Americans, Jews and Christians." The court entered pleas of innocence for the defendants and adjourned the proceedings until May 7.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Guarded by soldiers, armored vehicles carrying the defendants in a terrorism trial arrive Thursday at a court in Amman, Jordan. The suspects are accused of plotting to attack U.S. and Israeli tourists.

Load-Date: April 21, 2000


End of Document