Defense, prosecution spar over legal issues Judge rules for defense on key points in Al-Hussayen trial
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
May 4, 2004 Tuesday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 674 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


Federal prosecutors sought Monday to prevent Sami Al-Hussayen's defense
 attorneys from asking government witnesses if they ever have been arrested on
 terrorism charges.
 As the trial has proceeded through opening arguments and the beginning of
 the government's case against the computer science graduate student, defense
 attorneys have noted from time to time that various Internet experts called by
 the government have done some of the same things Al-Hussayen did - posted
 information on the Internet, including on the same Web sites Al-Hussayen
 helped maintain.
 The University of Idaho student faces charges of providing material support
 to terrorism by operating Web sites that authorities say helped raise money
 and recruits for terrorism.
 ''Defense counsel knows very well that none of the government's witnesses
 have been arrested for terrorism crime," prosecutor Todd Hinnen told the
 court. ''The only effect this can have is to confuse the jury."
But David Nevin, lead attorney for Al-Hussayen, disagreed. ''This is a
 really important question," he told the court. ''Nobody's ever been charged
 in the way that Mr. Al-Hussayen's been charged here."
 Earlier, Nevin had directly asked the administrator of the Internet
 Archive, a nonprofit Internet library that posts past versions of Web sites
 for all to see, if she'd ever been arrested. But as prosecutors objected, he
 withdrew the question.
 Nevin said he wouldn't ask Monday's witnesses that question but said he
 thought more arguments on the point still would be in order.
 That dispute was among a series of clashes between the prosecution and
 defense Monday that outshone the day's actual testimony for drama. The day's
 testimony consisted mostly of employees of various Web site registration and
 hosting firms verifying documents such as invoices for registration fees.
 That less-than-scintillating testimony was the main thing the jury heard
 Monday. The arguments on legal issues between the two sides took place before
 the judge without the jury present.
 Other issues raised outside the jury's presence Monday included:
 Objections by the defense to intercepted e-mail that prosecutors planned to
 introduce as evidence against Al-Hussayen. It apparently was unsolicited mass
 e-mail sent to more than two dozen recipients.
 The message, sent by someone identified as Omar Shakaa in response to a
 public proclamation against suicide bombings, sought support for a petition
 backing suicide bombings.
 U.S. District Judge Edward Lodge ruled against allowing the e-mail as
 evidence unless some link to Al-Hussayen is shown other than his simply having
 received it. ''It's not sent on by Mr. Al-Hussayen; it's just received, a mass
 mailing," Lodge said. ''He didn't do anything."
 Help the Needy, an Iraqi relief group affiliated with the Islamic Assembly
 of North America. The group came up in last week's testimony, as did
 Al-Haramain, a prominent charity in Saudi Arabia.
 Defense lawyers asked the judge not to allow any comments about the fact
 that Help the Needy has been indicted for illegally sending aid to Iraq and
 about the fact that two branch offices of Al-Haramain in Somalia and Bosnia
 have been formally designated as being linked to terrorism.
 Lodge agreed after attorneys noted that Al-Hussayen had contact only with
 the Saudi headquarters of Al-Haramain, which hasn't been designated as being
 linked to terrorism.
 As for Help the Needy, the judge said, ''The jury might read something into
 the indictment that's not there." An indictment is merely an accusation; the
 case hasn't gone to trial.
 Prosecutors then asked that the same ruling be applied to the Islamic
 Assembly of North America, requesting that defense attorneys be prevented from
 noting in court that the assembly has not been designated as a
 terrorism-linked organization.
 Defense attorneys objected, and the judge sided with them.
 The assembly ''is front and center in this case," argued defense attorney
 Scott McKay. ''The fact that IANA has not been designated has significant
 evidentiary value in this case."

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854 or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net. For more on Al-Hussayen's trial, see her Web log at  www.spokesmanreview.com/boise. 

Load-Date: May 6, 2004


End of Document