Defeating terrorism will be tough job
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
October 22, 2001, Monday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 769 words
Byline: DENNIS ZINIEL
Body


On Sept. 11, our values and our way of life were attacked. We all watched in horror as the World Trade Center towers collapsed, killing thousands of innocent victims. In shock, we saw our Pentagon burn and listened to reports of another airliner crashing in Pennsylvania.
 Government buildings in Washington, D.C., were evacuated, and for the first time in our nation's history all the airlines were grounded. Americans all over this great land looked on and listened in shock and disbelief. We knew our lives would never be the same again.
In the days that followed, we heard Osama bin Laden and others tell the world that we -- the decadent West, the great Satan -- were getting what we deserved and that, if we retaliated, a Jihad or holy war would be declared upon us. This holy war was one we would not be able to win. Muslims all over the world would rise up against us.
 We watched as Arabs faithful to bin Laden rioted in the streets of Pakistan, burning American flags and effigies of President Bush. Later, we heard bin Laden tell the world that we were shaking in our boots. Bin Laden also stated his reasons for anger at the United States, and in these arguments he hides behind his faith, spewing untruths. He is a man who needs to hate, and he has directed his hatred at the West.
 Through all of this, we watched our president -- strong, poised and ready for what was to come next. It was a time when the American people needed a great leader, and President Bush rose to the occasion.
 He did not falter and he did not waver in his demands. He formulated a plan and he is carrying it out. He is being honest with the American people, telling us this is going to be a long, drawn-out affair and that we will not always see what is going on. We need to be patient and we need to resume our lives. I listened to his words, and when I get angry all over again, I think about what he said. We need to be patient.
 President Bush was not drawn in by Osama bin Laden. Bush did not make this a religious war. He did not allow himself to be pulled into a trap that would pit the West against Islam. He sought the aid of our allies, and he told them, quite simply, this time you are either with us or against us. He handled the situation firmly, and he is going after the tyrants, while being careful to avoid as many civilian casualties as possible.
 He organized food drops into Afghanistan as we started bombing the Taliban. He is doing everything in his power to show compassion for the Afghanistan refugees, even requesting that American children donate a dollar for food for the children of Afghanistan.
 This is a new kind of war, and we need to fight it differently than we have fought any war before. Bin Laden has made it his personal goal, and the goal of his organization, to kill as many Americans as he can. This war is on our homeland, and our very existence is at stake. We need to stay firm in our resolve to wipe out terrorism, just as President Bush said. Failure to do so will result in future catastrophes equal to, or greater than, the World Trade Center and our demise as a culture.
 Taking out bin Laden can be only the beginning. We need to get to the roots of terrorism and tell the world we will not tolerate terrorists of any kind.
 To turn our backs and walk away is an invitation for more. We do not know when the cowards will strike, or how.
 I fear there will be more blood spilled on our homeland, but we should not fear these terrorists. The signs are many, and our nation is on alert. We need to be vigilant, and we need to eradicate terrorists and the poison they spread.
 Bin Laden and his band of thugs are no more than common criminals who hide in caves and behind the skirts of their women. Ironically, these are the same women they beat up. They talk tough, and there are even a few of them willing to die for their cause. But they are a few, and we need to keep this in mind. Many more Americans have died for the cause of freedom.
 I like the way one newscaster worded it, 'We are not the great Satan, but we will show bin Laden his first taste of what hell is.'
 The terrorism these fanatics promote is like a cancer that, unchecked, will grow and continue to take innocent lives.
 I believe that Bush is going down the right road and, if he continues on it, will be recorded in history as the man who finally defeated terrorism.
 To President Bush, all I can say is, 'Well done, Mr. President. Stay on course, you have my support, and thank you -- for once again I am proud to be an American.'
 (Dennis Ziniel is a mechanical maintenance supervisor for Minnkota Power Cooperative.)

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document