Defense against terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
November 14, 1980, Friday, Midwestern Edition


COPYRIGHT 1980 THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PUBLISHING SOCIETY
Section: The Monitor's Daily Religious Article; Pg. 21
Length: 658 words
Body


The Bible teaches the overcoming of fear by living close to God.
As we do this, we gain more than our own peace of mind.  We do something toward undermining terrorism itself, which relies on intimidation.  We promote the rule of law against they tyranny of lawless power.  And more than this, we play our part in advancing civilization toward acceptance of the fearless reign of God's love.
Christ Jesus is our example in this as in all things.  In the agony of Gethsemane he shrank from crucifixion.  Yet he rose above fear through love for God and man.  Submitting to death and afterward coming out of his tomb alive, he showed that total reliance on God holds an answer to all human problems.  He also indicated the real nature of man: spiritual and immortal.  Mary Baker Edd n1 tells us, "Evil has no power to harm, to hinder, or to destroy the real spiritual man." n2 
Prayer calms fear and replaces it with joy.  Even before troubles abate, we feel better able to cope with them.  But something else happens in communion with God.  We realize that sonship to the Almighty is ours already, that we partake of His spirit of fearless love, that we are bigger than we knew.
This isn't surprising on reflection.  Since Spirit created all things, we must be spiritual, not material.  As God is fearless Love, our true nature cannot be afraid or unloving.  His serenity has to be expressed in us.  We aren't imperiled creatures of fleeting years between birth and death, but the cherished children of unending Life.
Grasping something of this supremely comforting fact, we are able to accept with confidence Biblical promises of god's protection.  The Psalmist sang joyfully, "Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night." n3 Trusting God as our all-powerful Father, we perceive gratefully our everlasting safety in Him. 
Attaining this mental altitude through prayer and obedience to God's law, the law of Love, is basic to the world's release from the regressive savagery of terrorism.  Whatever practical steps governments take against this evil, the final remedy is spiritual and individual.
Nations grasp freedom firmly only as their citizens have a sure hold on the liberty of the children of God.  The Apostle Paul says, "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." n4 This divinely bestowed liberty is not a passive enjoyment of freedom from domination.  It is active love that cleanses the motives of individuals.  Through these individuals it purifies the social environment and prompts work for better laws, more justice, equity, and opportunity for all, thus reducing the causes of both fear and aggression. 
Terrorism is essentially an ugly misconception of power.  Like all sinful activities, it is based on the supposition that God, divine Love, doesn't exist or is less than all-powerful.  While matter is believed to be the substance of life and existence, materialistic tyrannies thrive.  But an increasing understanding that God, Spirit, is the only power and source of being undermines false pretensions to authority.
God is infinite, therefore All.  His creation, like Himself, has no limiting, ignorant, mortal elements.  Materialism, despite its credibility to the physical senses, is not the power it is assumed to be.  When this is seen clearly, our allegiance to God includes conviction of His omni- presence.  "God is everywhere," Mrs. Eddy states, "and nothing apart from Him is present or has power." n5 
To know with gladness this all-embracing truth -- and to live in its light -- is not only to have peace within ourselves.  It is also to spread abroad the challenging and healing love that is ultimately victorious over all evil.
History shows that God's law changes hearts.  It can defuse and ultimately destroy the bombing mentality, the wrong desires and values underlying terrorism.  And it does this through those who pray and obey.

DAILY BIBLE VERSE
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper.
Isaiah 54:17


End of Document