Defense chief Cohen to visit Gulf amid terrorism concerns concerns
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
November 10, 2000, Friday friday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P02C P02C
Length: 532 words
Byline: Robert Burns The Associated Press press
Body


WASHINGTON - Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to the Persian Gulf, where U.S. forces have been on a heightened state of alert since the Oct. 12 terrorist bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen.
The Pentagon announced, with few details, that Cohen will leave Tuesday to visit the Gulf states of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar, as well as Israel, Jordan and Egypt. He will consult with his counterparts in those countries, meet with other government officials and visit U.S. troops in the region.  region.
Similar attack botched
A U.S. intelligence official, meanwhile, said Thursday night that some of the same people thought to have attacked the USS Cole botched a similar attack 10 months ago in Yemen's Aden harbor.
The target was another U.S. warship that had stopped to refuel, said the official, who declined to be identified. But the attempt planned around the millennium celebrations was aborted when the attackers discovered their boat had been overloaded with explosives and was not seaworthy, the official said.
The small boat did not sink, but was not able to complete the mission and may have been refitted for the October attack on the Cole, the official said.
ABC News, citing intelligence sources, reported the target was the USS The Sullivans, which refueled in Yemen on Jan. 3.
USS Cole repairs set
The Navy, meanwhile, announced after weeks of deliberation that the Cole will be repaired at Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, Miss., where the $ 1 billion destroyer was built. It is due to arrive in the United States in early December. The Navy has estimated it will cost at least $ 150 million to repair the ship.
Navy spokeswoman Lt. Cmdr. Cate Mueller said it was not yet clear whether the Cole will return to its home port at Norfolk, Va., to offload its missiles and other weapons before entering the shipyard in Mississippi.
In response to new threats of terrorist attacks on U.S. interests in the area, American forces in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait were placed on the highest possible alert level - "threatcon delta" - in late October. About a week earlier, the alert level in Bahrain and Qatar had been raised to threatcon delta, although Pentagon spokesman Kenneth Bacon said Thursday the alert level has come down a notch in Bahrain. He would not elaborate.
The Pentagon said Cohen will return to Washington on Nov. 23, although Bacon said the schedule was not yet firm. Asked whether that was related to heightened tensions in the region, Bacon would say only, "There are a number of reasons why the schedule is changing. And we're still working on the schedule, and it's premature to discuss it."
There are about 5,000 U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and a similar number in Kuwait. In Qatar, a small contingent of U.S. forces maintain a large quantity of pre-positioned Army combat equipment. The United Arab Emirates hosts U.S. Air Force refueling aircraft.
Cohen's trip was scheduled before the Cole bombing and is one of his periodic visits to consult with Gulf allies on regional issues such as the Middle East peace process and containment of Iraq's military.
On the Net: The Pentagon at http://www.defenselink.mil mil

Load-Date: November 11, 2000


End of Document