Deja vu all over again with TRIA extension
Business Insurance
December 3, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 8
Length: 301 words
Body


SO CLOSE, YET so far away. That's the place in which proponents of a continued federal terrorism insurance backstop find themselves less than a month before the program is slated to expire. It's similar-but fortunately not identical-to the place they were this time in 2005 only weeks before the original backstop was supposed to sunset.
We say ``similar'' rather than ``the same'' because this time around, there's every reason to believe the backstop will be extended beyond Dec. 31, and for at least seven years as called for in the Senate's extension legislation. While we'd prefer a permanent extension or the 15-year extension sought by the House bill, seven years beats the two years granted in 2005 by any measure. It's a definite improvement over the approach of just two years ago.
Any compromise that emerges from House and Senate discussions appears certain to be an improvement over the current program in at least one other aspect as well. Both bills would eliminate the unnecessary distinction between terrorist acts stemming from foreign and domestic sources. The current program cannot cover losses from a catastrophic act of domestic terrorism.
No compromise is perfect, but then little in life-particularly political life-is. The backstop program likely to receive congressional approval this month would be better than the one now in place. It should help guarantee needed stability in the insurance marketplace in a time of economic uncertainty.
Policyholders-both as individuals and as members of organizations such as the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. and the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism-played a key role in moving the issue as far as it has gone. It's up to Congress to finish the matter as soon as possible by approving an extension bill that the president can sign.

Graphic

 
Art Caption: Walgreens to CVS drug plans: "You can let go now..."
Art Credit: Schillerstrom

Load-Date: December 7, 2007


End of Document