Delay in Naming of Spy Chief Is Said to Hurt Terrorism Fight
The New York Times
February 17, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 27
Length: 760 words
Byline: By SCOTT SHANE and ELISABETH BUMILLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16 
Body


The top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee complained Wednesday of White House ''foot-dragging'' in appointing an overseer for American spy agencies, saying the two-month delay was hurting efforts to fight terrorism and nuclear proliferation.
 At a hearing, the senator, John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, called the failure to name a director of national intelligence ''unacceptable.'' The job was created by the intelligence overhaul bill President Bush signed on Dec. 17.
 The White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, rejected the criticism. ''We're talking about a newly created position of critical importance to oversee a new agency, and the president wants to get it right,'' Mr. McClellan said.
 But Mr. Rockefeller's comments reflect a belief among some former intelligence officials and members of Congress that the White House is having trouble filling the job because the post lacks sufficient authority over the leadership and budgets of the nation's 15 turf-conscious intelligence agencies. 
 At least three candidates approached by the White House about becoming director of national intelligence -- Robert M. Gates, a former director of central intelligence; William P. Barr, a former United States attorney general; and Sam Nunn, a former Democratic senator -- have said they were not interested.
 ''If you talk about a job that is hard to recruit people for, this would be at the top of the list,'' said former Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma, a Democrat who was chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
 ''Your successes will remain secret, while your mistakes will all be public,'' Mr. Boren said. ''You'll have to constantly demonstrate to the public that you're independent, and it is bound to annoy any White House if you are independent.''
 The creation of the post was the centerpiece of changes resulting from a sweeping examination of the nation's intelligence-gathering efforts after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 
 Thomas H. Kean, chairman of the 9/11 commission, said he was troubled by the failure to appoint the director. ''I gather they've been having a problem, and until they find somebody, everything's at a dead stop,'' said Mr. Kean, former governor of New Jersey.
 The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas, said he believed the White House might now delay the appointment until the end of March, when the president's commission on intelligence regarding weapons of mass destruction completes its work.
 Two members of that commission, Laurence H. Silberman, a federal appellate judge, and William O. Studeman, a former director of the National Security Agency and deputy director of central intelligence, have been discussed as candidates for the job. 
 Some members of Congress are concerned that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld is moving to expand the intelligence-gathering role of his department, which controls more than 80 percent of the estimated $40 billion the nation spends on spying.
 ''I think potential candidates are looking at that with a wary eye,'' said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who helped write the intelligence overhaul bill. She said she believed the Defense Department was ''crossing over into territory that normally has belonged to C.I.A.''
 Representative Jane Harman of California, the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said such concerns were scaring top prospects away. ''My fear is that the Pentagon will not let the quarterback call the plays,'' Ms. Harman said
 But Porter Goss, the director of central intelligence, denied any problems at Wednesday's hearing, calling the Defense Department's actions ''completely appropriate.'' 
 Those who pushed for the intelligence legislation acknowledged that the powers of the director of national intelligence, or D.N.I., were lessened to win passage of the bill. But Ms. Collins said that the job still had the necessary clout. ''The law's very clear that the D.N.I. will be the principal intelligence adviser to the president,'' she said. 
 Only Mr. Gates, president of Texas A&M University, has publicly said that he was offered the job. But Mr. Barr, a top executive at Verizon Communications, also turned it down, according to a person familiar with the exchange, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the confidentiality of the search process. And a Republican with close ties to the White House said that Mr. Nunn, a senator from Georgia from 1973 to 1997, was also sounded out about the job but said no.                           

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 17, 2005


End of Document