Delta, FAA buying new bomb detectors to thwart terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 17, 1995, Tuesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: BUSINESS,
Length: 303 words
Byline: Rodney Ho; STAFF WRITER
Body


As a way to help prevent terrorism, Delta Air Lines has joined the Federal Aviation Administration to buy two explosives detection devices.
The systems, to be used on international flights for checked luggage, will be used with Delta's baggage handling system at Hartsfield International Airport next spring.
"It's a good program for us to have with the Olympics coming up and to test the system under a very intense environment," Delta spokesman Bill Berry said. If the experiment is successful, he said, Delta would buy more.
The devices, developed by Foster City, Calif.-based InVision Technologies, cost about $ 1 million each. Details of the financial plan weren't released.
Federal authorities have boosted security at U.S. airports because of increased fears of anti-U.S. terrorist attacks.
As a result, airlines are being extra cautious. On Sunday, for instance, a Delta flight from San Francisco to Atlanta made an unscheduled stop in Denver because of a bomb threat. And Monday, Delta said it would require all passengers ages 18 or over to have photo identification when boarding flights, or else officials may confiscate the ticket.
United Airlines in June said it would add the detection devices at San Francisco International Airport this year. Airports in the United Kingdom, Belgium and Israel use it.
The FAA approved the device in December because it consistently detected explosives similar to those from aviation bombings including the downed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
Called the CTX 5000, the system uses X-ray imaging and "computed tomography" or what's commonly known as CAT scanning. It can locate suspicious items regardless of shape or environment, InVision said. Traditional X-ray images are hard to interpret because overlapping items come out superimposed and cluttered.

Load-Date: October 18, 1995


End of Document