DEMAND ACTION ON GUNS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
October 24, 2017 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2017 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A9; GUEST COLUMN
Length: 441 words
Byline:  ISMAEL OZANNE 
Body


The Madison-born Onion keeps publishing the same satirical headline after every domestic terrorist attack: "'No Way To Prevent This,' Says Only Nation Where This Regularly Happens."
Domestic terrorism has killed Americans in places such as Virginia Tech University, Sandy Hook Elementary School, an Orlando nightclub, a Charleston church, an Oregon community college and a Las Vegas concert.
Terrorism is not defined by race, religion or ethnicity. Terrorism is an intentional act that creates trauma for those directly impacted, and fear for the rest of us. Terrorists want us to think about their acts every day, as we send our children to kindergarten or college, run a marathon, go to a club or see tall buildings.
They want our fear to outlast them and their acts.
Dane County's crime response program manager Julie Foley and three of her staff members went to Las Vegas following the recent mass shooting there. They tried to help trauma victims put their lives back together.
Is there no way to prevent the carnage and lifelong trauma these acts create? Who are we? Is this the culture we want for our children and grandchildren? Are we prepared to accept these acts as normal?
We are told the majority of Americans want restrictions on assault weapons and bump stocks. How many of us ever heard of bump stocks before Las Vegas? What other products are out there to turn lethal weapons into weapons of terror?
Instead of addressing issues of gun violence, both Congress and the Wisconsin Legislature are considering bills to lessen current gun ownership restrictions. We must demand that our congressional representatives put an end to the legalization of weapons that can cause mass destruction. Any law that would loosen gun restrictions or legalize new weapons should require an analysis of the benefits and harm, similar to an environmental impact study.
We must demand our leaders stand up to the National Rifle Association. If every person who felt the horror of these events wrote or called his or her representative and senators, we would see action. If we demand that some form of gun control be a major issue in the midterm elections, the candidates will have to pay attention.
That Onion headline and story about domestic terrorism has appeared after every incident since 2014 with only the date, location and body count changed. Every time, the Onion has used the same made-up quote: "No way to prevent this."
Unless we act, the joke's on us. I refuse to believe as Americans we cannot change this narrative.
CONTACT YOUR LEADERS
U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson: 202-224-5323.
U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin: 202-224-5653.
U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan: 202-225-2906.

Graphic

 
Ozanne

Load-Date: October 26, 2017


End of Document