Demos may use terrorism fears against Bush
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 26, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 1329 words
Byline: By Adam Nagourney New York Times News Service
Body


Democratic contenders for president are beginning to challenge President Bush's record on terrorism, arguing that Bush has failed to do enough to prevent another fatal attack on U.S. soil and that the nation is barely safer than it was before Sept. 11, 2001.
The expressions of concern about the nation's safety by Bush's prospective challengers, voiced in interviews, speeches and television appearances over the past three weeks, suggest that the focus of the Democratic White House candidates in 2004 will go well beyond the traditional Democratic fare of education, the economy, jobs and health care.
While so far the criticisms lack many specifics beyond asking for more money for police agencies or the creation of a new intelligence force, campaign aides said these early challenges on terrorism signaled what they expected to be a central theme in 2004. They argued that Bush was potentially vulnerable on the issue that Republicans view as a pillar of the president's political strength.
"It's time for us, without regard to party, to say what every American knows: Washington is not doing enough to make America safe," Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina said in a speech on domestic security in Washington last week. "If the administration continues to do too little, it will be too late again."
Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said the "American people are only slightly safer today here at home than we were on Sept. 11, 2001."
Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts said in an interview that the administration had squandered a year since the attacks, by failing to make "the preparations necessary to properly deal with an obvious problem of growing terror and the threat at home." And Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont said Democrats "have a real opportunity here," noting in particular what he described as the administration's bungling response to the rash of anthrax attacks.
Lieberman said: "With the possible exception of the aviation systems, we have not raised our guard sufficiently. This administration has been slow and inadequate in the response to the terrorist threat here at home."
White House officials described this line of attack as risky and unorthodox, with some suggesting that it would make the candidates appear willing to exploit American fears for political gain. "Any candidate who suggests that when the enemy attacks, the blame lies with the United States and not with the enemy does so at great peril to their own political future," said the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer.
Still, it is becoming increasingly clear that the dialogue of the coming presidential race will be unlike any other White House campaign in years, as a direct result of the attacks of Sept. 11.
Several Democrats said this campaign marked a fundamental shift in the way presidential candidates would have to present themselves.
They said polls showed that the voters would now consider a presidential candidate's ability to protect them from terrorism at home in much the same way voters in a big city might now consider a mayoral candidate's ability to stop crime in their neighborhoods.
"This is clearly going to be one of the cornerstones of the 2004 election -- I don't think there is any question about it," said Steve Jarding, a senior adviser to Edwards. "Every campaign cycle, you see candidates talk about education, talk about health care. And I guess for better or worse, terrorism is going to be a part of that dialogue from now on."
The contenders have so far offered a few, though not many, details on what they would do differently. Edwards, for example, urged creation of a domestic intelligence agency with the specific directive to work against terrorism at home, making up for what he asserted were the now-demonstrated weaknesses of the FBI and CIA.
Kerry and Lieberman assailed the administration for holding up $1.5 billion in antiterrorism aid to local police departments and emergency agencies allocated by Congress this year, and Lieberman said the White House should move aggressively to improve protection of borders, ports and transportation systems, which he described as vulnerable to attack.
And none of the Democrats have suggested, for example, further incursions on civil liberties or immigration, in some cases arguing that the administration has gone too far.
In a reflection of these difficult times, aides to the contenders said they were planning their campaigns with the assumption that another terrorist attack could happen at any moment and discreetly trying to assess what that might mean for an ongoing contest.
"If something else horrible happens, does the nation instinctively rally around the president?" asked a senior adviser to one contender, who did not want to be identified because of the sensitivity of the subject. "Or do they say, 'It's this guy's job to keep my family safe. He's had two years to prepare for it.' "
Along those lines, aides suggested that some statements made by the White House and the Democratic candidates now were intended in part to position the campaigns in the event of a terrorist attack over the next 24 months.
Kerry, for example, went on the NBC News program "Meet the Press" three weeks ago and declared that there were "enormous gaps and deficits in the preparedness level of our country," while Bush and his aides have repeatedly warned that another attack is possible.
Former President Bill Clinton pointed the way to this new Democratic line of criticism in a speech in New York a month ago, in which he said the Democrats needed to directly challenge the Bush administration on terrorism. Clinton is in regular touch with some of the presidential contenders, particularly Edwards, though aides to Edwards said he had decided on his own to make this a central part of his campaign.
Republicans said they were startled by the brazenness of the Democratic attacks, and suggested they would have little effect.
"It's a very tricky play because you're going to try to assign blame," said Russ Schriefer, a Republican consultant. "It's almost like you're trying to make political hay out of a disaster."
Even Democrats said they had to be careful not to be perceived as in effect hoping for a terrorist attack, in much the same way that the administration painted the party as rooting for an economic downturn this past fall.
Dean warned that his party had to be careful about a backlash in confronting this issue, and said that some of his fellow Democrats had already crossed a line, though he declined to name names.
"It depends on how shrill we are," Dean said. "Some of the candidates have sounded shrill."
Some Democrats said antiterrorism preparations at home had stalled because Bush had been distracted by the preparations for a war in Iraq, and took note of concerns cited by intelligence agencies that an attack against Iraq would result in terrorism reprisal attacks in the United States.
"The combined intelligence community says that there is a 75 percent or better chance that there will be terrorist attacks against U.S. interests, including inside the United States, when a war against Iraq is about to achieve success," said Sen. Bob Graham, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who said he was considering a presidential race.
"When there has been such a lethargic effort made to protect the American people by dismantling those international groups, both here in the homeland and in their headquarters, I think the administration has assumed a very serious potential risk."
While, for the most part, this is a fight between Bush and the Democrats, there are some differences among the Democratic presidential contenders as well. In offering his criticism of the administration, Lieberman noted that he had been a sponsor of the act creating the new Homeland Security Department in Congress.
But Edwards belittled the new Cabinet department, describing it as "more of a political achievement for the administration than a substantive achievement for America's security."

Load-Date: December 26, 2002


End of Document