Democratic candidates say Bush bungling war on terrorism
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
May 18, 2003, Sunday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 434 words
Byline: MIKE GLOVER, Associated Press writer
Body


DES MOINES, Iowa -- Democratic presidential rivals united Saturday in attacking President Bush on national security, an issue on which voters rate him highly.
White House hopefuls, at a forum designed to highlight their differences, accused Bush of scrimping on domestic defense in favor of cutting taxes for the rich.
The 2004 contenders said the inability to ascertain the fate of suspected Sept. 11 mastermind Osama bin Laden is symbolic of what they contend is Bush's failed policy on fighting terrorism.
The Democrats said Bush talks tough on homeland security but does not deliver, and uses the issue largely to advance a right-wing agenda.
Candidates at the meeting, sponsored by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, also renewed their criticism of Bush's tax-cutting efforts.
"The president's prescription for everything is take two tax cuts and call me in the morning," said former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean, a physician.
Recent bombings in Saudi Arabia and Morocco have raised questions about how effectively the Bush administration has defused terrorist threats.
In response to a question from a New York City firefighter, Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, said the administration's actions since Sept. 11, 2001, underscored his point about failings in homeland security.
Rescuers who went into New York's World Trade Center "were union members, and they were heroes. They were patriots, and they did everything we asked them to do," said Gephardt. Yet "when it came to passing a homeland security bill, this administration insisted on a bill that would take away the rights to organize."
Workers in the Transportation Safety Administration, created in that legislation, cannot join unions for collective bargaining. "When you get to the bottom line, the money is not there," said Gephardt. "We are vulnerable to further attacks because this administration has not done its job."
North Carolina Sen. John Edwards warned the union activists that Democrats cannot take back the White House unless the party convinces voters that it will keep them safe.
"We should not cede this issue to a president and a party whose idea of homeland security is plastic wrap and duct tape," Edwards said.
Florida Sen. Bob Graham warned that the administration had a golden opportunity to destroy the al-Qaida network but did not follow through. "We had them on the ropes, but we let them regenerate," Graham said.
Al Sharpton cited the uncertainty about bin Laden. "Mr. Bush, the question you have not answered is, 'Where is bin Laden?' " Sharpton said. "We need to go after those who went after us."

Load-Date: May 19, 2003


End of Document