Democratic platform tough on terrorism; The document is critical of Bush but it does not call the war in Iraq a mistake
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 4, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a3
Length: 329 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Democratic Party pledges an unrelenting struggle against terrorism and a commitment to seeing Iraq succeed, according to a statement of election principles shaped heavily by national security crises.
A draft released Saturday of the party's 2004 platform offers few departures from Democratic orthodoxy on social and economic issues and hews to the agenda of its presidential candidate, John Kerry.
In one shift from the 2000 platform, Democrats dropped a reference to endorsing the Kyoto treaty on global warming. Also, the Clinton-era embrace of the death penalty is gone.
The document is predictably critical of President Bush and the manner in which he "rushed to war" in Iraq. But it does not call the war a mistake, saying people of good will can disagree on that.
Kerry has said he would repair America's international alliances and build a genuine multinational coalition to secure Iraq, and the platform emphasizes that Democrats will not abandon Baghdad.
Having "gone to war, we cannot afford to fail at peace," it says. "We cannot allow a failed state in Iraq that inevitably would become a haven for terrorists and a destabilizing force in the Middle East."
National security takes up half the 63-page platform. It is a striking departure from past platforms and an effort to avoid ceding the advantage to Bush and Republicans on who is better at protecting the United States from terrorism.
"It is centered around a strong America," said Connecticut Rep. Rosa DeLauro, who led the drafting committee.
The platform contends that Bush, through unilateral acts, is responsible for damaged relationships with other countries. But it does not rule out pre-emptive military action, if necessary, under a Kerry administration.
Platforms are not binding on the candidates. Republicans, holding their convention a month after the Democrats, have not worked out their platform process.
The platform supports abortion rights, gay rights short of marriage and affirmative action.

Load-Date: July 4, 2004


End of Document