DEMOCRATS PULL SURVEILLANCE BILL AFTER AGREEMENT CRUMBLES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 29, 2020 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2020 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A-12
Length: 496 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


Democrats on Thursday pulled legislation from the House floor to extend FBI surveillance authorities after President Donald Trump and Republicans turned against the measure and ensured its defeat.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said there instead would be a new round of negotiations with the Senate over the expired powers the FBI considers vital in fighting terrorism. The House later voted 284-122 to officially start those negotiations.
The impasse raised the potential for the surveillance powers to remain expired indefinitely. The provisions, which lapsed in March, allow the FBI to get a court order for business records in national security investigations and conduct surveillance on subjects without establishing they're acting on behalf of an international terrorism organization. They also make it easier for investigators to continue eavesdropping on a subject who has switched cellphone providers to thwart detection.
A bill renewing those authorities passed the Senate with 80 votes earlier this month, and it appeared on track for easy passage. The House had overwhelmingly supported a similar measure in March with the support of 126 Republicans. That bill was a compromise worked out between the two parties and Attorney General William Barr.
But the compromise crumbled this week as Mr. Trump threatened a veto and House Republicans who had once voted for the bill quickly followed his lead.
Man wanted in slayings surrenders peacefully
A college student wanted in connection with two killings in Connecticut was taken into custody when he walked out of a wooded area and surrendered peacefully in Maryland after six days on the run, police said Thursday.
Peter Manfredonia declined to fight extradition to Connecticut during a brief court hearing Thursday conducted by video. It remained unclear how long he will stay detained in Maryland.
Authorities from several law enforcement agencies had converged at a truck stop just outside Hagerstown on Wednesday night and were discussing their next moves when Mr. Manfredonia approached them, said Hagerstown police Lt. Rebecca Fetchu.
Chinese lawmakers endorse Hong Kong law
China's ceremonial legislature on Thursday endorsed a national security law for Hong Kong that has strained relations with the U.S. and Britain.
The National People's Congress approved the bill as it wrapped up an annual session that was held under intensive anti-coronavirus controls.
The Hong Kong security law will alter the territory's mini-constitution, or Basic Law, to require its government to enforce measures to be decided later by Chinese leaders.
The measure and the way it is being enacted prompted Washington to announce it no longer will treat Hong Kong as being autonomous from Beijing.
Activists in Hong Kong have complained the law will undermine civil liberties and might be used to suppress political activity.
The legislature also approved a budget that will increase spending to generate jobs in an effort to reverse an economic slump.

Load-Date: May 30, 2020


End of Document