DEMOCRATS SCORE BUSH AIDE OVER TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 20, 2002 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 492 words
Byline: ALISON MITCHELL, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Democratic leaders yesterday assailed the president's chief political adviser, Karl Rove, for telling Republicans to use the struggle against terrorism for partisan advantage by putting President Bush's stewardship of the war effort at the center of their 2002 campaigns.
 In a fiery speech at the Democrats' winter meeting, Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., the House minority leader, recalled how the two parties stood "shoulder to shoulder" in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attack.
 He denounced as "a shameful statement" Rove's advice to Republicans at their own winter session in Austin, Texas, on Friday that they could "go to the country on this issue because Americans trust the Republican Party to do a better job of keeping our communities and families safe."
"I hope the president will set the record straight," Gephardt said. "We've got to stand together against terrorism. This is no partisan issue."
 With the hall cheering and applauding, he invoked the troops overseas and said: "These young people in Afghanistan are not fighting for the Democratic Party or the Republican Party. They're fighting for the greatest country that has ever existed on earth. That's the United States of America."
 At the same time, Gephardt and other Democrats drew sharp battle lines with the president over the state of the economy, noting the return to federal deficits and the rise in unemployment in the year since Bush took office.
 "We're not discussing anymore what to do with the surplus," Gephardt said.
 "The surplus is magically gone. Now, we're having that tired, troubled discussion that we used to have for 20 years of what are we going to do about the deficit? How are we going to save Social Security? What are we going to do about Medicare? How are we going to take care of health insurance for the unemployed?"
 The Democrats met at the start of an unsettled election year with three dozen governors' seats and control of Congress at stake. Bush's approval ratings remain high and Republicans believe his standing will help them at the polls. At the same time, the economy lags.
 Democrats argued yesterday that while they should stand with Bush in the battle against terrorism, they should strongly emphasize their own stands and values on domestic issues.
 They showcased some of their victors in the 2001 election -- Gov. Jim McGreevey of New Jersey, Mayor Rhine McLinand of Dayton, Ohio, and the Los Angeles city attorney, Rocky Delgadillo -- to say they can win even as the country rallies around Bush in the war effort.
 The party also approved a plan to protect Iowa and New Hampshire's early and influential positions in the presidential selection process in the 2004 race. The new calendar could lead to a nominee by mid March or earlier, and its supporters said it would give the party time to unify to fight Bush.
 The party rebuffed an effort by Michigan to end Iowa and New Hampshire's influential positions at the front of the primary calendar.

Load-Date: January 23, 2002


End of Document