Democrats tackle terrorism issue in debate
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 16, 2015 Monday


Copyright 2015 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 12
Length: 546 words
Byline: LISA LERER and KEN THOMAS The Associated Press
Body


DES MOINES - A day after deadly terrorist attacks in Paris, Hillary Rodham Clinton cast herself as the country`s strongest commander in chief in a scary world, even as she defended her own role in the rise of Islamic militants.
"This election is not only about electing a president, it`s also about choosing our next commander in chief," Clinton declared Saturday night in the Democrats` second debate of the presidential campaign. "All of the other issues we want to deal with depend upon us being secure and strong."
Amid the backdrop of global anxiety, Clinton found herself fending off questions about not only her foreign policy record but her economic ties, with both Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Maryland Gov. Martin O`Malley painting the former senator from New York as a lackey for Wall Street and corporate interests.
"Let`s not be naive about it," said Sanders, noting that Clinton collected millions in campaign donations from Wall Street bankers. "They expect to get something. Everybody knows that."
The barbs marked a far more aggressive shift in a primary race that has been notable in part for its civility compared to the Republican contest.
Since the Democrats` first debate a month ago, Clinton has built a lead in the early voting states, gains that have come amid other signs the party is coalescing behind her. But the nomination fight is far from over.
On Saturday night, Clinton faced criticism of her national security record, when Sanders traced the current instability in the Middle East to the U.S. Senate`s vote - including Clinton`s - to authorize military action in Iraq in 2002. He said that U.S. invasion "unraveled the region."
The former secretary of state fought back, saying terrorism has been erupting for decades. She rejected the idea that she and the rest of the Obama administration underestimated the growing threat of the Islamic State group.
The back-and-forth revealed a foreign policy split within the Democratic Party, with Sanders playing to the anti-war activists who boosted then-Illinois Sen. Barack Obama to the presidential nomination in 2008.
Sanders argued for a far more hands-off approach, advocating for Muslim countries to lead the fight and declaring that the war against Islamic State militants is about the "soul of Islam."
Clinton has a history of advocating for more robust involvement across the globe - both as a presidential candidate eight years ago and as Obama`s secretary of state. In recent weeks, she has called for a more aggressive U.S. role in the Syrian conflict, including a no-fly zone over the area, a move the Obama administration opposes.
The debate began with a moment of silence followed by the previously unplanned foreign policy questions. All the candidates denounced the attacks, but they gave some fodder to their Republican rivals who coupled condemnation of the Paris attacks with sharp criticism for Obama and Clinton.
All three Democrats criticized the term "radical Islam" used by Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and other Republican candidates as unnecessarily offensive to American Muslims.
"We are at war with violent extremism, we are at war with people who use their religion for purposes of power and oppression," said Clinton. "I don`t want us to be painting with too broad a brush."

Load-Date: November 16, 2015


End of Document