Democrats question possible expansion of anti-terrorism law; Plans: Ashcroft says no decision made
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 11, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 316 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Democrats on Monday asked the Justice Department to explain reports that it plans to ask Congress to expand an anti-terrorism law to increase surveillance while restricting access to information and limiting judicial review.
House Judiciary Democrats called on Attorney General John Ashcroft to explain the existence of a copy of draft legislation called the Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003.
The Center for Public Integrity, which posted the document online Friday, said it had obtained it from a government source.
Attorney General John Ashcroft said Monday that the Justice Department is working to figure out "what we can do to be more successful" in the war on terrorism.
The new legislation, according to the alleged draft, would prohibit disclosure of information regarding people detained as terrorist suspects and prevent the Environmental Protection Agency from distributing "worst-case scenario" information to the public about a nearby private company's use of chemicals.
The measure would create a DNA database of "suspected terrorists"; force suspects to prove why they should be released on bail, rather than have the prosecution prove why they should be held; and allow the deportation of U.S. citizens who become members of or help terrorist groups.
Ashcroft said no decisions have been made on a final proposal for an expansion of the USA Patriot Act. He added that officials were working with "a full range of ideas" while keeping one thing paramount: "The most important guideline is the Constitution of the United States."
Several Democrats called on Ashcroft to come to the Capitol and explain the department's thinking. "There have been no consultations with the committee on this bill," said Michigan Rep. John Conyers, senior Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee, and Reps. Robert Scott, D-Va., and Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas, in a letter to the Justice Department.

Load-Date: February 11, 2003


End of Document