DEMOCRATS ASSAIL C.I.A. PRIMER FOR LATIN REBELS
The New York Times
October 18, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 643 words
Byline: By JOEL BRINKLEY
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17
Body


Democrats in Congress reacted angrily today to reports that the Central Intelligence Agency had prepared a primer for Nicaragua's anti-Sandinista guerrillas that includes advice on how to kidnap and kill government officials.
 Representative Edward P. Boland, the Massachusetts Democrat who is Chairman of the House Select Committee on Intelligence, announced that his committee is conducting an investigation. He said the C.I.A. had never told the committee of the primer and that he was ''appalled by the image of the United States that the primer portrays.''
Congressional Democrats react angrily to reports that CIA has prepared primer for Nicaragua's anti-Sandinista guerrillas that includes advice on how to kidnap and kill Government officials (M)
Senator Daniel P. Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is Vice Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, said he has directed a senior C.I.A. official to report to the Senate committee by Friday on what the agency ''has learned about the facts surrounding this document.''
A C.I.A. spokesman said the agency would comply but offered no other comment.
Among the advice included in the 42- page booklet are instructions for blackmailing Nicaraguan citizens so they can be coerced to work for the anti-Sandinista rebels, arranging the deaths of fellow rebels to create ''martyrs'' for their cause, staging violence by armed mobs and arranging public executions of Nicaraguan Government officials.
All that, the primer says, is to ''improve the public attitude of the people'' toward the guerrillas.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat, said: ''The fundamental question is, did President Reagan know about the C.I.A.'s role in the preparation of this reprehensible document, and if he didn't, what is he going to do about it now?''
The White House declined to comment today.
A House Intelligence Committee staff member said the C.I.A has ''given us some answers'' about the primer ''but certainly not everything we want.''
Mr. Boland, in a letter to Representative Thomas J. Downey, the New York Democrat who requested an investigation, wrote that like the mining of Nicaragua's harbors, ''the manual is a disaster for United States foreign policy.''
The C.I.A. directed the harbor mining last year, but did not inform Congress. ''Like the mining,'' Mr. Boland wrote, ''the manual was not revealed to the committee.''
He added that it ''never should have been produced by any element of the United States government. It embraces the Communist revolutionary tactics the United States is pledged to defeat throughout the world.''
One of the questions the committee has been considering, the staff member said, is whether the primer violates Presidential and C.I.A. directives forbidding involvement in assassinations.
The primer never uses the word assassination. It advises the rebels to ''neutralize'' selected public officials, such as ''court judges, police and state security officers.''
Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who is ranking minority member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said: ''The Administration has launched an aggressive anti-terrorism campaign, and yet we seem to be engaged in the very same terrorist activities which we deplore elsewhere.''
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat who is a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, pointed out that twice this year he had offered amendments in the Senate that would forbid the C.I.A. to use any money in Nicaragua for terrorism or terrorist-related activities. Both times, in April and October, the amendments have been narrowly defeated.
Today Senator Dodd said, ''This administration has been vociferous in its condemnation of state-supported terrorism. But this document makes a mockery of that position. If this isn't state supported terrorism, then I don't know what is.''


End of Document