Democrats' debate to highlight terrorism; Deadly assault in Paris leads moderators to change focus; ELECTION 2016
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 15, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z1
Length: 937 words
Byline: Przybyla Nicole Gaudiano and David , Heidi Jackson
Body


A woman and her father gather in solidarity with the nation of France at Washington Square Park in New York, on Saturday.
Terrorism was planned to be a key topic during Saturday's Democratic debate in a reshuffling of plans by moderators following Friday's attacks in Paris.
"Last night's attacks are a tragic example of the kind of challenges American presidents face in today's world, and we intend to ask the candidates how they would confront the evolving threat of terrorism," said Christopher Isham, CBS News vice president and Washington bureau chief.
Democratic candidates - former secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., and former Maryland governor Martin O'Malley - were scheduled to face off in their second debate Saturday night at Drake University in Des Moines. CBS News is hosting the debate in conjunction with CBS' Des Moines affiliate, KCCI, and the Des Moines Register.
The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the multiple Paris attacks, which killed at least 129 people. Americans will want candidates during the debate to explain their strategy for preventing such attacks from happening on U.S. soil, Dennis Goldford, a political science professor at Drake, said Saturday.
"The question will be, can Sanders look stronger (rather) than being soft and dovish?" Goldford asked. "Can Clinton thread this line between the doves and the hawks in this party? And can O'Malley say anything that makes him stand out and win him a second look from a lot of people?"
The attacks put in bright contrast what is probably the biggest remaining difference between Clinton and Sanders - her advocacy for a more muscular approach to using the military to combat terrorism.
The debate creates a challenge for Clinton, as it magnifies her public split with President Obama on his approach to Syria. Several weeks ago, she was critical of Obama by saying there should be identified as Helen Jane Wilson, formerly of New Orleans, was undergoing surgery late Saturday at a Paris hospital after being wounded in the leg at the Bataclan, the Assocaited Press.
Molins said the attacks were carried out by seven terrorists operating in three separate but highly coordinated teams. It began at the Stade de France, or National Stadium, at 9:20 p.m. when a suicide bomber ignited his vest outside while a friendly soccer match between France and Germany was being played inside.
Shortly after, a gunman armed with an automatic rifle, stepped out of a black car and opened fire in Paris's 10th arrondissement, killing 15 people. Molins said 100 cartridges were found at the site.
A third attack occurred at a bar in the adjoining 11th arrondissement, where five people were killed and 8 injured. Individuals also opened fire from a black vehicle at yet another restaurant, killing 19 people sitting on a terrace.
Most of the victims were found at the Bataclan concert hall, where a performance by the California rock band Eagles of Death Metal was underway. Molins said the terrorists, who had parked their car in front, "burst into the room, shot into the air ... and took hostages in front of the band." He said 89 people were killed before French police stormed the building.
Police killed one of the gunman while the other two detonated their suicide vests.
Molins said authorities had identified one of the terrorists as a 30-year-old Frenchman known to security forces has having been radicalized. The terrorist, from the town of Courcouronnes, 15 miles south of Paris, was identified through fingerprints.
Regarding the Syrian passport found on the body of one of the terrorists, deputy public order minister Nikos Toskas confirmed in a statement that the document passed through Greece on Oct. 3. It was not immediately clear if the name in the passport was the dead terrorist.
Meanwhile, a tip from witnesses who spotted the terrorists' car
- with Belgian plates - at the theater, led Belgian authorities Saturday to arrest three men Saturday. Molins said the car been rented to a Frenchman living in Belgium who was identified in a spot check by police as he drove across the Belgian border with two others.
French President Francois Hollande called the murderous spree "an act of war" by the Islamic State, also known as ISIL, ISIS and its Arabic name Daesh.
"France will be pitiless concerning the barbarity of Daesh," he said. Hollande declared a state of emergency and ordered 1,500 extra troops to guard buildings and schools.
French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve authorized local authorities to impose curfews if needed and said in a televised address Saturday that authorities are banning all public demonstrations until Thursday.
Paris streets were largely empty Saturday, with theaters, cafes and some Metro stations closed. Major tourist sites, like the Eiffel Tower, were closed indefinitely. At least a dozen scheduled concerts, including a performance by the Irish rock group U2, were canceled in the capital.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility, calling the attacks a "blessed battle" of revenge for France participation in a U.S.-led coalition against militant targets in Syria and Iraq. Its propaganda arm released statements in Arabic, French and English that praised the killings.
"Allah granted victory upon their hands and cast terror into the hearts of the crusaders in their very own homeland," the statement said. The Islamic State said eight "brothers" were armed with assault rifles and wore explosives belts that they detonated when they ran out of ammunition.
Cummings Contributing reported : Stanglin from and McLean William , Va., don and . Jane Onyanga-Omara from Lon-

Load-Date: November 15, 2015


End of Document