Democrats pull surveillance bill
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 29, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 742 words
Byline: MARY CLARE JALONICK The Associated Press
Body


BY MARY CLARE JALONICK
The Associated Press
WASHINGTON - Democrats on Thursday pulled legislation from the House floor to extend FBI surveillance authorities after President Donald Trump and Republicans turned against the measure and ensured its defeat.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said there would be a new round of negotiations with the Senate over the expired powers the FBI considers vital in fighting terrorism. The House later voted, 284-122, to start those negotiations.
The provisions, which lapsed in March, allow the FBI to get a court order for business records in national security investigations and conduct surveillance on subjects without establishing they're acting on behalf of an international terrorism organization.
A bill renewing those authorities passed the Senate with 80 votes earlier this month, and it appeared on track for easy passage. The House had overwhelmingly supported a similar measure in March with the support of 126 Republicans. That bill was a compromise worked out between the two parties and Attorney General William Barr.
But the compromise crumbled this week as Trump threatened a veto and House Republicans who had once voted for the bill quickly followed his lead.
House Republican Leader Kevin McCarthy, who praised the bill in March and said it included "important reforms" to guard against abuses, reversed that stance when Trump said he opposed it. On Thursday, McCarthy said Congress should "take a pause."
Pelosi criticized Republicans for the about-face, noting that some were praising the legislation as recently as Wednesday morning. She said that as soon as the president made his views known, "the commitment to national security disappeared."
In threatening a veto, Trump cited his frustration with surveillance practices during the Russia investigation.
On Twitter Thursday, Trump praised "GREAT Republican Congressmen & Congresswomen" who blocked the bill "that would just perpetuate the abuse that produced the Greatest Political Crime In the History of the U.S., the Russian Witch-Hunt. Fantastic Job!"
An inspector general report documented serious mistakes in how the FBI used its authorities during its probe into ties between the Trump presidential campaign and Russia, though it said the FBI was justified in opening the investigation. The problems documented included errors and omissions in applications the FBI submitted under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act to monitor a former Trump campaign adviser.
Republicans have historically been hawkish on preserving surveillance powers in the name of national security, and the powers up for renewal aren't directly related to the errors that were uncovered during the Russia investigation.
But Trump has used the legislation to criticize the investigation, which eventually was turned over to special counsel Robert Mueller. Mueller found insufficient evidence to establish a criminal conspiracy between his campaign and Russia but said it could not exonerate Trump on obstruction of justice.
Complicating matters on the surveillance bill were new objections from the Justice Department and old divisions within the Democratic Party. The department said it opposed a Senate add to the bill that would attempt to boost protections for some surveillance subjects, and Democrats who have long opposed surveillance laws reiterated on Wednesday that they wouldn't support the bill.
The only difference between the House and Senate bills is the amendment adopted by the Senate with 77 votes. That bipartisan language, sponsored by Sens. Mike Lee, R-Utah, and Patrick Leahy, D-Vermont, would allow more third-party oversight to protect people in some surveillance cases.
The Justice Department said Wednesday that the amended Senate version of the bill would "weaken national security tools while doing nothing to address the abuses" identified by the inspector general's report.
And the leaders of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, which has about 70 Democratic House members, reiterated Wednesday that they'd oppose the bill, saying the legislation doesn't do enough to protect Americans' privacy.
"We cannot in good conscience vote for legislation that violates Americans' fundamental right to privacy," said the progressive caucus' leaders, Reps. Pramila Jayapal, D-Wash., and Mark Pocan, D-Wis.
Copyright 2020 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed without permission.

Load-Date: May 29, 2020


End of Document