Denies Murder Charge
The New York Times
October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 353 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: SALISBURY, Zimbabwe, Oct. 28
Body


A Zimbabwe Government minister charged with murdering a farmer says that one of his bodyguards killed the man in self-defense, according to documents entered today with the High Court.
The documents, released to reporters by attorneys for Edgar Z.  Tekere, the Manpower Planning Minister, said Gerald Adams, a farm manager, died during a ''military operation'' at a farm near Salisbury Aug. 4. Mr. Tekere took personal command of the operation, they added.
Mr. Adams was shot and killed by a bodyguard after he ''raised his pistol toward him with the apparent intention of shooting him,'' the documents said. ''The accused then shot the deceased before he himself could be shot.''
Zimbabwean Manpower Planning Minister Edgar Tekere, accused of murdering farmer, claims his bodyguard killed man in self-defense
This account of the killing emerged from a defense request that charges against the minister and seven bodyguards be dropped because, his lawyers said, the court had no jurisdiction in their case. The documents say Mr. Tekere and his men were protected by a 1975 act giving immunity to Government leaders acting in connection ''with the suppression of terrorism.''
The trial is scheduled to begin Monday.
 
China Is Reported Ready To Take I.L.O. Seat
 
Special to the New York Times
GENEVA, Oct. 28 - Peking is ready to occupy the seat in the International Labor Organization that has been held open for it since the United Nations agency ousted the Nationalist Chinese Government on Taiwan in 1971, diplomatic sources said today.
The sources said that Francis Blanchard, director general of the I.L.O., was informed of the Chinese desire to join while on a visit to Peking this month.
Questioned today, Mr. Blanchard would say only that Peking was ''actively considering'' taking over the vacant seat.  The diplomatic sources said China might begin active membership and send a delegation to the I.L.O. annual assembly in June. The principal question to be resolved is the backlog of $33 million in contributions that China has been assessed in the nine years since Peking was recognized as the rightful holder of the seat.


End of Document