DEPARTING U.S. ATTORNEY PUSHES WAR ON TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
January 8, 2002, Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 413 words
Byline: By ROBERT GEARTY DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body

Before stepping down yesterday as the nation's best-known terrorism prosecutor, Manhattan U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White came out in favor of using military tribunals to prosecute Osama Bin Laden and other Al Qaeda terrorists.
Such extraordinary legal measures are necessary given the nature of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center, she said in a farewell interview.
"We're at war," said White. "Military tribunals are an appropriate vehicle to deal with war criminals."
White leaves office after 8 1/2 years in dogged pursuit of Al Qaeda and other terror groups with one regret.
"I regret I leave before Bin Laden has been captured or dealt with," she said.
It was White who obtained Bin Laden's indictment for hatching the plot to blow up the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 in near-simultaneous attacks. The blasts killed 224 people, including 12 Americans.
At a brief private ceremony yesterday morning, former Virginia federal prosecutor James Comey, 41, was sworn in as White's interim replacement, pending his confirmation by the Senate as her successor.
White, 54, said she'll probably go back into private practice and would like to write a book on terrorism. She left open the possibility of running for public office.
She was the first woman to head the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office, where she racked up an impressive list of successful prosecutions. White locked up Gambino mobster John A. (Junior) Gotti, Westchester District Attorney Jeanine Pirro's husband, Albert, choke-hold cop Francis Livoti and numerous Wall Street fraudsters.
But it is for her terrorism prosecutions of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing defendants, as well as the cases involving Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, in a plot to blow up U.S. landmarks, and Ramzi Yousef, who was convicted in the '93 twin towers blast and a thwarted plot to blow up U.S.-bound airliners, that she will be best remembered.
The Sept. 11 attacks, she said, "changed all of us."
"It's certain the scope and horror of that event, none of us anticipated, not even those of us involved in dealing with terrorism," White said.
She said she thinks that combating terrorism is a military, more than a law enforcement, issue.
For that reason, she criticized former President Bill Clinton, who responded to the embassy bombings with a cruise missile strike against suspected Bin Laden terror camps.
"I certainly would have been happier to have seen a broader military response [based on] what I knew," she said.

Graphic

 
LINDA ROSIER DAILY NEWS LAST DAY U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White spends some time in her office Friday. Yesterday, White stepped down, saying she'll probably go into private practice.

Load-Date: January 8, 2002


End of Document