Deputies training for terror attacks
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
June 11, 2010 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Times Publishing Company
Section: PASCO; Pg. 1
Length: 646 words
Byline: RONNIE BLAIR, , rblair@tampatrib.com
Body


Schools make inviting targets, expert warns.
By RONNIE BLAIR
rblair@tampatrib.com
SHADY HILLS - John Giduck doesn't offer much in the way of comforting words when he lectures law enforcement and school officials on how to prepare for a terrorist attack on a school.
People will die and the best anyone can hope for is to limit the numbers, Giduck said Thursday during an all-day Pasco County Sheriff's Office training session.
He knows the message he delivers is not an upbeat one.
"I don't get to be a really inspiring motivational speaker," Giduck said during one of the session's breaks.
Giduck is president of Archangel Group, a Colorado-based company that offers a wide range of security and anti-terror training and services.
He authored a book published by his company titled "Terror at Beslan: A Russian Tragedy with Lessons for America's Schools," which was on sale at the training session.
In 2004, militants stormed a school in the small Russian town of Beslan and took more than 1,100 children, parents and school staff hostage. The terrorists demanded that Russian forces withdraw from war-ravaged Chechnya.
By the time the siege ended in explosions and gunfire two days later, 334 of those hostages were dead, more than half of them children.
Giduck visited Beslan, saw the school and studied what happened. He said the Beslan siege is the kind of attack America's enemies, such as al-Qaida, would like to bring to the United States.
A school, Bishop McLaughlin Catholic High School, was the setting for Thursday's training session. Only the first two hours of the training, which included a review of terrorist tactics, was open to the media.
The message might be sobering, but Sheriff Bob White said it's an important one. Pasco has nearly 500,000 people and about 100 public and private schools for law enforcement officials to protect.
"That's a big mandate," White said.
Among those in the audience were Heather Fiorentino, Pasco's superintendent of schools, and several other school district officials. County Commissioner Pat Mulieri also attended.
Largely, though, it was an audience of sheriff's deputies and police officers, including those who serve as school resource officers. Pasco County Fire Rescue also sent representatives, as did law enforcement agencies from nearby counties.
The sheriff's office has had anti-terrorism training before, but it was time for a refresher, said Lt. Joe Gleaton, who handles training for the office. Thursday's session was a lecture and PowerPoint presentation, but next month deputies will participate in hands-on training, Gleaton said.
What separates an act of terrorism from other crimes is that terrorists have a political agenda, Giduck said. Terrorists want a government to change a policy or take a specific action, and their tactics and targets are chosen to get media coverage and the public's attention.
Giduck said schools are a potential target because terrorists want to rivet the nation's and the world's attention by doing "the most horrific things they can imagine to the most innocent people they can find."
In Giduck's view, the federal government goes too far in keeping Americans in the dark about terrorist information that intelligence agencies gather and terrorist plots that they foil. He wouldn't mind seeing a national informational campaign about terrorism similar to the "Brain on Drugs" anti-drug campaign and the "Don't be a Litter Bug" campaign.
"We are so busy keeping people from being afraid that we are lining them up to be dead," he said.
Reporter Ronnie Blair can be reached at (813) 259-7065.
Photo credit: Staff photo by FRED BELLET
Photo: Archangel's John Giduck says terrorists get attention by doing "the most horrific things they can imagine to the most innocent people they can find."
Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: July 2, 2010


End of Document