Deputy chief: National Intelligence agency is 'agile'
USA TODAY
July 29, 2005, Friday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 423 words
Byline: John Diamond
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- To fight international terrorism, the nation's new intelligence agency will mimic the terrorists themselves by streamlining its bureaucracy and moving more quickly, the agency's No. 2 official said Thursday.
Under the old intelligence system, the CIA would have to get a consensus of 15 agencies before it could start a new program or operation, said Gen. Michael Hayden, deputy director of national intelligence.
That's not a problem for the new Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Hayden said. Instead, the office, which was created last year using recommendations by the commission that investigated the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, relies on the judgment of National Intelligence Director John Negroponte and Hayden to set policy.
In consultation with President Bush, Hayden said, he and Negroponte "can be more agile."
Rep. Mike Rogers, a Michigan Republican and member of the House Intelligence Committee, disputed Hayden's claim. Instead, Rogers said, the agency is already choked by a bureaucracy of 500 to 700 "second-guessers."
A former FBI agent with the organized crime bureau, Rogers said he was concerned about the potential blurring of lines between foreign and domestic intelligence.
FBI agents, Rogers said, "follow the law," while CIA officers overseas operate by a looser set of rules in which the aim is to "get the job done" even if it means dealing with unsavory characters.
While he said the new agency won't fill all the jobs allowed by law, Hayden said it takes people to coordinate 15 agencies, run intelligence missions and create teams that analyze terrorism and weapons proliferation.
Civil liberties will be protected, Hayden said, as his agency does the unprecedented job of blending foreign and domestic intelligence work together to fight terrorism.
Hayden said his new agency should mimic some of the elements of loosely organized terrorist networks so various intelligence agencies can operate on their own initiative.
Congress will soon see how Negroponte will operate when he makes his recommendation on a "very classified, very expensive" technical intelligence program, Hayden said.
The Senate last year engaged in an unusually public floor debate in which lawmakers expressed concern about the costs of the unspecified technical intelligence program. That program is most likely a network of radar-evading spy satellites that has been "plagued by schedule delays and cost overruns and other setbacks," said intelligence expert Steve Aftergood of the Federation of American Scientists.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: July 29, 2005


End of Document