Deputies discount bombs as terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 6, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NORTHWEST,
Length: 335 words
Byline: TOM BRENNAN; of The Tampa Tribune
Body


SUMMARY: Hillsborough deputies are still investigating two explosions in north Tampa that rattled windows over the weekend. An arrest is made in one case.
CARROLLWOOD - Sunday got off to a bang for law enforcement officers who kept busy investigating two explosions that rattled windows and nerves.
No one was injured in either blast. The first occurred at the soccer field of Carrollwood Elementary School at 3516 McFarland Road at about 3:40 p.m. Then, about three hours later, another occurred in a vacant field on the southwest corner of Ehrlich Road and Bearss Avenue.
Authorities don't believe the two incidents are related. Nor do they think they are dealing with terrorist or militia groups.
"The publicity about the recent Olympic bombing and pipe bombs have caused a phenomenon where every nut is trying to do it," said Jack Espinosa, spokesman for the Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office. "It doesn't look like anyone connected to those type of groups would go to an empty lot to experiment."
At the soccer field, a CO2 cartridge explosion created a smoke plume and rattled neighboring windows. Witnesses told deputies they saw a white man between the ages of 18 and 20 set off the canister.
Witnesses said the man fled north on Orange Grove Drive with a passenger in a white compact truck with yellow designs on the front fenders. The man was wearing a green hat and T-shirt.
Police arrested a Tampa man and juvenile in connection with the second explosion.
Eric Scott Garbo, 20, of 3421 Reynolds Wood Drive, was released on bail Sunday night after being charged with exploding a homemade pipe bomb. Police said they found materials for three similar devices in the suspect's home.
Authorities didn't identify or provide information about Garbo's juvenile companion because of his age.
Espinosa said the copycat phenomenon isn't new to law enforcement. "We do worry about it," he said. "There has been so much (publicity) lately, we expect it to come up. But people don't realize how dangerous those things are."

Load-Date: August 8, 1996


End of Document