Derailment in Moscow kills 21, injures 136
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 16, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 3
Length: 416 words
Byline: VITNIJA SALDAVA and NATALIYA VASILYEVA The Associated Press
Body


MOSCOW - A subway train derailed Tuesday deep below Moscow's streets, twisting and mangling crowded rail cars at the height of the morning rush hour. At least 21 people were killed, Russian officials said, and 136 more were hospitalized, many with serious injuries.
The Russian capital's airports and transit systems have been a prime target for terrorists over the past two decades, but multiple officials vigorously dismissed terrorism as a possible cause.
The Moscow Metro is world-famous for its palatial interiors with mosaics, chandeliers and marble benches. Park Pobedy, where the derailment occurred, is Moscow's deepest metro station - 275 feet below the surface - which made the rescue particularly difficult. The station serves the vast park where Russia's World War II museum is located.
It was unclear what caused the train to derail. Lines of inquiry included a fault in one of the cars or the sinking of the roadbed, according to Vladimir Markin, spokesman for Russia's top investigative body. He said other officials who said earlier that a power surge triggered an alarm, causing the train to stop abruptly, were incorrect.
Of the 136 people hospitalized, at least 42 were in grave condition, health officials said.
More than 1,100 people were evacuated from the train, which was stuck between two stations, in a rescue operation that lasted at least 12 hours.
By evening, rescuers had recovered all but two of the bodies trapped in the wrecked train cars, officials said.
In video released by the government, several wrecked train cars looked almost coiled, occupying the entire width of the tunnel.
Workers were trying to force open the mangled doors of one car to retrieve bodies. Photos posted on social media sites showed passengers walking along the tracks in the dimly lit tunnel.
Russian officials rushed to open an investigation into the accident. President Vladimir Putin, who is traveling in Brazil, demanded a detailed investigation into the "reasons for the event" and asked the country's top investigators to open a criminal case, his spokesman told Russian news agencies.
Mayor Sergei Sobyanin said unnamed officials will not only be fired but also charged with crimes, though he would not say what charges they might face.
While technical glitches are regular occurrences in the Moscow Metro, the subway hasn't seen deadly accidents in decades. Terrorism is another matter. More than 100 people have been killed in bombings on Moscow's subway trains or near stations since 2000.

Load-Date: July 16, 2014


End of Document