Dershowitz explains 'Why Terrorism Works'
USA TODAY
August 29, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; BOOK REVIEW
Length: 579 words
Byline: Bob Minzesheimer
Body

Why Terrorism Works
By Alan Dershowitz
Yale, 271 pp., $ 24.95
---
Most of Why Terrorism Works could have been written before Sept. 11, but who would have listened?
That's one of Alan Dershowitz's points in his provocative, challenging and opportunistic book. Its cover shows Yasser Arafat and Osama bin Laden, both smiling, but Dershowitz deals more with Arafat, the Palestinian leader who has been to the White House and met the pope, than with the hunted leader of al-Qaeda.
He writes that it's impossible to understand Sept. 11 without understanding "the success" of Palestinian terrorism that persists "because the international community rewards it with important concessions and decreased support for the country it targets."
It's the 18th book by the ubiquitous Dershowitz. A Harvard law professor and criminal defense lawyer, he was portrayed by Ron Silver in the movie version of Reversal of Fortune, Dershowitz's account of his successful appeal of the murder conviction of socialite Claus von Bulow.
In Why Terrorism Works, Dershowitz is more a prosecutor of Palestinian terrorists than a defender of Israel, even as he writes "the only court in the entire Middle East in which an Arab can expect justice against governmental repression is the Israeli Supreme Court."
He argues that Palestinian hijackers, repeatedly released by European countries, and suicide bombers succeed because "the international community has fallen hook, line and sinker for the Palestinian exploitation of the cruel fact that death produces sympathy for its cause whenever Israelis or Palestinians are killed."
He devotes 22 pages to a list of Palestinian terrorist acts and the benefits to the Palestinian cause, from U.N. resolutions to Arafat's audience with Pope John Paul II. He writes, "I have little doubt that if Arab armies were capable of defeating Israel's military, they would massacre the civilian population, rather than merely occupying the land."
The less polemical and more valuable part of the book deals with the U.S. response to Sept. 11 and the balance between national security and civil liberties.
In the way law professors play intellectual exercises with their students, Dershowitz raises tough moral and legal questions about collective punishments imposed on large populations for the deeds of their leaders and the use of torture on suspected terrorists.
He supports a national ID card and face recognition technology "to the extent that they can be made to work more effectively than they do now." He writes that Attorney General John Ashcroft "was way out of line when he suggested that those who disagree with the administration's approach to terrorism give aid and comfort to terrorists." He calls President Bush's order authorizing secret military tribunals to try non-citizens suspected of terrorism "frightening."
His writing is clear, if redundant. On one level, his book is not very original, relying on the research and reporting of others, especially Phillip Heymann in Terrorism and America, Bruce Hoffman in Inside Terrorism and New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman.
Dershowitz's contribution is to synthesize their work and play the role of intellectual provocateur. He warns: "We have seen that politics and security as usual did not prevent the most massive terrorist attack in history, but we do not seem to have learned much from this lesson. We need to start thinking outside the boxes that failed us, but without becoming like those who attacked us."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W

Load-Date: August 29, 2002


End of Document