DESIRE TO FIGHT TERRORISM LEADS TO LEGISLATIVE OVERLAP;
The result may be a list of well-intentioned bills that do little to make Maine safer.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
October 16, 2001 Tuesday, Final Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. 1A
Length: 648 words
Byline: From staff reports
Series: STATE HOUSE 2001
Dateline: AUGUSTA
Body


Legislators think Maine needs new laws that target terrorism. They are drafting bills to prevent future attacks, to raise money for relief organizations and to commemorate the events of Sept. 11.
The titles of the bills - names like "An Act to Protect Maine from Bioterrorism" - are impressive. But specific proposals are few. And the proposals themselves frequently repeat work already being pursued by the federal government or the executive branch of state government.
The result may be a plethora of well-intentioned bills that do little to make Maine safer. The federal government has taken the lead on the issue, observers said, and the nation's governors are better equipped than state lawmakers to coordinate the states' contributions to the effort.
The bills are still being drafted, but their titles have been released. Interviews with some sponsors suggest that frustrated lawmakers feel compelled to respond to last month's attacks, but they are finding it difficult to come up with workable solutions requiring new laws at the state level.
"It's a whole new concept," said House Majority Whip William Norbert, D-Portland, the sponsor of one anti-terrorism bill. "Unfortunately, we're all just trying to wade through it."
For example, details are lacking in Norbert's bill, "An Act to Protect Maine from Bioterrorism." Norbert said Maine needs stronger coordination between hospitals and state officials when health emergencies occur, but he offered no specifics.
Similarly, Republican Rep. Ronald Collins of Wells wants to create a task force of federal, state, county and municipal officials to coordinate the state's response to terrorism. Collins conceded that his task force might duplicate one that U.S. Attorney Paula Silsby created last month under orders from U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft, but Collins was undeterred.
"If, by chance, one (task force) doesn't work, there would be another one to step into its place," Collins said.
Yet another bill calls for a study of airport security, even though the federal government and the airlines are the key players in that area. Gov. Angus King and other governors recently dispatched National Guard troops to airports to boost security, but they did so at the request of President Bush, and with the understanding that the federal government will foot the bill.
"A lot of this is federal," said Rep. Lois Snowe-Mello, R-Poland, the sponsor of the proposed airport study, but she said the state has responsibilities for airport security as well.
Other terrorism-related bills that lawmakers hope the Legislature will consider next year would:
Increase security at the State House and the Burton M. Cross Building, a large state office building located directly behind the State House.
Force the Department of Public Safety to release what one legislator describes as a two-year-old report on security problems at the State House and the Cross Building.
Create a memorial in Augusta to victims of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Create a patriotic license plate to raise money for relief agencies, such as the Salvation Army and the American Red Cross.
"I can appreciate why people want to do it," House Speaker Michael Saxl, D-Portland, said of his colleagues. "Like every Maine family and every Maine person, we're all searching for ways to keep our families safe and to keep our neighbors safe."
But even Saxl acknowledged that federal-state coordination on terrorism "is probably best left to the executive," meaning the governor. The Legislature should get involved, Saxl said, if and when it becomes clear that new state laws are needed to implement or improve policies worked out by the governor and the federal government.
Legislative leaders will have the final say on which, if any, of the proposed anti-terrorism bills will be considered next year.
Staff Writer Paul Carrier can be contacted at 622-7511 or at:
pcarrier@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
House Speaker Michael Saxl, D-Portland

Load-Date: October 16, 2001


End of Document