DESPITE POPULATION DIP, CITY WILL GET FUNDS FOR ANTI-TERRORISM TRAINING;
FIRE CHIEF IS GRATEFUL TO QUALIFY FOR U.S. PROGRAM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 23, 1998, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO, Pg. B4
Length: 476 words
Byline: Tim Bryant; Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


St. Louis, whose shrunken population excluded it earlier from a federal program to fight domestic terrorism, can expect special firefighter training and equipment after all, officials running the program said Wednesday.
The coming federal budget carries $ 300 million in a program to fight domestic terrorism, up from $ 12 million in the current spending year, said Jeffrey A. Hunker, director of the federal Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office.
As a result, St. Louis firefighters will get training in how to combat chemical and biological warfare, Hunker said. Later, the city will get special protective gear for firefighters and "assay kits" that can detect the nature of potential chemical or biological threats. Training should take place in September, Hunker said. He was unable to say how much federal money will be provided for the training and equipment.
City officials were concerned last month when they learned the city was excluded from the program because of its dramatic population drop - to u nder 400,000 from 850,000 in recent decades. The smallest political body that made the cut was Jefferson County, Colo., with 493,000 people. It comprises Denver's western suburbs.
St. Louis Fire Chief Neil J. Svetanics said last month that the city's exclusion may hurt its ability to protect Pope John Paul II during his visit, scheduled for January.
Hunker and Richard A. Clarke, national coordinator for security, infrastructure protection and counterterrorism, were in St. Louis on Wednesday to meet with city officials. They also spoke to about 50 members of the Regional Commerce and Growth Association.
Clarke urged a government-business partnership to build readiness against those who might try to cripple utilities, transportation networks, banks and other institutions by interfering with their computers. In the future, American military action abroad might prompt foreign terrorists into attacking computer systems in the United States, Clarke said.
 
Building a 'cyberdefense'
Clarke told the RCGA members he is helping to develop within three years a "cyberdefense for the nation." One method could be to develop software that automatically detects computerized attacks and isolates them.
 
"We have ideas; we don't have the answers," he said.
Clarke said he is less concerned by the mischief of youthful hackers than he is by the serious threats posed by "cyberwarriors" who might have the support of foreign terrorists or drug cartels.
Internet providers already are alarmed, Clarke said. Recently, an extortionist told an Internet provider in Florida that he would post on the Internet the names and credit card numbers of its subscribers unless the provider sent money to the man's bank account.
U.S. authorities and German police foiled the plot by finding the extortionist at his computer in a hotel room in Hamburg, Germany, Clarke said.

Load-Date: July 24, 1998


End of Document