DESPITE DIVISIONS AND CRISES, ITALY AVOIDS DISASTER
The New York Times
February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 2174 words
Byline: By HENRY TANNER, Special to The New York Times; The author of the following article recently completed an assignment as chief of the Rome bureau of The Times.
Dateline: ROME
Body


After a century of national unity, Italy is still two countries. The north, with its industries and technology, is part of Europe - ''the southern tip of the Ruhr,'' a Milanese industrialist said only half facetiously. The largely rural south is part of the underdeveloped Mediterranean third world. Naples and Palermo evoke Alexandria, not Hamburg or Le Havre.
The north-south issue is the oldest and most fundamental of Italy's unresolved problems. These problems are so numerous and of such variety that foreigners, though not Italians, often fear the ultimate catastrophe - the collapse of the country's institutions or the breaking apart of its social fabric.
A cartoon in a leading French magazine some time ago showed the Italian boot spinning madly around Europe in imminent danger of being torn loose and flung either south into the third world, east into the Soviet orbit or perhaps s imply into the void of outer space.
Henry Tanner comment discusses how Italy avoids disaster, despite its divisions and crises
But the worst has never happened -and probably never will - in spite of the pressures of terrorism, recurrent political scandals, strikes, natural disasters and other afflictions.
 
Antiterrorism Effort Gains
The battle against terrorism, for instance, seemed hopeless for a long time. But last month thousands of separate police operations led to the freeing of Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier after 42 days of captivity at the hands of the Red Brigades, the country's most powerful terrorist organization. Last year 19 people were killed by political terrorists in all of Italy. In the southern city of Naples last year, nearly 200 people were killed in clashes between criminal gangs.
The south, roughly defined by a line running from south of Rome to the northeastern edge of the Abruzzi region on the Adriatic, includes about two-fifths of Italy's area and nearly half its population. But it produces only one-sixth of the country's industrial goods, and its unemployment is twice the national rate.  Between 1950 and 1970 more than four million southerners left the region, about half of them for northern Italy and the rest as emigrants to northern Europe or America.
In the last 30 years some $50 billion has been spent for the development of the south. The superhighways there are as wide as in the north, but emptier. There are good roads even to the remotest villages. Electricity and water have been brought to most hamlets.  Here and there northern industrialists have built plants with government aid.
 
Aid Is Subject of Dispute
Inevitably, the assistance program for the south became a subject of dispute. Charges of corruption are widespread. Some critics say Rome has dispensed its aid as a colonial power would, from the outside and the top, without recognizing that emigration has robbed the region of those who could have made the investment productive.
Catastrophes sometimes unite a nation, but this was not the case with the great earthquake that devastated most of the mountain area east of Naples 15 months ago.
Southerners are still bitter over the slowness of the rescue operations, which they say caused hundreds of people to die unnecessarily. It would have been different if the quake had struck in the north, they say. And in the north a visitor often hears remarks against southerners bordering on racism.
Some 150,000 people in Naples are still homeless or living in condemned houses on the verge of collapse. More than 100 schools are occupied by squatters. In the suburb of Bagnoli 750 people have been living for five years in a rat-infested abandoned hotel. They are among the 35,000 people who were homeless in the city even before the earthquake, and they say they are the ''real'' victims of the quake because all the government money that might have been spent on them is going to the new victims.
 
Unemployed Even Worse Off
A quarter of the population of Naples was listed as unemployed before the quake, but many of them had some income. Now these people are even worse off. Many of the home industries producing shoes and other goods in the narrow streets of the old city have been wiped out.
The contrast with the north is startling.  In Parma, the staid northern city famous for its ham and cheese and opera house, an official proudly reels off the cities with the highest average income and the lowest unemployment rate in the country. They are all in the north.
A young music student from the south taking his first walk around Parma marvels at not seeing any poor people and at the rows of old English-looking stores selling cashmeres, tweeds and jewelry. ''Why is everybody here so much richer than we are?'' he explodes.
 
'They Look Down Their Noses'
His father explains another difference between north and south.  ''If I tried to bribe the city clerk here, he would almost certainly call the policeman standing at the door, so I don't try,'' he said.
In Turin, the city of the Fiat automobile company, where half the population now consists of southerners, a driver says that even though he has lived and worked in the north for 30 years, he still calls Palermo in Sicily his home. Of the Torinesi, he says, ''They look down their noses and don't talk to anyone.''
A Torinese complains that the southerners have changed the city, even its eating habits. ''We used to feed broad beans to the animals, now we buy them at the grocer and eat them,'' he said.
Many of the problems of Italy transcend regional differences.
 
Living Well Amid Troubles
One of Italy's puzzling contradictions is that the economy is going through the worst crisis in a generation but many millions of Ita lians - probably even a majority - have ne ver lived better.
The rate of inflation was over 20 percent last year, though it has declined recently. Unemployment is 8.4 percent and still growing. But the restaurants are full of people eating well and expensively. The superb highways are full of cars despite a succession of steep increases in the price of gas.
Parts of the state sector, which accounts for 40 percent of the gross national product, are reported to be near bankruptcy. But many small industries are thriving quietly, adapting to the fluctuating prices, changing tastes and technological innovations on the world market. These businesses are often -misleadingly - lumped together as the ''submerged economy'' because some avoid union contracts, taxes and other state restrictions.
Giovanni Spadolini, the first Prime Minister in 36 years who is not a Christian Democrat, has said that his biggest problem is ''to cure the illness of false affluence.'' By that he means the high spending by individuals and the state, combined with low productivity and steeply rising costs in the factories.
Terrorism the Worst Scourge
Despite the endemic problems of the economy and the division of the nation, the worst scourge has been terrorism.  A year ago Gen. Umberto Cappuzzo, then commander of the Carabinieri, the paramilitary police, said the worst of the terrorism was over ''operationally speaking.'' But soon afterward Pope John Paul II was wounded by a gunman, and this year General Dozier, an American assigned to NATO, was abducted.
But General Cappuzzo may have been more right than wrong. General Dozier was the first captive of the Red Brigades to be freed by security forces since 1975. The police, who for years had found it impossible to infiltrate the terrorist organizations, have now accumulated a store of valuable information from captured prisoners.
Politically, the terrorists have failed to achieve their goals. The ''civil war'' they had announced did not take place, and the ''armed party'' they wanted to create has not taken shape. The terrorists - both those of the extreme left and the extreme right - no longer appear to have an appreciable political following.
 
Active Mostly in North
The terrorists have been active almost exclusively in the north.  The Red Brigades have their roots in the student movement of the late 1960's. For instance, Renato Curcio, the dominant figure among the founders, came from a middle-class Roman Catholic background in the north and moved from campus radicalism to revolutionary action and ultimately to violence after living among striking farm workers in the south. The terrorists of the extreme right also came from northern cities.
In the south there has been only one major local terrorist organization, the Armed Revolutionary Nuclei, which operated from Naples for a few years in the early 70's. One reason for its failure was that the rackets and the Mafia were too solidly entrenched and would not tolerate a third underground.
The Red Brigades occasionally ventured into Naples but never for long.  Perhaps the biggest single mistake of the Red Brigades was the kidnapping and killing in 1978 of Aldo Moro, a respected politician who had been Prime Minister five times. The Italian Establishment - the Government, political parties, the press - was slow to react, but gradually it mobilized against the terrorists. At the start of the Moro affair many Italians saw the terrorists as a modern version of Robin Hood, but afterward public sympathy for them sharply declined.  Now the rescue of General Dozier is widely regarded as a national victory. Policemen, not normally admired in this country, have become heroes, and in Padua, where General Dozier was freed, a crowd was ready to lynch his kidnappers.
 
Students Become Apolitical
The mood among Italian students has also changed over the last decade. The overwhelming majority of them seem to have withdrawn from active politics. ''We don't even talk about politics,'' one student said. There have been no political marches in years, other than last fall's parades against nuclear weapons that were a European phenomenon.
In Rome and Parma, students and professors say the only two organizations really active on the two campuses are Catholic lay groups run by young priests who wear civilian clothes, operate dining halls and sometimes say mass. The League of Young Communists, the youth branch of the Communist Party, had 120,000 members four years ago; last year it had 60,000, having lost 20,000 each year.
Students cite indifference and disillusionment as the reasons for young people's flight from politics.
 
Universities Overcrowded
 
The universities are as overcrowded as ever . In Rome there are 130,000 students in buildings built half a ce ntury ago for 25,000.  Three-quarters of Italy's more than two milli on unemployed are in their 20's or teens, and many of them have ne ver had a job.
Italians as a whole, normally highly politicized, seem to have lost much of their interest in party politics and are more cynical than ever about most of their politicians. This has hurt the dominant Christian Democrats.
For the first time in years the political center is gaining ground.  Bettino Craxi, the Socialist leader, wants to succeed Mr. Spadolini as prime minister. But he also wants to build around his party a national third force that would change the country's political lineup by presenting a viable centrist alternative to the Christian Democrats and the Communists for the first time since the war.
 
Christian Democrats Suffer
The Christian Democrats have suffered a sharp loss of public esteem. They have been governing the country alone or at the head of shifting alliances since the end of World War II, and some of their leading figures have been involved in a score or so of political and financial scandals. Now the party's era of power may be nearing its end.
The Communists have been paralyzed and traumatized by the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the situation in Poland. After an agonizing internal debate they have now practically repudiated their ideological link with Moscow. Moscow has accused them of blasphemy and last month virtually excommunicated them.
The break may have major political consequences in Italy. The Communists are apt to lose some of their voters, the old rank-andfile members for whom Moscow remained the source of all wisdom. But the party is likely to pick up new, more ''liberated'' voters.
 
Church Loses Influence
The Roman Catholic Church, long a pivotal power in Italy, has lost much of its political influence in recent years, and this too is hurting the Christian Democrats, who have always been close to the church. The Polish Pope, John Paul II, with his worldwide concerns, has shown little interest in and no flair for Italian politics. The Christian Democratic leaders who were the personal friends of past Popes have not been received by him.
John Paul intervened publicly in Italian politics only once, and then it was a disaster. During a referendum campaign last spring, he repeatedly urged Italians to vote for repeal of the country's liberal abortion law.
The voters, including most practicing Catholics, ignored his advice and voted overwhelmingly to retain the law. Clergymen and Christian Democrats say that the Pope had been warned this was a hopeless fight and that it was wrong to engage the prestige of the church and the party.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of factory worker photo of farm worker


End of Document