Despite some concerns, House backs state anti-terrorism plan
Chicago Daily Herald
November 30, 2001, Friday Cook,Lake


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 321 words
Byline: John Patterson Daily Herald State Government Editor
Body


SPRINGFIELD - New laws defining terrorism, sending terrorists to death row and giving police expanded wire-tapping authority cleared the Illinois House overwhelmingly on Thursday.  
Gov. George Ryan is now considering the proposal. The death penalty provision could be a hang up for the governor, who has rejected other plans to expand the death penalty while a commission he appointed studies changes to the system.  
Although several lawmakers voiced concerns about whether Illinois needs terrorism laws and potential infringements on civil liberties, only Chicago Democrat Annazette Collins voted against the plan.  
State Rep. Tom Cross, an Oswego Republican and one of the plan's sponsors, admitted that if there were ever a terrorist threat or attack in Illinois, it would be the federal government that would prosecute the case.  
What's important, he said, is that the police officers of the state be given the power to investigate potential terrorism.  
"Local law enforcement can't just go investigate federal laws," Cross said in arguing for the state laws.  
Attorney General Jim Ryan, who first proposed the anti-terrorism plan, applauded lawmakers' effort.  
"This victory is clear evidence that state leaders can set aside any differences when action is required in the interest of citizens' safety," Ryan said.  
If signed into law by the governor, carrying a gun onto a plane would become a felony punishable by up to three years in prison. The current penalty is a maximum of a year in jail. In addition, money laundering in connection with terrorism would carry up to a 30-year prison term.  
One anti-terrorism plan that did not pass Thursday was the call for a special edition of the state lottery to help fund costs associated with higher security around Illinois since Sept. 11. The plan passed the Senate but was never called for a vote in the House before lawmakers adjourned their fall session Thursday night.

Notes

Additional Zone/Page: DuPage-7

Load-Date: November 30, 2001


End of Document