Despite efforts, more weak nations emerge; The failing states, seen as breeding grounds for global terrorism, are detailed in a report by the World Bank.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 18, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 432 words
Byline: Karen DeYoung, Washington Post
Body


The number of weak and poorly governed nations that can provide a breeding ground for global terrorism has grown sharply over the last three years, despite increased Western efforts to improve conditions in such states, according to a new World Bank report.
"Fragile" countries or regions, whose deepening poverty puts them at risk of terrorism, armed conflict and epidemic disease, have jumped to 26 from 17 since the report was last issued in 2003. Five states graduated from list, but 14 made new appearances, including Nigeria and seven other African countries, Kosovo, Cambodia, East Timor, and the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
"Past international engagement with these countries has failed to yield significant improvements," said the assessment released last week by the World Bank's Independent Evaluation Group, which reports on the bank's programs to the board of directors.
Hurdles facing the countries at risk, often referred to as "failed" or "failing" states, include "weak security, fractured societal relations, corruption, breakdown in the rule of law, lack of mechanisms for generating legitimate power and authority" and limited investment resources to meet basic needs, the report said.
To avoid "adverse spillover effects - such as conflict, terrorism and epidemic diseases - the international community and the Bank need to find more effective ways" of assisting them, it said.
The Bush administration has described failing states as a major threat to U.S. security.
"The danger they pose is now unparalleled," Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice wrote in a column that appeared late last year in the Washington Post. "Absent responsible state authority, threats that would and should be contained within a country's borders can now melt into the world and wreak untold havoc.
"Weak and failing states serve as global pathways that facilitate the spread of pandemics, the movement of criminals and terrorists, and the proliferation of the world's most dangerous weapons."
The administration's updated counterterrorism strategy, published earlier this month, sets economic development in "failing states or states emerging from conflict" as a key objective.
Official U.S. foreign assistance to the least developed countries topped $27 billion in 2005, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, more than twice the level when Bush took office.
That amount places the United States first among international donor nations in terms of absolute dollars, although Washington remains at the bottom when aid is tallied as a percentage of gross national product.

Load-Date: September 18, 2006


End of Document