DESPITE DEFENSES, TERRORISTS STILL TARGET THE U.S.;
'TERRORISM IS EASY TO CARRY OUT IF YOU WORK AT IT,' OFFICIAL SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 8, 1998, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 16
Length: 778 words
Byline: Laura Myers; The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* Security was tightened at embassies after 1983 bombings in Beirut, but outside the walls, protection is left to local authorities.
Concrete barriers, metal detectors and armed guards protect U.S. embassies worldwide. But, as Friday's bombings in Kenya and Tanzania demonstrate, such efforts are not always enough to stop extremists determined to kill Americans overseas.
"Terrorism is easy to carry out if you work at it," said Lt. Gen. Lawrence Snowden, a retired Marine who participated in a U.S. security review after a series of 1983 bombings in Beirut killed nearly 300 Americans.
After the review, U.S. embassies and military installations around the world were ordered to set up barriers and tighten security systems to prevent easy access by unauthorized people - Americans and foreigners.
Trucks and unknown cars are prevented from driving into compounds and visitors often must wear special badges to roam buildings after passing through metal detectors. But outside well-protected walls, security is left to local authorities, and terrorists can get close enough to strike.
That's what happened just outside U.S. embassies in the capitals of Tanzania and Kenya, where bombs exploded within a few minutes of one another in what U.S. officials called a coordinated terrorist attack.
"There's very little you can do to defend against this sort of thing," said Smith Hempstone, ambassador to Kenya from 1989 to 1993, when the embassy went on high alert during the Persian Gulf War. "As the only superpower, we're an obvious target for anything that they believe the West is responsible for," he said, referring to political extremists.
After Friday's bombings, the Clinton administration immediately tightened security at its embassies and military installations around the world. And local governments helped in the effort.
In Cairo, Egyptian police strengthened security outside the U.S. Em bassy and U.S. Agency for International Development offices.
The Ugandan government ordered traffic police to move vehicles from the building housing the U.S. Embassy in Kampala, and more security officers ringed the building near Parliament housing the mission.
"Additional security measures have been taken," said U.S. Embassy spokesman Gene Bigler in Rome. "That's all I can say."
The London embassy, in fashionable Grosvenor Square, is already ringed by 87 steel-reinforced concrete posts, installed in February and designed to prevent terrorists from targeting the building with car bombs.
A series of deadly bombings during Lebanon's civil war in the 1980s revealed America's vulnerability to terrorist attacks overseas.
The American Embassy in Beirut was hit by a Shiite Muslim suicide bomber on April 18, 1983, killing 62 people, including 17 Americans. Six months later, trucks packed with explosives rammed into a U.S. Marine barracks at Beirut airport, killing 241 U.S. service members. A U.S. Emba ssy annex in Beirut was attacked by a car bomb on Sept. 20, 1984, killing 16 people.
 
'They learn everything. . .'
Snowden said the bombers had the Beirut complexes under surveillance for weeks, if not months, before the explosions, which is typical for terrorists who often train for years on how to carry out such attacks.
"We can take measures to limit access by some people, but a real clever terrorist will study a long time before they do something," Snowden said. "They learn traffic patterns in and out. They learn everything they need to know to carry it out. As long as we have those kind of people, it's very difficult to totally guard against and to prevent the loss of life."
The embassies in Kenya's capital, Nairobi, and Dar es Salaam, the capital of Tanzania, had tight security but didn't maintain the vehicle setbacks that are a staple of high-security U.S. missions in the Middle East and other hot spots.
P.J. Crowley, a White House spokesman, said the embassies weren't on high alert because there had been no warnings of a possible terrorist act, although U.S. officials frequently conduct reviews to determine security needs.
 
"Terrorism is a fact of life in the world today," Crowley said.
Dennis Williams, director of overseas diplomatic security for the State Department until retiring in 1995, said older U.S. embassies are most vulnerable since they're often located on busy city streets and haven't been reinforced under new standards to withstand bomb blasts.
British security expert Michael Yardley said terrorists find weaknesses.  "If you harden one target . . . terrorism merely deserts to a softer target. That seems to be exactly what's happened here," he said. "It's almost impossible to protect yourself globally from this sort of attack."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, MAP (1) Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A U.S. Marine guard from the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, instructs a cameraman to move back from the site of Friday's explosion that damaged the embassy. Authorities say the blast was caused by a car bomb.
 (2) Map from AP _ U.S. embassies bombed
 Dozens of people were killed when two powerful bombs exploded within minutes of each other outside the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania

Load-Date: August 8, 1998


End of Document