DESPITE REASSURANCES, SYRIA KEEPS TERROR TAG IT WON'T BE REMOVED FROM THE OFFICIAL LIST BEFORE NEXT WEEK'S CLINTON-ASSAD MEETING, THE STATE DEPT. SAID.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 5, 1994 Wednesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. B05
Length: 281 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite reassuring words from Syrian authorities, the administration said yesterday that it does not plan to remove Syria from the official terrorism list before next week's meeting between President Clinton and President Hafez al-Assad.
"Syria will remain on the list of state sponsors of terrorism so long as it continues to provide support and safe haven for terrorist groups," State Department spokesman Mike McCurry said.
The administration is giving high priority to promoting an agreement between Syria and Israel, and Clinton is expected to press for that when he meets with Assad next week in Geneva as part of a week-long foreign trip.
Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Shara assured Secretary of State Warren Christopher last month that Syria would withhold support for any group seeking to disrupt the self-rule agreement Israel reached with the Palestine Liberation Organization in September.
Despite the gesture, Syria continues to be one of seven countries on the State Department terrorism list. Countries so designated are subject to economic sanctions.
U.S. officials believe Syria maintains close ties with terrorist groups in Lebanon and elsewhere. Syria has denied the allegation, saying its goal is to combat terrorism.
McCurry said the terrorism issue has been discussed with Syrian authorities virtually every time the two countries have had high-level diplomatic contact.
"The President will obviously be discussing our concerns on that issue when he meets with President Assad," McCurry said.
Syria's image in the United States has improved somewhat with its decision last spring to make it easier for Syria's Jewish population to emigrate. Since then thousands have left.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document