DESPITE REAGAN ASSERTION, AIDES SAY IRAN STILL PROMOTES TERRORISM
The New York Times
November 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 971 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21
Body


Despite President Reagan's assertion that there was no recent evidence of Iranian-backed terrorism against Americans, officials in his Administration say they believe that Iran continues to use terrorism as an important component of its foreign policy.
They say they fear that disclosures of secret American-Iranian arms deals may encourage other governments and independent arms traders to ship large quantities of weapons to Iran, which could tip the balance in its war against Iraq and increase its influence in the region.
Most important, these officials say, are Iran's military training and financial support of terrorist groups in Lebanon and its military and ideological training of Islamic radicals in Iran. They also cite recent assassinations of Iranian opponents abroad and attempts by Iranian pilgrims to smuggle arms on the annual pilgrimage to Mecca as evidence of a continuing Iranian policy of support for terrorism in the name of national liberation.
In his speech on Nov. 13, Mr. Reagan said that since the American initiative to ship arms to Iran, ''some progress'' had been made toward the elimination of state-supported terrorism by Iran. He said that since United States Government contact began with Iran, ''there's been no evidence of Iranian Government complicity in acts of terrorism against the United States.''
 
No Examples Are Found
Other Administration officials say they cannot point to examples of Iran's moving away from terrorism that can be linked to Mr. Reagan's approval of the Iran operation last January or to earlier exploratory contacts.
''Iranians use terrorism as an instrument of their policy when it serves their political goals,'' an Administration official said. ''What makes it so difficult to document is that Iran has been more careful than either Syria or Libya.''
These officials acknowledge that in mid-1984, after severe losses in the war with the Iraqis, Iran made a tactical decision to limit the use of terrorism against other Persian Gulf nations, at least partly to improve its image abroad.
In that period, Iraq began to use French-made Super Etendard fighters with Exocet missiles against Iran, and Iranian leaders asked other gulf nations to persuade Iraq to slow down.
In June 1984, Saudi Arabia shot down an Iranian F-4 fighter plane 60 miles from the Saudi border, and that jolted Iran into the realization that it could not drive a wedge between Iraq and the other gulf nations by threats of force. Shortly afterward most Iranian-inspired terrorist bombings in the region stopped, and Iranian leaders began to speak of Iran as a peace-loving nation misunderstood by its gulf neighbors.
''By the time we got involved with Iran, its leaders had already decided to moderate some of its policies on using terrorism to export its revolution to the gulf,'' an Administration official said.
 
Role in Lebanon Continues
The chief exception to this policy, officials say, is Lebanon. Iranians continue to train Shiite Lebanese guerrillas known as the Party of God in the central Lebanese town of Baalbek to fight against the Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army.
Since last year, Iranian-backed guerrillas, opposed to the policy of the Shiite Amal militia of limited attacks against Israel, have moved into southern Lebanon in an attempt to set up their own bases. Israeli sources say they believe that some Iranian troops might be involved in the fighting in the south, where maps, weapons and banners in Persian have been found.
Most knowledgeable Administration sources appear to agree that Iran's leaders have considerable, although not total, influence over the Party of God, whose members are believed to be holding at least some of the remaining American hostages in Lebanon.
It is still unclear whether the Revolutionary Justice Organization, the previously unknown group that claimed responsibility for capturing three American hostages recently, is another name for the Party of God, a separate revolutionary group or an apolitical band of mercenaries, some officials say. Secretary of State George P. Shultz said in a televison interview last Sunday that Iranian-backed groups were behind the hostage-takings.
Officials acknowledge that Hashemi Rafsanjani, the Speaker of the Iranian Parliament, was instrumental in securing the release of hostages taken by Lebanese fundamentalists in the hijacking of a Trans World Airlines plane in June 1985. And they agree that Iranian leaders certainly helped secure the release of American hostages recently in return for weapons.
 
Powerful Bureau Is Punished
Administration sources say they do not believe that the arrest last month in Iran of Mehdi Hashemi, who headed the powerful Bureau for Liberation Movements Abroad and is a relative of Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri, is an attempt by Iranian leaders to curb operations in Lebanon. Rather, they say the bureau, one of the few independent armed organizations left in Iran, was punished for overstepping its mission of exporting the Iranian revolution after it was blamed for briefly kidnapping Syria's charge d'affaires in Teheran.
Revolutionary guards still train a variety of foreign liberation movements, primarily Arab Shiites, in Islamic ideology, organization and paramilitary use of weapons and explosives, according to American and European intelligence sources. They say one training camp, in a former army installation several miles outside Isfahan, comes under the supervision of followers of Ayatollah Montazeri, the designated successor to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian leader.
Some Administration officials say they believe there was Iranian complicity in some of the bombings this year in Paris. As evidence, they point to the fact that one of the demands after the February bombing of a shopping arcade was for the release of an Iranian from a French prison.


End of Document