DESPITE TERRORISM WARNINGS, CHRISTIANS REJOICE IN BETHLEHEM WITH A FESTIVE AIR
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 25, 1999, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A1
Length: 805 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, WEST BANK
Body


* In Vatican City, the pope begins the Catholic Church's millennium celebrations by opening the Holy Door of St. Peter's Basilica in a solemn Christmas Eve ceremony.
In celebrations in Bethlehem and Vatican City, Christians from all over the world celebrated the last Christmas Eve of the millennium Friday.
In the little town where Jesus was born, people streamed up the road from Jerusalem to Manger Square.
"I feel as if I followed the star of Bethlehem to get here," said Nick Roosevelt, a pilgrim from Storrs, Conn. "When I was growing up, each Christmas my brothers and I dressed up as the three kings. One of those brothers passed away recently and this trip is in his memory."
Despite warnings of terrorism or possible clashes between Muslim and Christian Palestinians, the day in Bethlehem proceeded with a calm and festive air.
White lights twinkled on trees in Manger Square and Christmas gospel music rang out in the misty night air as Palestinian police in blue camouflage uniforms kept a watchful eye on the crowd. Israeli soldiers staffed a network of checkpoints on roads approaching the West Bank city, which is under Palestinian control.
In Vatican City, Pope John Paul opened the Holy Door of St. Peter's Basilica in a solemn Christmas Eve ceremony to begin the Roman Catholic Church's millennium celebrations.
The 79-year-old pontiff opened the door, which remains closed except for during holy years, and then prayed before it to begin what he has proclaimed to be the church's "Great Jubilee of the year 2000."
About 8,000 people inside the basilica witnessed the door-opening ceremony, as did some 50,000 others who followed the service on huge television screens outside in St. Peter's Square.
After the door was opened, faithful from Asia and the Pacific adorned its jambs with flowers and perfumes as music was played on a traditional instrument called a koto.
In his homily at the traditional midnight Mass that followed the ceremony, John Paul called the birth of Jesus Christ "the truth which on this night the church wants to pass on to the third millennium."
"And may all of you who will come after us accept this truth, which has totally changed history," John Paul said. He said Christ is the "true door, symbolized by the door which on this night we have solemnly opened."
Today, the pope is scheduled to appear at the basilica's central balcony at noon to give a speech and his blessing to the world.
 
Traditional midnight Mass
In Bethlehem, the traditional highlight of Christmas Eve festivities is the midnight Mass presided over by Latin Patriarch Michel Sabbah, the highest-ranking Roman Catholic cleric in the Holy Land. The Mass is held in the Church of the Nativity in Manger Square, built over the grotto where Christian tradition says Jesus' birth took place.
Sabbah made his grand entrance into the city in a religious procession preceded by Palestinian marching bands that provided enthusiastic renditions of marching songs and Christmas carols.
Dressed in bright pink ceremonial robes and headpiece, the patriarch sprinkled holy water as he entered the church, while rows of monks, jostled by the crowd, waved incense and sang chants to greet him.
 
Nail bomb is defused
Earlier, police in the northern Israeli town of Netanya defused a powerful nail bomb spotted by an observant kiosk owner. It was not clear if the incident was an attempted terrorist attack, but authorities said a tragedy had been averted.
In Bethlehem, soldiers with guns dotted the rooftops around Manger Square. Warnings by the U.S. government held the crowd to an estimated 15,000 people, far fewer than the 60,000 city officials predicted for Friday and today.
Inside the church, believers from around the globe knelt and kissed the stones close to where the manger likely lay. Romanian pilgrims scribbled the names of loved ones on scraps of paper for a Greek Orthodox priest to take with him into the grotto and mention in his prayers.
As a nearly full moon rose over the cobblestone square, some of the top Christian choirs in the world -- including Germany's Kolner Kantorei and American gospel singer Liz McComb -- raised their voices from an outdoor stage.
An ecumenical spirit permeated the day as church bells rang to announce separate Lutheran and Anglican services and finally the famous Roman Catholic midnight Mass.
Earlier, the traditional Muslim call to prayer wailed plaintively from a minaret with the chant "Allah Akbar," God is Great. Locals, including Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, participated in Ramadan holiday prayers in the Omar bin al-Katab mosque across from the Church of the Nativity.
Arafat also held a dinner in the dining room of the Franciscans, a Ro man Catholic order of clergy. Among others, the presidents of Malta and Uganda and the prime ministers of Spain, Italy and Morocco were in attendance.

Graphic

 
PHOTO Color Photo by the Associated Press - A Palestinian police officer stands guard as priests leave the Church of the nativity to escort Latin Patriarch Michel Sabbah in a procession Friday in Bethlehem. Security was tight as Muslims observed Ramadan, Christians celebrated Christmas and Jews observed the Sabbath.

Load-Date: December 25, 1999


End of Document