Despite war on terrorism, al-Qaeda is not slowing down
USA TODAY
November 21, 2003, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 599 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin and John Diamond
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Two more grisly bombings of Western targets in Turkey on Thursday show that despite the toppling of regimes in Afghanistan and Iraq, al-Qaeda and its allies have been able to accelerate the pace and reach of their attacks.
The assaults on a British bank and the British Consulate in Istanbul followed bombings of two synagogues there last Saturday and recent bombings in Saudi Arabia and Morocco. With U.S. targets much harder to get at since the 9/11 attacks two years ago, terror experts say al-Qaeda and loosely linked local groups are increasingly attacking softer targets in moderate Muslim states aligned with the West. It's unclear whether that will work to destabilize those regimes and make them less friendly to the West -- there are signs the bombings in Saudi Arabia are instead galvanizing opposition to al-Qaeda. What does seem clear is that al-Qaeda is growing more aggressive.
Since the invasion of Iraq in March, there have been six major attacks linked to al-Qaeda. There have also been numerous bombings within Iraq, directed at Jordanian, Turkish and other international targets.
"This is an unprecedented level of activity," says Ben Venzke, an al-Qaeda expert who heads IntelCenter, a terrorism analysis company in Alexandria, Va. "The volume of the attacks and their frequency is deeply disturbing." Venzke's company warned on Thursday, "There is a high possibility of another major al-Qaeda operation occurring in the coming weeks."
Thursday's bombings came as President Bush was visiting British Prime Minister Tony Blair in London. From the perspective of al-Qaeda, "it was beautiful publicity for the cause," says Audrey Cronin, an expert on international terrorism for the Congressional Research Service. "It makes al-Qaeda look very powerful, forcing the two most powerful leaders in the world to respond at a press conference. That's what terrorism is all about: controlling perceptions."
The attacks challenge the administration view that Iraq was the most appropriate "phase two" after Afghanistan in the war on terrorism, and that Iraq is now the central front in that war. "The administration made a fundamental mistake thinking the problem was a state," rather than an ideology, says Daniel Benjamin, director of counterterrorism for the President Clinton's National Security Council and co-author of the book The Age of Sacred Terror.
"This is a grand struggle," said a top U.S. official traveling with Bush in London. "This is a war that these people have launched against civilization, against freedom, against tolerance.  . . .  They're simply not going to succeed."
In a lengthy Internet statement that terrorism experts attribute to al-Qaeda, the group writes of the importance of increasing the frequency and geographical reach of attacks to "exhaust" the United States. "The rate of attacks before 9/11 was one operation every two years, but after the blessed Manhattan attack, the rate increased to more than two operations per year and the battlefield expanded," the group says. "So the enemy that needed only to protect its own land now needs to protect its vast interests in every land."
"The war against Iraq does not appear to have significantly weakened al-Qaeda in the Middle East," says Kenneth Katzman, an expert on the region at the Congressional Research Service. Katzman says the group has become even more diffuse since the ouster of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan that gave it shelter. "There really is no central front" in the war on terror, Katzman says. "There's a country-by-country local dynamic to each subgroup of al-Qaeda."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Mustafa Ozer, AFP/Getty Images; Investigating: Turkish police on Monday examine the site of a Nov. 15 synagogue blast in Istanbul.

Load-Date: November 21, 2003


End of Document