DESPITE SUMMIT RESOLUTIONS, ISLAMIC DIVISIONS REMAIN
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 18, 1994, Sunday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P15A
Length: 732 words
Byline: Elaine Ganley
Body


CASABLANCA, Morocco (AP) _ Although the world's
Muslim leaders were able to patch over differences and issue a public
statement against Islamic extremism, the divisions within the Islamic
world make containing fanaticism merely a tempting mirage.
The statement was among the resolutions made at last week's
summit of the 52-nation Organization of the Islamic Conference which
brought together leaders from the Middle East, Europe and Asia,
sporting business suits, turbans or sabers.
"The summit once again saved face," said Antoine Sfeir,
publisher of the Paris-based "Les Cahiers d'Orient," a review on
Arab and Islamic affairs.  "In fact, the breakages and divisions
remain the same."
Many of the conference's resolutions were on causes that would
not offend any member, such as the plight of Bosnian Muslims and
Muslims in Kashmir.
The leaders, however, broke new ground on one of the trickiest
issues _ confronting the problem of Islamic extremism which has been
rolling like a wave across the Islamic map.
It was a display of deft diplomacy that defied the realities of
the Muslim world.
Nations such as the westward-looking Morocco, staunchly
fundamentalist Saudi Arabia and Sudan and Iran _ both accused of
fomenting extremism in neighboring states _ joined in a final
declaration calling for an "illuminated Islam exempt of extremism or
fanaticism" and condemning state-sponsored terrorism.
"Today, after playing the sorcerer's apprentice, many countries
see dangers within their own borders |e movements that contest the
regime," said Sfeir.
From North Africa to Malaysia and the Philippines, Muslim
militants are making inroads or fighting armed battles to topple
their governments.
In Algeria, more than 11,000 people have been killed in an
Islamic insurgency trying to topple the military-backed government
.  Militants are active in Egypt, Jordan and Oman.  Even in tightly
controlled Saudi Arabia, seat of Islam's holiest site, Mecca,
extremists are stirring.
Summit host King Hassan II of Morocco introduced the sensitive
subject in a measured address that put the focus on the image of
Islam which most Muslim nations consider maligned by the West.
But he turned the thesis of Western plots on its head, blaming
extremism for "prompting fierce campaigns against Islam."
Both Sudan's leader, Gen. Omar al-Bachir, and Iranian Foreign
Minister Ali Akbar Velayati, who headed his delegation, denied any
connections with militant groups or state-sponsored terrorism.
"The Islamic government in Iran is one of the victims of
terrorism," Valayati said in an interview with The Associated Press
and APTV.  He was referring to bombings that have killed citizens and
officials in the 15 years since the Islamic revolution.  The bombings
have been blamed on the Baghdad-based opposition group, the
Mujahedeen Khalq.
"If you think that Iran is isolated, I tell you very frankly
this is the dream of some Western countries."
Irony was the order of the day and tact was the tenet for the
uncommon banding together, which was not without compromise.
A resolution _ co-sponsored by Iran _ condemned "international
terrorism" but failed to mention Islamic extremism.  And the Iranian
capital, Tehran, was chosen as the next summit site in three years'
time.
The resolution "is against terrorism imposed on Muslim
countries from the outside, not inside," Velayati insisted.
"That's a very delicate difference."
The goal of Islamic leaders is to create a bloc that gives the
Muslim world's more than 1 billion people a voice in the changing
world order.  But there is common agreement that that dream is a long
way off.
"The Islamic world is weak and divided," Pakistan's prime
minister, Benazir Bhutto, said in a blunt admission at an OIC
ministerial meeting this fall.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak blamed Muslims "blinded by
ignorance and greed" for "wasting a chance in drawing the world map
."
But the full explanation is more complex.
Many Islamic countries are currently clients of the West or
allied with Western powers in a delicate balance of security.
And then there are the often rancorous differences.
Sfeir noted the caricature often used to portray Islamic summits
_ a portrait of Muslim leaders, their arms clasped behind each other
in apparent friendship, accompanied by a portrait taken from behind,
and showing daggers in each others' backs.
Ganley has been based in Paris since 1984, covering France and
North Africa and the fundamentalist movements there.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document