Destruction of property can only be deemed terrorism
University Wire
April 22, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 The Dartmouth Free Press via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 644 words
Byline: By Peter Van Buren, The Dartmouth Free Press; SOURCE: Dartmouth College
Dateline: HANOVER, NH 
Body


When I first met Mr. William Ayers in the lobby of the Hanover Inn, my first thought was that he looked very much like the college professor who lived across the street when I was growing up. What never crossed my mind was the thought that I was shaking hands with a terrorist. I had learned a little bit about the violent Weathermen and his involvement in the group, but nothing had given me reason to think of Ayers or the other Weathermen as terrorists. However, when I spoke with Ayers while he was at Dartmouth for the showing of a film made on the Weather Underground, he left no doubt in my mind that he and his compatriot Weathermen engaged in terrorist actions.
Ayers was a member of the Weathermen, an organization that systematically bombed a variety of American targets and engaged in other behavior that can only be termed destructive. An offshoot of Students for a Democratic Society, the Weathermen were opposed to the Vietnam War and what they considered to be institutions of "American injustice," such as the military. Unlike the nonviolent Students for a Democratic Society, however, the Weathermen saw violence as the best way to end American involvement in Vietnam and American injustice as a whole. The Weathermen chose to participate in events like the "Days of Rage," in which they smashed people's cars and storefronts, and also in numerous bombings throughout the country.
While I can appreciate the desire of the Weathermen to end the Vietnam War and American injustice as a whole, I cannot see the actions of the Weathermen as anything but terrorism. In my mind, the systematic destruction of property can only be deemed a terrorist action. Perhaps I'm wrong, but it seems contradictory to use terrorism to end a war on the grounds of concern for the people.
During our conversation, Ayers stated several times that the Weathermen never hurt anyone and therefore did not understand people's condemnation of the Weathermen. Perhaps his definition of "hurt" and mine differ. First, three Weathermen were killed in Manhattan when a bomb accidentally went off, meaning that the Weathermen definitely hurt themselves. Secondly, property damage does hurt someone. In the case of smashed cars and storefronts, the person who worked to pay for that car or storefront will need to either pay for repairs or replacement or, if they have insurance against this sort of wanton destruction, will suffer higher insurance premiums for the rest of the time they hold that policy. In the case of governmental property damage, the entire nation is hurt through tax hikes and benefits that have to be cut in order to pay for repairs and heightened security to prevent a recurrence.
Ayers himself seemed to be very much a walking contradiction. He explained that he had been born to some wealth and educated in the finest preparatory schools, but then proceeded to join a group which attacked and derided the very system that had given him so much. His comments seemed to focus on everything but the Weathermen, and that included the comments made in response to pointed questions. For example, the present world situation and various injustices came up frequently in answer to questions that had nothing at all to do with these issues. Had a politician made the same remarks, I would take it in stride as part of his pandering to various demographics. Coming from a representative member of a controversial group, Ayers seemed to be intentionally skirting the issue at hand. While I suppose this is his prerogative, such statements only make me wonder what he feels the need to hide. He insisted that it was ludicrous to consider the Weathermen terrorists, but never supplied any sufficient reason for this assertion. In the end, Ayers leaves me with no conclusion but to deem him and his fellow Weathermen terrorists.
(C) 2003 The Dartmouth Free Press via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 22, 2004


End of Document