Detaining terrorists, Brexit negotiations and the repeal of the Human Rights Act
The Foundation For Research On Equal Opportunity
February 25, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 
All Rights Reserved
Length: 1099 words
Byline: Jim McConalogue
Body


The current challenges that face Boris Johnson both in relation toending the automatic early release of terror offenders from prison and theimpending Brexit negotiations could be solved very easily by him taking onedecisive position – to govern in the national interest while repealing thatcrumbling lawyer’s charter, the Human Rights Act 1998. 
Immediately after the Streatham terror attack this month, it alarmed most to discover that the attacker had only just left prison for terror-related offences when he carried out the attack leaving three ordinary people injured. The government’s strategy has been to enact emergency legislation this month with the intention of ending the automatic early release from prison of both current and future terror offenders. The Terrorist Offenders (Restriction of Early Release) Bill is now through the House of Lords and looks likely to become law. So, those convicted of terrorism offences will no longer be released automatically (without any oversight by the Parole Board) after they have served half of their sentence. The only problem is this: by itself, it is probable it could be heading for the courts in its current form.
Good legislative intentions will not prevent the situation in which thegovernment, by extending the time terrorists serve in prison, will inevitablyface the courts in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights,incorporated into UK law by the Human Rights Act. In this instance, it mightseem probable the Convention (under Article 7) would mean a ruling against thegovernment on making any retrospective changes for existing prisoners.
Ministers themselves are defensive. They have stated the Bill does not engage Article 7 of the European Convention because their law relates to the way in which the sentence is administered, not a change in the nature of the penalty itself. But Strasbourg jurisprudence has always moved the goalposts of UK criminal justice policy decision-making. There is a justifiable fear therefore that it will not go the government’s way. Certainly, the Bill does not claim to create a new criminal offence. Instead, it seeks to prevent terrorists convicted by UK courts on the basis of offences that existed prior to the Bill from having automatic early release. The government maintains that the Bill does not retrospectively alter a serving offender’s sentence as imposed by the court or alter the maximum penalties for offences.
Nevertheless, in the House of Commons debate on the legislation, one MP (SirBill Cash) highlighted Strasbourg case law that could well still come into playthere – it is well worth watching out for as it seems probable to have somebearing. As Cash suggested, “I fear that it might be used effectively againstthe Bill.” He assured that although he did not think that Article 7 applied tothe Bill, he talked of ensuring that the courts do not find a way around theBill or “a misguided interpretation” that would frustrate the intention of theBill.
Were this new hypothetical situation to arise, the Prime Minister could (in theory) suspend, or “derogate” from the European Convention but a similar challenge occurred under the infamous Belmarsh prison ruling, which ended incredibly badly for the then Labour government. Recall, following the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the US in 2001, the Labour Government enacted anti-terror laws. They provided for indefinite detention of foreign nationals suspected of being involved in terrorism and who could not simply be repatriated to their countries of origin.
But, even though the then Labour government had itself necessarily optedout of part of the European Convention which protected the right to a fairtrial in order to bring in anti-terrorism legislation, the House of Lords in2004 found the Government to be in breach of the Convention. In the case ofnine detainees, it considered the law to be both disproportionate anddiscriminatory. The judges interfered in a highly charged national securitycontext by making a quashing order of the derogation order – and it seemsprobable they would do so again. There have been innumerable cases. In theevent of encountering those Convention obstacles, the current government couldfinally choose to repeal the Human Rights Act.
It is twenty years overdue. The former Prime Minister (Theresa May), asHome Secretary, advocated repeal of the Act. The Prime Minster before her(David Cameron) pledged to scrap it. Now, Boris Johnson looking across thelegal minefield, must act.
The Human Rights Act has left us with absurd obligations put in placeand supported by hasty reforms of a naive, post-1997 Labour administrationgeneration, gripped by neo-liberal assumptions of automatic rights forquestionable ‘human rights’ cases.
To make matters worse, buried deep inside the European Commission’splans (released this month) for the Brexit negotiations on a future UK-EUrelationship is the challenge that the agreement “…should provide for theautomatic termination of the law enforcement cooperation and judicialcooperation in criminal matters if the United Kingdom were to denounce theEuropean Convention on Human Rights”. There is to be “automatic suspension” ifwe are to repeal our domestic law giving effect to the Convention. The PrimeMinister has rightly rebutted many existing EU demands for alignment, but hemust now commit to a fundamental dealignment on Strasbourg jurisprudence.
During the Brexit process, the glaring contradiction between thegovernment withdrawing from an EU legal architecture while seeking to enhance acomplementing Council of Europe rights-based system (through the Human RightsAct) represents a flawed and ambiguous guarantee of rights for the whole ofsociety. 
There are many ‘rights activists’ who advocate saving the Human RightsAct at every turn but entirely neglect the rights of all members of the publicin society to national security and public safety. The Act also remainsentirely at odds with any legitimate governing strategy after Brexit: to have astronger democratic process in which applicable rights and laws of the land arederived from a strongly contested and democratic public sphere.
During the completion of the Brexit process, the UK must clearly leavethe jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. Thelegitimate public expectation for the detention of terrorists, the legalobstacles in the Brexit negotiations, along with the Conservative government’scommitment to “update” the Human Rights Act in its own manifesto at the lastelection, surely provides a stark illustration of why the Act must finally beabolished.

Load-Date: February 26, 2020


End of Document