Detainees' lawyers try to chip away at secrecy; Terrorism probe: 326 people remain in custody as part of the investigation
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 8, 2002 Friday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c9
Length: 399 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body


Lawyers for people arrested for questioning in the terrorism investigation are using a variety of legal tactics to try to chip away at the unprecedented secrecy surrounding the detentions.
Although hundreds of detainees have been released since the attacks, the Justice Department says 326 people remain in custody as part of the sweeping terrorism investigation launched after Sept. 11, most of them in New Jersey jails.
In the latest lawsuit filed on their behalf, civil-rights groups and three New Jersey publications are seeking a ban on secret court hearings for detainees. The suit against the federal government was filed Wednesday.
"America and Americans have a long history of distrust and disdain for secret proceedings," said Ed Barocas, legal director of the Newark chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What transpires in court is public property."
The suit was filed by the ACLU chapter and the New York-based Center For Constitutional Rights on behalf of the New Jersey Law Journal and North Jersey Media Group, publisher of The Record of Hackensack and the Herald News of West Paterson. Reporters at the papers who tried to cover hearings involving detainees were barred from courtrooms, along with the rest of the public.
The suit mirrors another that the ACLU, two Detroit newspapers and Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., filed in January, seeking to open immigration court hearings for the co-founder of an Islamic charity raided in December by federal agents seeking terrorism links.
The federal government says it needs to clamp down on the release of information because it might help terrorist organizations know which of their members are in custody.
Justice Department spokesman Dan Nelson did not return calls seeking comment Wednesday.
The suit filed Wednesday was the second pursued by the Newark ACLU branch seeking information about detainees. In January, it sued two New Jersey counties in seeking the names of Sept. 11 detainees, which it said are public information under state law.
"Here, you're first guilty, then after a few months you become a suspect, then finally, you're innocent," said Regis Fernandez, a New Jersey immigration lawyer representing several detainees.
Fernandez and several other New Jersey immigration lawyers met last fall to plan a response to secrecy directives that were rendering attorneys and advocates for detainees virtually powerless.

Graphic

 
Protesters hold signs denouncing the detention of immigrants during a recent rally outside the Passaic County Jail in Paterson, N.J. The Justice Department says that 326 people remain in custody as part of the sweeping terrorism probe launched after Sept. 11

Load-Date: March 8, 2002


End of Document