Detainee rulings are called key;
A poll found the public sees high court cases on terror as important as decisions on abortion.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
August 4, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 291 words
Byline: By Will Lester; Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Americans consider Supreme Court decisions about the rights of detained terrorism suspects as important as its rulings on abortion, a poll found, even though abortion has been the most publicized issue in early debate about the high court vacancy.
Sixty-three percent of those polled called the court's abortion rulings "very important," while 62 percent gave the same rating to its rulings on the rights of detained terror suspects, according to the poll conducted by the Pew Research Center for the People & the Press.
The poll was taken before President Bush chose John G. Roberts Jr. as his nominee to replace retiring Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.
The results are based on separate surveys conducted July 13-17 among 1,502 adults and July 7-17 among 2,000 adults. The error margin is plus or minus 2.5 percentage points, larger for subgroups.
"This important question of the trade-off of civil liberties and protection is one the public takes very seriously," said Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center. "The public has been reminded recently of the ongoing threat of terrorism and what we should or should not have to sacrifice for our safety."
Kohut said public concerns about detainees' rights appeared to be high, even though "this has not been one of the issues at the forefront of debate about the Supreme Court."
Last year, the Supreme Court declared the Bush administration out of line for jailing foreign terrorism suspects at the Navy base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, without access to lawyers and courts. The justices also said American terror suspects could not be held in legal limbo.
A state of war "is not a blank check for the president when it comes to the rights of the nation's citizens," O'Connor wrote in one of the cases.

Load-Date: August 4, 2005


End of Document