DETAINED AFGHAN BOY, 15, HAD "GOOD TIME" IN CUBA/ HE SPENT A YEAR WITH TERRORISM SUSPECTS AT GUANTANAMO BAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 2004 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 407 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NAW ZAD, AFGHANISTAN
Body


A 15-year-old boy released after spending a year at the U.S. prison for terrorism suspects in Cuba says he was detained after Afghan militiamen falsely accused him of being a Taliban sympathizer.
Mohammed Ismail Agha was reunited last week with his family in a southern Afghan village. He had spent a year as one of the youngest inmates in Guantanamo Bay, the high-security prison holding about 650 suspected al-Qaida and Taliban fighters detained since the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan. The war began in response to the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.
Agha was one of three Afghan boys freed. Military officials said the boys had provided viable intelligence but had no further value and were no longer a threat to the United States.
In his first interview since his release, Agha said the U.S. military "stole" 14 months of his life - but still treated him well.
Agha was seized about a year after the Taliban were ousted by a U.S.-led coalition.
Agha said American forces interrogated him at Bagram Air Base, north of the capital, Kabul, about whether he was a Taliban supporter. Yet once he reached Cuba, there were few questions, only schooling, prayer and good food.
"At first I was unhappy with the U.S. forces. They stole 14 months of my life," said Agha, sitting in a relative's general store at the bazaar in Naw Zad, a market town some 300 miles southwest of Kabul.
"But they gave me a good time in Cuba. They were very nice to me, giving me English lessons," said Agha.
He said his family feared he was dead or had traveled to neighboring Pakistan or Iran to find work. It was not until 10 months into his detention that family members received a letter from him through the International Red Cross, saying he was alive.
Agha denied having anything to do with the ousted Islamic militia now mounting a vicious insurgency.
"I'm not Taliban, it's not true. I'm innocent," he said.
The group Human Rights Watch said those juvenile detentions violate an international treaty obligating the United States to rehabilitate child soldiers.
Agha says his odyssey began when he and a friend refused to join a group of Afghan militiamen, who then turned them over to U.S. soldiers saying they were Taliban. He was separated from his friend and never saw him again, Agha said.
He was housed in Cuba with two other teenagers, who also were released Jan. 29 and brought home last week. Agha never saw the other prisoners detained at Guantanamo, he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo headshot - Mohammed Ismail Agha, 15, says he was treated well and was taught English.

Load-Date: February 8, 2004


End of Document