Detention bill's future uncertain; Marshall's bill has led to squabble for Republicans
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 16, 2012 Friday
State Edition


Copyright 2012 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. B-01
Length: 868 words
Byline: WESLEY P. HESTER
Body


As Virginia lawmakers scrambled late in the General Assembly session to wrap up loose ends, an unusual piece of legislation with potentially vast ramifications passed with little fanfare.
If signed into law, House Bill 1160, sponsored by Del. Robert G. Marshall, R-Prince William, would prohibit state employees -- including members of the Virginia National Guard and state police -- from aiding in the military detention of U.S. citizens without trial.
The bill is based on a provision in the National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 that opens the door to the indefinite government detention of citizens.
"This is not what our country was established on," Marshall said, claiming the loophole could be used at any time to trample on constitutional liberties.
But while his bill easily cleared both chambers of the legislature with the support of tea party groups, the ACLU and the Japanese American Citizens League, it has led to a squabble among Republicans and faces an uncertain future in the hands of Gov. Bob McDonnell.
In signing the Defense Authorization Act late last year, President Barack Obama sought to allay the concerns that Marshall's bill addresses, saying he disagreed with the provision and would not authorize its use to detain citizens.
That did little to comfort Marshall and others, who say the loophole could be used by any administration at any time to unlawfully detain citizens.
"It's on the books. The fact that he even said that tells you this is unfettered power given to the chief executive," Marshall said. "The military has one function: to kill people and destroy property ... so why do you want that instrumentality of government to be the one dealing with ordinary criminal activities?"
Some other Republicans are not so sure Marshall's bill is the best way to address the issue.
"While the governor does not condone the unlawful detention of U.S. citizens, we do have concerns about the impact, whether intended or not, this legislation would have on joint terrorism task forces of which state and local agencies are members, information-sharing by and with the Virginia State Police and local law enforcement, and on our Virginia National Guard personnel," McDonnell spokesman Tucker Martin said.
Marshall said no such concerns were raised by National Guard representatives while the legislation was working its way through the House and Senate, adding that McDonnell has not been clear about what he'd like to see altered.
"It's a little puzzling," he said. "I can't address what he's not saying."
Del. Barbara J. Comstock, R-Fairfax, a former public affairs director for the Justice Department, was the bill's most outspoken opponent.
Comstock said she had grave concerns that the legislation could hinder terrorism investigations and bemoaned that the legislature had passed a bill based on a national defense act it knew nothing about, apart from "Delegate Marshall's characterizations of it."
"We always say, 'Don't pass a bill you haven't read.' Well, this is nullifying (part of) a bill we haven't read," she said, describing its message as "saying we won't cooperate on national defense matters."
That message, she worries, could result in reduced National Guard funds from the federal government.
"This is a bill considered by Congress after lengthy and extensive hearings, and if there needs to be any changes -- and there might be good arguments for that -- the state legislature is not the place to do that," she said.
Marshall responded that Comstock had no such reservations about supporting his Health Care Freedom Act two years ago, which established that Virginians cannot be compelled to purchase health insurance, setting the stage for Virginia's challenge to Obama's health care overhaul.
But Comstock argued that national defense is a different issue, suggesting that Marshall's bill could cause operational difficulties by upsetting information-sharing and coordination among state and federal agencies on issues as serious as terrorism.
"I don't think we should be playing politics with national defense," she said, adding that she thought Democrats had helped push it through because "they thought it was a dumb bill but they just kind of wanted to let the governor handle it."
Marshall, who is seeking theseat being vacated by Sen. Jim Webb, D-Va., is on shaky terms with the governor after lambasting him over the handling of abortion issues this session. McDonnell also has endorsed Marshall's rival for the GOP nomination in the Senate race, former Gov. George Allen.
Adding to the complexity of the issue is the fact that Comstock and McDonnell supportRepublican presidential candidate Mitt Romney, aformer Massachusetts governor who has said he supports the Defense Authorization Act and would have signed it as president.
The governor has 30 days from the date the bill passed, March 10, to consider whether to sign, amend or veto it.
Marshall fears it will be vetoed and said that's a shame.
"If you really want to abandon what it means to be an American, go ahead and do that," he said. "I don't."
whester@timesdispatch.com
(804) 649-6976
Copyright © 2012, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: March 17, 2012


End of Document