Developments in World Terrorism TERRORISM IN EUROPE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 18, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 750 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


IRAN
Iran's judicial authorities have banned a newspaper for publishing a front-page headline allegedly indicating support for French satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo. Mohammad Ghoochani, chief editor of the daily Mardom-e-Emrooz, or Today's People, is quoted by the semi-official Tasnim news agency as saying his paper has been ordered closed for publishing a front-page story on the controversial French newspaper.
Iran has condemned both the newspaper's publication of caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad and the deadly assault on the newspaper's Paris office by Islamic extremists who killed 12 people.
BELGIUM
Belgium has raised its terrorism warning to 3, the second-highest, after anti-terrorism raids there on Thursday that left two suspects dead and a third wounded. The country deployed 150 paratroopers Saturday to guard potential terrorism targets, including some buildings in Antwerp's Jewish quarter. It was the first time in 30 years that authorities used troops to reinforce police, and they said the number of troops could double.
AFGHANISTAN
Afghan President Ashraf Ghani condemned Charlie Hebdo on Saturday, calling the newest cover image of Prophet Muhammad, published Wednesday, blasphemous and irresponsible.
"Freedom of expression should be used in a way to boost understanding between the religions," he said. "Afghanistan has suffered many years of war and violence, more than any other country, and it is necessary to understand and promote peaceful coexistence among all the people of the world."
IRAQ
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi also issued a statement of condemnation, warning that, "offensive words might lead to further bloodshed."
Al-Abadi called on all parties to "desist such practices that create an atmosphere of division and rejection." He also reiterated his condemnation of the attacks on innocent victims in Paris, saying that terrorism "has nothing to do with Islam in any way."
YEMEN
Protesters demonstrated Saturday in front of the French Embassy in the Yemeni capital of Sanaa. Yemeni authorities have arrested two French citizens suspected of being members of al-Qaida, the country's national security chief said Saturday, without mentioning whether they were involved in this month's attack by gunmen on a French newspaper. Gen. Ali Hassan al-Ahmadi says the pair were arrested on charges of belonging to the militant group, adding that al-Qaida had about 1,000 members in Yemen, from 11 different countries.
GREECE
Four terrorism suspects were arrested separately in Athens, Greek police said. They included a man who matched the description of the suspect Belgian authorities believe was behind a jihadi cell that was dismantled in Belgium on Thursday.
But after initial vetting in Brussels, federal magistrate Eric van der Sypt said the information they received showed no link.
NIGER
The president of Niger said at least 10 people were killed after violent protests over the French publication Charlie Hedbo's cartoon depicting Islam's prophet.
President Mahamadou Issoufou said five deaths were reported after demonstrations in the capital of Niamey on Saturday. The victims were inside churches and bars that were set ablaze, he said. On Friday, at least five people were killed in the town of Zinder after prayer services there.
OTHER AREAS
• In Egypt, the Islamist Noor Party denounced the latest Charlie Hebdo cover on its French-language Facebook page. "Just as the Noor Party rejects the assault on civilians and the negative effects it has for all Muslims of Europe, it also rejects this barbaric, irresponsible act under the name of freedom of expression," the statement declared.
• In Karachi, Pakistan, protesters demonstrated against Charlie Hebdo.
• In Gaza City, the capital of the Gaza Strip, vandals scrawled graffiti on the walls of the French Cultural Center. In addition to statements praising the Prophet Muhammad and declaring him off-limits for ridicule or satire, the vandals also wrote: "To hell, to a miserable destiny, French journalists."
‘ISLAMIC STATE'
On Friday, a number of jihadi-linked Twitter accounts began tweeting links to khilafalive.info, a website that claims to be an "official website for the supporters of the Islamic State Caliphate." A selection of video and radio channels were hosted on the site, some playing Islamic State propaganda videos and others Islamic vocal music. Users were able to "chat" with fellow viewers. Notably, two of the channels claimed they would soon be broadcasting "directly" from Islamic State.

Load-Date: January 18, 2015


End of Document