Developing nations: Poverty feeds terrorism; General Assembly shifts from Iraq to loftier goals
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 24, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a9
Length: 494 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


Developing nations fear that U.N. policies dictated by their wealthy counterparts have blocked efforts to fight poverty and warned that the failure to improve life for the world's poor would only perpetuate terrorism.
On the second day of the General Assembly's ministerial meeting, leaders shifted their focus Wednesday from Iraq to strengthening the United Nations and realizing the world body's lofty goals of upholding human dignity and reducing hunger.
"In this undertaking, we cannot ignore the ever widening income gap between the rich and the poor, between the industrialized north and the developing south," said Namibian President Sam Nujoma. "This situation represents a dangerous time bomb, which the world can ill-afford to let take its own course."
The leaders stressed that the priorities of the developing world are receiving little more than lip service and that the United Nations hasn't tackled key issues, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
"Terrorism poses the most urgent threat to many countries, including the most powerful states. For many of us, the terrorist threat is very close and … very personal," Pakistan's President Gen. Pervez Musharraf said, a day after President Bush addressed the assembly and defended the U.S.-led war in Iraq.
Global cooperation has been "highly successful" and the international community is "winning the battle against terrorists," said Musharraf, whose country is a key U.S. ally in South Asia. "However, what we are doing is insufficient to win the ultimate war against them."
While many countries have called for a concerted effort against terrorism, leaders of developing nations argued for a closer look at terrorism's roots, which many said lie in anger driven by widespread hunger and poverty.
"For the majority of the world's people … the most immediate threats are those of poverty, hunger, unsafe drinking water, environmental degradation and endemic or infectious diseases, such as AIDS and Malaria," Djibouti's president, Ismail Omar Guelleh said.
Musharraf echoed that sentiment, saying that anti-terror responses must be "accompanied by a clear, long-term strategy, striking at the root of the problem if we are to ensure final success against this scourge."
On the same day a Palestinian teenager blew herself up at a busy Jerusalem bus station, killing two Israeli policemen and wounding 16 bystanders, Musharraf and other leaders said resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also was vital to reducing tensions that lead to terror.
Musharraf described it as "an open wound on the psyche of every Muslim," a conflict that "generates anger and resentment across the Islamic world."
South Africa's President Thabo Mbeki said that a key reason why pledges have yet to be tangibly acted upon is because world priorities - most notably terrorism - are being determined by the strongest countries.
Meanwhile, the "poor and powerless feel threatened by a permanent hurricane of poverty," he said.

Load-Date: September 25, 2004


End of Document