DEVELOP AN ALTERNATIVE TO PRESIDENT BUSH'S MILITARY COMMISSIONS ACT ON HANDLING DETAINEES
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 21, 2011 Wednesday
Politifact.com Edition


Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITIFACT
Length: 936 words
Byline: DAVID G. TAYLOR
Body


"He will reject the Military Commissions Act, which allowed the U.S. to circumvent Geneva Conventions in the handling of detainees. He will develop a fair and thorough process based on the Uniform Code of Military Justice to distinguish between those prisoners who should be prosecuted for their crimes, those who can't be prosecuted but who can be held in a manner consistent with the laws of war, and those who should be released or transferred to their home countries."
Sources:
"Barack Obama: The War We Need to Win"
Subjects: Foreign Policy, Human Rights, Terrorism
* * *
No end in sight for military commissions
Obameter: PROMISE BROKEN
The status of terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo Bay is still being contested 10 years after the September 11 terrorist attacks.
Civil rights groups criticized the Bush administration for its promotion of military tribunals to try terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo Bay, instead of federal courts on the U.S. mainland.
Trying at least some of these suspects in U.S. courts was one of President Barack Obama's objectives upon taking office, and widely considered a crucial step toward Obama's goal of closing the Guantanamo Bay detention center -- a promise that we rated Broken. The same executive order that announced the closure of the detention facility also halted military trials at Guantanamo. In November 2009, Attorney General Eric Holder announced that the Department of Justice would try Khalid Sheikh Mohammed -- the Al-Qaida mastermind behind the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks -- and four others in federal court in New York City.
A number of factors prevented these federal court trials from occurring.
Congressional lawmakers criticized the administration's plan, citing national security implications if terrorist suspects were brought to the U.S. mainland. New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who initially supported civilian trials, reversed his stance, arguing that the extra security costs and general disruption would be too burdensome on the city. A last-ditch attempt at trying the suspects from a federal prison in the village of Otisville, N.Y. also fell through.
Particularly damaging to the administration's goal was the outcome of the civilian trial of Ahmed Ghailani, a suspect in the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Ghailani is unique for being the first former Guantanamo detainee to be tried in U.S. civilian court. A jury acquitted Ghailani of over 200 chargers in late 2010. Ultimately he was sentenced to life in prison after being found guilty of conspiracy to destroy government property. Despite his conviction, this experience left a sour taste in the mouths of many politicians. "If Ghailani had been acquitted of just one more count, he would have been considered innocent of these heinous crimes," said Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee in a press release.
Shortly thereafter the administration opted to try Mohammed and others in the military tribunal system. One reason for this decision was the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2011, in which Congress prohibited the use of defense funds to transfer prisoners from Guantanamo to the United States.
Attorney General Eric Holder said the administration made the change so as not to delay prosecutions. "We must face a simple truth: those restrictions are unlikely to be repealed in the immediate future. And we simply cannot allow a trial to be delayed any longer for the victims of the 9/11 attacks or for their families who have waited nearly a decade for justice," he said.
The House of Representatives, now under Republican control, wants to renew the transfer ban for the next fiscal year. In July, the House passed the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2012, by 336-87. Like its predecessor, the act would prohibit funds from being used to transfer detainees to the United States. The Senate version of the budget bill passed through the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee in June. The bill is still waiting for approval in the full Senate.
Without any clear alternatives, the Obama administration has been forced into employing the military tribunal system to try terrorist suspects. President Obama pledged that he would develop an alternative to military commissions. Despite the administration's efforts, we do not see this happening at any point in the near future. We rate this Promise Broken.
* * *
Sources:
White House, Executive Order 13492, January 22, 2009.
U.S. Department of Justice, press release, November 13, 2009.
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, H.R. 1540.
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, S. 1253.
U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services, press release, June 17, 2011.
U.S. Department of Justice, "Statement of the Attorney General on the Prosecution of the 9/11 Conspirators," April 4, 2011.
White House, Executive Order--Periodic Review of Individuals Detained at Guantánamo Bay Naval Station Pursuant to the Authorization for Use of Military Force, March 7, 2011.
USA Today, "House passes $649B defense spending bill," July 8, 2011.
USA Today, "N.Y. Mayor Bloomberg prefers terror trials be moved," January 27, 2010.
The New York Times, "Village Doubts It Could Have Handled Terror Trial," April 8, 2011.
The New York Times, "Ex-Detainee Gets Life Sentence in Embassy Blasts," January 25, 2011.
Rep. Lamar Smith, press release, January 25, 2011.
The Hill, "Obama to resume Gitmo military trials," March 7, 2011.
ABC News, "In Reversal, Obama Orders Guantanamo Military Trial for 9/11 Mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed," April 4, 2011.

Graphic

 
PHOTO (2)

Load-Date: September 22, 2011


End of Document