DIALOGUE
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 18, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. C4
Length: 670 words
Body


FBI support needed
The best record of taking down violent drug traffickers, such as Maurice Hill, who shot six police officers last week, was held by a joint task force operated by the FBI with federally deputized Philadelphia police officers and others. It had the time and money to invest in gathering intelligence and then indicting as many as 40 drug dealers at a time. But after 9/11, the FBI shifted its focus to terrorism, forgetting the terrorism going on in neighborhoods across this city and elsewhere every day. As a result, drug gangs reemerged stronger, waging war on neighborhoods and gathering more high-tech weaponry. It's time to reconstruct what worked in the past.
|Kitty Caparella, Philadelphia
Stiff penalty for gun crimes
I'm reading the article on the moron who shot six officers and can't believe that it stated he could face life in prison. Looking at his record, one would assume he should already have been in prison for the rest of his life. Any person who would shoot a policeman should face mandatory life in prison. Any person who commits a crime with a gun should face 30 years in prison. People have a right to walk the streets without fear of being shot. We spend $50,000 a year housing each of these creeps in prison. Forget about rehab programs; these violent people will never change.
|Bill Mestichelli, Moorestown
McSwain's rush to judgment
From the first day of law school, we were taught that assertions must be based on evidence, not suppositions (or politics). Our U.S. attorney, who immediately blamed Wednesday's shootings on District Attorney Larry Krasner in the absence of any evidence that one had anything to do with the other, seems to have abandoned this principle.
|Len Rieser, Philadelphia
Natural gas is poor alternative
We would do well to dig a little deeper into the claim that natural gas is a clean energy alternative. It may burn cleaner at the refineries, but from the fracking sites through the pipelines, the leakage of methane, intentional or accidental, poses a climate threat. Methane is an aggressive pollutant, with 80 times the warming power of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in the short term. Natural gas is not a source of clean renewable energy.
|Pamela Haines, Philadelphia, pamela.haines@firstup.org
False premise to disparge Israel
I was gratified by the House's recent approval of the anti-BDS resolution because it shows broad political support for Israel. The resolution was obviously intended to denounce the hypocrisy of Reps. Ilhan Omar, Rashida Tlaib, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for supporting the anti-Israel- boycott movement, and their scurrilous claim that Israel has enacted "racist policies." Their false premise should have been dismissed out of hand. Regrettably, the failure to reject that deceitful premise allows those who are biased against Israel to make the cynical claims that Israel's policies, which are of inclusion, are racist, while her neighbors' policies, which are of exclusion, are tolerant. The fact that Israeli Arabs, Christians, and Muslims are members of the Knesset and the Supreme Court, professors at universities, physicians in hospitals, and participants in virtually every aspect of public and private life does not register with them. Neither does the fact that in most, if not all, Middle East and Muslim-majority countries, Jews are forbidden to hold office, participate in government, teach at universities, or practice their chosen professions.
|Steve Wenick, Voorhees
Bad to ban congresswomen
As an America Jew I am mortified that the leader of the State of Israel has been bullied to the extent that Israel is blocking two members of Congress from entering Israel. I do not agree with Reps. Omar and Tlaib and their views, but we Jews are a people of many opinions on the same issues. President Donald Trump is in love with the killer of North Korea, and he and Benjamin Netanyahu strongly support the Saudi crown prince - both of whom continue to live up to extremely low expectations.
|Marc J. Horman, Perkasie

Load-Date: August 18, 2019


End of Document