Did Justice Fall From the Skies Over Tripoli?;
Tonkin Gulf Parallel
The New York Times
April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 300 words
Body


To the Editor:
The Constitution provides, in Article I, Section 8, that Congress has the power ''To declare War, grant Letters of marque and reprisal.'' The responsibility of Congress to issue letters of marque and reprisal is a power long overlooked in the debate concerning war powers.
According to Black's Law Dictionary, such letters are appropriate ''whenever the subjects of one state are oppressed and injured by those of another, and justice is denied by that state to which the oppressor belongs.''
Letters of marque and reprisal may be more appropriate to authorize the seizure of persons and property, rather than their outright destruction, which would appear to be an act of war. In either case, while the President undoubtedly has the right to defend against an overt attack on United States military personnel, such as occurred in the Gulf of Sidra, under the Constitution, it is the responsibility of Congress to authorize military reprisals for acts of terrorism.
It was the failure to observe these simple rules that led us off the deep end in Vietnam. The Tonkin Gulf Resolution was not a declaration of war nor a letter of marque and reprisal, and did not authorize specific military activities. The Government conceded this in the subsequent court cases challenging the constitutionality of the war. Nevertheless, Presi-dent Johnson acted as if it were such authority, and escalated the conflict without congressional authority.
The War Powers Resolution of 1973 does not and cannot alter the Constitution. Nothing in that act authorizes the President to order specific military reprisals for acts of terrorism.
If we are to insist that governments around the world adhere to the rule of law, we must start by adherence to our own fundamental law.MARC J. LUXEMBURG New York, April 14, 1986

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document