Differing state stances muddy coverage issue; California nixes exclusion for terrorism risks
Business Insurance
January 14, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 864 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


California's rejection of a proposed terrorism exclusion for commercial lines policies is increasing uncertainty about the extent to which risk managers will be able to obtain coverage for terrorism risks.
California last week became the first state to reject terrorism exclusions proposed by the Insurance Services Office Inc. That move-coupled with a statement by New York's top regulator that he is ''not inclined'' to accept any exclusion that would limit coverage to just $25 million in total losses-is raising questions about the effectiveness of exclusions that would not be available in the nation's two largest insurance markets.
Currently, 45 jurisdictions in the United States-43 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico-have adopted terrorism exclusions that are at least as broad as those proposed by ISO, said a spokesman for Jersey City, N.J.-based ISO late last week. With terrorism coverage excluded, risk managers would have to buy such protection as separate endorsements or policies, or self-insure the risk.
While negotiations between ISO and the National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners limited the scope of the exclusions, a few states have taken additional steps to protect insurance buyers (BI, Jan. 7). For example, Illinois requires insurers to demonstrate that they have lost their reinsurance for terrorism risks rather than merely certify that loss by signature, according to Illinois Insurance Director Nat Shapo.
Many insurers maintain that some terrorism exclusions are needed in the short run to help guarantee solvency in the event of future terrorism losses, and to encourage insurers to write business they might otherwise avoid.
Most members of the NAIC have endorsed exclusionary wording as a way to help commercial lines policyholders obtain at least minimal terrorism coverage via endorsements or separate policies, though California and New York both voted against the NAIC measure last month.
The actions of those two states are significant. Admitted insurers in 1999 wrote nearly $160 billion in gross direct premium in California and New York alone, compared with $738 billion in all other states in that year, the latest for which such figures were available.
In rejecting ISO's filings last week, California Insurance Commissioner Harry W. Low said he was concerned about, among other things, limitations of coverage and the definitions of what constitutes terrorism in the exclusions proposed for commercial lines and homeowners policies. In a statement, Mr. Low said that ''the term 'terrorism' has been broadly used to define everything ranging from vandalism to hate crimes'' and that the exclusion's trigger-$25 million in damage industrywide-is ''unreasonably'' low. ISO's options include seeking a hearing on the rejected filings or submitting new ones.
In New York, Insurance Superintendent Gregory Serio is currently negotiating with around 50 companies about the wording of proposed terrorism exclusions, a department spokeswoman said.
The lack of uniformity among states is one significant problem for policyholders and insurers in the rapidly hardening market, some say.
''The current chaos will be a nightmare for entities that operate in multiple states and countries,'' said Robert W. Esenberg, a consultant for Berkley Risk Administrators Co. L.L.C. in Virginia Beach, Va., and a former president of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
In the long run, though, most risk managers and insurers hope that Congress will address the coverage problem by creating a federal backstop for terrorism insurance. Congressional efforts to create such a mechanism stalled when lawmakers recessed late last month (BI, Dec. 24/31, 2001).
California's rejection of the exclusion ''points back to the need for congressional action that supersedes state action,'' said Michael Phillipus, risk manager of Houston-based Pennzoil-Quaker State Co. Mr. Phillipus, who is vp-external affairs for RIMS, said risk managers should lobby for such action, including providing information about negative market experiences to the U.S. Government Accounting Office.
But, Jeffrey W. Pettegrew, vp-insurance and risk management with Westaff Inc. in Walnut Creek, Calif., predicted that such congressional action ''will only happen if another major terrorist act occurs with horrific losses.'' In an election year, Congress may prove even less likely to act if federal lawmakers think that state regulators have stabilized the situation by approving exclusions.
But some observers question the appropriateness of terrorism exclusions.
''For the consuming market to acquiesce to such an exclusion is inappropriate at this time,'' said Arthur Bostwick, a former president of RIMS who retired in 1998 as risk manager for Stone Container Corp. in Chicago. ''This is a case of insurance industry overreaction to a single event,'' he said.
J. Robert Hunter, director of insurance for the Washington-based Consumer Federation of America, supports California's rejection of ISO's terrorism exclusion. He noted that ''larger risks should be able to negotiate terms with insurers'' using typical manuscript policies, while smaller risks do not need such coverage.

Load-Date: January 18, 2002


End of Document