DIGEST - NATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 18, 2011 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 568 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


Terrorist's lawsuit tossed by judge
A federal judge has tossed out a lawsuit alleging a man convicted of plotting terrorism was tortured at a Navy brig in South Carolina. U.S. District Judge Richard Gergel on Thursday ruled Jose Padilla has no right to sue for constitutional violations and that the defendants enjoy qualified immunity.
111 accused of Medicare fraud - The federal government's Medicare Fraud Task Force brought criminal charges Thursday against doctors, nurses and health care company executives - in all, 111 people in nine cities - in what was billed as the nation's "largest-ever federal health-care fraud takedown." Thursday's indictments were for suspects in Miami, Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston, Detroit, Chicago, Brooklyn, Tampa, Fla., and Baton Rouge, La.
Alaska ignoring health care law - Alaska Gov. Sean Parnell says he will not enact the federal health care overhaul after a judge in Florida struck down the law as unconstitutional. Parnell considers that ruling the law of the land, barring implementation in the state. He said the state will pursue options of its own instead. The Justice Department then filed a motion to clarify, asking a federal judge in Florida to tell states that they must continue to enact the Obama administration's health care overhaul despite the judge's ruling that the law is unconstitutional.
Giffords laughing - Rep. Gabrielle Giffords is able to laugh at jokes, recognize visitors and even offer a poignant response when asked recently by her husband how she was doing. "Better," Giffords said, in one of the first words she uttered since being shot in the head Jan. 8. Family friend Tilman Fertitta described the encounters after spending time with her family and friends and recently visiting Giffords in Houston, where she is undergoing intensive rehabilitation.
Slain judge honored - President Barack Obama signed into law a bill that named a new federal courthouse in Arizona after slain federal Judge John M. Roll. Roll was killed on Jan. 8 when he stopped to visit Rep. Gabrielle Giffords at a Tucson shopping center after the devout Roman Catholic attended Mass. Five other people were killed. Thirteen people were wounded, including the congresswoman.
Parts of Patriot Act extended - Congress gave final approval to a temporary extension of parts of the Patriot Act, a step that merely postpones a burgeoning political debate over the controversial terrorism law and its implications for the civil liberties in the U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to sign the legislation into law.
FDA process on medical devices is hit from both sides - The Food and Drug Administration is approving medical devices too slowly. Or too quickly - depending on whom you ask. House lawmakers heard both arguments Thursday at a hearing examining the FDA's regulation of U.S. medical devices. The FDA is in the process of overhauling the system used to clear most devices, triggering a slew of reports apparently aimed at influencing the agency's plans.
Broadband use lags in rural areas - In rural America, only 60 percent of households use broadband Internet service, according to a report released Thursday by the Department of Commerce. That is 10 percentage points less than urban households. Overall, 28 percent of Americans do not use the Internet at all.
- Read full versions of these stories and the latest national news at stltoday.com/news/.national.

Load-Date: February 18, 2011


End of Document