DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 11, 2008 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 684 words
Byline: FROM NEWS SERVICES
Body


CAPE CANAVERAL, FLA.
Endeavor set to blast off early this morning
Space shuttle Endeavour was poised for a rare early-morning launching today to the international space station.
With no major problems reported, NASA began fueling the shuttle late Monday afternoon for its 2:28 a.m. liftoff.
It will be the first shuttle launching in darkness since 2006; only a quarter of all shuttle flights have begun at nighttime.
Endeavour's seven-man crew will deliver a new Japanese compartment to the space station as well as a Canadian robot for outside maintenance.
WASHINGTON
Flights reduced during peak hours at Newark
The federal government is reducing by 13 percent the number of flights during peak hours at New Jersey's Newark Liberty Airport to ease delays in the New York City area that routinely spread nationwide.
Newark will be limited to 83 flights per hour during peak periods, Department of Transportation Secretary Mary Peters said Monday. The airport handled about 95 flights per hour during last summer's peak.
The 83-flight cap is the same one that starts Saturday at New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport, where about 100 flights per hour were scheduled last summer. Similar flight caps, which are intended to alleviate record-high delays, already exist at New York's LaGuardia Airport.
JFK, LaGuardia and Newark last year had the nation's lowest on-time arrival rates.
MELVILLE, N.Y.
School district blocks student's service dog
A Long Island school official said a hearing-impaired teenager will not be allowed to bring his service dog to school, despite a ruling Monday that the district's policy violates state law.
East Meadow school district Superintendent Leon Campo said Monday that the district, which intends to appeal, disagreed with the order's contention that disabled students have an "absolute right" to bring service animals to school. The district has argued that animals pose a safety threat to other students.
The state Division of Human Rights ruled that John Cave, 15, must be allowed to bring his dog, Simba, to his high school. Cave tried several times last year to bring Simba to school, but was blocked by school officials.
WASHINGTON
Venezuela could be listed as supporting terrorism
Following up on allegations that Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez's links to Colombian guerrillas have been much deeper than previously thought, a senior U.S. government official has confirmed that President George W. Bush's administration has asked its lawyers to look into what gets a country on the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism.
The investigation is the first step in a process that could see Venezuela join North Korea, Cuba, Sudan, Syria and Iran as countries that the State Department has designated as supporters of terrorism.
WASHINGTON
Saddam had no link to al-Qaida, study says
An exhaustive review of more than 600,000 Iraqi documents that were captured after the 2003 U.S. invasion has found no evidence that Saddam Hussein's regime had any operational links with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network.
The Pentagon-sponsored study, scheduled for release later this week, did confirm that Saddam's regime provided some support to other terrorist groups, particularly in the Middle East, U.S. officials told McClatchy Newspapers.
President George W. Bush and his aides used Saddam's alleged relationship with al-Qaida, along with Iraq's supposed weapons of mass destruction, as arguments for invading Iraq after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
WASHINGTON
Reporter seeks to block fines dictated by judge
A former USA Today reporter sought Monday to block fines of up to $5,000 per day imposed by a judge who wants her to disclose confidential sources for stories on a scientist under scrutiny in the 2001 anthrax attacks.
Toni Locy must pay fines out of her own pocket as long as she refuses to identify her sources. In addition, she could be ordered to prison after a hearing April 3 if she continues to defy the judge in a lawsuit against the government filed by Steven J. Hatfill.
The judge wants Locy to reveal her sources so Hatfill's lawyers can question them.

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - TAKING FLIGHT  With the space shuttle Endeavor behind them on the launchpad, white ibis work on their own takeoffs and landings Monday at the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla. The shuttle was set to blast off early today. Among the passengers is local astronaut Robert Behnken. (See story on B5.)   Eliot J. Schechter | Getty Images 

Load-Date: March 11, 2008


End of Document