DIGEST - NATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 23, 2009 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 654 words
Byline: From news services
Dateline: 0 
Body


Stadiums, hotels on alert amid terrorism case
The government expanded a terrorism warning from transit systems to U.S. stadiums, hotels and entertainment complexes as investigators searched for more suspects Tuesday in a potential al-Qaida plot to set off hydrogen-peroxide bombs hidden in backpacks.
Police bolstered their presence at high-profile locations. Extra officers with bulletproof vests, rifles and dogs were assigned to spots such as Grand Central Terminal in New York. Plainclothes officers handed out fliers at a nearby hotel with a warning in large block letters: "If you suspect terrorism, call the NYPD."
The warnings come amid an investigation centering on Najibullah Zazi, 24, a Denver airport shuttle driver who authorities say received al-Qaida explosives training in Pakistan and was found entering New York City two weeks ago with bomb-making instructions on his computer.
New wildfires erupt in California - New wildfires threatened homes in Southern California on Tuesday as hot and dry Santa Ana winds turned the region into a tinderbox. A blaze in the rural hills of Ventura County northwest of Los Angeles spread over 6,000 acres threatening the northwestern area of the city of Moorpark, said county fire spokesman Bill Nash. Evacuations were ordered for scattered ranches and homes.
Flooding swamps Southeast - Rescuers glided through neighborhoods in fishing boats and canoes on Tuesday, searching waterlogged houses for trapped residents, after heavy rains flooded Georgia and other parts of the Southeast. The deluge left eight people dead, dozens stranded and thousands without electricity. As the mucky red-brown waters slowly receded after days of torrential rain, Gov. Sonny Perdue of Georgia declared a state of emergency in 17 counties and pleaded for federal aid. The state insurance commissioner estimated that $250 million worth of damage had been done, mostly to homeowners without insurance.
House approves bill to extend jobless benefits - The House approved on Tuesday a bill to extend benefits by up to 13 weeks for jobless workers living in 27 states plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico that have unemployment rates of 8.5 percent or higher. Both Illinois and Missouri are among the states that would be affected. The bill is sponsored by Rep. Jim McDermott, D-Wash.
Off-duty officer fatally shoots wife, self - Police in a Detroit suburb say an off-duty officer fatally shot his wife in the parking lot of a library and then shot himself. He died shortly afterward. Sgt. Mark Gajeski of the Canton Township Public Safety Department says the couple were both were Detroit officers who lived in Canton.
Man's slaying of wife called mercy killing - An elderly man in Laguna Woods, Calif., gave his wife morphine, then shot her once in the head with a small-caliber handgun before turning the gun on himself, authorities say. Phyllis Fish had dementia and terminal pancreatic cancer. James Fish, 90, survived, but his wife, Phyllis, 88, did not. Prosecutors have charged him with voluntary manslaughter for what they believe was a mercy killing.
One injured in shootout at border crossing - One person was injured in a gunbattle Tuesday involving an attempt to smuggle illegal immigrants from Mexico at the busiest border crossing in the U.S., authorities said. Details remained sketchy, but dozens of suspected illegal immigrants were detained when drivers tried to storm past inspectors at the San Ysidro port of entry and make their way into the U.S. without stopping, said Lauren Mack, a spokeswoman for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
LA limits roosters to one per household - The chickens have come home to roost for Los Angeles city dwellers who keep roosters. The City Council passed on Tuesday an ordinance that - with few exceptions - allows only one rooster per property. It was spurred by complaints over noise and hygiene and concerns over illegal cockfighting.

Load-Date: September 23, 2009


End of Document