DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 2006 Wednesday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 453 words
Byline: FROM NEWS SERVICES
Body


MINNEAPOLIS
President Ford checks into Mayo Clinic
Former President Gerald R. Ford was admitted Tuesday to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota for "testing and evaluation," his office said in a statement. The statement gave no details about why Ford, 93, went to the clinic in Rochester.
Ford became the nation's oldest living former president after the death of Ronald Reagan in 2004.
Ford was House minority leader when President Richard M. Nixon chose him in 1973 to replace Spiro Agnew, who resigned as vice president. Ford became president on Aug. 9, 1974, when Nixon resigned amid the Watergate scandal.
MARIETTA, OHIO
Terrorism charges dropped against two men
Prosecutors dropped terrorism charges Tuesday against two Michigan men who were arrested after buying large numbers of cell phones, saying they couldn't prove a terrorism link.
Ali Houssaiky and Osama Sabhi Abulhassan, both of Dearborn, Mich., left jail after each posted a $1,000 bond on the remaining misdemeanor counts of falsification.
"We know it was just a matter of time. We were just hoping it wouldn't be forever," Abulhassan said.
The remaining charges stem from allegations that the two men initially gave deputies different names than what appeared on their IDs. Washington County Prosecutor James Schneider said the investigation remains open.
TRENTON, N.J.
Attorney general resigns after ethics finding
New Jersey's attorney general resigned Tuesday after a special prosecutor concluded she had violated state ethics laws by intervening in a traffic stop involving her boyfriend.
Zulima Farber said, "I admit to being human and making that error."
Farber's live-in boyfriend, lawyer Hamlet Goore, was pulled over by police for a traffic violation in May, and Farber showed up at the scene in her state car. Goore's van was found to be improperly registered and his license appeared to be suspended, but he was allowed to drive home.
Farber, 61, is New Jersey's first Hispanic attorney general. Gov. Jon S. Corzine, a Democrat, named her to the post.
WASHINGTON
Drug officials: Ring of traffickers busted
Federal agents arrested more than 130 drug-trafficking suspects from coast-to-coast Tuesday.
Authorities said the traffickers had smuggled heroin from Mexico and had even offered phone-up home deliveries, like a pizza shop.
COLUMBUS, OHIO
September primary to pick House nominee
The Republican primary to choose a replacement for resigned U.S. Rep. Bob Ney on the November ballot will take place Sept. 14, the secretary of state's office said Tuesday.
Ney announced last week he was quitting the race, citing the strain of a corruption investigation that has focused on his dealings with disgraced lobbyist Jack Abramoff. Ney denies wrongdoing and has not been charged.

Load-Date: August 16, 2006


End of Document