Digest
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 26, 2014 Friday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 584 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


Hamas, Fatah to share power in Gaza Strip
The Islamist movement Hamas has agreed to share power in the Gaza Strip with the more moderate and secular Fatah faction, representatives from the two sides said at a news conference in the Egyptian capital on Thursday. Hamas forcibly ejected its rival Fatah from Gaza in 2007 and has ruled the seaside enclave since then. But in the wake of the 50-day summer war in Gaza that was halted with a cease-fire a month ago, it became clear that neither Israel nor other world nations were willing to rebuild the war-battered region with Hamas in sole charge. The two factions have been taking part in reconciliation talks held parallel to indirect negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians in Cairo.
Indonesia drops local elections • Indonesia's parliament voted today to scrap the direct elections of local officials in what appears to be a blow to the country's democracy. The bill is supported by a coalition of parties whose candidate was narrowly defeated in July's presidential elections. Direct elections for mayors, regents and governors began in 2005 as part of Indonesia's democratic transition after the fall of the Suharto dictatorship in 1998. Today's bill stipulates they will now be chosen by the local parliaments as they were prior to 2005. The president will continue to be directly elected.
Britain arrests 9 for terrorism aid • British counterterrorism police have arrested nine men on suspicion of being members of banned organizations as well as supporting and encouraging terrorism. The men, ranging in age from 22 to 51, are in custody at London police stations. British media reported that Anjem Choudary, a former leader of a banned radical group called al-Muhajiroun, was among those arrested. Police raided homes, businesses and community centers as part of an ongoing investigation into Islamist-related terrorism rather than any immediate risk to public safety.
Woman pilot led Emirates airstrikes • The first female air force pilot in the United Arab Emirates led airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Syria earlier this week, the federation's ambassador to Washington said on Thursday as he pledged that his country would do "whatever is necessary" to defeat the militant group. Social media has been buzzing with rumors that F-16 pilot Maj. Mariam al-Mansouri played a part in attacks against the jihadist group, with many users taking delight in the rebuke it implied toward the militants' ultraconservative ideology.
Hundreds of refugees rescued near Cyprus • A cruise ship picked up hundreds of people, apparently refugees who fled Syria, who were stranded aboard a small boat off Cyprus on Thursday, officials said. Cyprus planned to send the 345 people, including 52 children, to a reception center near the capital, Nicosia; but Salamis Cruise Lines Managing Director Kikis Vasiliou said they were insisting that they be taken to Italy instead.
Sudan to talk with rebels • Sudan's information minister says the government will hold cease-fire talks next month with the country's main rebel coalition, the Sudan Revolutionary Front. The talks are to take place Oct. 12-15 under the leadership of chief African Union mediator Thabo Mbeki, who will visit Khartoum soon.
China cites terrorist explosions • Chinese state-run media reported Thursday that 50 people, including 40 assailants, were killed in a series of explosions over the weekend in the far western region of Xinjiang, in what officials called a terrorist attack.

Load-Date: September 26, 2014


End of Document