Diminishing the power of words
The Bismarck Tribune
October 25, 2019 Friday


Copyright 2019 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: A0; Pg. 10
Length: 723 words
Body


Words matter and have real meaning. But far too often, powerful words are being willfully and improperly used for the purpose of diminishing them.
Sen. Oley Larsen of Minot is by no means the first, but simply one of the most recent to do so. Earlier this week, the North Dakota lawmaker shared a photo claiming it showed U.S. Rep. Ilhan Omar at an al-Qaida training camp. The problem is, it doesn't. The photo has been authenticated as having been taken four years before Omar was born.
After deleting the Facebook post, Larsen then called Omar a terrorist. By definition, she isn't. Webster's dictionary defines a terrorist as one who engages in "the unlawful use or threat of violence especially against the state or the public as a politically motivated means of attack or coercion."
There are any number of ways one who disagrees with Omar may describe her views or politics, but by its very definition, terrorist is not one of them.
Sen. Rich Wardner, Republican majority leader, called on Larsen to apologize, and that would be a good first step.
Again, Larson is not the only one to engage in hate-filled name-calling and the improper use of language. We see it almost daily from politicians, on social media and in the media.
President Trump improperly used the word lynching in one of his tweet storms this week (as others have done in the past, including Joe Biden when he was a senator and Clarence Thomas when seeking a seat on the Supreme Court). Referring to the impeachment process, Trump said, "All Republicans must remember what they are seeing here -- a lynching."
By its very definition, it is not a lynching. Webster's defines a lynching this way: "To put to death (as by hanging) by mob action without legal approval or permission." IF President Trump is impeached by the U.S. House of Representatives, he will receive a trial in the U.S. Senate. Not a lynching.
And IF he were to be convicted by the Senate, which is highly unlikely, he would not face death, not by hanging or any other means. Not a lynching.
There are any number of words the President may have used to describe the impeachment process, including unfair, partisan, etc., but lynching is in no way a descriptor of the process. In using it, the president diminishes this powerful, ugly word that should lay bare our shared national shame.
We need to be shocked, horrified, when someone uses the word lynching. The mental image should make us cringe. And when someone uses the word terrorist, terrorism or acts of terror, we need to have a heightened sense of alarm and a healthy dose of fear.
We witnessed the ugly face of terrorism on 9/11. We owe it to the men and women who died that day, and all of those who have fought it around the world, to never forget what terrorism looks like. And it doesn't look like a Muslim woman who was legally elected by the citizens of her community –- no matter how much we may disagree with her politics and world view.
We have seen in film and in books what hate-filled human beings are capable of. Be it lynching or gas chambers, we must never forget or diminish the brutality and hatred of the people who carried out these heinous atrocities on fellow human beings.
Since a 1907 article appeared in The American Journal of Psychology, "semantic satiation" has been studied and in test after test it is proven that when we hear a word repeatedly, over and over and over, the human brain actually changes how it responds to the word.
Dr. Leon James, a professor of psychology at the University of Hawaii College of Social Sciences, has studied the phenomenon for more than 50 years.
Dr. James said, "It is a kind of fatigue" and it's called "reactive inhibition." He said that a brain cell "fires" on certain words or thoughts and that upon repeatedly hearing the word it requires more brain energy each time to make the cells fire, essentially building up a "tolerance" to the word or thought.
Our society cannot afford for us to become fatigued with ugly, powerful words like "lynching" or "terrorist," and simply tuning it out is not the answer.
Hateful thoughts lead to hateful words, and hateful words lead to hateful actions. Our nation cannot bear the price of those actions, so it is our duty to refuse to participate in it and to call it out when we hear it or read it.
Gary Adkisson is publisher of The Bismarck Tribune.

Load-Date: October 25, 2019


End of Document