DIPLOMAT CALLS SECURITY KEY ISSUE IN PEACE TALKS;
ISRAELI AMBASSADOR SAYS PALESTINIANS MUST AGREE TO COUNTER TERRORISM;
U.S.-LED SUMMIT STARTS TODAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 15, 1998, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A10
Length: 756 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Clinton administration, responding to Israel's security concerns, is preparing to present Yasser Arafat with a document that calls for "very specific" steps to counter terrorism on the West Bank, Israeli ambassador Zalman Shoval said Wednesday.
On the eve of the summit being convened by President Bill Clinton, Shoval said Arafat runs a risk along with Israel if the militant Hamas organization is not uprooted on the West Bank.
"Without the security document in place we cannot sign an agreement," Shoval said at a news conference.
Clinton is to open the summit at the White House today, greeting Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, and then go to the site of the talks, the Wye River Conference Centers on Maryland's Eastern Shore, for further meetings with them in the afternoon and evening.
The parties are pursuing a deal that has eluded them for 19 months on exchanging Israeli control over land for firm Palestinian commitments to clamp down on militants - opening the way for "final status" talks on permanent peace.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright will assume the U.S. steering role on Friday and Clinton will be free to dip back into the talks as they progress toward what the U.S. administration hopes will be a deal on Sunday.
Arafat said Wednesday he was optimistic and Netanyahu said he would work toward an agreement on a West Bank troop withdrawal.
Clinton has been pushing the sides to end months of stalemate by completing an agreement based on a U.S. initiative for Israel to withdraw troops from 13 percent of the West Bank in exchange for detailed Palestinian measures to fight terrorism.
Shoval said that Netanyahu had agreed to relinquish the 13 percent of the West Bank to the Palestinian Authority, with 3 percent turned into a nature preserve. He said security issues would "make or break" the conference.
Netanyahu, however, is under intense pressure from Israel's right-wing camp, which opposes ceding land to the Palestinians. On Wednesday, opponents of the U.S. plan, including the powerful Jewish settler lobby, threatened to topple the government and field a challenger to Netanyahu in the next elections if he signs off on a pullback deal with the Palestinians.
Even two Netanyahu allies, Trade Minister Natan Sharansky and Science Minister Silvan Shalom, said Netanyahu should back out of the summit because unrealistically high expectations for success would pressure Israel into making too many concessions.
Settlers were demonstrating outside of Netanyahu's home Wednesday and planned to send representatives to the summit to try to convince Israeli leaders to walk away from the talks.
But Netanyahu said Wednesday that if Israel's security demands are met, "we will be willing to go a long way, even very long" toward a peace agreement.
Palestinian promises to constrict Hamas, which claims responsibility for several bloody attacks on Israeli civilians, will not suffice, however, Shoval said. "We have so many general promises we can paper the walls with them," he said.
Spokesmen at the White House and State Department echoed Israel's concerns and condemned the latest incident, an attack that killed one Israeli and wounded another as they swam in a spring on a communal farm outside Jerusalem.
"We join him in condemning the violence that took place," Joe Lockhart, the president's spokesman, said of Netanyahu's denunciation of the attack.
Meanwhile, CIA Director George Tenet has been in the region consulting with Israeli and Palestinian officials on tougher security measures.
State Department spokesman James Rubin said Hamas extremists "are a threat to everyone in the Middle East," including Arafat. "We have a common enemy, and that is Hamas," he said.
Rubin confirmed, meanwhile, that the Clinton administration was "trying to stitch together a package of measures that will fight terrorism."
Shoval, meanwhile, ticked off Israel's demands that illegal weapons be confiscated, terrorist cells uprooted, and terrorist suspects kept in prison.
Shoval also reiterated Israel's demand that the Palestine Liberation Organization either scrap its covenant or cancel the 29 provisions he said call for Israel's destruction.
Rubin indicated the administration would not press the point at the summit. He said the Palestinians had taken action on the charter and that any further changes should be taken up by Israel with the Palestinians.
Shoval said a redeployment of Israeli forces on the West Bank and specific security measures by the Palestinians are the "two pillars" of any accord.

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photos from AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
 (1) An Israeli settler Wednesday glances at posters showing Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
 (2) Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu (left) walks with Jordan's Crown Prince Hassan ibn Talal on Wednesday after they met in Amman, Jordan, as Netanyahu headed for the U.S.-hosted summit in Maryland.

Load-Date: October 15, 1998


End of Document