Diplomat with local ties takes on African crisis
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
June 5, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: NATIONAL POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 435 words
Byline: Ken Newton, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


June 05--An American diplomat with St. Joseph ties has been dispatched by the U.S. State Department to another African hotspot.
W. Stuart Symington has been sent as a special representative to the Central African Republic, a nation torn by sectarian violence and with more than 1 million residents and refugees at risk of starvation.
For more than a decade, Mr. Symington's postings have built in him an expertise on African affairs, particularly in areas of conflict and humanitarian need.
He served as deputy chief of mission in Niger from 2001 to 2003, working to build anti-terrorism cooperation in western Africa. He later became ambassador to Djibouti, a small nation but key to American counter-terrorism efforts in the Horn of Africa, bordering Somalia and across the Gulf of Aden from Yemen.
In 2008, President Bush appointed him as ambassador to Rwanda.
Mr. Symington, who practiced law in St. Joseph and is married to Susan Ide Symington, a native of St. Joseph, faces a challenge in shaping U.S. policy in the Central African Republic.
Landlocked and bordering countries like Cameroon, Chad and Sudan, the Central African Republic has seen in influx of at least 200,000 refugees from fighting in neighboring countries, according to the United Nations. That population adds to the roughly 600,000 displaced people from within the nation.
In April, the UN Security Council authorized 10,000 peacekeepers and 1,800 police officers to the nation, hoping to protect the civilian population and advance humanitarian efforts. Shortly after, the State Department tabbed Mr. Symington for his new assignment.
The United States has committed almost $175 million this year to restore security, support peace efforts and prop up humanitarian work in the Central African Republic.
One of Mr. Symington's missions will be to move the country toward democratic elections next February. He did similar work in Iraq in 2004 and 2005, helping ensure electoral legitimacy while that nation transitioned from the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein.
Mr. Symington is the grandson of four-term Missouri U.S. Sen. Stuart Symington, who served under President Truman as the first secretary of the Air Force. The diplomat, who was raised in Missouri, joined the U.S. Foreign Service in 1986.
Susan Ide Symington is the daughter of the late Dr. Lucien Ide and Barbara Ide.
Ken Newton can be reached at ken.newton@newspressnow.com
Follow him on Twitter: @SJNPNewton.
___ (c)2014 the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) Visit the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) at www.newspressnow.com/index.html Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: June 5, 2014


End of Document