DIPLOMACY IS NO ANSWER TO TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 12, 1989, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 662 words
Body


Regarding the hostages, bravo for Bill McClellan and his Aug. 6 column in which he said the United States should bomb a village for each hostage held.  He expressed my sentiments exactly. It's too bad he's not president.  Jacqueline Dolan Ballwin Once again, Israel is being made to answer for another's actions. When terrorists recently threatened to hang American hostages, Israel's actions were questioned.  Media reports have implied that the hanging of Lt. Col. William Higgins was an act of retaliation, which would not have taken place had the Israelis not abducted Shiite Moslem leader Abdul Karim Obeid. Never mind that Obeid is suspected of having conspired to kidnap Higgins as well as others.  President Bush has said, in effect, he is irritated with Israel for an inappropriate move, but why is he not instead taking more direct action against the real perpetrators, the Islamic extremists?  After all, Israel has not kidnapped innocent Americans abroad. It has not made and carried out death threats against them, yet Israel is being criticized. It has long been easier and safer to make Israel a scapegoat since its leaders are highly visible, unlike the shadowy terrorist figures. Why does the world cry injustice at the kidnappings yet say nothing about the slandering of Israel?  If the United States is interested in rescuing the hostages, let it pressure the countries who claim diplomatic relations with the United States, such as Syria, to use their influence with the countries responsible for hostage-taking and insist that they release the hostages they are now holding.
In short, lay the blame back on whom it belongs: the Moslem extremists who have kidnapped the hostages and those countries who aid by doing nothing to stop them.  Cathy Pollack Maryland Heights The United States is in mourning once again over another senseless death caused by terrorism. Once again, the politicians are running to affix the blame, pointing their accusing fingers at Israel. Once again, the media have turned a tragedy into a circus. Once again the experts and liberal politicians are rallying to the cry that violence begets violence and that we should deal with these groups on a diplomatic level. Once again, I sit and am amazed at the continuing treatment of these groups as political entities instead of criminals.  If we continue to treat terrorist groups under the auspices of international law and continue to treat the countries that harbor them with diplomacy, the problem of terrorism will grow. As we continue this soft treatment, these organizations and their supporters plot their next atrocities. We must become as harsh and uncaring in the treatment of terrorists as the terrorists are in the treatment of their victims. What we are dealing with is not political protest; it is war. The Israeli government understands this and deals with terrorists in a brutally efficient way.  Many of our politicians abhor the use of military force in dealing with terrorist groups because of the fear of killing innocent bystanders.  There are no innocents in war. It is a simple and brutal fact of which the terrorists are totally aware. The civilians in and around the terrorist camps in Lebanon are living there by choice. They freely integrate themselves with these groups by supplying them with support and anonymity. To call them innocents would be to call an American person who aids a criminal in the free knowledge of that person's crime an innocent. These people have accepted the risk of allowing the terrorists a place in their community. It is time to make them understand the risk.  The final solution to the problem of terrorism is to deprive these groups of a safe place to function. These groups and their supporters have chosen to live outside of international law, outside of the bounds of civilized behavior, and because of this, their rights to be treated under a civilized code of justice have also disappeared.  Kevin McCarney St. Louis

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document