Diplomat Dole, Candidate Dole
The New York Times
January 30, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 396 words
Body


Politicians are entitled to a certain quota of cynicism. Senator Bob Dole exceeded his by denouncing Secretary of State George Shultz's meeting with Oliver Tambo, the head of the African National Congress. Mr. Dole, a probable candidate for the 1988 Republican Presidential nomination, was perhaps less concerned with terrorism, as he claimed, than with currying favor with his party's right wing.
The Shultz-Tambo meeting was the first ever between a Secretary of State and the head of an organization generally considered the leading foe of apartheid. Mr. Shultz's decision to hold the meeting was tough, because the Reagan Administration has been so wedded to its one-sided policy of ''constructive engagement'' with the white-dominated Government in Pretoria and so estranged from most groups representing the black majority. Conservatives blasted the decision, declaring the A.N.C. a Soviet-dominated ''terrorist'' organization.
Faced with a choice of backing Mr. Shultz, staying silent or piling on with the ideologues, Mr. Dole piled on. Meeting with other South African black leaders would have been all right, he said. But to the Senate minority leader, talking with Mr. Tambo gives the impression that the United States approves of the A.N.C.'s tactics and program, including, he said, ''terrorism.''
The situation is far more complicated than that. No other organization in South Africa has the A.N.C.'s anti-apartheid credentials. Even Gatsha Buthelezi, the Zulu chief whom American conservatives favor, never fails to mention his membership in the organization. Moscow's influence, whatever it has become, derives in part from Washington's refusal to have any contact with A.N.C. leaders.
Mr. Dole and other conservatives assail the A.N.C.'s guerrilla activities as terrorism, but what really offends them is Communism. Otherwise, why would they support guerrillas in Angola, Afghanistan or Nicaragua? If they wish to resist Communism in South Africa, perhaps a more effective way would be to encourage relations with the black organization that leads the resistance to South Africa's unjust white regime. To stiff-arm the A.N.C. only pushes it closer to Moscow.
If the United States now hopes to foster a peaceful settlement in South Africa, it will be by following Mr. Shultz' path, engaging the A.N.C. as well as the Pretoria regime. Mr. Dole's path leads backward.


End of Document