Director of British Domestic Intelligence Agency Defends Spying Policies
The New York Times
October 10, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 973 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER
Body


LONDON -- Warning that there are thousands of Islamic extremists who view British citizens as ''legitimate targets,'' the chief of Britain's domestic intelligence agency, MI5, said this week that recent leaks about government spying capabilities had caused enormous damage, handing ''the advantage to the terrorists.''
The comments by Andrew Parker, who was appointed director general of the agency in April, were a harsh rejoinder to widespread criticism that American and British surveillance programs, some of them revealed by Edward J. Snowden, the American intelligence analyst, are an excessive and even illegal intrusion into personal privacy.
His remarks were the most vigorous defense of Britain's counterterrorism policies by a government official to date, including its monitoring of Internet and telephone communications.
In a speech on Tuesday night to the Royal United Services Institute, a defense and security research organization, Mr. Parker called ''utter nonsense'' claims that the British electronic eavesdropping agency, Government Communications Headquarters, known as GCHQ, listened in on ''everyone and all their communications,'' insisting that surveillance was tightly controlled.
''Far from being gratuitous harvesters of private information, in practice we focus our work very carefully and tightly against those who intend harm,'' he said, insisting that adequate safeguards were in place to protect innocent citizens.
''The reality of intelligence work in practice is that we only focus the most intense intrusive attention on a small number of cases at any one time,'' he said.
Intelligence intercepts are crucial tools in national defense, Mr. Parker said. ''Reporting from GCHQ is vital to the safety of this country and its citizens,'' he said.
MI5, known formally as the British Security Service and responsible for domestic security and counterintelligence, expects one or two major attempts at terrorism in Britain every year, Mr. Parker said. Citing the recent killings at a mall in Nairobi, Kenya, and the civil war in Syria, he said terrorism had become more diffuse and less predictable, with more sophisticated use of encryption technology. ''Threats are diversifying, but not diminishing,'' he said.
It was Mr. Parker's first public speech since becoming director general. He has spent three decades working for MI5 and was director of its counterterrorism division at the time of the London bombings in July 2005, becoming deputy director general in 2007.
Alan Rusbridger, the editor of the newspaper The Guardian, which has published many of the Snowden revelations, said Mr. Parker had said ''what you'd expect him to say'' as an intelligence professional.
''But MI5 can't be the only voice in this debate,'' Mr. Rusbridger told the BBC, contrasting the more open discussion in the United States with the less robust one here.
The intelligence services ''will say that's the haystack, they need that and they will look for needles in extremely controlled circumstances,'' Mr. Rusbridger said. ''The question is: Who gets the oversight of that? There has to be a wider debate.''
Mr. Parker called Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Pakistan and Yemen ''the more direct and immediate threats'' to Britain. The Yemeni group, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, has succeeded in smuggling explosives onto airplanes three times in the past four years, though its efforts have been foiled by faulty technology or by intelligence provided by human espionage.
He said the conflict in Syria was producing new threats, with extremist Islamist groups aspiring to attack Western targets. The intelligence agencies are working to monitor British and Western citizens who have traveled to Syria to fight and then returned home. A number of those returning have been stopped at the border and some have been arrested, he said, without elaborating.
Mr. Parker said 330 people had been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in Britain between Sept. 11, 2001, and the end of March 2013. Of those, 121 remain in prison; almost 75 percent of them are British. In the first few months of this year, he said, there have been four trials tied to terrorist plots, including plans for another attack on public places using bombs in backpacks, as in July 2005; two plots to kill soldiers; and one to attack a march of a far-right English organization. In each case, he said, there were guilty pleas, with 24 people convicted.
He argued that technology allowed Western governments to stay ahead of terrorism. ''What we know about the terrorists, and the detail of the capabilities we use against them, together represent our margin of advantage,'' Mr. Parker said. ''That margin gives us the prospect of being able to detect their plots and stop them. But that margin is under attack.''
Mr. Parker did not mention Mr. Snowden by name. Now in Russia to avoid extradition to the United States, Mr. Snowden leaked information to The Guardian and other newspapers that have revealed mass surveillance programs like Prism, run by the National Security Agency in the United States, and the Tempora program in Britain. The two countries share their intelligence findings.
Anger over the surveillance revelations continues in both countries. In Britain, Nick Pickles, director of the civil liberties advocacy group Big Brother Watch, said Mr. Parker had delivered a ''partial picture'' and a defense that lacked detail or transparency.
''Nothing in this speech did anything to assist a more informed picture or address public concern about the scale of the information being collected by the agencies,'' Mr. Pickles said. ''The fact he does not feel GCHQ's reach should be publicly discussed is in stark contrast to the U.S. government's efforts to maintain public confidence by bringing further transparency and oversight to the reach of the N.S.A.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/10/world/europe/britains-intelligence-chief-defends-spying-policies.html

Load-Date: October 10, 2013


End of Document