DIRECTOR OF F.B.I. IS ASSAILED
The New York Times
December 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 383 words
Byline: By The Associated Press 
Body


Workers at abortion and family planning clinics around the country assailed today as absurd and outrageous an assertion by William H. Webster, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, that increasing attacks against the facilities are not terrorism.
The workers, some at clinics that have been bombed, said they feel harassed and threatened by the violence, and said the bureau was failing to energetically investigate the attacks.
 
20 Incidents This Year
There have been 20 bombing and arson incidents at abortion and family planning clinics this year, compared with two in 1983 and three in 1982, according to Federal figures.
Workers at abortion and family planning clinics around country are angered by Federal Bureau of Investigation Director William H Webster's assertion that increasing attacks against facilities are not terrorism; workers, some of whose clinics have been bombed, note tremendous increase in such incidents in past year (M)
But Mr. Webster said Tuesday the attacks did not meet the bureau's definition of terrorism. Lane Bonner, a bureau spokesman, elaborating on Mr. Webster's comments, said the abortion violence could not be considered terrorism under bureau guidelines because no organized group or conspiracy had been identified.
Thomas Webber, executive director of Planned Parenthood of Minneapolis, called Mr. Webster's remarks Tuesday ''about the dumbest thing I've ever heard.'' His organization's abortion clinic in St. Paul has been struck by arsonists four times.
''If we saw in this nation, hospitals being similarly victimized, nursing homes being victimized, legal aid offices, churches and synagogues being victimized, we would have a national campaign to ferret out those responsible,'' he said.
Gloria Feldt, executive director of Planned Parenthood of Central and Northern Arizona called Mr. Webster's statement ''outrageous.''
''It seems to me to show some disregard for what the F.B.I. is supposed to do,'' she said.
 
'An Outrageous Statement'
Daniel E. Pellegrom, exective director of Planned Parenthood of Maryland, based in Baltimore, also said Mr. Webster's comment was ''an outrageous statement to make.''
If ''25 Hilton Hotels or 25 department stores had been bombed,'' he said, ''it would be regarded as very serious in the eyes of law enforcement.''


End of Document