DISASTER'S CAUSE MAY NEVER BE UNCOVERED THERE WAS NO INDICATION EARLY ON OF TERRORISM OR OTHER FOUL PLAY. CRUCIAL WRECKAGE COULD BE LOST.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 1, 1999 Monday SF EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1220 words
Byline: Seth Borenstein and Jonathan Landay, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Somewhere in the deep, cold, swiftly moving and corrosive waters off the island of Nantucket lies the answer to why EgyptAir Flight 990 plunged into the sea with 217 people aboard.
But experts fear it may never be found.
"We do not know at this point what caused the crash," National Transportation Safety Board Chairman Jim Hall said at a news conference yesterday afternoon. "We are beginning what may be a long investigation."
Although there was no indication that terrorism or other foul play was involved, FBI and CIA agents have joined airline crash detectives on the case. They are reviewing maintenance records, interviewing everyone who had access to the plane, checking every passenger on the manifest, and diving into the intelligence community's vast store of data on the recent whereabouts, movements, phone calls and bank accounts of known and suspected terrorists.
But experts on airplane crashes say this one may be a tough case to crack.
Safety officials know that the plane left New York at 1:19 a.m., and say the air crew made a routine call at 1:47 a.m. to the New York air traffic control center. Three minutes later, the plane disappeared, Hall said. (The New York Port Authority reported that last communication at 1:43.)
At 1:50 a.m., preliminary radar data showed that the plane made "a very rapid descent" of about 24,000 feet in 36 seconds. For 90 more seconds, radar picked up "reflections from the metal structure," Hall said. Then nothing.
"The only way it could be tougher is if they never knew [the plane] went down," said C.O. Miller, a retired head of airplane crash investigations for the National Transportation Safety Board. "I don't think you can get a hell of a lot worse."
All the clues are lying beneath 250 feet or more of saltwater that is at 59 degrees and getting colder with every day. And some of the key pieces of the puzzle may already be on their way to Europe, carried by a swift ocean current.
"The underwater currents will take parts, and the parts will take secrets," said Mike Polay, a retired military crash investigator and professor of aviation safety at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Prescott, Ariz.
Just recovering the pieces of the plane, not to mention reassembling them and analyzing them, is going to be a mammoth job for the Navy search-and-recovery ship USS Grapple and its divers, who will use sonar to try to locate big pieces of wreckage.
But not all the pieces will be found, aircraft safety experts predicted.
"It's worse than a jigsaw puzzle," Polay said. ". . . In this case, it may be the one part you cannot find" that holds the key to the mystery.
"They may never recover enough of it to really find out," agreed Norman Horton, a private airplane accident investigator in Oregon and a former professor at the University of Southern California.
"These aircraft are so sophisticated, it could be just about anything," said Ed Monhollen, a private aviation crash investigator in San Antonio. "There are so many possibilities."
The possibilities fall into two general categories - loss of control and sudden explosion - Miller said. But there are dozens of explanations in each category.
An explosion does not automatically mean a bomb. For example, faulty wiring running through the center fuel tank is now the leading suspect in the July 1996 crash of TWA Flight 800, and explosive cargo has been blamed for the May 1996 ValuJet crash in the Florida Everglades, Monhollen said.
There is no hint of a terrorist act, and so far no one is claiming responsibility, the FBI said. Investigators are looking into a Sept. 24 threat to planes leaving Los Angeles or New York's Kennedy Airport, one of many such threats logged regularly, but are not giving it much credence at this time.
Nevertheless, a slew of government agencies, including the State Department, FBI, CIA and National Security Agency (NSA), jumped into action yesterday to determine if there was any reason to suspect foul play.
Analysts reviewed several months of intelligence reports and other data, looking for any terrorist threats against EgyptAir, Egyptians in general, or Americans, who made up most of the passengers.
"They scoured everything to see if there was any clue," a U.S. official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. "We have lots of threats . . . but nothing with the [EgyptAir] plane."
Gmaat Islamiya, the main Egyptian extremist group, which is supported by fugitive Saudi Arabian terrorist Osama bin Laden, did call on Muslims to kill Americans. But that organization "is basically out of business," and seeking to become a legal political party, said Vincent Cannistraro, a former head of operations at the CIA's Counter-Terrorism Center.
Officials also looked at the names and nationalities of every passenger on the aircraft's manifest. Any names that raised the slightest red flag were run through intelligence databases, including those of the super-secret NSA, whose main function is intercepting and decoding international communications.
"The NSA people are mining their databases for anything," the official said.
Several of the passengers were from Syria and Sudan, both of which are on the State Department's list of states that sponsor international terrorism. But searches of the names produced no known terrorist links, the official said.
U.S. investigators also were expected to question all mechanics, catering personnel and ground staffs who had any involvement with the flight in Los Angeles or New York.
With no obvious criminal angle, the NTSB is taking the lead in the investigation.
And aviation experts pointed to the July 17, 1996, TWA Flight 800 crash as a good reference point.
That investigation has taken more than two years, and its preliminary finding that faulty wiring caused the plane's center fuel tank to explode is still in dispute, Horton said. Investigating this new crash will be much like investigating TWA 800, "only it's harder because the water is deeper," Horton said.
Of key importance are the "black boxes," the plane's two flight recorders, which are actually bright orange. One records the pilots' voices; the other stores data on the plane's engines, control surfaces and position.
Even though the pilots did not have time to radio for help, Miller, the former NTSB investigator, said the black boxes could tell investigators more than the rest of the plane put together.
If investigators find those recorders, "they're in Fat City," Horton said. That is because the recorders can tell what happened when, to the one-thousandth of a second, and the NTSB lab "is really excellent in deciphering what's on those recorders," he said.
Without the recorders, investigators must piece the puzzle together. Slowly.
Each piece of metal, especially those around the interior fuel tanks and parts of the wings, indicates the direction that things came apart, and then it can be deduced how and why, Horton said.
In general, the Boeing 767 has an "excellent safety record," said John Eakin, president of Air Data Research, a San Antonio firm that collects airplane safety data and used to do crash investigations. The plane has had two fatal crashes: One was hijacked, and ran out of fuel; the second had an engine go into reverse, killing 223 people in Thailand in 1991.
* Tish Wells of the Inquirer Washington Bureau contributed to this article.

Notes

The Crash of Flight 990

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document