Discontent Surrounds Start Of Mubarak's Third Term
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
October 12, 1993, Tuesday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 6
Length: 894 words
Byline: Deborah Pugh, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: CAIRO
Highlight: Egyptians are unhappy about the country's economic decline and
the crackdown on opposition political leaders along with terrorists
Body


A WEEK after winning a showy presidential referendum in which he
was the only candidate, Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak will be
sworn in today for his third six-year term. But the pomp of
ceremony will be overshadowed by circumstance.
At home, Mr. Mubarak faces mounting domestic political turmoil
and continuing economic decline. Abroad, he is struggling to assert
his democratic credentials in a rapidly changing region, in which
Egypt's importance to Arab-Israeli relations may be diminishing in
the wake of the peace accord between the Jewish state and the
Palestinians.
Cairo is gratified that the talks between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization will open here tomorrow, keeping
the focus on Egypt. But there is concern in government circles and
the military that the resolution of the Middle East conflict will
ultimately deny Egypt the huge annual aid package it has received
from the United States since it made peace with Israel in 1978. US
military aid is $ 1.3 billion a year.
The concerns seem justified, as worsening economic conditions
threaten Mubarak's credibility at home. Public resentment is
widespread, undercutting the credit Mubarak has earned even from
his most scathing detractors for significant accomplishments during
his 12 years in office, including a loosening of the political
system and an easing of restrictions on the press.
But even if these gains are lost, most Egyptians, illiterate and
totally detached from party politics, would hardly notice.
Unemployment is unprecedented and food prices are skyrocketing, as
Cairo has removed all food subsidies except that for bread, in
order to comply with an economic program designed by the
International Monetary Program.
''The social fund, which was supposed to lesson the blow of the
new economic order, has been a disaster, and there is nothing to
protect ordinary Egyptians,'' says one Western diplomat.
According to one of the country's leading economists, great
strides have been made in liberalizing Egypt's heavily controlled
economy - a process eased by the benefits from the massive debt
write-off that Cairo won for joining the coalition in the Gulf war.
But more has to be done to create a climate of stability by
tackling economic problems, which the economist sees as at the root
of the surge in Islamist violence. The concern is that, in trying
to counter terrorism, political openness will be lost and without
it, the hard choices needed for reform will not be made.
''This second phase of economic reform will be much more
difficult than the last; we need to have an atmosphere of
creativity and confidence, and that is a contract. If we continue
to have these concerns about corruption, and if the Cabinet remains
largely as it is, the signal will be that nothing has changed,''
confides the economist. He, like most Egyptians, is wary of openly
criticizing the president, but feels the need for change is
paramount.
The inauguration ceremony follows the weekend arrest and
interrogation of leading opposition politicians and journalists for
opposing the extension of the president's tenure and alluding to
government corruption in arms deals in an opposition newspaper.
It is most unusual, perhaps unprecedented, for even an
opposition Egyptian newspaper to target Mubarak openly. The
opposition press, while it frequently highlights corruption in high
places, has generally been intimidated by the aura of power and
abuse by many of the president's long-serving ministers, whose
futures are now a subject of debate as Mubarak prepares to appoint
a new Cabinet.
The Egyptian Human Rights Organization has condemned the
arrests, reminding observers that the men can be convicted under
Egypt's sweeping anti-terrorism laws, ammended in July 1992 to
counter a wave of attacks by Islamic extremists.
But in Egypt's increasingly tense atmosphere, observers were not
surprised that the authorities moved so swiftly against the critics
of the president. There are indications that Mubarak is sensitive
to rumors of corruption now touching his family. In a recent
interview in a state-owned magazine, the president denied that his
sons or those of other high-ranking officials were taking advantage
of their influence to gain government contracts or concessions from
foreign companies.
Yet the damage to the reputation of Mubarak and his ministers
may already have been done. ''A few years ago the image of
President Mubarak was of a man who was not particularly innovative
but he was considered modest, clean, a man of high integrity,''
says an influential Egyptian.
''This has changed: Now people are talking about his sons and
those of other high officials. It has become a hot issue. Some of
these stories I find unbelievable, but the truth is that people are
prepared to believe them and this is very bad,'' he says.
The referendum also heightened public disatisfaction. The
official results claim that over 80 percent of eligible Egyptians
cast their ballots and 96 percent voted for Mubarak. Polling
station visits by independent observers revealed irregularities.
Meanwhile, the military courts instituted last December to try
civilians charged with offenses under the broad sweep of the
terrorism act have condemned 27 to death, and 15 were hanged in
June and July.
In an apparent revenge attack on Saturday, men believed to be
Islamic extremists wounded a high ranking Egyptian military
prosecutor involved in a mass trial of alleged militants.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: HOSNI MUBARAK: Egyptian president has become
sensitive to criticism, including charges that some members of his
family and government are involved in corruption., BANDPHOTO

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document