Dismissal Is Sought in Case Against Terrorism Suspect
The New York Times
May 14, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 26
Length: 545 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


More than a decade ago, a federal grand jury in New York indicted a man on charges that he helped plan the 1998 bombing of the American Embassy in Tanzania, which killed 11 people and injured scores more. 
  At the time, the man was a fugitive. He was finally captured in 2004, held in the secret prisons run by the Central Intelligence Agency, and transferred in 2006 to the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Last year, military prosecutors filed war crimes charges against him in connection with the 1998 attack.
  The man, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, a Tanzanian, thus became the rare detainee facing similar charges in both the military and civilian courts for the same act.
  Now, in an unusual twist, a lawyer for Mr. Ghailani has told a federal judge in Manhattan that he plans to seek dismissal of the federal indictment on the ground that his detention by the government has violated his right to a speedy trial in the civilian court system.
  The lawyer, Scott L. Fenstermaker, also contends that the government has violated Mr. Ghailani's ''right to counsel and due process'' by blocking him from communicating with Mr. Ghailani since July 2008, and refusing to deliver letters the lawyer has sent him. 
  The lawyer's claim comes as the Obama administration weighs how to proceed with detainees' cases, whether to again use a military commission system, or to prosecute detainees in existing American courts.
  The United States attorney's office in Manhattan declined to comment on the lawyer's claims, which he made in a letter to Judge Kevin T. Duffy of Federal District Court.
  Civilian and military authorities have both accused Mr. Ghailani, believed to be in his mid-30s, of helping to obtain explosives and a truck for the Qaeda-led embassy bombing, and assisting with other logistics. In 2007, Mr. Ghailani appeared before a military review panel at Guantanamo, and apologized for assisting those who planned and carried out the attack, but said he had been kept in the dark about its purpose. ''It was without my knowledge what they were doing, but I helped them,'' he said, according to a transcript. He added, ''I'm sorry for what happened to those families who lost, who lost their friends and their beloved ones.'' 
  Mr. Ghailani also said that he had once met Osama bin Laden, as well as Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the Qaeda figure held in Guantanamo Bay who has said that he was the mastermind of the 9/11 attacks.
  Mr. Mohammed also faces a federal indictment in New York, dating to the 1990s, charging him with conspiring in the so-called Bojinka plot to bomb American passenger airliners over the Pacific.
  Mr. Fenstermaker, reached by phone Tuesday, declined to comment on his letter to the judge.
  Col. Peter Masciola, chief defense counsel in the military office that represents detainees at Guantanamo, declined to comment on Mr. Fenstermaker's claim that he had been forbidden to communicate with Mr. Ghailani since last July. 
  But Colonel Masciola said that in March of this year, he approved Mr. Fenstermaker as a member of a pool of civilian lawyers who help represent detainees at Guantanamo, for the purpose of potentially representing Mr. Ghailani. That, he said, was still subject to approval by Mr. Ghailani and a military commissions judge.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani faces charges in both military and civilian courts. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)                                                                          

Load-Date: May 14, 2009


End of Document