dismissed over death
USA TODAY
December 2, 2011 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 578 words
Byline: John Bacon with staff and wire reports
Body


Florida A&M University said that it's dismissing four students for their role in the death of a marching band member last month.
University President James Ammons referred to the dismissals in a memo to members of the FAMU Board of Trustees on the school's zero-tolerance hazing policy, but didn't specify the involvement of the students in the death Nov. 19 of drum major Richard Champion. "I want to report that four students have been dismissed from the University in connection to the Robert Champion incident," the memo says.
Champion, 26, was found unresponsive Nov. 19 on a bus parked outside an Orlando hotel after the school's football team lost to a rival. FAMU's band director, Julian White, was fired and Ammons suspended the band, the Marching 100.
Sandusky charity won't fold for now
Attorneys for someone claiming to have been molested by a former Penn State assistant football coach said they have settled a lawsuit aimed at keeping solvent a charity the coach founded.
Harrisburg lawyers Ben Andreozzi and Jeffrey Fritz sued to prevent The Second Mile charity from dissolving or transferring its assets without court approval. They say the settlement protects the rights of their client, whose identity has not been revealed, to the charity's assets and lets Second Mile's day-to-day operations continue. Jerry Sandusky founded the charity in 1977. His lawyer, Joe Amendola, said he hasn't discussed a plea bargain and that Sandusky maintains his innocence. Also Thursday:
Penn State officials said they will donate $1.5million from the school's share of Big Ten football bowl proceeds to a pair of sex-crime advocacy organizations in the wake of sex-abuse allegations levied against Sandusky.
Massachusetts sues over foreclosures
Massachusetts sued five major banks citing deceptive foreclosure practices such as the "robo-signing" of documents. The suit filed by Massachusetts Attorney General Martha Coakley accuses Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo, Citigroup, and GMAC of "unlawful and deceptive" conduct in the foreclosure process.
Talks have been ongoing for more than a year between major banks and the attorneys general from all 50 states over fraudulent foreclosure practices that drove millions of Americans from their homes. Coakley said banks have failed to "show accountability for this economic mess."
California lawmakers give back cars
California lawmakers had to give up taxpayer-subsidized vehicles, some costing more than $50,000, in favor of mileage reimbursements under rules effective Thursday.
California had been the only state that provided vehicles to its rank-and-file lawmakers for unlimited use, the National Conference of State Legislatures says. The Citizens Compensation Commission voted last spring to end the perk in favor for reimbursement of 55 cents per mile they drive on official business. Senate and Assembly members also had received insurance, repairs and unlimited gas. The state is selling the cars.
Senate passes $662 billion defense bill
The Senate approved a $662billion defense bill despite a presidential veto threat over provisions dealing with the handling of terrorism suspects.
The measure, which passed 93-7, would require the military to hold terrorism suspects linked to al-Qaeda or its affiliates, even those captured on U.S. soil, and detain some indefinitely.
The bill still must be reconciled with the House-passed measure. It would provide defense spending for the fiscal year that began Oct.1. 

Load-Date: December 2, 2011


End of Document