DISPUTE OVER CLOTHING DOMINATES GUANTANAMO BAY HEARING; DEFENDANTS' REQUEST TO WEAR CAMOUFLAGE IN COURT GRANTED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
October 17, 2012 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 1061 words
Byline: Ben Fox, Associated Press
Body


GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba -- Three Sept. 11 defendants took a judge up on his offer to let them skip their military tribunal Tuesday and the proceedings went on without them. The Guantanamo detainees won a new request to return to court in camouflage clothing if they wanted.
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the self-professed 9/11 mastermind, was not in the courtroom while attorneys delved into a dense debate on legal motions, including rules for handling classified evidence at trial and what kind of clothing would be allowed.
Only two of the five defendants made it to court for the second day of the weeklong hearing. Mr. Mohammed, Saudi defendant Mustafa Ahmad al-Hawsawi and Pakistani national Ali Abd al-Aziz Ali -- Mr. Mohammed's nephew -- all stayed away.
The presiding judge, Army Col. James Pohl, ruled Monday that the defendants didn't have to attend the hearing every day this week, although he said they would have to attend their formal trial and may need to attend future hearings.
Mr. Mohammed was taken from his cell at the U.S. base in Cuba to a holding cell outside the courtroom, then chose to boycott at the last minute, said a Navy officer whose name was not released by the court for security reasons.
The 47-year-old Mohammed, who has previously said he conceived and orchestrated the Sept. 11 attacks, gave no reason for sitting out the hearing. But on Monday, he dismissed the military tribunal with scorn, saying "I don't think there is any justice in this court."
Authorities have portrayed the other defendants as Mr. Mohammed's underlings, who provided logistical and other help to the Sept. 11 hijackers. All five face the same charges, which include terrorism and murder, in what is considered one of the most significant terror prosecutions in U.S. history. They all could get the death penalty if convicted at a trial that is at least a year away.
In attendance were Walid bin Attash, a Yemeni who grew up in Saudi Arabia, and Ramzi Binalshibh, another Yemeni who was originally chosen to be one of the hijackers but couldn't get a U.S. visa to enter the country. Both sat through the hearing without incident, apparently following the proceedings.
Prosecutors had argued the rules for the special wartime tribunals known as military commissions require defendants to attend all court sessions, and said the defendants' presence would ensure the proceedings are legitimate. But lawyers for the men said the threat of forcible removal from their cells would be psychologically damaging for men who had been brutalized while held by the CIA in secret overseas prisons before being taken to Guantanamo in September 2006.
The judge granted another concession to the defendants Tuesday, giving them more freedom to choose what they wear in court.
Mr. Mohammed and Mr. bin Attash had wanted to wear camouflage clothing in the courtroom at their May arraignment, apparently to portray themselves as soldiers, but the prison commander refused to allow it. The judge ruled they could wear some camouflage items as long as they were not U.S. military uniforms.
The judge also began hearing arguments Tuesday on a protective order, a set of rules for handling classified evidence that the defense and other critics say are overly broad.
Protective orders are standard in civilian and military trials, and prosecutors say the one proposed for the Sept. 11 trial is necessary to prevent the release of classified secrets and protect national security.
But defense lawyers say the rule would make it harder for them to introduce the men's own accounts of the conditions of their captivity during the several years they each spent in CIA-run overseas prisons, where they were subjected to what the government calls "enhanced interrogation techniques" that included being tied up in uncomfortable "stress positions," forced nudity, sleep deprivation and the simulated drowning technique known as waterboarding.
The protective order contains provisions to censor or close proceedings that appear to violate constitutional protections for the right to open trials and will undermine the public's confidence in the military tribunals, said David Schulz, a lawyer for a coalition of media organizations that includes The Associated Press.
The judge did not rule on the issue; testimony was scheduled to continue today.
Mr. Mohammed and his four co-defendants face charges that include terrorism, conspiracy and 2,976 counts of murder in violation of the law of war, one count for each known victim of the Sept. 11 attacks at the time the charges were filed.
In another terrorism case, a federal appeals court Friday overturned the terrorism conviction of Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a former driver and bodyguard for Osama bin Laden whose case has been one of the most tangled to emerge from the war crimes trials of detainees held by the military at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The court found that Mr. Hamdan's conviction by a military commission for providing material support for terrorism could not stand because, under the international law of war in effect at the time of his actions, there was no such defined war crime.
The Military Commission Act, a law passed in 2006, does not authorize such retroactive prosecutions, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled.
The case of Hamdan, once considered a dangerous terrorist by the Bush administration, forced Congress to pass that 2006 statute in the first place.
Lawyers for Mr. Hamdan, a Yemeni who was captured in Afghanistan in 2001, had challenged his detention and won a landmark Supreme Court case in 2006 that found the military commission system for prosecuting war crimes unconstitutional and in violation of U.S. military law and the Geneva Conventions. That forced Congress to rewrite the rules, leading to Mr. Hamdan's trial and conviction in 2008. Because he had already served so long in prison, he was released later that year to Yemen, his home country.Mr. Hamdan traveled from Yemen to Pakistan and then Afghanistan in 1996, attended an al-Qaida training camp, met bin Laden, and became a driver carrying jihadis and their weapons. Eventually he began driving bin Laden personally, and even was told by bin Laden several days before Sept. 11, 2001, that they would have to evacuate their compound because of an impending operation that might provoke retaliation.

Notes

The New York Times contributed./

Load-Date: October 17, 2012


End of Document