DISTURBING ART, PAINFUL TALK MARK VICTIMS' RIGHTS WEEK; RANGE OF CRIME: MURDER, DRUNKEN DRIVING, STALKING, TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 2, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: ST. CHARLES; Pg. 1
Length: 797 words
Byline: Leigh Anne Porcher St. Charles Post Special Correspondent
Body


Dark paintings lined the meeting-room wall, describing - through art - the anguish of crime victims and of mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters and friends affected by crime and abuse.
A picture of a child on its back trapped in an array of spikes might have spoken loudest. Sharon Harper, the artist of the display, said she had turned to explore another side of life. "I don't find it hard to be loved, to be cared for, to love," Harper said. "I find it hard to address those things that I am holding back."
Harper spoke at a reception Thursday in St. Charles where law-enforcement officials, county leaders, counselors and relatives of crime victims spoke. The reception highlighted activities of Victims' Rights Week in the county.
"It is Victims' Rights Week and also Child Abuse and Awareness Month," said Maggie Cruzen, coordinator of the program to assist crime victims in St. Charles County. "This was a combination to honor victims and to bring education and awareness to the very painful and sobering fact of child abuse and neglect."
Harper's work, often disturbing, seemed to depict the range of crime addressed at the reception: murder, drunken driving, stalking, child abuse, and terrorism. Harper is an artist and assistant professor at Southwest Missouri State University in Springfield.
"Often times we don't take time to tell each other: 'Yes, we know how you feel,' " Harper said. "I know how hard it is to tell your stories. You're not alone."
Judy Hake of St. Peters and Cheryl LaFollette of St. Charles told their stories. Each mother lost a child to crime. Another story was read about a woman whose life changed when she became a stalking victim. The speakers spoke of pain but also of healing and of defeating violence.
Hake started a chapter of Mothers Against Drunk Driving in St. Charles County and recently began a support group for people affected by drunken drivers. LaFollette wants to start a local group of Parents of Murdered Children.
"It gives me a goal to keep Jenni's name alive," Hake said. "I am committed to help every other victim."
Hake's story begins on Dec. 4, 1992 - or maybe 18 years earlier, when her youngest daughter, Jennifer, was born. On that December evening, Jenni was killed when her car was hit head-on by a 26-year-old mother who had drunk too much at a Christmas party.
Jenni, a cheerleader at Fort Zumwalt South High, intended to take friends out to eat after a basketball game. Moments before the wreck, she allowed a friend to drive her car while she climbed in the back seat with two other youth. In the crash on Muegge Road, only Jenni was killed. "The one thing I will never forget is my beautiful 18-year-old daughter in a casket," Hake said.
Nearly a year later, the drunken driver was convicted, sentenced to 60 days in jail with a work release, five years' probation and 300 hours of community service, Hake said. The woman lost her drivers license for five years.
Hake said the terms disappointed her. Her family endured numerous court delays but was able to make a victim-impact statement.
"At the time of the sentence, I felt she deserved more," Hake said. "Now I feel there are other ways of punishment worse than jail. She has to live with it.'
LaFollette's story is also fresh. Her son, Paul Kinion, 22, was murdered at a party Feb. 5, 1993. Kinion had planned to go to a party given by his cousin, but when that fell through, he went instead to a party at the Townhouse Inn in St. Charles. Paul never returned home. He was shot, beaten and murdered by someone at the party.
In December, Heath D. Priest pleaded guilty in exchange for a life sentence without possibility of parole.
"My family feels justice has prevailed," LaFollette said.
But justice is only a small salve for the hurt. The memories of Paul are still so vivid, LaFollette said; and nearly two years of working the case took its toll. She still thinks "what if" and "if only" and "why me," she said.
Kinion's body was discovered in the trunk of his car in Knob Noster four days after his family knew he was missing. The family had been frustrated because police waited 24 hours before beginning to search for him because Kinion was 22 years old, LaFollette said.
LaFollette and her husband, Richard, did their own research and learned who Paul was with when he left the party. The description matched that of a person seen near Paul's car in Knob Noster. In September 1993, Priest was arrested in Nebraska. In November, evidence pointed to his having killed Kinion in the basement of Priest's home.
"Why anyone would want to hurt Paul like this, I'll never know," LaFollette said. "We lost a beautiful, kind person when we lost Paul."
LaFollette urged crime victims to band together.
"We need to give extra thoughts to crime victims and their families," she said.

Load-Date: May 3, 1995


End of Document