DISTRICTS INSURE AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 29, 2003 Wednesday
NORTH EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: METRO,
Length: 363 words
Byline: JILL CUENI-COHEN
Body


The Deer Lakes School District has bought something it never wants to use: terrorism insurance.
 The Butler Area School District also has decided to buy the insurance.
 Deer Lakes will pay a premium of $1,881 for the remainder of the fiscal year, which ends June 30, to cover the district against losses that arise from acts of terrorism under the terms of the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, signed into law Nov. 26 by President Bush.
"The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act was created as a result of Sept. 11, and the [Pennsylvania School Boards Association] offers it at a low cost," Deer Lakes Superintendent Mark King said after the board unanimously agreed to buy the insurance. The premium is paid to the association, and the cost of a full year's coverage has yet to be determined.
 King said that an "act of terrorism" must be declared as such by the president and certified by district officials in concurrence with the U.S. secretary of state and the U. S. attorney general. It must be committed by a person acting on behalf of a foreign interest in an effort to disrupt the lives and government of Americans.
 "It can't be used in a Columbine-type of situation, where kids are shooting people," King said. "It has to really be a terrorist act."
 Under a formula established by the law, the United States will pay 90 percent of covered terrorism losses that exceed the insurer's deductible, and the insurer will pick up the tab for the remaining 10 percent.
 King said the school board preferred to err on the side of caution.
 "We felt it was prudent for the community to spend that kind of money, but we hope we never have to use it," he said.
 The Butler Area school board on Jan. 20 approved paying $4,553 for the insurance.
 Greg Faulk, business manager for Butler Area, said the board acted on the advice of its solicitor.
 "A lot of the school districts aren't going with it," he said, "but the board wanted to make sure we had all possible coverage."
 The policies are described as covering only terrorist acts made on behalf of foreign political groups, not disgruntled students or other local actions, but Faulk said the policy Butler Area signed is open to interpretation.

Notes

DEER LAKES/BUTLER AREA SCHOOLS Jill Cueni-Cohen is a freelance writer. Freelance writer Nancy Welsh contributed to this report.

Load-Date: January 30, 2003


End of Document