DMC student acted alone in base shooting, FBI says
Foghorn: Del Mar College
May 28, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: CAMPUS; Pg. 1
Length: 295 words
Body


Navy security officer kills man; second person no longer sought
The man who opened fire at Naval Air Station-Corpus Christi
in an attack that left one injured, according to authorities, was a Del Mar
College student.
Adam Alsahli, 20, was a business administration major and was enrolled during the fall 2018, spring 2019 and fall 2019 semesters, according to Melinda Eddleman with Del Mar's College Relations department.
The FBI said all the evidence points to the attack being terrorism related. Two officials familiar with the investigation told the Associated Press that agents are examining social media posts made by Alsahli expressing support for extremist groups, including al-Qaida.
Alsahli was born in Syria and was a U.S. citizen.
Authorities say Alsahli opened fire and wounded a Navy
security officer while trying to drive a truck through a base entry gate the
morning of May 21.
According to the Associated Press, the female security
officer was able to roll over and hit the switch that raised a barrier,
preventing Alsahli from entering the base. He was then shot and killed by
security officer.
"The sailor displayed tremendous courage and took immediate
action under fire that allowed Navy security forces to respond quickly and
effectively," NAS-CC Commanding Officer Captain Christopher Jason said in a
statement.
A second suspect had originally been sought, but the FBI said
on May 27 that Alsahli acted alone.
More than 20 special agents, analysts and technical experts came
to Corpus Christi to support the ongoing investigation, according to the FBI's
Twitter page.
The FBI is still investigating the attack urges anyone with
information to call 800-225-5325.
The Foghorn News has submitted a public information request
to find out more about Alsahli's time at Del Mar College.

Load-Date: May 29, 2020


End of Document