Do Americans have the courage to combat terrorism?
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 28, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; LETTERS
Length: 393 words
Body


Editor, New Era:
Kelly Clinger (Sept. 24 letter, "If war is not the answer to terrorism then what is?) is to be congratulated and held in high regard for her comments regarding the protesters.
She realizes, as do many of us older citizens, that our protesters have the right to carry out their cowardly acts only because the generations before them carried out what they bravely considered their duty to defend the country, its people and its Constitution -- whatever the cost to them and theirs.
I wonder how many of the people who are displaying flags on their lawns and on their vehicles and lapels know what it is to sacrifice in time of tragedy and war. My only hope in that regard is that the concern for our well-being indicated by many of the flag wavers of recent days will not disappear as their newly acquired stars and stripes fade and shred in the wind.
#MUM.S28S281.#
The "me" generation of today has little time and patience for any effort that takes more than two to three weeks to finish, let alone the time it will take to unseat our terrorist enemies.
The truth of the matter is that we, as a nation, have enemies and that these enemies will attack us if we do nothing to defend ourselves.
Like Mr. Luckenbill of that same paper, I am disappointed with our preachers' approach to this tragedy. All our clergy want to do is preach religious love to our "fellow man."
What many don't seem to understand is that the evil cowards who attacked us were spreading their kind of religious love. And they killed many of us. When will we learn?
The parents of these same clergy, if not dead, would be living in prisons in this country or Germany or Japan had not the brave in our population taken arms and defeated our enemies in the last great war on behalf of all of us, including the conscientious objectors.
It is a nice idea to spread the gospel and, no doubt, it has its place. However, as Mr. Luckenbill points out, the terrorists are Satan incarnate. This time, it will take more than kind words to put down Satan.
It is time for action -- measured action, under God's guidance -- but physical action nonetheless, to which Ms. Clinger alludes.
It is at times like this that I wonder how many of our current population would truly subscribe to Patrick Henry's gutsy approach of "Give me liberty or give me death." I fear not enough.
J. Eugene Mummau
Lancaster

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document