Doctor convicted in terror attacks
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 17, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 6
Length: 342 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


LONDON (AP) - A British-Iraqi doctor was convicted of conspiracy to murder Tuesday for failed car bomb attacks upon young nightclubbers and rescue workers in London and airport travelers in Scotland. Prosecutors said he plotted to kill hundreds in revenge for the deaths of loved ones in Iraq.
Bilal Abdulla, 29, who is due to be sentenced today at London's Woolwich Crown Court, was also convicted of conspiring to cause explosions in central London and at Glasgow airport.
His co-defendant, Jordanian neurologist Mohammed Asha, 28, was acquitted of playing any role in the plot.
Abdulla represents an unlikely type of militant: a British-born doctor who had pledged an oath to protect human lives. Anti-terrorism officials said Abdulla's case challenged the British public to broaden their thinking about potential homegrown threats.
"I personally find it bizarre that people who have trained as doctors can seek to take life in such a cruel way," said John McDowall, head of anti-terrorism policing in Britain. "When you look at the profile of these individuals, they are very different from the terrorists we have dealt with in this country before - being professional people."
All of Abdulla's planned attacks fizzled. Lethal car bombs placed near crowded London nightspots did not go off, and an attempt to ram a blazing Jeep into the passenger terminal at Glasgow's airport was also thwarted.
Investigators said Abdulla, a Sunni Muslim born in Britain but mainly raised in a middle class Baghdad neighborhood, blamed the West for the deaths of friends and relatives in the 1991 Gulf War and the 2003 invasion.
"I wanted the public to taste what is going on, for them to have a taste of what the decisions of their democratically elected murderers did to my people," Abdulla said during the trial, referring to Iraq.
Abdulla, who holds dual British-Iraqi citizenship, was arrested with Kafeel Ahmed, a 28-year-old Indian engineering student, after they attempted to crash their burning Jeep through entrance doors to Glasgow airport's departure terminal.

Load-Date: December 17, 2008


End of Document