DOCTORS MUST FORM FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE AGAINST BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM, EXPERTS;
SAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 17, 1999, Wednesday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A10
Length: 447 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ARLINGTON, VA.
Body


Doctors - not the military or police - will be the first to recognize whether biological terrorists have struck the United States, experts told the first medical conference on the danger Tuesday.
Imagine a truck driving by a football stadium during a fall game. It sprays a mist that drifts over the stadium. Nobody notices.
Two days later, hundreds show up with sniffles and fevers that doctors believe is the flu. But five days later, 300 people are dead before a local scientist solves the mystery: It's not flu, it's anthrax.
Johns Hopkins University used that fictional scenario to tell doctors that the danger is real - and the nation isn't yet ready to handle it.
Dr. D.A. Henderson of the university's staff said, "To remain unprepared is to invite disaster." Johns Hopkins led the world's eradication of smallpox and now is mobilizing health workers and the government against biological terrorism.
Policy-makers know how to respond to bombs but have "an almost total lack of understanding of the implications of epidemic disease," Henderson said.
The average American is far more likely to die in a car crash than ever face a biological attack, other experts reassured the conference. But the threat is real, so the government is starting to prepare doctors and hospitals.
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala said, "We must not be afraid, but we must be aware." Her department is spending $ 158 million this year to prepare and has asked Congress for $ 230 million next year. She gave the opening speech at the conference, which the department organized with Johns Hopkins.
Currently, there is no national stockpile of treatment or vaccines. And doctors must be educated how to spot unusual symptoms and then what to do.
A huge attack like the Hopkins anthrax scenario is unlikely but possible, said Col. Gerald Parker, the Army's chief of infectious disease. The worst agents would be anthrax and smallpox, which are deadly and can be carried through the air.
A more likely scenario is small attacks, said former National Security Council member Jessica Stern. Americans have experienced one: In 1985, a religious cult poisoned Oregon salad bars with salmonella, making 750 people sick.
If local doctors spot unusual symptoms, alerting the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention quickly could help health officials mobilize drugs to stop an epidemic. Antibiotics can prevent anthrax if people take them soon enough after exposure, for instance.
But more research is needed, Henderson said. Smallpox vaccination hasn't been given anywhere in the world for years; there are only enough vaccination doses left for 6 million people and no factory left to make more.     

Load-Date: July 7, 1999


End of Document