Doctors and terrorism: Those who cure also kill
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
September 8, 2007 Saturday


Copyright 2007 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 693 words
Byline: Joseph Cramer, M.D.
Body


   Primum non nocere. First, do no harm. These Latin words, paraphrasing language from the Greek Hippocratic Opus "to help, or at least to do no harm," have been the center of medical ethics for more than a century. Now with the recent involvement of physicians in failed bombings in London and a fiery crash in Glasgow, it brings into question the role of doctors in revolutions.
The father of American pediatrics, Abraham Jacobi, was expelled from Prussia in the 1850s for his political views. Che Guevara studied medicine in Argentina before he joined the armies of Fidel Castro. The current No. 2 man in al-Qaida, Ayman al-Zawahiri, trained as an Egyptian surgeon, and a former leader of Hamas, Abdel Aziz Rantisi, was a pediatrician before the Israelis took him out with helicopter-launched missiles. Before that an Israeli medical student had assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin for his desire for peace. The wanted list goes on.
In the London attempt, as in any terrorist act, there was not only the desire to inflict damage. There is a greater wish to create terror. What is particularly distressing in this case is the intent to inflict death and harm to the innocent passer-by. Blowing up a car is one thing -- to damage nonliving and nonbreathing property -- but adding nails to the toxic mix created anti-personnel weapons with the only intent to hurt the living. Adding to the chill was the cryptic message passed on to a British cleric in Jordan some months before, "Those that cure you will kill you."
Are we that mad as a world that those who have sworn to treat fellow human beings in order to heal -- and if not to stand by the family and patient in time of passing -- are now the same ones to hasten that moment in intent?
There is self-selection of those who enter the field of medicine. For the most part they are bright and caring. In the United States there is further narrowing of the field by committees of admissions. They choose and pick from generally a broad array of candidates who have shown with test scores, grades and extra activity their worthiness to become students of medicine. It will be only later, after performing satisfactorily in that four-year marathon and then a residency, that they are officially doctors of medicine permitted to practice the art and science of their profession. They start out wanting to do what is right for their patients.
Idealism is a common trait among the eager students. Perhaps it is that grand illusion and an equally inflated image of themselves that prompt some to turn from rounds to bullets. There may also be the disillusion that as doctors with the newest drugs and finest instruments, people die. Or even as the patient walks out of the hospital on new artificial hips and joints they will have to limp back into their poverty and pain. But where does this anger give permission to anyone to blow up innocent people?
Another explanation for the inexcusable is that in other countries the selection of the physicians is different, and the sadistic and the perverted can enter the classes on anatomy or practice the intimate examination of the human body. They intentionally learn about the heart so they can stop it; they diligently study the brain to destroy it; they read about life to take it. But the arrangement of different people and various places would suggest this is not a worthy answer. Nor is it religion, because in the examples above, Christian, Jew and Muslim students and doctors of medicine all joined in the carnage.
It is far more likely that this transformation from the healer to the heathen is part of a great mutation of men who by intelligence become consumed in their own anger and self-righteous importance. For some sick souls, the elimination of societal cancers with a sword is akin to treating of the ill with surgery. Their arrogance has killed their reason, and civilized society has the right to terminate their evil. Joseph Cramer, M.D., is a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics, practicing pediatrician for more than 25 years and an adjunct professor of pediatrics at the University of Utah. He can be reached at jgcramermd@yahoo.com

Load-Date: September 8, 2007


End of Document