Documentary looks at Somali culture
The Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wisconsin)
February 17, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 The Leader-Telegram
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 435 words
Byline: Rob Hanson, The Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis.
Body


Feb. 17--Until the news story broke in late 2008 about young Somalian men from Minneapolis being recruited for terrorist efforts in their home country, many people were oblivious to the large population of refugees that had settled in the area.
In an effort to raise awareness and even clear up some misconceptions about the Somali community, UW-Eau Claire will screen the documentary "Broken Dreams" at 7:30 p.m. tonight in room 102 of Hibbard Hall.
Through interviews with the families of four of the young men killed after joining the group Al-Shabab in Somalia, writer and producer Fathia Absie said the film provides a never-before-seen account of how Muslims really feel about the connection between terrorism and their religion.
Absie said she at first expected the families to be reluctant to talk about the tragedies, but they were more open than expected.
"They actually talked about their hopes and dreams for their boys and the kind of people they were," Absie said. "It's also about how by leaving, these boys impacted the entire Somali community.
"Things have changed in a big way since that story came to light."
Absie, who worked the past three years at the Somali Service of the Voice of America (VOA) in Washington, D.C., began filming the documentary in December of 2009.
Absie said she did the documentary to explore her own unanswered questions: "Is this the norm? Killing anyone that is not Muslim?"
"Sporadically you will see (Muslims) condemning terrorism," Absie said. "But not in large numbers, and that always bothered me. In reality terrorism hurts more Muslims than it does people in the west or anyone else in the world.
"I don't think they're very outspoken about what is happening."
Absie approached UW-Eau Claire associate professor of foreign languages Kate Reynolds to have the second screening of the documentary at UW-EC.
Reynolds had spent the last year and a half studying Somalian culture in the Twin Cities as part of a grant project.
"We felt that it would be really amazing for the student here who went on the grant experience to have this further contact with the community," Reynolds said. "But also for all the other student who really don't understand anything about the Somali population in the twin cities."
To see more of The Leader-Telegram or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.leadertelegram.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: February 17, 2011


End of Document