Documents: U.S. wary of Iraq-linked terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 15, 1998, Wednesday


Copyright 1998 Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. b 6
Length: 302 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: TOKYO (AP)
Body


LOS ANGELES (AP) - The U.S. government is seeking to deport six Iraqi nationals for allegedly having links to Saddam Hussein and for visiting other countries suspected of sponsoring terrorism, their lawyer said.
Niels Frenzen, a defense lawyer for the men, said hundreds of pages of declassified documents show that some men were suspected of working for Saddam.
The others were suspect largely because they traveled to Iran and Syria, nations that U.S. officials have accused of sponsoring terrorism, the attorney said.
The men deny being Saddam supporters and say they face certain death if forced to return to Iraq. It is the first time authorities have disclosed details of their reasons for wanting to deport the six to Iraq.
Frenzen said the Justice Department released the documents after an internal review determined that the evidence was erroneously labeled secret.
"The government is saying, 'Oops, we made a mistake. Let's start all over again and try to do this correctly,"' Frenzen said Friday. "But the tragic thing is our clients have been separated from their wives and children all this time."
The six were among thousands of refugees evacuated to the United States from northern Iraq when Saddam crushed opposition forces in 1996.
The men - five of whom were former military officers - were among a handful who were detained by the United States as suspected security risks. The men say they believe they were victimized by statements from enemies within the fractured Iraqi resistance.
In March, a federal judge denied the men asylum, ruling that they were security threats and ordered them deported. The Iraqis, who have been held for more than a year, are appealing the decision.
Currently, the men are being held in an Immigration and Naturalization Service jail in San Pedro, south of Los Angeles.

Load-Date: July 15, 1998


End of Document