DoD panel eyes a 'Manhattan Project' against terrorism
Air Force Times
October 18, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSLINES; Pg. 10
Length: 620 words
Byline: By Jason Sherman; Times staff writer
Body


If the United States is to win its far-reaching war on terrorism, the Pentagon must marshal the nation's brightest scientific minds to develop technologies that can track individuals, items and activities in ways that exist today only in the realm of science fiction.
Technologies that can identify someone by unique physical characteristics -- fingerprint, voice, odor, gait or even pattern of iris -- must be merged with new means of "tagging" so that enemies who escape into a crowd or slip into a labyrinthine slum can still be located by U.S. forces.
A high-level advisory panel to Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld recently recommended the Pentagon spearhead a massive federal effort to put in place a new array of tagging, tracking and locating (TTL) technologies that it believes is essential to the terrorism war.
A Defense Science Board study this summer, "Transition to and From Hostilities," calls for this new array of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities.
"The global war on terrorism cannot be won without a 'Manhattan Project'-like TTL program," state briefing charts summarizing some of the study's findings. The top-secret Manhattan Project was a military-led effort involving many civilian scientists during World War II to develop the atomic bomb.
Such a focused undertaking could help future operations in such places as Iraq and Afghanistan, where enemy leaders do not wear military uniforms and can easily blend into the civilian population, move around in vehicles difficult to detect in traffic and use schools, mosques, hospitals and factories as operations bases.
Traditional U.S. military intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance systems from the Cold War and conventional war "was never designed for these purposes," state the charts used to brief Rumsfeld in late August.
The objective is to "locate, identify, and track people, things, and activities in an environment of one in a million to give the United States the same advantage in asymmetric warfare it has today in conventional warfare," the briefing charts say.
This tagging and tracking could be used for:
. Individuals such as enemy leaders or sympathizers, nuclear weapons or explosives experts, terrorist paymasters, or even groups of interest.
. Weapons of mass destruction, materials or components, precision machinery, pharmaceutical plans, specialized instruments, pathogens and seed stocks or vehicles.
. Activities such as recruiting, financial transactions, Internet activity, pathogen genome sequencing or organizational activity or meetings.
These sorts of practices would require the federal government to wrestle with many legal and ethical issues, as well as jurisdiction and who pays for such a project.
Whatever the price, the stakes are high, the panel said.
"Cost is not the issue; failure in the global war on terrorism is the real question," state the briefing charts.
The Pentagon's acting acquisition chief last year outlined the challenge of dealing with a new kind of threat in a memo establishing a task force focusing on developing identification technologies for the future.
"One of the most conspicuous lessons learned from our last two wars -- Afghanistan and Iraq -- is that we are not, in general, able to find, locate, track and either capture or otherwise isolate, key individual enemy leaders or important packages of material that may have been dispersed within their country," Michael Wynne, the Pentagon's acting acquisition czar, wrote in the Oct. 21, 2003, memo.
"This deficiency," he said, "has fundamentally undermined what otherwise would have been unquestionable military combat success, has prolonged the conflict and has denied us important intentional political objectives."

Notes

1 COLOR PHOTO.

Load-Date: December 2, 2004


End of Document