DoD Maps Strategy To Protect Military Installations; Personnel, Bases Vulnerable To Terrorism, CIA Leader Says
Federal Times
December 2, 2002 Monday


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 13
Length: 675 words
Byline: By VINCE CRAWLEY
Body


The Defense Department says it will issue by January a worldwide strategy for protecting its installations from terrorists.
Pentagon officials say they have had to delay by more than a year a congressional mandate to protect people and bases from terrorist attacks because they been so busy fighting terrorism since Sept. 11, 2001.
Congressional watchdogs say the Pentagon needs to pay closer attention to its $6 billion in antiterrorism funding for fiscal 2003. In many cases, the military services are not following any long-term plan and are hesitant to do so until they get Defense Department guidance, according to a new report by the General Accounting Office.
For example, the Army National Guard has not issued antiterrorism goals for its 3,900 armories and 211 installations and has no plan to do so, the report says. Only three of the 12 major headquarters reviewed by the GAO had any kind of long-term protection plans.
The Pentagon generally concurs with the report's findings and promises it will finish its master terrorism security plan by January.
At issue is a federally mandated practice known as "results-oriented management." Under this principle, leaders faced with a problem first must develop a strategic plan, including long-term goals and strategies to achieve them and external factors that could affect those goals. Second, leaders must develop a performance plan that states performance goals, describes resources needed, develops ways to measure progress, creates an evaluation plan and lists corrective actions to deal with any unmet goals.
Congress authorized $7.3 billion in fiscal 2003 for Defense to combat terrorism. This includes $6 billion for antiterrorism security measures, $676 million for counterterrorism, $360 million for dealing with any acts of terrorism, and $223 million for counterintelligence efforts.
Another $2.8 billion was approved to be held in reserve by the Pentagon as an "emergency response fund" for counterterrorism and force protection.
The Pentagon's proposed antiterrorism measures include "increased security and vigilance for key personnel, installations and equipment," lawmakers said in the recent conference report on the 2003 Defense authorization bill.
The conference report, released Nov. 12, noted that CIA Director George Tenet recently testified that U.S. military facilities around the world are at particular risk from the al-Qaida terrorist network.
At the GAO's request, the Pentagon in 2001 began developing a long-range, results-oriented plan on how to spend the $32 billion poured into force protection since 1999. More than half of that, $19.4 billion, is in personnel costs, including $14.1 billion for personnel performing security duties.
However, the GAO said that while the Pentagon "initiated steps to develop the framework," it suspended those efforts after the terrorist attacks and only recently restarted them. The report, released Nov. 1, is entitled "Combating Terrorism: Actions Needed to Guide Services' Antiterrorism Activities."
Marshall Billingslea, the Pentagon's principal deputy for special operations and low-intensity conflict, said in a written response to the GAO that "strategic guidance for all DoD component antiterrorism programs" will be published "no later than January 2003."
The GAO noted that spending decisions to date "generally were not made with reference for specific, long-term goals."
The Army's Forces Command, parent headquarters for many stateside Army installations, appeared to have the most comprehensive antiterrorism plan, the GAO said. Air Force headquarters and the Navy's Atlantic Fleet also had "some, but not all, elements of a results-oriented management framework in place."
However, auditors said, "According to service officials, a comprehensive . . . framework for antiterrorism efforts is not consistently used across all services and commands because DoD does not require it."
The GAO also said service officials indicated they were reluctant to develop such an approach until the Pentagon issued a departmentwide strategy.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document