Dodd blasts Bush on Constitutional rights
University Wire
November 7, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Daily Iowan via U-Wire
Length: 548 words
Byline: By Christopher Patton, The Daily Iowan; SOURCE: U. Iowa
Dateline: IOWA CITY, Iowa 
Body


Speaking at the Iowa City (Iowa) Public Library on Tuesday, Democratic presidential-nomination hopeful Chris Dodd said his first priority as president would be to restore the Constitution, which he said the Bush administration has disregarded.
Lt. Comdr. Charles Swift, the Navy officer who defended terrorism suspect Salim Ahmed Hamdan in the landmark 2006 U.S. Supreme Court case Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, introduced Dodd, a senator from Connecticut.
"Before it was popular, Sen. Dodd fought for the rule of law," Swift said. "I'm proud to support Sen. Dodd because the honor of our military is at stake."
In Hamdan, the Supreme Court ruled that the military commissions the Bush administration set up to try detainees at Guantanamo Bay violated the Uniform Code of Military Justice and the Geneva Conventions. Among the practices the Supreme Court ruled illegal were the allowance of secret evidence and evidence obtained through torture, Swift said.
He argued that fear of terrorism has led the United States to turn away from the rule of law. However, he said, the Bush administration's methods are actually increasing the threat of international terrorism.
"Our foreign policy must be about our values or we have nothing," he said.
Dodd's speech focused on the importance of abiding by the Constitution and international law.
"Today, in the early years of the 21st century, our defining question is a simple one," he said. "Can we defend America if we fail to defend our Constitution and the rule of law?"
Not dismissing those who answer the question differently from he does, the senator said such people are well-intentioned, believing that the threat of terrorism is so great that the country needs to disregard parts of the Constitution in order to defend itself. But Dodd insisted that such people are dangerously mistaken.
Criticizing his fellow senators for passing the Military Commissions Act last year, Dodd called the bill disgraceful. The act allows the president to detain indefinitely anyone he designates an unlawful enemy combatant and use evidence gained from torture, the senator said.
"The Senate was frightened out of the rule of law and into the waiting arms of the rule of men," he said.
As a result of laws such as the Military Commissions Act, the senator said, the United States is losing the prestige it gained in the years following World War II. At that point, America took the lead in creating international institutions such as the United Nations, NATO, and the International Monetary Fund, but now, he said, the country is no longer known for such positive contributions.
"Rather, America is increasingly known today for Abu Ghraib, for Guantánamo," he said.
The senator further criticized the Bush administration for keeping its interrogation methods secret. Again referencing the Hamdan case, Dodd said Swift wasn't allowed to ask his client what interrogators had done to him.
"America's moral authority isn't incidental to our security -- it's the very foundation," he said. "Restoring our belief in this most fundamental of American principles is the challenge we face today."
Though Dodd has recently gained in popularity among Democratic bloggers, the Des Moines Register's October Iowa Poll found his support to be only 1 percent.
(C) 2007 The Daily Iowan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 8, 2007


End of Document