Dodd will be missed by insurance industry
Business Insurance
January 11, 2010


Copyright 2010 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS; Pg. 0008
Length: 303 words
Body


ONE THING&apos;S CERTAIN about the decision of Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee Chairman Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., not to seek re-election: He definitely will be missed.
If for no other reason, that&apos;s because Sen. Dodd took a leading role in one of the most important risk management and insurance issues of the decade-establishing a federal terrorism insurance backstop. Three times he pushed legislation that provided certainty in a terrorism-shaken economy.
While he is no shill for the insurance industry, he understands its issues. The comprehensive financial services reform act he has drafted contains two provisions of considerable interest to risk managers, brokers and insurers.
The first, which had been approved several times by the House on a stand-alone basis, would streamline the regulation of surplus lines insurers and make it easier for qualified risk managers to access that critical market.
The second would establish a federal insurance office within the U.S. Treasury Department. This would provide expertise as federal authorities tackle insurance issues, particularly on the international level.
Sen. Dodd also played a key role in the Senate health care reform bill, taking temporary leadership of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee in the stead of his terminally ill friend, Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass.
But when given the choice of whether to chair the HELP or banking committee, he chose to remain at the helm of the latter.
Sen. Dodd still has nearly a year left in office. If he can achieve enactment of the surplus lines and federal insurance office provisions, he will leave office with an even more solid legacy on risk management issues than he already built with terrorism insurance.
Copyright 2010 Crain Communications Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: January 13, 2010


End of Document