Does Terrorism Work?
The New York Times
May 30, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 565 words
Byline: By Shibley Telhami; 

Shibley Telhami, a professor of government at the University of Maryland, is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.

By Shibley Telhami;  Shibley Telhami, a professor of government at the University of Maryland, is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
Dateline: COLLEGE PARK, Md.
Body


There is no escaping the conclusion that the unilateral withdrawal of Israel from southern Lebanon is a victory for Hezbollah, a group synonymous with terrorism in much of the West.
Its fighters and methods are being hailed not only in Lebanon but also in much of the Arab world. For years Hezbollah forces relentlessly attacked the Israeli army and its allied militias and avenged Lebanese civilian casualties by shelling Israeli settlements. A commentator in a Kuwaiti newspaper expressed a common view, advising Syria to "borrow Hezbollah for the Golan, or set up its own." He added: "It will cut the long negotiations short for them."
It took a few hundred fighters to force the unconditional retreat of one of the world's most powerful armies. So, here is a question on the minds of both frustrated Palestinians and angry Israelis: Does terrorism pay?
The answer? No, not all. Indeed, the lesson offered by events in Lebanon may be the opposite: Israel did not succumb to terrorism. Instead, Israel, despite the power of its army, could no longer overcome the weakness of its moral position -- occupying someone else's land.
Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon has not been the result of the group's terrorist attacks on Israeli civilian settlements. If this were the case, it would be strange for Israel to be bringing the group's fighters closer to its own civilian population by pulling its forces out of Lebanon. Moreover, no one doubts the ability of Israel's army, and the will of its people, to defend Israel's own territories.
The withdrawal from Lebanon was the result of military losses inflicted by Hezbollah fighters on Lebanese soil. The losses became unbearable not because they were especially large, but because they seemed pointless to many Israelis. And the occupation of Lebanese territories made Israel's retaliation seem illegitimate to much of the world.
The strength of moral positions has become a factor in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. When the Palestinians reacted in 1987 to Israel's continued occupation in the West Bank and Gaza with an uprising, much of the world sympathized, and many in Israel asked themselves if they wanted their sons and daughters to suppress Palestinian children on a daily basis.
By 1993 the Israeli public's doubt about the morality of occupation was as much a factor in the country's increased openness to territorial compromise as actual Israeli losses and international criticism. In contrast, when Palestinian militants attacked civilians in the streets of Tel Aviv in 1996, Israelis didn't give in to their demands; instead, they elected the hawkish Benjamin Netanyahu as prime minister.
Today, Prime Minister Ehud Barak appears to be betting that if he retaliates against any new attack on Israel's own soil, he will win both domestic and international understanding. The Israeli public usually has more stomach for losses in the defense of its own territory.
Although ultimate peace on the Lebanese border will have to await agreements with Syria and Lebanon, Israel's position is enhanced by the withdrawal. The real risk of the withdrawal may be that militants across the Middle East, especially Palestinians, draw the wrong lessons about the value of violence.
There is a sure way for Yasir Arafat and Ehud Barak to dispel that idea: quickly reach a fair deal, sending a message that peaceful negotiations have the greater payoff.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 30, 2000


End of Document