DOLE THREATENS TO STALL ANTI-TERRORISM BILLS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
June 05, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5D
Length: 474 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Questioning President Clinton's leadership,
Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole threatened Sunday to shelve
anti-terrorism legislation unless Democrats begin cooperating.
"I'm not going to spend two weeks on this bill to satisfy every
Democrat who wants to make some political point," Dole said.
His remarks on NBC's "Meet the Press" escalated a bipartisan
war of words that threatens to jeopardize a legislative response to
the Oklahoma City bombing.
Last week, Clinton accused Republicans of dallying.  "There is
no further excuse for delay," the president said Wednesday.
The majority leader said Clinton's package, scheduled for Senate
debate this week, is bogged down by 67 Democratic amendments.
Dole said he wrote the president last week and urged him to
press Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., to work out
disagreements with Republicans, paving the way for a vote as early as
Tuesday.
"It's time, Mr. President, to step up to the plate and provide
some leadership," Dole said.
"Otherwise I'm going to pull it down," he said.
Trying to lay the blame on Clinton, Dole said, "The president
is in a position to be helpful, but so far we've had very little
help." Republicans have offered 30 amendments of their own, but Dole
said they can be dispatched quickly.
Presidential aides said Sunday that the White House will
continue to consult with lawmakers when Congress returns this week
from its recess.  "The president has put his shoulder to the wheel
on this issue and Sen. Dole knows it," presidential spokesman Calvin
Mitchell said.
Clinton's package has drawn criticism from Republicans and civil
libertarians who fear it could erode constitutional protections.
Dole said he didn't want to pass a bill "in the heat of
the moment" and discover months later that "we have trampled on
constitutional rights."
A major sticking point is a provision to expand wiretap
authority.  Clinton wants police to be able to move their wiretaps
without getting a new court order each time terrorists move to evade
surveillance.
The Senate voted 52-28 last month to block a Democratic attempt
to expand wiretap authority.
Clinton also wants to be able to involve the military when
terrorists are contemplating the use of biological or chemical
weapons.  Currently, the military can assist criminal investigations
only when they involve nuclear weapons.
Critics are wary of giving the military a greater role in
domestic law enforcement, warning of potential government abuse of
individual rights.
Dole said he does not oppose a Clinton proposal to place
traceable materials in chemicals that can be used to make bombs. The
National Rifle Association opposes the provision.
""This bill should take two or three days, but it has become a
Christmas tree for everybody with some agenda," Dole complained.
He said Clinton has spoken often about the bill but failed to
forge compromises.

Load-Date: June 5, 1995


End of Document