Dole Focuses on Terrorism And Drugs in a Radio Talk
The New York Times
July 28, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 398 words
Byline: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE 

By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 27
Body


Bob Dole began his radio address today by asking for a moment of silent prayer for the victims of the bombing in Atlanta, which he called a "cowardly act."
"For the second time in two weeks we find ourselves mourning the loss of innocent life," Mr. Dole said. "The F.B.I. presumes terrorism in the Olympic bombing and terrorism remains strongly suspected in the downing of T.W.A. Flight 800. So with our silent prayers today, we must make a very public pledge: We will find the perpetrators, we will stop them, we will punish them, and we will never surrender to their terror. This we resolve not as Republicans, or Democrats, but as Americans."
In the bulk of his regular radio address, Mr. Dole excoriated the entertainment industry for "glamorizing" the use of drugs.
The number of overdoses from heroin that are treated in emergency rooms have increased by 50 percent since the late 1980's, Mr. Dole said. And, he said, monthly use of illicit drugs by students in grades 8 through 12 has increased 79 percent since President Clinton took office.
Mr. Dole said that while heroin had killed a number of young actors and musicians in the last two years, some people in the fashion and entertainment industries "insist on glamorizing drug use." He called on parents to "refuse to be silent" in the face of what he termed "skyrocketing" drug use in America.
Mr. Dole reminded his listeners of the public outcry that quashed a recent Calvin Klein advertising campaign criticized as child pornography. "That's not censorship," he said. "That's good citizenship.
"And to those in places like Hollywood and New York City who have the ability to influence our children, I would just ask that you look in the mirror every day before you go to work and ask yourself if what you will do that day will send the false and deadly message to America's youth that drugs are harmless fun.
"And if the answer to that question is yes, then I would simply suggest that you not go to work that day and you spend your time reading the obituaries of those in your industry who learned the hard way that drugs kill."
Joe Lockhart, a spokesman for the Clinton campaign, said that as a Senator, Mr. Dole had not helped in the fight against drugs. He noted that Mr. Dole had voted against the 1994 Clinton anticrime bill, which provided money for more police on the streets and called for the death penalty for drug kingpins.

Graphic

 
Photo: Bob Dole talking to reporters after taping his weekly radio address. (Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: July 28, 1996


End of Document