DOLE SEES MILITARY FIGHTING DRUG 'TERRORISM'
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 26, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 590 words
Body


PALOS PARK, Ill. (AP) - Bidding for a share of the Democrats'
spotlight, Bob Dole stopped outside their convention city Sunday to
accuse President Clinton of surrendering in the war on drugs and to
pledge to use the military for that fight in his own administration.
Clinton and his administration - far more than drug dealers - were the
target of Dole's fire. "They raised the white flag in the war on
drugs.  They turned 'Just Say No' into 'Just Say Nothing,'" Dole told
a lakeside crowd of picnicking Republicans.
As the GOP presidential nominee arrived at the park just 17 miles
south of the Chicago site where Democrats were gathering for their
national convention, he joked he was there only because he "heard
there was a party happening somewhere in the area."
His tone on stage hardly befitted a party.
Dole cited last week's government finding that teen-agers' use of LSD,
marijuana and cocaine had doubled between 1992 and 1995. Clinton took
office in 1993.
Dole, in shirtsleeves and a necktie in the hot sun, called the
statistics "nothing short of a national disgrace" and blamed Clinton
for cutting back money for drug interdiction and for the office of the
president's drug policy director.
"It's wrong to abandon our young people to the ravages of drugs - it's
wrong! It's wrong! It's wrong!" Dole shouted.
Clinton, in an interview on CNN, said Dole and House Speaker Newt
Gingrich are "partly responsible" for not supporting his Safe and
Drug-Free Schools proposal and other education, treatment and
prevention programs.
"But this is a very complicated thing," Clinton said. "It's obviously
going on in other countries, and all the experts say it began in 1990
with the change in attitudes about how dangerous these drugs are That
seems to be right at the root of what the problem is."
If elected, Dole said he would stop the flow of illegal drugs from
abroad by using "the capabilities of our armed forces" as well as the
CIA, FBI and specially trained and designated National Guard units.
He acknowledged the traditional resistance to - and possible
constitutional problems with - using military forces to combat
domestic problems. But, Dole said, "our drug problem today is more
than a domestic security matter."
"We'll treat drugs for what they are, the moral equivalent of
terrorism. Like the terrorism of fanatics who blow up people and
hijack planes, the terrorism of drugs destroys our young people and
hijacks America's future," said Dole.
The CIA is legally barred from engaging in domestic intelligence. The
military, though it has become involved in helping detect drug
smugglers, is barred from arresting civilians. The Bush adminstration
stepped up the military's role in providing surveillance and other
support to U.S. law enforcement agencies, particularly in tracking
drug smuggling from Latin America.
Dole decided just last week to appear at Sunday's annual joint picnic
of several suburban Chicago Republican party organizations. With
Democratic activists focused on their downtown convention, Dole's
crowd was thoroughly Republican. In advance of his arrival,
picnic-goers were given poster boards and paints with which to fashion
such signs as "Ethnics For Dole" and "Illinois: Land of Dole."
Dole, before leaving Chicago, took a different tack on his dueling
goals of tax cuts and deficit reduction than he had a day earlier,
saying they were "both No. 1, tied for first." On Sunday, he had said
balancing the budget was his top priority and "tax cuts are No. 2."
A lone Clinton-Gore campaign volunteer quietly distributed to
reporters a statement against Dole.

Load-Date: August 26, 1996


End of Document