DOLE JABS AT FOREIGN POLICY
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
June 30, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. A2
Length: 381 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ ; Associated Press writer
Body


DALLAS -- In a speech nostalgic for his own military days, Bob Dole suggested Saturday that President Clinton's defense policies had "turned off the porch light" and left Americans vulnerable to terrorist attacks like last week's bombing in Saudi Arabia.
The Republican presidential challenger also contended that the bombing proved the need for beefed-up military spending and a missile defense.
In side-by-side national radio broadcasts, both Dole and Clinton condemned the "cowardly" bombing of a U.S. military housing complex in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 Americans. And both took the tragedy as an opportunity to make some political points.
Clinton, who was headed to memorial services in Florida for the victims, said he has "directed our senior officials to come together as soon as possible to discuss additional steps to intensify the worldwide fight against terrorism."
Clinton, speaking in Lyon, France, at the end of an economic summit of world leaders, cited his administration's record in fighting terrorism and building a strong economy. When he came into office, Clinton said, "the United States was not in a strong position to lead."
Now, he said, the worldwide fight "against terrorist, international crime, drug trafficking and the spread of weapons of mass destruction are part of a campaign America has been leading for three years now. Without our leadership, the job will not get done."
Dole, confined to the campaign trail, called for a united American front against terrorism, saying that "when tragedies like this occur we're not Democrats, we're not Republicans -- we're Americans."
Yet, both his brief radio broadcast, which was aired as the GOP response to the president's address, and a speech to the Texas state convention of Veterans of Foreign Wars echoed earlier criticism of Clinton as weak and naive in foreign policy.
"While the Cold War is over, the painful reminder of this week is that the world remains a very dangerous place," Dole said. "We can't just turn off the porch light, lock our doors, cross our fingers and hope everyone behaves."
Dole said earlier he didn't begrudge Clinton the positive news coverage that comes as a president helps his nation mourn. But he noted that Clinton had just attended a summit on terrorism and "then this happened."

Graphic

 
STEPHAN SAVOIA / The Associated Press * Get tough: Republican presidential hopeful Bob Dole greets supporters Saturday at a rally in Knoxville, Tenn. In campaigning Saturday, he used the bombing in Saudi Arabia to criticize Clinton as weak on terrorism.

Load-Date: July 18, 1996


End of Document