DOMESTIC TERRORISM ON THE FRONT BURNER; SUBVERSIVES ARE BECOMING MORE SOPHISTICATED
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
March 31, 1997, Monday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 1325 words
Byline: Angie Cannon Knight-Ridder Newspapers
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The once unthinkable is becoming all too common:
An Ohio white supremacist illegally orders three vials of bubonic plague.
Terrorists tamper with a railroad track in Arizona, derailing a 12-car Amtrak train.
A plastic drum with 100 pounds of ammonium nitrate and fuel oil is left in the IRS parking lot in Reno, Nev.
In the nearly two years since the explosion of the federal building in Oklahoma City, federal law enforcement, armed with millions more dollars, has stepped up its efforts against domestic terrorism.
Hundreds more FBI agents are at work. Federal officers have increased security at government buildings, even banning vehicles from Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House. Officers are boning up on hate crimes, stressing techniques to preserve clues at crime scenes. Police, firefighters and paramedics are reviewing procedures for the possibility of delayed, second bombs. Threats of possible bomb violence now bring unusual public warnings.
Law enforcement officials say their efforts have paid off in several instances. But terrorists are getting better, too. A new FBI report on terrorism notes that the bombs being used are deadlier, and unconventional weapons -- including biological ones -- are being sought. Terrorists are better at collecting information, raising money and issuing rhetoric.
As the Oklahoma City bombing trial starts today in Denver, a former FBI agent, Clint Van Zandt, said, ''We are walking on eggshells domestically. There are tinderboxes out there that could blow up in a second or two.''
The bombing on April 19, 1995, killed 168 people and seared domestic terrorism into the national psyche. Although many people's first reaction was to think of foreign terrorists, like those convicted of blowing up the World Trade Center in New York City, the investigation quickly turned closer to home.
All of a sudden, disaffected members of camouflage-clad militia groups, ranting about government conspiracies, became chillingly familiar figures.
''It was like no one had ever heard of a militia until then,'' said Neil C. Livingstone, author of several books on terrorism. ''Neither the government nor the media were doing their jobs.''
That changed, as national political figures and law enforcement officials rushed to fill the void.
''The FBI is devoting tremendous resources to both domestic and foreign terrorism,'' said Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., a former chairman of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on terrorism. ''They are trying to deal with the threat. The reality is there is no easy answer to it.''
The FBI turned down an official request for an interview for this story. But Weldon Kennedy, the recently retired deputy FBI director who oversaw the Oklahoma City bombing investigation, said: ''There is a real, increased level of threats to government buildings. To say we can prevent them from ever happening is naive.''
Still, the FBI believes it has thwarted some possible terrorist plans. Last October, members of the West Virginia Mountaineer Militia were charged with plotting to blow up the FBI's new $  200 million national fingerprint center inClarksburg, W. Va. Earlier, the government charged that the Viper Militia in Arizona was plotting to bomb federal buildings in Phoenix.
''You can chalk those up as demonstrable successes,'' said Specter. ''The failures are on the front pages.''
The federal response is a mix of several factors: new laws, more money, political muscle and a willingness by law enforcement to try new strategies.
President Clinton sent anti-terrorism legislation to Congress, and ultimately signed a bill last year that included a ban on certain suspected terrorist groups' raising money in the United States and granted new authority to exclude or deport suspected foreign terrorists.
In this and other measures, some critics believe the fear of domestic terrorism has driven Americans to give up some basic liberties.
''Did the government shoot wide when it went after terrorism?'' asked Gregory Nojeim, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), which works to defend constitutional rights. ''The evidence is still coming in, but it suggests that many of the measures that were proposed or put in place have done nothing to make us safer and end up making us less free.''
Clinton lost on two measures he sought. He wanted the FBI to be able to conduct so-called multipoint wiretaps, meaning agents could tap every phone line a terrorist might use. Federal authorities say that power is critical in a cellular phone age.
Clinton also wanted to use chemical identifiers, known as taggants, in explosives, including fertilizer, making them easier to track. But the National Rifle Association opposed that and Congress didn't approve it.
After last summer's Olympic bombing and TWA Flight 800 crash, Clinton again pushed for both expanded wiretap power and taggants in black and smokeless powders. He lost, but Congress did authorize a study of taggants, exempting black and smokeless powders.
Money to fight terrorism followed, even in a time of budget restraint. The spending bill Congress passed later last year included more than $  1 billion tfight terrorism, including hiring more than 530 new FBI agents and improving safety at federal buildings and U.S. diplomatic missions.
''You can sell anything so long as it is for terrorism,'' said Livingstone. ''It has become a gravy train. We frighten the public in the name of terrorism and everyone gets their bucks.''
After last summer's crash of TWA Flight 800, a White House commission recommended numerous steps aimed at terrorists -- even though no cause for the crash has been determined. The commission asked for better screening of aviation workers, enhanced explosive detection systems and more bomb-sniffing dogs in airports.
The commission also recommended profiling airline passengers to determine which ones were more likely to pose risks. But it said race, religion and national origin of U.S. citizens should not be considered in drawing up the profile.
Still, the ACLU worries that profiles will target certain groups, and that airport searches will become intrusive. ''The FAA is funding the development of technologies that would take a picture of a person's naked body under their clothing,'' cautioned Nojeim.
In working to fight terrorism, the new FBI report found that agents are up against several trends:
Advanced technology allows terrorists to communicate efficiently and securely. Some public computer databases are filled with inflammatory rhetoric that can influence extremists. Some databases contain recipes for bombs, hold information on unconventional weapons or offer computer viruses to download.
''These groups are technically sophisticated,'' said William W. Ellis, a senior specialist on terrorism for the Congressional Research Service.
Bombs are deadlier, and recipes for large explosives are available to any extremist willing to research them.
In addition, extremists have proved to be interested in experimenting with unconventional weapons. Besides the bubonic plague incident, in February 1995, a Minneapolis jury convicted four members of an extremist group who manufactured the toxic biological agent ricin so they could kill law enforcement officers.
Ironically, the FBI report warns, success in fighting terrorism may cause its own problems: the threat of terrorist reprisals. In 1995, numerous foreign and domestic terrorists were either apprehended or sentenced to prison. Several known terrorist groups have publicly threatened to retaliate, the report says.
''On the bright side, there is a limited reservoir of potential adherents to this kind of ideology,'' said Brian Levin, director of the Center on Hate and Extremism in Pomona, N.J. ''Sometimes, we have unrealistic expectations from law enforcement. You can't prevent every single ideological thug from attacking innocent people in a free country, but you can try to make it more difficult for them.''

Graphic

 
Associated Press Two unidentified visitors console each other Sunday outside a fence that surrounds the remains of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. Thousands visited the site Sunday to pay their respects and view the area. Jury selection in the trial of bombing suspect Timothy McVeigh begins today in Denver.

Load-Date: April 1, 1997


End of Document