Domestic terrorism threat real
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
July 6, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 449 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


Documented terrorist acts over the past 20 years suggest that Americans, wherever they are, must be diligent about protecting human life, government installations and property.
Terrorist attacks on American targets abroad have killed hundreds over the past two decades. Remember the 1983 terrorist suicide bombing of the U.S. military installation in Beirut, Lebanon, that killed 240 Marines and sailors; or the bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Tanzania that killed 230 people, among them 12 Americans? In recent memory, 17 sailors aboard the USS Cole died when terrorists bombed the destroyer while it docked in Yemen for refueling.
Until a few years ago, no one would have imagined that Americans were vulnerable to such attacks on their own soil. Then came the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993, which illustrated that the distinction between international terrorism and domestic terrorist attacks have eroded. The bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building further revealed America's exposure to home-grown terrorism.
Now, a review by the General Accounting Office has revealed "numerous potential vulnerabilities" at U.S. military bases. GAO researchers reportedly told congressional members in a recent closed-door session that most of the problems could be fixed without more money but by changes in operations.
Certainly, money could help military operations employ more sophisticated anti-terrorism measures. But this page agrees with the GAO that money is but part of the answer. Americans must be ever vigilant against terrorist attacks and recognize that the national strategy must implement a full spectrum of anti-terrorism activities including intelligence, investigation and prosecution and crisis management.
While this new GAO report has focused on domestic military installations, they are not islands unto themselves. A terrorist act would also impact nearby communities, so it is vital that federal, state and local law enforcers, fire departments and emergency medical services have a stake in planning and executing new anti-terrorist approaches.
Hill Air Force Base officials report that the base conducts random anti-terrorism measures daily and a force protection working group meets quarterly to review base security. Security for special event such as the Hill Air Force Base Show 2001, which attracted some 200,000 visitors, was planned six months in advance to consider a variety of scenarios. Clearly, security is a priority at Hill.
And understanding the attention to security at domestic military installations, would terrorists risk attacks of such targets on American soil? Twenty years ago, it was a remote possibility. Today, it's a stark reality.

Load-Date: July 6, 2001


End of Document