Domestic terrorism is much scarier than Pakistan; Too Big To Fail
The Mirror (Pahrump, Nevada)
October 25, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 The Mirror (Pahrump, Nevada)


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 1006 words
Byline: The Mirror staff
Body


We've heard another presidential debate, this one focused on foreign policy, and another load of malarkey from both candidates. When asked what the future holds for national security threats, both seemed to think that international terrorism would continue to be the greatest threat we face. It might not be. The horrific attacks of September 11 will certainly never be forgotten, but neither will the Oklahoma City bombing, the Centennial Olympic Park bombing, the shooting of Senator Gabrielle Giffords, the Aurora cinema massacre, the Sikh temple shootings, the Unabomber attacks, nor the siege of Columbine High School. Domestic terrorism of postal workers by other postal workers is not forgotten either, just harder to keep track of. We are our own worst enemies.
In any zombie movie, it's never the walking dead banging at the door that are the greatest threat; that honor always belongs to someone on the inside pretending to be just ordinary folk. So it is with terrorism. Extreme left and right-wing groups, many of whom are natural-born Americans, are plotting heinous acts of human sacrifice even as you read this. Some of their number might be explained away as lone gunmen, but that sort of semantic distinction is only meaningful to statisticians. Some domestic terrorism, - particularly the kind perpetrated by those "going postal" in the workplace, is the direct result of socioeconomic pressure. Religious terrorism makes up a significant part, and some attacks are obviously rooted in racism. Regardless of the group affiliation or motives of these violent lunatics, you or your family members may become their next "soft target." It could be at the movies, at an IHOP, at work, school or even at home. No place is safe from domestic mass murderers and psychopaths.
Domestic terrorism cannot be stamped out as easily as waging war in a foreign land. We can't just bomb our own neighborhoods with Raytheon missiles and ignore the civilian casualties. Domestic terrorism's embers are floating in and among us, and they are continually being stoked by the extremist views fired off daily by irresponsible news outlets, radical Internet forums and fundamentalist churches. Extinguishing these threats without violating our own liberty in the process is a delicate balancing act. It demands impeccably careful investigation and surgical strikes of faultless precision. Some of those goals might be achievable if we worried a little less about other countries' business, and a little more about our own.
What I found most disturbing about Monday's debate was Romney's determination to continue to send aid to Pakistan on the grounds that they have nuclear weapons, so we had better prop them up or else. I spot these schemes a mile away, and this sounds like every other Too Big to Fail pitch to me. Bill Clinton managed to cut off funding to Pakistan almost entirely and the world kept right on spinning. Bush and Obama in Pakistan, now that's a different story. Under the last two presidents, we've given Pakistan over $20 billion in aid. That's not money we had to spare. We borrowed that from China in order to fund (placate) a nation we know can't be fully trusted. The entire plot seems at odds with Romney's views on our unemployment situation, which has consistently been that if the wealthiest people keep more of their money, they will be able to employ more people and the situation would solve itself. If that philosophy were true, then shouldn't we keep our money in this case and let Pakistan do something worthwhile trade-wise in order to earn that money? Especially if the unemployed here don't deserve it, and they aren't even running a protection racket for terrorists!
It seems Obama and Romney both agree that funding will ease tensions in Pakistan, make the country more stable, and ultimately benefit us somehow in the long run. If that were true, then it should be just as true here at home, where investment spending in education, infrastructure and emerging technologies certainly offer us more long-term benefits than giving the same money to Pakistan. Those are just the intangibles, though: there are more obvious and immediate benefits to investing in public services. When a crazed, home-grown madman walks into a public place with an automatic weapon hell-bent on racking up a body count, it helps to have well-trained first-responders, adequately equipped to protect citizens and supply emergency services as quickly as possible. I just don't understand all the Pakistan spending.
Another strategy I fail to grasp in our foreign policy is imposing sanctions to attack Iran's economy. Iran has admitted to sponsoring terrorism and is actively trying to build nuclear weapons presumably to destroy civilization as we know it, while our master plan amounts to "be nice or we're not gonna play with you anymore." Seems like, if economic sanctions are a plausible solution to Iran, we could introduce a similar economic hardship to drug cartels just by legalizing marijuana. Hit 'em in their pocketbooks, and earn some tax profit, too. At the same time, we could reduce billions in annual expenditures by releasing prisoners currently incarcerated for marijuana-only offenses. People in our own country bum a plant and we take away their freedom, while the Iranian government funds global terror but gets a slap on the wrist. We can't preach freedom from tyranny while we operate a prison state.
That's not the least of our hypocrisy, either. When it comes to terrorism, American celebrities and elected officials alike are threatening armed rebellion if things don't go their way in the upcoming presidential election. The textbook definition of terrorism is using threats or intimidation to coerce others into political compliance. Anyone who genuinely champions liberty and justice for all ought to be ashamed of our partisan extremism and threats of armed revolt. It should be that our differences do not define us. Either way, our nation will soldier on no matter who is elected president next month.

Load-Date: March 28, 2014


End of Document