DOMESTIC TERRORISM HAS NO PLACE IN THIS COUNTRY
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
July 6, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL;
Length: 360 words
Body


All Americans - from President Clinton to the most ordinary folks - decry the terrorism that has resulted in death and destruction from Scotland to the Mideast. But homegrown terrorists, including members of anti-government militias in this country, are just as deadly and just as wrong.
The destruction of the Oklahoma City federal building last year is the most hideous example of domestic terrorism, and the violent sentiments that sparked that bombing appear to have spread.
Last October, an Amtrak passenger train was sabotaged, killing a crew member and injuring 80 people, and investigators found an anti-government note referring to Waco and Ruby Ridge.
In Phoenix this week, law enforcement officers found explosive devices in the home of a paramilitary group called the ''Viper Militia'' that is accused of plotting to blow up government buildings.
Group members are charged with planning to bomb buildings housing federal agencies in retaliation for the incidents at Ruby Ridge and Waco.
It's every American's right to hate the government. The Constitution protects the right to protest and seek redress against poor government practices. But resorting to killing innocent people is no more appropriate in this country than it is anywhere in the world.
There are those who point to the American Revolution as the ultimate anti-government protest, using history to condone acts of violence against what they deem unfair and dictatorial government.
But the American Revolution was not about terrorism. The cowardly annihilation of innocent people - including small children - that some militia groups advocate is not a legitimate way to express a political point of view and has no place in the United States.
The Oklahoma City bombing was cold-blooded murder of innocents. Police believe the Arizona conspiracy began almost a year earlier. A courageous undercover officer who had infiltrated the group found training videos showing government buildings, their security features and the best places to put explosives.
Those convicted of committing such acts or conspiring to commit them should receive the maximum punishment. Domestic terrorism cannot be tolerated.

Load-Date: March 30, 1998


End of Document