Domestic terrorism cases often fizzle out
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 25, 2009 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 285 words
Byline: By DEBORAH HASTINGS • The Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


NEW YORK - It usually starts with a snitch and a sting operation, followed by a great deal of publicity and controversy.
Case in point: Four Muslim men charged last week with plotting to blow up synagogues and military planes. The informer is a felon and Pakistani immigrant who turned informer seven years ago to avoid deportation. This wasn't his first foray into undercover work for federal authorities.
With considerable fanfare, a steady stream of terrorism busts has been announced by the FBI since Sept. 11, 2001. And in most cases, accusations soon followed that the stings were overblown operations that entrapped hapless ne'er-do-wells. Federal authorities say such arrests save lives.
But what happens to these cases after the media spotlight fades and the noise dies down? And are the snitches involved reliable?
"Most of these guys don't get tried," said security analyst Bruce Schneier. "These are not criminal masterminds, they're idiots. There's huge fanfare at the arrest, and then it dies off."
The New York men arrested last week were ex-convicts down on their luck. In federal court, one admitted that he'd recently gotten stoned. "I smoke it regularly," he told the judge. Not to worry, he added, "I understand everything you are saying."
Federal authorities say agents have prevented many attacks by nipping them in the bud. Among the biggest headline grabbers were alleged plots to blow up the Sears Tower in Chicago and underground gas pipes at John F. Kennedy International Airport, and allegations that others planned to storm the Fort Dix military base in New Jersey while dressed as pizza delivery men.
However, court statistics show that most domestic terrorism cases never make it to trial.

Load-Date: May 26, 2009


End of Document