Domestic Terrorism"€”Fear from Within
Horizons: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
September 26, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FINAL-APPROACH; Pg. 1
Length: 676 words
Byline: Grace Gammello
Body


We're all aware of the explosion of recent terrorism trends around the world. Internationally and domestically, fear continues to run rampant due to the number of attacks and threats. However, for those of us within the United States, we've noticed a significant rise of domestic terrorism attacks.
What is domestic terrorism? Domestic terrorism is essentially the act of raising violence against a nation by the hand of someone within the nation itself, normally a citizen of said country, in an attempt to embed intimidation, reverence for a given belief, or the creation of influence on national policies or culture.
Why is it in existence? An expert on psychology, Arie Kruglanski, argues in favor that terrorism requires a desire to complete a quest, a reason to justify the means, and a group to justify the events. Terrorism comes with a motive to gain attention for the sake of an ideological quest through means of violence, and with international terrorism literally encouraging these types of actions, it is happening within our boundaries.
Taking this into account, I would say terrorism, by its own means, encourages itself. It's a culture on it's own. We must be aware of the concept of "radicalization" within the United States. Just because we don't live in war-torn Syria doesn't mean the ideology is unavailable to citizens here. Social media, news, shout-outs and speeches from radical leaders, and even prior events themselves spread an unsettling public opinion. This is happening within our cities, and it would be unwise not to take note of that.
What are the trends? Lately, domestic terrorism is showing up all around our nation. The two weeks following 9/11 this year yielded several attacks in and of themselves - knifing in Minnesota, bombings in Manhattan and New Jersey, and a shootout also in New Jersey. The trend isn't new. Most of the attacks here in the United States follow patterns - these past three years alone, there have been at least a notable twenty-nine terror attacks resulting in death and injury within our borders.
Most of the attacks involved an active shooter (shooting to kill) or an agent of terror wielding a blade of some sort. Victims are either students, police or military, or available citizens with no connection to the attacking individual. Surprisingly, only about two groups of victims seem to have been targeted for their religion (in general; specifically in these past three years).
Of the motives uncovered in domestic terrorism within these past three years alone, most - at least sixteen-have been recorded as Islamist. The remaining motives are either left-wing or right-wing motivations. I believe it's a national stereotype to believe that terror attacks in this day and age are solely stemming from Islamist extremist groups; however, this is not the case. We often seem to overlook our own civil unrest as a cause for domestic terrorism. Citizens against citizens; neighbors against neighbors.
So how are these rising attacks affecting our nation? Among many answers spanning from added security measures to the topic of a presidential debate, the answer, on the simplest of levels, is "look around yoo". Seriously - the media publicizes growing terror attacks; our discussions surrounding safety and security often include a nod towards bombings, or the radical Islamic State, or our fear for our children in this society of unrest.
Sadly, that is exactly the point of an act of terror - to terrorize; to instill fear within. However it is done, it gets our attention. Being aware of the motive behind terrorism may be the first step to combating it.
Larger steps, such as the monitoring of cities using unmanned aerial systems, could also increase security - if they don't instigate fresh controversy from our already on-edge nation. Domestic terrorism is a definite threat today, and homeland security is continuing to do its best to defend us from within. All I have to say is that the more we know, the better we can spot warning signs and react in an intelligent manner to these attacks.

Load-Date: January 9, 2017


End of Document