Domestic acts of terrorism a looming threat to United States
Advance-Titan: University of Wisconsin - Oshkosh
December 5, 2013 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 566 words
Byline: Reginald Parson
Body


In today's state of national security, there should be awareness of terrorists and acts of terrorism committed by foreign citizens on foreign soil. However, it should not be forgotten that these acts are being committed under our noses in our neighborhoods. Terrorist attacks on American soil were occurring long before Sept. 11.
Most Americans would not have predicted the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 would be a prelude to decades of terrorism against America.
In 1995, the Oklahoma City Bombings conducted by Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, which killed 168 and injured hundreds, would prove those from foreign nations would not be the only threat to national security.
Natural-born American citizens also seek to do harm against the United States.  It was a tragedy, but terrorism was regarded as something Congress and Americans should be aware of, instead of something to scare people. Six years later, Sept. 11 happened, and here we are today with terrorist attacks happening on a regular basis. 
America's colleges and universities are also vulnerable to terrorists.  Active shooters on campuses have increased in the last 15 years.
The FBI via U.S law in part defines domestic terrorism as "acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or state law; appear intended (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population."
 One of the most notable shootings was at Virginia Tech in 2007, and the most recent campus shooting happened at Lone Star College in Dallas this year.
These should be a reminder that at any moment things can go from peaceful to tragic.
Colleges and universities are continuing to modify their emergency procedures and conduct more active shooter trainings to sharpen their skills. The best way to be proactive about this as a student is to sign up for notifications through the University or review the Emergency Procedures Guide. 
Since Sept. 11, Americans are considered the enemy and are as closely watched as foreigners. Moments of outburst in public regarding the government or Americans who express anti-government views on the Internet are considered hostile and have potential to commit terrorist acts. Americans' First Amendment rights have been restricted to a point where no one can joke about bombs in an airport or public transportation center without law enforcement pressing for information, but that's the price Americans pay for security.
Some people in small communities believe terrorism only happens in large metropolitan areas.
Tragically, the city of Oak Creek, Wis. was given a harsh reality in August 2012 when lone-wolf gunman Wade Michael Page entered a Sikh Temple and opened fire, killing six.  Anyone who lived in Page's neighborhood told reporters he didn't cause any trouble, seemed like a nice gentleman and kept to himself.
After an investigation was conducted there were some indicators to worry about: he was affiliated with a neo-Nazi organization, was seen in neo-Nazi music videos and had prior contact with law enforcement. Terrorism is real and should not be taken lightly; its plotting and acts are becoming more prevalent.
Congress understands the burden and responsibility of protecting this nation through legislation.
However, it does not take becoming a politician or having a college degree to understand that Americans can also be a national security threat as well and realize that terrorism could be right under our noses. 

Load-Date: December 5, 2013


End of Document