DOMESTIC TERRORISM SUSPECTS GO ON TRIAL
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 03, 1997, Monday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. 3
Length: 571 words
Byline: By JOHN K. WILEY ; Associated Press writer
Body


SPOKANE -- Three Idaho men accused in a series of bombings and bank robberies were to go on trial today, facing possible life sentences for crimes that prosecutors say were inspired by their extremist anti-government views.
"In part, I think that their beliefs are what's going to be on trial -- their religious beliefs and their beliefs about the government," said Aaron Lowe, an attorney appointed to represent defendant Verne Jay Merrell.
Their religious views are constitutionally protected and irrelevant to the case, the attorney said. "They are not charged with any crime where their beliefs will be called into play," said Lowe, who concedes he has difficulty understanding his client's legal reasonings. "I think that would be unfair."
Federal prosecutors declined to comment on the trial, which could last six to eight weeks before U.S. District Judge Frem Nielsen.
The case briefly gained national attention after a newspaper reported the three were being investigated in connection with the Olympics bombing in Atlanta last summer, but FBI officials said such a probe of bomb-related cases was routine. No one has been charged in the Atlanta bombing.
The three defendants are linked to the Christian Identity movement, which combines Old Testament, constitutionalist and white supre-macist doctrines.
Merrell, who contends the federal court has no authority over him and refuses to help Lowe prepare his defense, filed a document claiming diplomatic immunity from prosecution on grounds that the three defendants are "ambassadors of the Kingdom of Yahweh."
The three men also contend they are not subject to state motor vehicle registrations or to property and income taxes.
Merrell, Robert S. Berry and Charles H. Barbee, all of Sandpoint, Idaho, were arrested in Yakima after an alleged aborted bank robbery attempt in Portland in October, while they were under surveillance by federal law enforcement agencies. A federal grand jury indicted them on a dozen counts of bank robbery, illegal use of firearms and bombings in suburban Spokane Valley in April and July 1996.
If convicted of all counts, the defendants could be sentenced to life terms without the possibility of parole on two bomb counts, as well as a maximum of 175 years on other counts plus a total of $ 3 million in fines.
All three have pleaded innocent and have filed documents saying they have alibis that place them elsewhere when the crimes were being committed.
The defense also may attack the credibility of evidence processed by the FBI crime laboratory, Lowe said. The Justice Department is investigating allegations of contamination, poor training and biased lab reports at the lab.
Merrell has called the judge "a priest of a pagan religion" and has refused to sit at the defense table with attorneys and co-defendants. Merrell and Berry also both resisted being represented by court-appointed lawyers.
Merrell, 51, a former Florida nuclear-power-plant engineer turned Christian Identity preacher, is identified in court documents as the group's leader.
Barbee, who turns 45 on Sunday, is a former AT&T supervisor from Georgia who left the company over its anti-discrimination and diversity policies, he told The Spokesman-Review newspaper in December 1995.
Berry, 42, until last year operated a Sandpoint, Idaho, auto repair shop. He served prison time in Oregon in the 1980s for theft.
At least one unidentified cohort is believed to be still at large.

Graphic

 
STEVE THOMPSON / Spokesman Review * Crime scene: Spokane firefighters investigate the bombing outside a Spokane Spokesman Review bureau on April 1. Three men are on trial, accused of participating in a crime spree that began with the newspaper bureau explosion, followed by a robbery and bomb attack at a nearby bank that day, and a July 12 pipe bomb attack on a Planned Parenthood clinic moments before a robbery at the same bank branch.

Load-Date: March 4, 1997


End of Document