Don't relent in war on terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
August 27, 1998, Thursday


Copyright 1998 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 519 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


Suddenly, terrorism is not only in the news, it's dominating the news.
Since the terrorist bombings of the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug. 7, the following developments have taken place:
&#149; The United States launched air strikes (cruise missiles) against a terrorist compound in Afghanistan and a factory used to help process chemical weapons in Sudan.
&#149; The United States and Britain agreed to let two alleged Libyan agents go on trial in a neutral country, the Netherlands, almost a decade after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
&#149; Palestinian terrorist Abu Nidal, linked to terrorist attacks in 20 countries that have killed or injured almost 900 people, was apprehended in Egypt and is being detained there.
What the above clearly indicate is that terrorism is a very serious problem that requires an equally serious and well-thought-out solution.
The methods used in this fight must be bold, flexible and well-coordinated.
Striking against terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan shows that attacks like those masterminded by bin Laden and his organization will not go unanswered. Indeed, as Secretary of Defense William Cohen noted, "Terrorists should know that we will not simply play passive defense."
That sentiment is a welcome change to what had been perceived as this country's long-term approach to combating terrorism -- which was to tolerate it with little retaliation.
The key question, though, is will the United States maintain its new-found resolve? It's one thing to lob a few missiles at Afghanistan and Sudan, two countries with little capacity to respond militarily. Those countries play bit parts in the overall terrorist drama. But what about the main players -- Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea, for example? How will we react when they're linked to heinous acts?
The answer must be this -- with the same kind of resolve and determination we have just shown. Otherwise, last week's action will have availed us nothing. In fact, without a strong commitment to follow through on the war on terrorism, it will have been worse than nothing.
Diplomacy is a better option than military action, but since when have the likes of Saddam Hussein and Moammar Gadhafi responded just to diplomacy? Force (followed by diplomacy) is the only kind of language these leaders understand, as has been shown by George Bush in the case of Saddam Hussein and Ronald Reagan regarding Gadhafi.
President Clinton's resolve may be tested soon. By agreeing to let the Lockerbie bombing suspects stand trial in the Hague as opposed to the United States, the United States forced the hand of Gadhafi to make good on a previous offer to do just that. On Wednesday it appeared Libya did not want to test the U.S. resolve as the Libyan government issued a statement saying it agreed to the proposal.
Terrorism is a worldwide problem that, if left unchecked, will have serious national and global repercussions. In a very real sense it is a cancer. The United States must take the lead in seeing to it that terrorists are contained and cut off from those countries that abide them.

Load-Date: August 27, 1998


End of Document