Don't trust Russia, Sentsov warns Europe ahead of Normandy summit
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 27, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 354 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


European Parliament President David Sassoli handed the award over to Oleg Sentsov during a plenary meeting of the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Tuesday, own Ukrinform correspondent reported.
Sentsov was arrested on the charges of leading a terrorist organisation and plotting acts of terrorism against the Russian "de facto" rule in Crimea.
"I don't trust Mr. Putin and I call upon you not to trust him either".
Russian Federation returned the three ships to Ukraine last week, two months after returning the 24 Ukrainian sailors in a prisoner exchange. Prominent political and cultural figures around the world joined the campaign for his release. Zelenskiy asked Putin to return equipment that he says was stolen by Russian Federation when it seized three Ukrainian naval vessels in November 2018.
"Please remember thousands of those who have fallen in Ukraine. They want to see Ukraine on its knees", he added.
More than 13,000 people have been killed during the more than five-year-old conflict between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian government forces.
Industry Calls for Legislated End to Rail Strike
They spoke with CN and the union throughout the process and felt optimistic they'd be flexible in order to reach a deal quickly. Wet conditions have stalled the harvest across much of Canada , including much of Haerle's corn crop near St Isidore, Ontario.
"We talk a lot about peace-building, about making peace with Russian Federation, but I don't believe what Putin says and I encourage you not to either", he said.
He was unable to receive the reward previous year as he was in prison.
Russia, Ukraine have been at loggerheads since 2014, when Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimea Peninsula after a controversial referendum.
Relations between Russian Federation and Ukraine have remained badly strained since Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 and Moscow's support for a separatist insurgency in eastern Ukraine.
While Macron sees a cautious rapprochement with Putin's Russian Federation as a key early step to building Europe's future security, some European allies have been irritated by his soft position on Moscow.

Load-Date: November 27, 2019


End of Document