DON'T TARGET ARAB-AMERICANS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 15, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 315 words
Body


Arab-Americans in St. Louis and elsewhere are suspicious of the FBI's sudden interest in protecting their civil rights in the wake of the Persian Gulf crisis. The FBI says it wants to head off potential hate crimes against these citizens.
In fact, the purported concern appears to be a pretext for grilling Arab-Americans about their political views and pumping them for potential information about Iraqi terrorists.  The bureau has a legitimate mission to thwart domestic terrorism. But it is showing gross insensitivity and stooping to unfortunate stereotyping by assuming this diverse group of generally law-abiding Americans is privy to terrorist plots.  Among those interviewed in St. Louis was Dr. Abe Hawatmeh, a surgeon and head of the local chapter of the National Association of Arab-Americans. He reported the session was friendly, but said the targeting of ''one ethnic group - especially as heterogeneous as ours - in this political condition is clearly intimidating in my opinion and racist in its nature.'' In addition to the FBI interviews, the Justice Department says immigration officials will begin photographing and fingerprinting anyone entering the United States with an Iraqi or Kuwaiti passport. Why the administration is automatically branding people on the basis of nationality is a mystery. The tactics recall the ugly episode when Japanese-Americans were interned during World War II.  Rep. Don Edwards, the California Democrat who heads the House subcommittee that oversees the FBI, has urged the agency to discontinue its efforts against Arab-Americans. Because Arab-Americans probably know just as little about terrorism as Americans in general, it is unfair for the FBI to single them out because of the tension in the Persian Gulf. This program may well help to whip up the very public hysteria against Arab-Americans that the FBI claims it wants to prevent.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document