Don't Let Terrorists Hold Us Hostage Over Mumbai Attacks: Pak PM
RTT News (United States)
January 28, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 357 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Pakistan Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani has said that his country and India must carry forward the stalled composite dialogue process and that he believes the two nuclear-armed neighbors must not be held "hostage to one incident"--the 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks.
In his first TV interview with an Indian television channel since the 2008 Mumbai terror strikes, Gilani said if a billion plus people was held hostage to one incident, then the beneficiaries were terrorists and therefore both countries should move ahead.
Asserting that the case related to the Mumbai attacks is already sub-judice with the courts (in Pakistan), the Pakistani Premier said Islamabad needed more information on 26/11 accused Lashkae-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorist Hafiz Saeed to take the probe forward.
Pakistan too is a victim of Mumbai-type terror attacks, he said, adding his country condemned terrorism and believed that neither India nor Pakistan soil should be used against each other.
"We are victims of terrorism and you know how we are fighting the war on terror. There are 101 Mumbai-like incidents in Pakistan after that (26/11)," said Gilani.
Stating that dialogue is the only answer to remove the mistrust between the two countries, he said as responsible nations neither could afford war and both the countries should now leave the IPL issue behind and move on.
Gilani was apparently referring to the Pakistani cricketers not being picked by the Indian Premier League (IPL) franchisees for the third version of the tournament to be held in India later this year.
He also said Pakistan had nothing to do with the spurt in terror attacks in India&apos;s Kashmir region. New Delhi has blamed its neighbor for trying to fuel unrest after the valley saw a drastic reduction in violence over the past few years.
India has also accused Pakistan of increasing incidents of cease-fire violation along the international border and the Line of Control (LoC) in what is seen as an attempt by the latter to push militants into Kashmir to create unrest.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 15, 2010


End of Document