Don't trust government to end terrorism
University Wire
July 27, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Daily O'Collegian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 535 words
Byline: By Brent Battle, Daily O'Collegian; SOURCE: Oklahoma State U.
Dateline: STILLWATER, Okla. 
Body


While I appreciate the quaint pseudo-patriotic rants and ravings of the neo-conservative apologists aimed at the "liberals" and "leftists," remember one thing: Western governments staged terrorist attacks on their own people to control them with fear.
From the Gulf of Tonkin to the 2005 bombings in London, our mainstream media outlets fail to flush out the context of these events. Even though each event is at first blamed on Islamists or some terrorist organization, the government admits months, years or even decades later each incident had no connection to foreign terrorists.
The London bombings were the result of state-sponsored patsies, according to John Loftus, a former U.S. Department of Justice prosecutor and terrorism expert. He said on Fox News' "DaySide" that Haroon Aswat, the alleged mastermind behind the bombings, is an MI5 asset for British intelligence. Loftus said after Seattle DOJ prosecutors captured Aswat in 1999 on charges of terrorism, the head office of the DOJ in Washington D.C. ordered the Seattle DOJ to release him because he worked for MI5.
Loftus' claims have not been denied by any U.S. government official or agency. The attacks came weeks before Bush crony Tony Blair was predicted to lose the parliamentary elections based on polling information. After the attacks, Blair magically pulled off a victory.
In 1967, President Johnson worked secretly with the Israeli government and used their military to attack the U.S.S. Liberty off the coast of Israel in the Mediterranean. He is quoted on record for saying he wanted to see the ship "on the bottom" of the Mediterranean, according to tapes released in 2001.
The U.S. wanted to blame the attack on Egypt to justify a full-scale invasion of the Middle East. Israeli fighter planes could not sink the nation's most decorated warship in time. They ended after Russian spies were seen watching.
Fast forward to Sept. 11, 2001. The FBI recently stated there is no evidence linking Al-Qaeda to the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon (the Bush administration's reasoning for invading Afghanistan). Even though Osama bin Laden allegedly claims responsibility in recent video and audio tapes, Al Jazeera aired an interview with bin Laden one week after the attacks in which he denied involvement.
These events plague nations with fear of a shadowy enemy that could strike at any moment. The question becomes: who stands to gain from terrorism?
It's no wonder Rev. Mark Hitchcock of Edmond's Faith Bible Church declares Iran "the No.1 terrorist nation in the world," according to the Associated Press. Iranians hate the U.S. because the CIA overthrew their democratically-elected Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadegh in 1953 for not letting the British establish an oil empire in their nation. Iran wants nuclear weapons because the U.S. and Israel threaten them with the same, and it wants to wipe Israel "off the map" because Israel wants the same for them.
Perhaps it is ironic that the slogan for "Counter Terrorism" magazine is "You have to think like a terrorist to win this war."
Watch the film "Loose Change" online and open your mind's eye. Don't trust me. Do your own research.
(C) 2006 Daily O'Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 27, 2006


End of Document