Don't Chase The Headlines On Terrorism 
The New York Times
August 19, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6; MARKET VALUES
Length: 784 words
Byline: By Conrad de Aenlle
Body


THE reports of a plot to blow up commercial jets flying between Britain and the United States have raised urgent questions about security. Investors seem to doubt that businesses selling terrorism defenses have many answers, however, at least not ones that will profit shareholders.
  Stocks of companies involved in fields like biometric scanning and X-ray screening soared after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, some close to tenfold. The reaction was far more muted when the suspected plot to destroy multiple planes using liquid explosives was disclosed nine days ago.
It is not as though the stocks were priced for perfection. Several had plunged in preceding weeks, to 12-month lows, after companies issued disappointing earnings statements.
  Investment advisers encourage caution before buying security stocks, noting that it is tough to succeed in the industry, no matter how dangerous the world. Even so, there are companies whose technologies they find promising, and the stocks trade at bargain prices, they say.
  One of the biggest obstacles in this field is bureaucratic inertia, said Mark Mowrey, editor of The Prudent Speculator TechValue Report. Technology is moving faster than Congress's ability to decide which systems are best and merit purchase.
  ''In theory, there's a lot of pent-up demand for security matters,'' Mr. Mowrey said. ''There are folks in decision-making roles being bombarded with all these technologies and they can't make decisions. None of them are cheap, and none are infallible or solve every problem.''
  Until Congress does some serious buying, investors are likely to hold off, too. ''They're waiting to see who gets the money before getting into these stocks,'' he said.
  But Mr. Mowrey is happy to recommend a couple of them while lawmakers and traders make up their minds. A favorite is Cogent, a supplier of fingerprint identification systems whose stock hit a 12-month low on the day the suspected plot surfaced, which coincided with a poor earnings report. ''We recommended that stock several dollars above where it is now,'' he acknowledged.
  He pointed to concerns among investors that Cogent's technology might be surpassed by other identification methods, like iris scanning. If Cogent's system catches on, however, there could be profitable commercial applications, for instance, to identify debit card holders in supermarkets, as well as military uses, he said. The company has cash on its books equal to more than one-third of its market value, Mr. Mowrey noted.
  BARBARA S. WALCHLI, manager of the Aquila Rocky Mountain fund, predicts ''continued government spending on technology to improve intelligence, communications and security'' over the next few years. Companies that she expects to benefit include SpectraLink, whose wireless communication systems were used in New York and Washington immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks, and Ciber, which assembles computer systems and has developed surveillance technology that may be employed at American ports.
  Robert D. Stimpson, a portfolio manager at Oak Associates, issued the same warning about security stocks as Mr. Mowrey -- and had a similar interest in owning some.
  ''You have to choose your technologies carefully,'' Mr. Stimpson said. ''Because of competition in the sector, one company can win and the rest can lose.'' The cumbersome Congressional budgeting process, in which allocations are ''discussed forever, then tweaked,'' can have ''a big impact on psychology,'' keeping valuations low, he said.
  One potential winner, he said, is American Science and Engineering, a manufacturer of X-ray scanning systems that Mr. Mowrey also likes. The stock trades at 13.5 times earnings, a very cheap valuation relative to its 20 percent long-term annual earnings growth, Mr. Stimpson said.
  He also likes Flir Systems, whose night-vision technology is used in spotting leaks in oil and gas pipelines and at refineries, as well as for security. The commercial uses of Flir's technology hold more appeal for him than the security applications. The revenue flow is more even and there is less reliance on all-or-nothing government contracts.
  The trading patterns of security stocks since Sept. 11 -- panic buying, then five years of flat to negative performance -- show the importance of not reacting reflexively to events, especially when everyone else is. It is better to invest in well-rounded, reasonably priced businesses and hold on to them, Mr. Stimpson advised.
  ''You need to own them for the long term,'' he said. ''If you own them for the short term only, it's going to be difficult, and trying to own any of these companies solely for terrorism, it's going to be a volatile ride.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 19, 2006


End of Document