Don't let terrorism be used to take away our liberties
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 31, 1996, Wednesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 15A
Length: 970 words
Byline: Greg Hicks, Austell
Body


The Editors: President Clinton's response to the recent wave of terror was completely predictable: Increase the power of the federal government. Clinton is a master at using every tragedy to further the expansion of the centrist state and the erosion of our liberty.
Clinton already has complete power to stop the most egregious form of terrorism ---state-sponsored terrorism such as that which occurred at Waco and Ruby Ridge ---but instead calls for escalation of the unconstitutional expansion in the size, scope and power of the central government. While the administration assures us that it is doing everything possible to prevent terrorism in aviation, they belie the fact that they were not doing so to the full extent of existing law before the bombing, despite warnings that drastic action was needed.
Despite the outrage we feel about the bombings, we must resist at all costs the continued erosion of our liberty. Like the many who gave everything they had to defend it, we must prepare to do the same. Resist the federal leviathan.
 
Worthwhile fight
ROBERT C. ANDREWS, Smyrna
The Editors: I seldom agree with editorial positions of the Atlanta newspapers. However, I will give the Atlanta Journal-Constitution its due for challenging Angela Gittens, general manager of Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport, for making distribution of the newspapers difficult, if not impossible.
Gittens should remember an important rule: Be careful when you pick a fight with someone who buys newsprint by the truckload.
 
Lies and more lies
JACK CHARLESWORTH, Peachtree City
The Editors: In the article " 'Primary Colors' author learns hard truths about lying," Dee Dee Myers, former press secretary to President Clinton, said of author Joe Klein, "He looked his friends in the eye and he lied ---for money." Meyers worked for our draft-dodging, lying president and she has the gall to take Klein to task. We need a constitutional amendment that specifies the level at which an American can lie without being chastised.
I respect the newspaper's balance. On the same day, you published this Jerry Brown quote in the Washington in Brief column: "I do want to say I think Clinton is a liar. There's no question about that in my mind."
 
The biggest winner
RICHARD W. WILLIAMSON, Stone Mountain
The Editors: Among the hoopla surrounding the Olympics, with stories of transportation disasters, complaints about the weather and multimillionaire athletes turning in lackluster performances, one little lady helped us rediscover the true meaning of these Games. Hobbled and hurting, tiny gymnast Kerri Strug put her teammates first.
I thank Strug for showing us there are more important ideals than "what's in it for me?" ---ideals such as putting others before self, teamwork and unity. Though she can't win the all-around gold medal, she's already the biggest winner of these games.
 
Go a little farther
CHARLES A. FARNHAM, Dunwoody
The Editors: There are many ways this city, my adopted home, could enhance its image to the world. There is so much more available a short distance from the main event. Small historic areas, such as old Roswell, are to most European eyes the old America of Western movies and the birth of the new world.
Roswell is enjoying a festival in a charming town of galleries and restaurants where true Southern hospitality is alive and well. The street is full of interesting stalls selling country products. At a bar on the corner, country music is part of the nightly feast. Guests can dine elegantly on the balcony of the restaurant just down the street.
At the equestrian venue at Conyers, visit the old town for more Southern charm and maybe a bargain at one of the antique malls. There is a warm welcome waiting and visitors will take away a picture of the true South that will warm even the most cynical heart. I urge all who have taken the trouble to travel so far to go the next 10 yards.
 
Missing the point
MICK CORNISH, Marietta
The Editors: In NBC-TV coverage of Olympic swimming, the network is more concerned with sensationalizing trivial statistics than with presenting the incredible athletic achievements and acts of sportsmanship which are the very essence of the Olympics.
Michelle Smith of Ireland wins her country's first medal ever; yet, it is not until the controversy surrounding her late entry into another event that she is interviewed and audaciously accused of performance- enhancing drug use.
Angel Martino's touching gift of her bronze medal to a sick friend barely rated an editorial side note. I hope the Great Britain medley relay team was oblivious to NBC's pairing of the New Zealand flag with their team in the pre-race graphic. At least New Zealand is part of the British Commonwealth ---close enough for NBC standards, I suppose.
 
Same old Atlanta
TEDWARD A. WATKINS, Decatur
The Editors: I share columnist Jim Minter's wish that after the Olympics the city can do for itself what it did for the world. However, I am too much of a realist to believe it can happen.
After the Olympics are gone and the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games is taking care of putting itself out of business, Bill Campbell will still be mayor, Beverly Harvard will be chief of police and the Atlanta City Council will still be in power.
The city government will still be more in the business of running a jobs program for African-Americans and women than in delivering services efficiently. Olympic Park will become a dormitory for alcoholics, drug users, the mentally ill and riffraff. The police department will continue to be more interested in confiscating sex toys than in controlling street crime.
Atlanta will return to its old self in a few weeks, and suburbanites will avoid downtown once more. Would that Atlanta's government had the vision and the will to do what Minter proposes. However, it won't.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document