Don't let terrorism Grinch steal Halloween
University Wire
October 25, 2001


Copyright 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 456 words
Byline: By Ian Costello, Montana Kaimin
Dateline: Missoula, Mont.
Body


Halloween. Fat kids' Christmas.
Sadly, just like those poor Whos in Whoville, someone is trying to steal somebody's Christmas.
Up in his cave, way above town, a Grinch called fear and his sidekick Max, also known as Osama bin Laden, celebrate. Due to the actions of terrorists, Halloween is in danger. For the fat Whos in Whoville, there may be no Christmas (Halloween) this year.
U. Montana
As worry spreads over the possibility of increased bioterrorism concerns, one of the most recognized traditions in the United States is facing fear. And not the good fun, ghosts and witches on broomsticks kind.
Thomas Hargrove of Knox News writes: "The anthrax scares and general tensions over terrorism have escalated concern about Halloween, prompting merchants and public officials to ponder whether they should try to curtail trick-or-treating this year." He goes on to say that several merchants have already canceled or modified Halloween party plans this year.
The concern is legitimate. The idea of a network of kids going door to door to collect candy only to be used as agents of bioterrorism against themselves is scary. But as a country heals and stresses a return to normalcy, is "curtailing" Halloween activities a legitimate response or are we just letting the Grinch and his dog steal our Christmas?
Authorities in Arkansas, who have already been overwhelmed with testing 32 suspicious "white-powder" substances, feel that limiting trick-or-treating might be a good idea.
"We don't think there's a danger of children getting anthrax," said Arkansas health department spokeswoman Ann Wright. "But because we are testing so many samples, it is starting to overwhelm our system." Wright, like other health authorities across the country, is concerned less about anthrax and more about panicky parents wanting any white substance to be tested.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is warning parents of the usual dangers of trick-or-treating, but as of yet is stopping short of suggesting a moratorium on trick-or-treating.
Exercising caution is a great idea, and with all the crazies about, most of them home-grown, caution has always been a great idea, especially on Halloween. Hamstringing trick-or-treating may prevent the scare of an outbreak, but allowing fear to determine holiday activity just makes it easier for the Grinch to sit in his cave and laugh -- knowing that he is winning. Fear is the enemy here, and if the enemy continues to win, Halloween could be the beginning of many stolen holidays.
Where is Little Cindy-Lou Who when you need her? She always knew the Grinch was more scared of us then we were of him. Now, as a country, we have to prove it.
Trick or treat?
(C) 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document