DON'T HEED THIS LONDON CALLING;
TO FIGHT TERRORISM, BRITAIN AND IRELAND PROPOSE DRACONIAN LAWS SURE TO;
BACKFIRE. AMERICA'S SILENT APPROVAL IS FOOLHARDY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 2, 1998, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 899 words
Byline: DENNIS B. RODDY
Body


In the annals of bad ideas, pride of place goes to laws passed in the heat of righteous anger.
For the governments of Britain and Ireland, the righteous anger was created by a bomb in the middle of the County Tyrone town of Omagh Aug. 15. Everybody was furious: the British government, the Irish government, the family and friends of the 28 people killed, even the Provisional Irish Republican Army, once renowned for its bombing skills, was enraged.
The perpetrators are a splinter group that calls itself the Real IRA, and its political wing, the 32-County Sovereignty Committee. Membership reaches, perhaps, 50 people. They are politically isolated, at great risk of being eradicated by angry IRA regulars, have no prospects of support - and are about to get a huge favor done for them.
The prime ministers of both Britain and Ireland this week plan to introduce legislation that will dramatically short-cut already dicey laws aimed at terrorists.
This comes as President Clinton is about to pay his second visit to Northern Ireland. His advisers want the United States to steer clear of any kind of criticism of the new security laws. This is dangerous nonsense. America has long insisted that totalitarian regimes shape up and protect civil liberties. If we wink at allies' strongarm tactics, our credibility is further eroded.
*
Here's what's proposed: Both Britain and Ireland want to enact laws that will change the rules of evidence needed to convict someone of membership in a banned organization. Until now, police had to offer corroborating evidence and witnesses. Under legislation Prime Minister Tony Blair intends to hand to Parliament, a person could be convicted of membership on the sworn word of a senior police official.
Corroboration is still required, but barely. If a suspect refused to cooperate, say offer an alibi or otherwise converse with his captors, that could be inferred by the trial judge - they don't use juries in these things - as further evidence of guilt.
Under the old system in Northern Ireland, prisoners already were convicted on the word of single witnesses, and oftentimes confessions were extracted under very smelly circumstances. Now, rubber hoses will not be needed. All that will be needed to put a man or woman away for 10 years is proof that, 1) he got arrested and 2) he didn't confess.
Americans, long comfortable with the idea of a Fifth Amendment, are precluded from testifying against themselves. Only in the bent world of anti-terrorism hysteria can failure to say anything at all amount to testimony. Imagine your local police with these powers.
The last time the rule of law was suspended to stamp out terrorism in Northern Ireland, world sympathies turned against the authorities. In the early '70s, the British, acting under a Northern Ireland security statute that a South African prime minster once openly coveted, rounded up suspected IRA members. Their information was so bad that they mostly got a group of elderly men, one of them stone blind, a few mouthy teen-agers and word that several of their suspects had long ago died. Then they switched to a system of non-jury trials that included single witnesses. The response by the Irish in America and Australia was to raise funds for the IRA. If you want the Irish to do something, tell them they're not al lowed. If you want to promote a cause with them, persecute it.
That's why a man named Bobby Sands, who went on a hunger strike inside the Long Kesh/Maze prison in 1981, was, days before his death, elected to the British Parliament by Catholic voters who, before then, had given their vote to the anti-IRA Social Democratic and Labor Party.
President Clinton's work in bringing peace to Northern Ireland has been as important as it has been symbolic. His visit there in November 1995 moved public opinion toward a political settlement and pushed recalcitrant Unionist politicians off dead-center. It is troubling, therefore, that his deputy national security adviser, Jim Steinberg, in a press briefing last week, said of the proposed terrorist legislation that "the decisions have to be for individual governments to make about what the specific steps are. We obviously want everything to be done in a way that is consistent with the broadest possible freedom of expression and political rights. But the president supports the efforts of the governments to move forward on this."
You might imagine what the Chinese will say the next time Clinton lectures them on human rights. His own administration has just used the language the Chinese use to tell us to mind our own business on that subject.
The putative target of this new law, the Real IRA and its political wing, the 32-County Sovereignty Committee, are not at all liked by Irishmen north or south of the border. Their tenuous claim to an IRA pedigree is a woman named Bernadette Sands McKevitt. She's the sister of the late Bobby Sands, MP. Now, estranged from her old allies, the object of hateful glares from her neighbors, Bernadette Sands McKevitt and her partner, the presumed brains behind the Omagh debacle, are about to be handed the thing they most need in their hour of peril: a just cause.
They might as well ask for a few hundred copies of the new anti-terrorism legislation when it goes to press. They can print recruitment flyers on the back.
Dennis B. Roddy, a Post-Gazette staff writer, writes frequently on Ireland.

Load-Date: September 4, 1998


End of Document