Don't Let Libya Off the Hook
The New York Times
April 10, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 15; Column 2; Editorial Desk ; Column 2; ; Op-Ed
Length: 690 words
Byline: By Paul Hudson; 

Paul Hudson is a lawyer. He lost his daughter Melina in the Pan Am 103 bombing.

By Paul Hudson;  Paul Hudson is a lawyer. He lost his daughter Melina in the Pan Am 103 bombing.
Dateline: ALBANY
Body


Although Libya has finally handed over two suspects charged with planting the bomb that brought down Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland more than a decade ago, the United States should not assume that full justice is being done.
President Clinton, like Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush before him, has said that there can be no safe haven for terrorists -- not even for government officials engaged in state-sponsored terrorism. But some American officials are now arguing that we should be satisfied with prosecuting two low-level operatives in a conspiracy that probably involved other officials in Libya and perhaps even Iran.
Now that the United Nations has removed sanctions against Libya because the two suspects have been delivered to the Netherlands for trial, some American companies are lobbying for the removal of United States sanctions -- the very sanctions that helped persuade Libya to turn over the suspects. Moreover, United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan has reportedly pledged that the trial will not be used to "destabilize" Libya. Whether that means that higher-level officials in the Government will not be prosecuted is open to interpretation.
So many concessions have been given to Libya to bring these suspects to justice, I can only wonder what kind of justice it will really be.
International law says that when agents of a government murder citizens of another country, the agents' government is liable for their actions -- even if they abused their authority. Countries are sometimes required to pay compensation to the families of the murdered people, and even reparations to the government of the victims' nation.
The two Libyan suspects in the Pan Am 103 case were chief of security for the Libyan national airline and an employee of the airline in Malta. They are also suspected of being representatives of the Libyan agency for state-sponsored terrorism known as the External Security Organization.
According to a white paper by the American State Department, the Libyan Government also financed, planned or committed dozens of other acts of terrorism against citizens of the United States and other Western nations in the 1980's.
Representatives of the Libyan Government, including the brother-in-law of Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, have been charged by French courts with blowing up a French UTA jet over Niger in 1989, killing all 171 on board, including six Americans and the wife of the United States Ambassador to Chad.
The investigation of Pan Am 103, the sanctions by the United Nations and United States, and the implicit threat of American military retribution have no doubt prevented and deterred many other terrorist attacks over the past decade. However, the United States must do more to really end the threat of state-sponsored terrorism. It must continue its criminal investigations of Pan Am 103 and other cases of terrorism to obtain the evidence needed to indict any higher-level Libyan officials responsible. Should any new evidence against other suspects come out in the trial in the Netherlands, we should pursue these leads to their fullest.
America has the world's best intelligence agencies, along with witness protection programs and many new Federal Bureau of Investigation field offices in foreign countries. All of these resources can be used to shed more light on the Pan Am 103 case as well as other major terrorist cases.
In addition, the families of Pan Am victims have 150 civil cases now pending in the American court system against Libya, its airline and its agents. If these cases succeed in getting punitive damages, it would not only punish those responsible for the bombing, but may help deter other such acts in the future. Mr. Qaddafi and his henchmen would like immunity from American criminal and civil courts, as well as from international tribunals. They must not get it.
The courts must go wherever the evidence leads. No person or government should be able to get away with mass murder merely by giving up the lowest-level players, paying minimal compensation and allowing the passage of time and economic pressure to absolve them of responsibility.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 10, 1999


End of Document