Don't Let Trade Center Blast Ignite Witch Hunt
The New York Times
March 23, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Column 4;; Letter
Length: 452 words
Body


To the Editor:
The arrest of Mohammed A. Salameh in connection with the World Trade Center bombing (front page, March 5) has unleashed a torrent of disingenuous discussion in the public realm. An act as reprehensible as the bombing rightly bears the mark of crisis; but moments of crisis demand caution and a sense of justice, not hysteria and flagrant witch hunting.
I write as a member of the Arab Association of Columbia University, neither to defend nor to convict Mr. Salameh. We believe in the concepts of due process and innocent until proved guilty. The bare facts of the case have led us to believe that a great deal must be known before anyone can be convicted of this heinous crime. We do, however, accuse the mass media of irresponsibly trying and convicting not only Mohammed Salameh, but also all his associates and, by the media's own runaway logic, virtually all Arabs, Muslims and new immigrants to this country.
Labels such as "Islamic fundamentalism" and "Arab terrorism" obfuscate more than enlighten. They serve as negative ideological tags pinned on entire populations, as was once done with "yellow peril," at horrible cost to the Japanese-American population. It reminds us of the dark chapter of McCarthyism in the book of American history.
As in the Japanese-American experience, there is a racial element to this demonization. One example, from "Surprises in a Crowded Courtroom," part of your March 5 coverage, will stand for all too many:
"Ten courtroom artists furiously sketched the defendant's beakish nose, hollow cheeks, cropped beard and the sideways tilt of his head."
Such racial stereotyping serves nothing except to feed an existing hate and fear.
Arab culture and Islam have long been so grossly misunderstood and caricatured in this country that terms like "Arab terrorism" and "Islamic fundamentalism" now stand in to mean Arab culture and Islam. Such terms have taken on a life of their own, divorced from the traditions, lives and aspirations of the people to whom they are supposed to refer.
In this country, this has meant that Arabs and Muslims have been at the receiving end of terrorist attacks (consider the 1985 murder of Alex Odeh); intimidation by the Government (Federal Bureau of Investigation surveillance before, during and after the Persian Gulf war), and violence (a Muslim woman was pelted with eggs a few days ago and told to go back where she came from -- she was born in the United States).
The bombing of the World Trade Center was a horrible and vile act. We denounce it and all acts like it. Surely, however, in the search to find the criminals responsible, more innocent people must not be made to suffer from it.
 
MOUSTAFA BAYOUMI
New York, March 11, 1993

Load-Date: March 23, 1993


End of Document