DON'T BE DECEIVED: ARAFAT IS STILL ARAFAT
The New York Times
February 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 690 words
Byline: By Abraham H. Foxman and Kenneth Jacobson; Abraham H. Foxman is associate national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith. Kenneth Jacobson is the organization's director of Middle East affairs.
Body


Just when we most need to know the identity of those behind the international terrorism movement, the notion is circulating that Yasir Arafat is not responsible for recent Palestinian terrorism. Abu Nidal, a rival of Mr. Arafat, is said to be the person behind the killings in the Rome and Vienna airports. Mr. Arafat claims innocence and condemns the actions.
What is the role of Mr. Arafat and his Palestine Liberation Organization in the terrorist incidents these past six months?
To begin with, Yasir Arafat taught Abu Nidal all he knows. Abu Nidal joined Mr. Arafat's al Fatah movement in 1959 and stayed with him until 1974, when he left to form his own group. It was Mr. Arafat who legitimized the use of terror against innocents to achieve the P.L.O.'s goal: the destruction of Israel. It was Mr. Arafat who legitimized attacking Americans because America supports Israel. Abu Nidal learned well. And though he turned against the master, the master is still the master.
Yasir Arafat is not merely the intellectual ancestor of today's international terrorism. He continues to be its legitimizer. At times, he has his henchmen carry out terrorist acts. Mohammad Abbas, the mastermind behind the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, is a pro-Arafat member of the Palestinian movement.
Why in the world, one might ask, would Yasir Arafat allow one of his lieutenants to engage in a major terrorist expedition when he seeks to improve his image in the West? Mr. Arafat has always been of two minds: trying to prove to the West that he is really a good guy, and trying to prove to his guerrillas that he still is a tough guy. Indeed, the more he is perceived as the diplomat, the greater his need to protect his flank from his own more radical forces by proving his terrorist credentials.
In particular, it is important to note Yasir Arafat's statement in Egypt, now known as the ''Cairo declaration,'' following the Achille Lauro affair. While the statement was hailed by some as a breakthrough in the P.L.O.'s attitude toward terrorism, Mr. Arafat made abundantly clear that he had no intention of abandoning his role as the symbol of the terrorist movement.
He said he had concluded that terrorism outside Israel had become counterproductive - had turned opinion against the Palestinians - and therefore he opposed such terrorism. But nowhere did he say that killing innocents was evil, that he regretted having done so and would cease. The message was clear: Terrorism remains a legitimate instrument but one that the P.L.O. now says it chooses not to use - except in Israel - because of the public mood.
Other Palestinian terrorists - Abu Nidal for one - may disagree with Mr. Arafat's tactical assessment, but it is from Mr. Arafat that even now they receive their strategic cue. To condemn Abu Nidal while ignoring Mr. Arafat is moral obscurantism.
At least two steps are necessary before one can seriously consider absolving Mr. Arafat from responsibility for terrorism. First, he must unequivocally renounce the terrorist complex - its legitimacy, P.L.O. involvement in its many aspects: moral support, funding, training, supplies. This must include activities within Israel as well. There can be no exceptions, no rationalizations.
Secondly, Mr. Arafat must clearly end his intention of destroying Israel. P.L.O. terrorism is intimately connected to the absolutist thinking regarding Israel that has characterized the P.L.O. since its creation. Israel has no right to exist, the P.L.O. asserts, and thus the P.L.O. is justified in using any means, including killing women and children, to pursue its goal. It is only when the P.L.O. unequivocally abjures its absolutist goals that one can take seriously its stated intention to abandon its terrorist means.
Will these changes happen in the near future? It is unlikely. For now, to avoid the moral confusion that leads to paralysis, the West must make clear that it sees through the Arafat-Nidal split, that the two share far more in common than what divides them and that only unequivocal anti-terrorism will cause us to reassess the Palestine Liberation Organization and Mr. Arafat.


End of Document