Donald Trump's Anti-Terrorism Plans
The New York Times
August 17, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18; LETTERS
Length: 506 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Trump Invokes Cold War in Plan to Fight Terror'' (front page, Aug. 16): 
  My jaw dropped when I read that Donald Trump stated that the Orlando and San Bernardino mass attacks were carried out by ''immigrants, or the children of immigrants.'' I am the child of an immigrant. My father came here after being in a slave labor camp in Siberia, having fled the Nazis in World War II.
  My family and I live in a very diverse town of immigrants. Amazingly, there isn't a terrorist in the whole bunch of us.
  Not surprisingly, Mr. Trump did not mention homegrown terrorists like Timothy McVeigh, the Oklahoma City bomber, or Dylann Roof, the Charleston church shooter. Instead of worrying about immigrants, I would like to know how Mr. Trump plans to deal with the problem of white men, or the children of white men.
  ELAINE EDELMAN
  East Brunswick, N.J.
  To the Editor:
  It's too bad the Republican Party didn't come up with the idea of ''extreme vetting'' first.
  TOM GOODMAN
  Chicago
  To the Editor:
  Re ''Secret Ledger in Ukraine Lists Cash for Trump Aide'' (front page, Aug. 15): Thank you for reporting on the relationship between the party of the former president of Ukraine, Viktor F. Yanukovych, widely seen as a puppet of President Vladimir V. Putin, and the Republican presidential candidate's campaign chairman, Paul Manafort.
  Donald Trump has little knowledge of foreign policy. His campaign chairman, for a period of years, advised Mr. Yanukovych's party and profited handsomely as a result. Mr. Trump has praised Mr. Putin repeatedly during the course of his campaign. Am I missing something, or is Mr. Trump being led by the nose?
  Imagine the uproar if Hillary Clinton, even with her far superior understanding of foreign policy, had hired such a sullied individual as her campaign chairman.
  LORAINE OTIS
  Belle Mead, N.J.
  To the Editor:
  It sounds like a thriller filled with twists and turns involving an American presidential nominee and his campaign chairman. And Vladimir V. Putin. There's cyberwarfare against opponents. Then there's the secret ledger filled with undisclosed cash payments totaling $12.7 million. And then there's the maneuvering to change the party platform on Ukraine.
  If that does not have you on the edge of your seat, there are the Russian investors in the candidate's private business ventures.The American people are counting on you to uncover the truth about all of it. Our country is at stake.
  MARY ELLEN MILLER
  Myrtle Beach, S.C.
  To the Editor:
  Your Aug. 16 editorial ''Mr. Trump's Foreign Policy Confusions'' states that Donald Trump's speech on Monday blaming President Obama and Hillary Clinton for the rise of the Islamic State and for undermining Middle East stability ''shows either misunderstanding or ignorance.''
  There is of course another explanation: intentional falsehood on Mr. Trump's part. Surely after all of Mr. Trump's blatant lies in his campaign to date, he is not entitled to the benefit of the doubt in this matter.
  PETER H. JACOBY
  Philadelphia

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/17/opinion/donald-trumps-anti-terrorism-plans.html

Load-Date: August 18, 2016


End of Document