DONATION HONORS TERRORISM VICTIM;
PARENTS GIVE $100,000 TO SCOTTDALE LIBRARY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 12, 2005 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE,
Length: 360 words
Byline: REBEKAH SCOTT, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE
Body


Terrorism struck home hard in 1988 when Beth Ann Johnson, a 21-year-old senior at Seton Hill College, died in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
 Seventeen years later, Johnson's parents are donating $100,000 in her honor toward a new library in the family's hometown of Scottdale, Westmoreland County. They announced the gift at a gathering yesterday at the little library on Pittsburgh Street.
"We do this to honor Beth's memory, and to benefit this town where our family is so firmly rooted," said Carole Johnson, Beth Ann's mother.
 "When I was a kid I was here in the library two or three times a week," said Glenn Johnson Jr., Beth's father. "Beth worked at the library when she was in college. Her grandmother was a librarian, too. We've always had a feeling for the place."
 Their daughter was returning home from a semester in London when Pan Am Flight 103 crashed in Scotland in December 1988. Investigators later learned the jetliner was brought down by a bomb smuggled aboard in a radio by Libyan terrorists.
 The Johnson family since received about $8 million in insurance and reparations, Glenn Johnson said, and the family has funded several local causes since then.
 The Scottdale Library, a popular spot wedged into a former A&P grocery, outgrew its space in 1996, so the Johnsons funded a new Beth Ann Johnson Children's Reading Room in an adjacent storefront. They chipped in another $5,000 for new computers.
 "Still, we outgrew that too," said library director Patricia Miller. "The board decided the next thing to do is build a whole new library, with triple the space."
 They bought an abandoned YMCA building two blocks away and had it demolished, then started a $1 million capital campaign to finance the new building. The Johnson donation brings the total collected so far to about $350,000. Library officials hope to open the new library by the end of 2007.
 Scottdale Public Library serves about 12,000 residents of Scottdale and East Huntingdon and residents in neighboring Fayette County communities.
 "Giving to the library helps meet the library's needs. And it meets an emotional need for us," Carole Johnson said.

Notes

Rebekah Scott can be reached at rscott@post-gazette.com or 724-836-2655.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Beth Ann Johnson

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document