Donald Trump to remove Sudan from USA terror blacklist
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 20, 2020 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: HI TECH; Pg. 1
Length: 604 words
Byline: Sandy Mccarthy
Body


President Donald Trump on Monday said Sudan will be removed from the US list of state sponsors of terrorism, a move that would open the door for the African country to get the worldwide loans and aid that are essential for reviving its battered economy and rescue the country's transition to democracy. Mr Trump wrote on Twitter, vowing to delist Sudan as soon as the compensation is "deposited".
There was no mention by Mr Trump of Sudan having to recognise Israel. "Resisting the pressure of the Americans and Zionists... overcoming crises and ending American sanctions are based on mobilising people's power", it insisted in response to reports that Sudanese officials have said that Sudan is seeking to normalise ties with Israel in return for ending USA sanctions and overcoming the country's crises.
Sudan's designation as a state sponsor of terrorism dates to its toppled ruler Omar al Bashir and makes it hard for its transitional government to access urgently needed debt relief and foreign financing. But according to two analysts briefed on the plans, the USA will also take other key steps to support the Sudanese government, including providing hundreds of millions in aid, including direct food aid; backing $3 billion in debt forgiveness and help with $65 billion of national debt; and sponsoring an investment conference with a high-level US trade delegation.
The Trump administration has brokered similar peace deals between the Israeli government and Arab nations in recent months.
Relations between the USA and Sudan have improved since President Omar al-Bashir was ousted after mass street protests previous year.
A key sticking point in US-Sudan talks has been Sudan's insistence that any announcement of Khartoum's de-listing not be explicitly linked to normalisation with Israel.
Sudan is one of four nations branded by Washington as a state sponsor of terrorism along with Iran, North Korea and Syria - severely impeding economic development, with few major foreign investors willing to run afoul of U.S. laws.
County reports 27th COVID-19-related death
There have been more than 150 cases per day since Friday, with the largest single day total at 174 from Sunday to Monday. Albany County has the most cases of any county in the state with 988 confirmed cases and 1 deaths, according to the WDH.
The deal has been brokered with the condition on Sudan agreeing to pay $335 million in compensation to the victims of Qaeda attacks on United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 and the Navy destroyer Cole in 2000.
His apparent aim is to prod the Arab nation to establish diplomatic relations with Israel.
Just minutes after Trump's statement, Sudan's Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok tweeted: "Thank you so much, President Trump!" Differences remain between Sudanese political and military officials on how far to go in the warming of relations with Israel.
One possibility, a USA official said, would be for Washington to leave it to Sudan and Israel to go public later, possibly in coming days, with an agreement on opening relations.
The UAE and fellow Gulf state Bahrain in September became the first Arab states in a quarter of a century to sign agreements to have formal ties with Israel, forged largely through shared fears of Iran. "I hope that the intensive contacts will yield positive fruit".
The Trump administration, which is also expected to offer economic aid, must now notify the US Congress of its intent to take Sudan off the terrorism list.
The designation of Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism dates back to the 1990s, when Sudan briefly hosted Osama bin Laden and other wanted militants.

Load-Date: October 20, 2020


End of Document