Donald Trump Says Terrorists Dream of a Clinton Victory
The New York Times
July 2, 2016 Saturday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 375 words
Byline: By NICK CORASANITI
Body


DENVER -- After spending most of the last week focusing on trade, Donald J. Trump turned his attention on Friday to terrorism and the threat from the Islamic State, suggesting that terrorists groups were hoping for a Hillary Clinton victory in November.
''They have dreams at night,'' Mr. Trump said. ''And their dreams are that Hillary Clinton becomes president of our country.'' 
  The comments came as he gave an extended riff on terrorism, claiming ''I see things that a lot of people don't,'' and citing his opposition to the invasion of Iraq (which he didn't originally oppose) and his criticism of NATO as ''obsolete'' as examples of his gut on foreign policy proving him right.
  He littered his comments with fear of homegrown terrorism, slightly changing his tone regarding Syrian refugees that have come into the country.
  ''They could be ISIS,'' he said. ''I used to say that they're probably not. But now I say that many of them probably are.''
  Mr. Trump called on Turkey specifically to fight the Islamic State, saying the group was responsible for the bombings of the Istanbul airport on Tuesday. While Turkey has blamed the Islamic State for the airport attack, no group has claimed responsibility.
  ''Turkey, by the way, should be fighting ISIS,'' Mr. Trump said. ''I hope to see Turkey go out and fight ISIS.''
  Turkey and the United States announced a major agreement last year to fight the group.
  While he used foreign policy and Bill Clinton's impromptu meeting this week with the attorney general, Loretta Lynch, as a means of criticizing Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump also played up his primary victories, including spending the first five minutes of his speech rehashing his battle over delegates in Colorado.
  ''Colorado taught me a lot about politics,'' Mr. Trump said. ''I learned a lot because polls came out that I was going to win Colorado and doing really well in Colorado and looked good and I was looking forward to it. And then all of the sudden I didn't get the delegates. I said, 'What happened to the vote, remember?' And I started to learn. I'm a quick learner.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/02/us/politics/donald-trump-says-terrorists-dream-of-a-clinton-victory.html

Load-Date: July 2, 2016


End of Document