Donegal School Board eying anti-terrorism policy
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
June 11, 1998, Thursday


Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 326 words
Byline: Andy Ciotola
Body


Incidents of school terrorism occurred in rural Oregon, Arkansas, Kentucky and as close to home as Edinboro. Could it happen here?
The Donegal School Board wants to reduce the possibility by adopting a zero-tolerance policy for students who threaten terroristic acts.
#DONEGAL.J11#
School board president Willis Spangler brought up the issue for discussion at the board's Tuesday night meeting. Board member Aldo Jacobus cited the recent series of school shootings as cause for concern.
According to school district Superintendent Woodrow Sites, the proposed policy would impose severe punitive measures on any student who threatens to "terrorize another, to cause evacuation of a building or to cause serious public inconvenience."
The language is derived from the Terroristic Threats/Acts entry in the policy guide of the Pennsylvania School Board Association (PSBA). Donegal routinely refers to PSBA in crafting district policy.
Sites expects the board to adopt guidelines calling for expulsion of a student threatening terrorism and referral of the case to law enforcement officials. If allowed to return to school, the student could be subject to random searches.
The proposed policy is due for discussion by the board on Tuesday, Aug. 9.
"We want to implement every practice and procedure that we possibly can to assure a safe environment for all of our students and employees," Sites said.
Sites said Donegal would be the first school district in the county to adopt a measure dealing specifically with threats of terroristic violence.
Though violence in Donegal schools is rare, Sites noted three instances in the past two years that would have fallen under the terrorism policy.
In two of the situations, Sites said, students "made very serious verbal threats to the safety of two teachers."
In the third incident, a student threatened violence against another student.
Through disciplinary action, all three students were prohibited from further attending school.

Load-Date: October 14, 1999


End of Document