Doormen out front in the war on terrorism
USA TODAY
July 12, 2004, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 767 words
Byline: Martha T. Moore
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body

NEW YORK -- There was a time when the only infiltrator an apartment house doorman had to worry about was the guy who slipped Chinese food menus under everyone's door.
Now the men who hail taxis and open doors are the front line against terrorism in Manhattan's posher precincts.
Doormen, superintendents and other workers in residential buildings are learning about weapons of mass destruction and the goals of terrorist organizations in a program sponsored by New York City police, the building workers' union and real estate management companies.
In a four-hour session, the building workers learn that an exterminator's canister, for instance, can be used to spread chemical weapons against humans, not just cockroaches. They find out what to do if a suspicious package arrives (evacuate the area and call 911) and what to ask someone who phones in a bomb threat (the location of the bomb and name and address of the bomber). They test their observation skills and pass around an envelope filled with a white substance that turns out to be baby powder.
'We have to be on point'
"I want you to be more aware of this in August. That's when all the bigwigs are coming to New York" for the Republican National Convention, says Xanthe Beecher, a police detective who teaches the classes under an arrangement with the building workers' union. "We have to be on point. We want to let the terrorists know we're standing our ground."
To tourists -- or the delegates attending the convention -- New York may look like a crowded, anonymous city. But doormen, and they are virtually all men, know much about their neighborhoods, including the children, dogs and deliverymen, and who parks on the street. Not to mention what they know about their buildings, such as who comes in drunk and who sneaks out at 5 a.m. after staying over.
The odds of a terrorist attack on an expensive Fifth Avenue apartment may seem remote, but the odds of the city being attacked again are less so, says Michael Fishman, president of the union representing the city's building workers, a local of the Service Employees International Union. "The doormen just happen to be the people who are really the first responders in any apartment building.  . . .  Our guys would need to know what to do."
It will take more than a year to train all 28,000 workers in the city's residential buildings, union officials say. But the classes will be accelerated for workers near Madison Square Garden, where the convention will be held Aug. 30-Sept. 2.
Two dozen workers gathered last week for a class in a building overlooking Central Park. Since the Sept. 11 attacks, they said, they had already changed some routines. They wear gloves to sort mail. They added security cameras. And they now keep a log book to register packages and visitors.
Moises Crespo, a doorman on East 69th Street for 37 years, says a mysterious satchel with wires inside was found near his building recently. "That wakes you up," he says. "We don't feel threatened by terrorists, but I think the best approach to security is to be alert." The bag turned out to be harmless.
'A lot of roles'
After the Metropolitan Museum of Art prohibited visitors from bringing packages inside, tourists would stash their parcels with the doormen at Peter Santiago's building near the museum. "There's a lot of roles that we play," including babysitter and dog-walker, Santiago says. "Doormen -- we're everything." His building now declines to take tourists' packages.
The classes are paid for by a $1 million training fund created by the current contract between the union and real estate management companies, who represent apartment owners and renters. Off-duty police teach the classes; each building worker is paid $100 for attending.
Doormen and other building workers "are in a position to see things that are out of the ordinary: the unattended package, et cetera. It's sort of a natural extension of the eyes and ears of the department," police spokesman Paul Browne says.
Emilio De Jesus, superintendent of a white-glove building on Central Park West, says he has called 911 to report photographers aiming cameras at his building -- although they were paparazzi staking out actor Keanu Reeves, not terrorists. Since last summer's huge blackout, he also keeps flashlights, glow sticks, a radio, water and candy bars stashed at the concierge's desk.
An experienced doorman has seen it all -- except terrorism, he says. The men in the training session, he says, "have been doormen for 30 years, but this stuff is happening now. Unfortunately, this is the way we live now, for the rest of our lives."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Jennifer S. Altman for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Tina Fineberg, AP; Security: Emilio De Jesus, left, Peter Santiago, in jersey, and other New York City doormen learn to recognize suspicious mail in a class taught by Detective Xanthe Beecher, at rear behind projector. <>On Fifth Avenue: A doorman stands outside the Plaza Hotel.

Load-Date: July 12, 2004


End of Document