Double shootings heighten fears of 'white terrorism' in US
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
August 6, 2019 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 442 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


US President Donald Trump on Sunday (Aug 4) praised the efforts of law enforcement after two mass shootings within 24 hours killed at least 29 people in the US states of Texas and Ohio.
He added that white nationalists are feeling "validated" by President Trump's "hateful" ideology which is emboldening them to commit these acts.
"Then the next day, [he] meets with the NRA and he folds", she said on CNN's "New Day".
"We are not going to stop until we get gun safely legislation", he said, "we are going to keep fighting until we have gun safety in schools, in churches, in shopping malls". "You know, you can always be hopeful, there are some Republicans that have signaled support for this bill, but it's long overdue".
Buttigieg compared Trump's rhetoric to that of prominent white nationalist David Duke, who ran during the presidential candidacy in 1988.
Speaking to reporters outside a hospital in El Paso where he was visiting victims of the shooting, O'Rourke said Trump had proven himself a racist with his recent attacks on four ethnic minority congresswomen and his past branding of Mexicans as rapists.
Turner says that many group members who didn't join the protest march to the White House Saturday, instead converged on the Martin Luther King, Jr.
WhatsApp rolls out new feature 'Frequently Forwarded' in India
These users can still copy and paste the message, except that choosing to do so will make the process a tad longer for them. WhatsApp Global Head Will Cathcart said that the company was aiming to roll-out the service by the end of this year.
"He's spoken about immigrants as being invaders".
The El Paso shooting was the eighth deadliest in U.S. history. Police Chief Greg Allen said a "manifesto" believed to be from the suspect indicated "there is a potential nexus to a hate crime".
The shooting renewed attention to domestic terrorism.
Six of the 20 people killed in the shooting were Mexican nationals, the country s president, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, said Sunday. Memorial to call for nonviolence.
El Paso and Ciudad Juarez, together with the neighboring city of Las Cruces, New Mexico, form a metropolitan border area of some 2.5 million residents constituting the largest bilingual, binational population in North America.
Armed with an assault rifle, the shooter killed 20 people and wounded 26 before surrendering to police. In 2017 a mass shooting in Las Vegas claimed 58 lives, becoming the deadliest mass shooting in USA history.
Nonetheless, Democrats responded to the pair of shootings this weekend with renewed calls for Washington to take action. McConnell's office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Load-Date: August 6, 2019


End of Document