Doubts Goldwaters support of nuke option
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
August 1, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A,
Length: 339 words
Byline: LETTERS
Body


TO THE EDITOR: When Barry Goldwater said, Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice, most Americans recoiled, and he was soundly beaten at the polls. I doubt that even Goldwater would have supported the suggestion you received from Wayne Merris in a recent letter, The nuke option. Goldwaters thought was much better stated by President Kennedy: We shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty. Setting aside how we got there, isnt what were now doing in Iraq an attempt to assure the success of liberty? Although we have made remarkable progress in this regard since the end of the Cold War, there are still some tyrants and terrorists who want to stop the march toward democracy. Although terrorism has always been with us, we have never faced so many that want to die for their cause, using the Quran as their rationale. But there are emerging pinpoints of light at the end of the tunnel. For example, a recent poll found that support for terrorism among Muslims in the Mideast has dropped sharply in the last two years, although there is a significant percentage that hasnt yet switched. Several countries in the region are moving toward democracy. In Pakistan, talk is beginning on reforming the religious school system (the madrassas) which, in some cases, allow respected scholars (mullahs) to inculcate in their youth a hatred toward western societies.
#717136.wrk#A former Saudi official has written: The world will come together to show you that the only people it rejects are the aimless purveyors of death and terror whose misinterpretation of Islam not only claims thousands of innocent lives but also offends and shames Muslims across the world. A Muslim member of the British Parliament has told his fellow Muslims that the time has come to confront as well as condemn the terrorists. I believe that the support for our cause will grow as the support for terrorism continues to fade. Bill Jewett, Willow Street

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document