Double Take: Is the U.S. government's military response to terrorism creating more terrorists?; Fighting back more effective than 'do nothing' approach
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 4, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a17
Length: 771 words
Byline: ROD BLUM
Body


If the United States shows weakness, bin Laden and others will be emboldened
Is the U.S. government's military response to terrorism creating more terrorists? In the short term, we probably are, but what is the alternative?
Some suggest "leaving the terrorists alone." Terrorists are like the wasps in your garage. If you leave the nest alone, at least you won't have the whole swarm chasing you. Hurry in and out of your car and you will only get stung occasionally, though you will be afraid to go into the garage every day of your life. Sounds to me like the wasps won.
"Leaving the terrorists alone" clearly hasn't worked. Terrorists attacked our Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983, the World Trade Center in 1993, the U.S. Khobar Towers military complex in 1996, two U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998 and the USS Cole in 2000. More than 600 civilians and U.S. servicemen were killed in these attacks.
The U.S. response to these attacks was weak and insignificant, prompting Osama bin Laden to call the United States a "paper tiger." Terrorists were so emboldened by America's weak responses they carried out this generation's equivalent of Pearl Harbor: the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that killed about 3,000 innocent Americans. I don't know about you, but when I see fellow Americans jumping to their deaths from 90 stories up, I am not inclined to "do nothing."
Some of my liberal friends say we need to understand why terrorists hate America. Many terrorist groups see the United States as an accomplice of Israel, a partner in what they believe is the ruthless repression of Palestinian aspirations for land and independence. Bin Laden's most provocative issues with the United States are Israel's control over Islamic holy sites in Jerusalem, the stationing of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and the U.N.'s former economic sanctions against Iraq.
Now what? Should we change our policy of supporting Israel or pull our troops out of Saudi Arabia? If we contemplate this to appease terrorists, then we place ourselves on a very dangerous slippery slope because the attacks will continue and a new list of demands will be created.
Sen. John Kerry wants to let the "international community" and the United Nations handle terrorism. Last I checked, there are more than 30 nations fighting alongside us in Iraq. Does this not constitute an "international community?" The United Nations can serve some limited useful purposes, but fighting terrorists is not one of them. Remember that U.N. sanctions and resolutions didn't remove Saddam from Kuwait. And for 10 years after his surrender, Saddam made a mockery of U.N. resolutions. The United Nations administered the Iraq "Oil for Food Program," but we now discover that U.N. officials were most likely taking kickbacks and bribes from Saddam on the side.
Relatively speaking, terrorists in the Middle East are very small in number. Most of the Middle East does not hate America. Bin Laden and his cohorts form a small subculture of Islam that views violence as a legitimate tool against the infidel West. Though the leaders do all they can to avoid death, their foot soldiers are not only willing to die for their cause - they want to die. These terrorists are driven by a twisted belief they have a holy mission to advance their religion and drive Judeo-Christian influence from any Islamic territory.
The Middle East will always be a haven for terrorists because the countries treat their citizens so poorly. To solve the terrorism problem in the long run, Middle Eastern citizens need more democracy, more jobs, more prosperity and, most importantly, more hope for a better tomorrow. These are the seeds we are now trying to sow in Iraq - it's the only long-term solution to Middle East terrorism. Running from Iraq now will only embolden the terrorists.
In the short term, the proverbial wasp nest needs to go. The bottom line is that we can fight the terrorists on their soil with our highly skilled military personnel or we can fight them here on American soil, in our aircraft (as Todd Beamer did), our shopping malls and our office buildings. We must convey strength against terrorists. If we had twice as many soldiers in Iraq, we would have much more stability in that country today.
America has the power to assert its will but has America the will to assert its power? The answer to this question will determine our success or failure in the war on terror.
Blum, chairman and chief executive officer of Digital Canal Corp., is a former chairman of the Dubuque County Republican Party.
$$ @122:Companion to: "Bush's shift in focus enables Taliban, al-Qaida to regroup" by Ralph Scharnau

Load-Date: July 4, 2004


End of Document