Double Take: Is the U.S. government's military response to terrorism creating more terrorists?; Bush's shift in focus enables Taliban, al-Qaida to regroup
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 4, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a17
Length: 867 words
Byline: RALPH SCHARNAU
Body


Iraq war makes America more isolated, feared and reviled than ever
Nearly three years ago, President Bush called upon Americans to support his "war on terror." He summoned us to "stay the course" in an open-ended war against a stateless, unseen and malignant enemy.
It all started when the Bush administration reacted to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks with the invasion of Afghanistan, a country where the ruling Taliban harbored Osama bin Laden-led al-Qaida terrorists linked to 9/11. After the Taliban were ousted and bin Laden escaped, Bush diverted critical resources to prepare for the overthrow of Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein. The shift in focus gave al-Qaida and its Taliban allies time to regroup for further attacks.
Bush claimed that the Iraq invasion represented a major blow against terror. Yet, the Sept. 11, commission found no "credible evidence" that former Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's regime collaborated with al-Qaida on attacks against the United States.
The London-based International Institute of Strategic Studies issued a report in late May stating that the invasion and occupation of Iraq weakened the campaign against terrorism while becoming "a potent global recruitment pretext" for al-Qaida. Even the U.S. State Department's newly corrected global terrorism report indicates that terrorism increased by most measures in 2003.
Iraq has become an ugly spectacle, a quagmire of sectarian and terrorist passions. Rather than isolating the terrorists in Muslim public opinion and starving them of support, the effect of the Iraq war has been to move their view of the United States closer to the mainstream.
A recent poll reveals that, while grateful we deposed Saddam Hussein, a majority of Iraqis despise our occupation and want U.S. troops to leave immediately.
Another recent poll shows that a majority of people in Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan and Turkey, four Muslim-majority countries with strong ties to the United States, view the war on terror as a campaign to control Middle Eastern oil and dominate the world. Many living in France, Germany and Russia hold similar views. Meanwhile, American public approval for the war in Iraq is fading, fueled by reports of prisoner abuse, mounting casualties and insurgent resistance.
For those who argued that Bush's reckless use of military force was defensible to protect human rights, a rebuke comes in Amnesty International's cover letter to its 2004 annual report: "The global security agenda promulgated by the U.S. administration is bankrupt of vision and bereft of principle. Sacrificing human rights in the name of security at home, turning a blind eye to abuses abroad and using pre-emptive military force where and when it chooses have neither increased security nor ensured liberty."
The Bush administration's Iraq war, then, has stoked anti-Americanism across the world and provided al-Qaida with a rallying cry among Muslims. Ironically, U.S. efforts to combat terrorist groups have actually strengthened them.
Confronting global terrorism requires international cooperation, a strategy ignored or even scorned by Bush. Instead, the Bush administration went to war in a misleading and manipulative way that alienated key allies, divided and weakened the United Nations, outraged the world community, made us more hated in the world and diluted the energy and resources of the global counter-terrorism coalition. America is more isolated, feared and reviled today than at any other time in our history.
Rather than pre-emptive military adventurism, the United States should turn its full attention once again to an anti-terrorism campaign based on collaborative intelligence operations to capture terrorists and shut off their financial resources. Political dialogue and diplomacy also must be part of the process to restore America's reputation as a leader on matters of international law and peace as well as an honest broker in dangerous regions like the Middle East.
The United States, the world's sole military superpower, needs to improve its capacity to conduct anti-terrorist investigations using techniques similar to those successfully employed in Spain, Britain and France. No one doubts our military dominance, but militarizing the problem of terrorism obfuscates its political, social, cultural and historical dimensions.
The true path to safety lies in respect for human rights and the views and experiences of others, not in asserting, under the rubric of national security, unilateral authority to be a law unto ourselves. Ultimately, the United States cannot give or guarantee freedom, democracy or liberty for the Iraqi people. At best, we can give them the opportunity to choose their future.
While the United States can claim some counter-terrorism successes, we should adopt a more flexible, humane and internationalist approach to terrorism. America is capable of wiser, more measured and more humane applications of our considerable power and influence in the world.
Scharnau teaches U.S. history at Northeast Iowa Community College, Peosta. His publications include journal articles on labor history in Dubuque and Iowa.
$$ @122:Companion to: "Fighting back more effective than 'do nothing' approach" by Rod Blum

Load-Date: July 4, 2004


End of Document