Double Take: Under Homeland Security measures enacted in the past 2 years, are Americans safer today?; Nation remains mostly unprepared for attack
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 1, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a17
Length: 885 words
Byline: RALPH SCHARNAU
Body


Government cannot be given unchecked authority
A public opinion poll conducted in January indicates that jobs, health care and terrorism rank as the most important problems facing the United States today. With respect to homeland security, we understand better than ever before that there is no such thing as absolute security for any person or for any nation.
How effective, then, are the homeland security measures taken in the wake of the 9/11 attacks? After four years of work, a federal commission established to assess our domestic response to terrorism issued its final report in mid-December of last year. The 17 panel members consisted mainly of law enforcement, medical and municipal officials with James Gilmore III, a former Republican governor of Virginia, serving as chairman.
While the Gilmore Commission characterized the government's response to 9/11 as a good beginning, "the momentum appears to have waned as people, businesses and governments react to the uncertainties in combating terrorism and to the challenge of creating a unified enterprise." The Commission emphasized the need for better planning, coordination, funding and implementation. The panel also strongly warned against sacrificing liberty in the pursuit of security.
The Gilmore report provides a general framework for examining the Bush administration's handling of security issues. Over the last two years, Congress approved two Bush-backed measures, the Patriot Act and a new Department of Homeland Security.
Despite the opening about a year ago of the Department of Homeland Security, the nation lacks a serious domestic anti-terrorism strategy. While airport security has been enhanced and color coded warnings adopted, most other areas of homeland security receive only rhetorical support or, at best, token investment.
Our nation remains, for the most part, unprepared for attacks on our critical infrastructure such as mass transit systems, ports and borders, electric power lines, gas pipelines, nuclear facilities and chemical plants. Few federal dollars fund translators and analysts needed to counter terrorist threats. The federal government invests little in local government training and equipment for first responders.
Meanwhile, the Patriot Act of 2001 continues to undermine personal privacy by expanding domestic surveillance and allowing law enforcement officials to obtain records of Internet activity, credit card, medical, business, library and educational institution records of individual citizens without any evidence of criminal behavior. The Patriot Act also gives new and broader definitions of terrorism that could include protestors and organizations that voice disagreement with administration policies.
Criticisms of the Patriot Act come from all parts of the political spectrum. A few weeks ago, Los Angeles became the 237th community, and by far the largest, to adopt a pro-civil liberties resolution as a direct response to the Patriot Act.
Beyond the Patriot Act, President Bush claims the unilateral right to secretly deport people designated as terrorist suspects and to hold in preventive detention individuals labeled as enemy combatants. Those in detention can be locked up indefinitely, incommunicado, without charges, without trail or access to courts or lawyers.
A further infringement of civil liberties occurs when the Bush administration relegates protesters to "free speech zones," confining them to areas away from the view of public officials and the press. Supporters of the president, however, suffer no such distancing.  Mr. Bush ought to remember that all of the United States is a free speech zone!
Clearly we must safeguard our constitutional freedoms and strengthen our homeland security. The Gilmore Commission regards "security and civil liberties" not as "competing" but as "mutually reinforcing" values.
The Gilmore Commission recommends a unified security strategy that defines priorities, sets standards and measures progress. The Commission also calls for the creation of a new, independent intelligence-gathering agency. Advancing our preparedness requires increased homeland security funding to state and local communities as well as a first responder grant program.
The Commission also recommends establishing an independent, bipartisan civil liberties oversight board. Given the record of the Bush administration such a board is needed. We cannot allow any government official unchecked surveillance, investigative and detention powers. We must defend due process, equal treatment under the law, the dignity of the individual, freedom from unreasonable search and seizure, freedom from unwarranted government surveillance. We must protect our constitutional system where Congress and the courts serve as checks and balances on executive power.
The Bush administration needs to do much more to protect the American homeland from terrorist attack. The Bush administration also needs to defend our freedoms, not abandon them. Strategic planning is necessary to combat terrorism, but "there is probably nothing more strategic that our nation must do," according to the Gilmore Commission, "than ensure our civil liberties."
Scharnau teaches U.S. history at Northeast Iowa Community College, Peosta. His publications include journal articles on labor history in Dubuque and Iowa.

Graphic

 
Companion to "Country safer because terrorism being addressed" by Rod Blum

Load-Date: February 1, 2004


End of Document