Double Take issue: In an effort to combat terrorism, should Americans surrender some constitutional rights?
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 7, 2002 Sunday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a19
Length: 378 words
Body


Background
It is called the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act.
Commonly referred to by its acronym, the USA PATRIOT Act, the post-Sept. 11 legislation breezed through the U.S. Congress and was signed by President George W. Bush the next day, on Oct. 26.
The 342-page measure, passed without congressional hearings and little debate, expands government's powers to identify, monitor and detain terrorism suspects. The legislation closely followed Attorney General John Ashcroft's outline for combating terrorism.
Among its many provisions are those that allow roving wiretaps, redefine electronic communication (permitting monitoring of e-mail and Internet use with a single search warrant), permit the detention of foreign suspects without charges for up to one week, allows wider use of military tribunals and makes it easier to detain or expel immigrants.
Critics say the USA PATRIOT Act tramples of on constitutional rights and civil liberties and does nothing to protect Americans from acts of terrorism.
Timothy Lynch, director of the Cato Institute's Project on Criminal Justice, wrote, "This cycle of terrorist attack followed by government curtailment of civil liberties must be broken-or our society will eventually lose the key attribute that has made it great: freedom."
In late September, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, after a visit to Ground Zero - where the World Trade Center towers once stood - said, "We're likely to experience more restrictions on personal freedom than has ever been the case in this country."
However, most Americans say they don't mind.
A poll conducted in April and May by the Gallup Organization and University of Oklahoma, indicated that 78 percent of respondents would exchange certain freedoms for security.
While 71 percent favored national identification cards for all U.S. residents, only 30 support giving authorities more rights to access private communications such as mail, e-mail and telephone conversations.
"It was amazing the percentage of people who are willing to give up freedom to get back some sense of personal security," Elaine Christiansen, senior research director for The Gallup Organization, told The Associated Press.

Load-Date: July 11, 2002


End of Document