Down to the wire Jim Talent touts support for anti-terrorism policies, fight against stem cell research.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 5, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1273 words
Byline: By Jo Mannies POST-DISPATCH POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT Tim Townsend of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report.
Dateline: COLUMBIA, Mo. 
Body


Sen. Jim Talent readily acknowledges that this re-election campaign isn't just about him.
"It's not an unmixed blessing," the Missouri Republican said last week before introducing another in a parade of national and state GOP leaders who would tell a supportive crowd that the future of the Senate and the nation were riding on Talent's race.
During such speeches, Talent stands discreetly to the side. He admits to a bit of discomfort.
"It's so much simpler if you can just run your campaign," he says.
But that's not possible this time. The national mood and the tightness of his contest with his Democratic rival, state Auditor Claire McCaskill, are prompting national and state Republicans to do all they can to boost Talent's chances.
Democrats need to capture six seats to gain a majority in the Senate and take control. As GOP candidates elsewhere have slipped in the polls, national Republican strategists have increasingly looked to Missouri and Talent as a "firewall."
Talent's powerful Missouri colleague in the Senate, fellow Republican Christopher "Kit" Bond, and state Republican Party chairman Doug Russell accompanied the senator and his wife Saturday in a flyaround targeting northern Missouri. On Sunday, the focus is on the Bootheel.
At Saturday's first stop, the state Republican Party's headquarters in Jefferson City, Bond lauded Talent as "a workhorse" in a national chamber full of "show horses."
"I've got a great right hand," Bond said, referring to Talent. "I am working hand in glove with Jim Talent in Washington. I need to have the two of us working together for Missouri, not canceling each other's votes."
"Real intensity"
At the Boone County Republican headquarters Thursday in Columbia, national Republican Party chairman Ken Mehlman told about 70 volunteers that Talent's support in the Senate for electronic surveillance and similar anti-terrorism policies are "one of the big reasons America hasn't been attacked" since Sept. 11.
On Friday in Springfield, Mo., President George W. Bush exhorted thousands at a Talent rally that "you're not only voting for the United States senator, you're voting to determine what kind of judges will sit on the bench."
The Republican National Committee and the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee are spending millions of dollars on Talent's behalf in TV and radio ads and staff on the ground. So are a number of independent groups, such as the National Chamber of Commerce.
Talent calls such help, especially Bush's presence, strong signs of the "real intensity'' that has gripped both sides in the final days of campaigning.
To that end, he's kept his speeches short, telling volunteers that he doesn't want to keep them away from the canvassing and door-to-door work key to bringing in the vote.
Low-key by nature, Talent exudes cautious optimism. At most stops, such as Saturday's in Jefferson City, he tells volunteers, "I feel good. If we finish strong, you're going to re-elect yourself a U.S. senator!''
The state party is doing its job, making 1.3 million voter contacts in recent months. That's twice the number in 2004, when Bush handily carried the state along with a number of statewide Republicans.
Said Talent: "I'm more pleased with our get-out-the-vote effort than in 2002."
Talent was referring to his first U.S. Senate bid, when he defeated then-U.S. Sen. Jean Carnahan, D-Mo. His margin of victory was fewer than 22,000 votes, as was his defeat for governor in 2000 against Democrat Bob Holden.
Those two experiences, says Talent, are helping him prepare for a close finish this time.
"One would always like to be well ahead,'' he said. "But this is Missouri."
Seeking rural turnout
Talent has seen a lot of Missouri, moving from one rural town to another. He travels with a few aides, no media allowed. He makes a point of stopping at local Republican headquarters to thank volunteers.
Like all statewide Missouri Republicans, Talent needs a strong turnout of rural voters to win. In recent elections, the GOP has claimed the allegiance of close to two-thirds of those voters.
Talent is often accompanied by Charlie Kruse, president of the Missouri Farm Bureau, arguably the state's most powerful rural group. After Bush left Missouri on Friday, for example, Talent and Kruse traveled to rallies in Perryville, Kennett and West Plains.
"It's up to us to do our job in rural Missouri, to get the biggest turnout we can get,'' Kruse said last Thursday, as he hosted a chili supper/rally for Talent at the bureau's headquarters in Jefferson City.
Talent delivered one of his most passionate late-campaign speeches, as he told bureau members of his dream of an agricultural boom prompted by the conversion of corn and soybeans into alternative fuels.
Talent is particularly proud of his Senate work to help rural Missouri increase production of ethanol, while curbing the illegal methamphetamine industry.
His suburban stops have had a different flavor, featuring such high-profile figures as presidential press secretary Tony Snow in Frontenac and former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani in Independence, Mo.
Giuliani focused on his fears that a Talent defeat would shift the nation's strategy on terrorism and Iraq. "If they win, we're going back on defense,'' Giuliani said.
The crowd of several hundred, gathered outside the Jackson County Republican headquarters, enthusiastically agreed.
David Nitzsche, 61, a retired teacher from Independence, said he had no doubt Talent would win. "He's on the right side of the issues," Nitzsche said.
Stem cell politics
For many Republicans showing up at Talent's events, those issues include one on which he and Giuliani disagree: embryonic stem cell research.
Talent is now running an ad explaining why he opposes Amendment 2, which would protect all forms of embryonic stem cell research allowed under federal law. He says it will legalize human cloning; amendment supporters sharply disagree.
Addie Winslow, a veteran Jackson County Republican, predicts that the controversy over the amendment will help Talent win. "I think it's going to get people out to vote,'' she said. "Our bishops, right down the line, that's all they're talking about."
Last Wednesday, Talent showed up in Springfield at the state's convention of Southern Baptist leaders. He told the 1,200 delegates that "as a believer" he was grateful for "what God has done through you." He also praised "your work in opposing Amendment 2."
The crowd gave him a standing ovation.
Talent often mentions another social issue: his support for Missouri's constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage. He told the Baptists it was "a matter of common sense," adding "people, not courts, should decide the direction of our country."
That stance, along with his support for gun rights and his opposition to abortion, are the chief reasons farmer Jule Dotson, from Marionville, backs Talent.
"He sees it the way I do,'' said Dotson, who attended the Friday event with Bush in Springfield.
Such unequivocal support is helping Talent weather the downside to all the national focus on his contest.
When a reporter asks how he's coping, Talent recalls a favorite story of Abraham Lincoln about a man who was tarred and feathered and run out of town on a rail. Asked for his reaction, the man replied that "he was honored by the attention but would have preferred to avoid the experience."
Saturday morning, with Election Day near, Talent emphasized that he wasn't complaining about the necessity of campaigning. "I enjoy it,'' he said. "But I'm ready to get back to work."
---
Get coverage of the Senate race, including past stories, audio, issue analysis, polls and more. STLtoday.com/politics

Notes

 ELECTION 2006 - ELECTION DAY PREVIEW 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - - Talent's national parade Charlie Riedel | The Associated Press  PHOTO - Sen. Jim Talent, R-Mo., appeared Thursday in Independence, Mo., with former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. John Sleezer | Kansas City Star 

Load-Date: November 5, 2006


End of Document