DOWN TO BUSINESS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 9, 1993, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14B; EDITORIAL
Length: 416 words
Body


One process that can enlarge mutual interest in Middle East peace is a series of no-nonsense meetings between top Israeli and Palestinian leaders, the people who speak for most of their own. The first of such meetings occurred Wednesday in Cairo between Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
By all accounts of the public part of this historic encounter, Mr. Rabin and Mr. Arafat were uncomfortable with each other and refused to shake hands for the cameras. Yet in private they put their personal feelings behind them, did shake hands and got down to the very hard task of beginning to turn the peace accord of Sept. 13 into a workable arrangement for Palestinians and Israelis to share the same sliver of land west of the Jordan River.
Time is running out. The accord sets specific dates. Israel must begin withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and an as-yet undefined area around the West Bank city of Jericho by Dec. 13; a Palestinian council that would manage internal affairs must be elected by July 13, 1994. To meet these goals, the PLO and the Israelis must meet regularly and in good faith for many weeks to decide how to allocate land and water in the occupied territories, as well as to foresee such problems as administration of justice when crimes are committed.
Making the agreement into a living process that offers peace and stability instead of continuing conflict would benefit both the Labor government of Mr.  Rabin and the PLO. Each must win over skeptics among Israelis and Palestinians. In effect, the Israelis are handing power over to the Palestinians. This process will work only if the Israelis are satisfied that Palestinians pose no mortal threat to Israel.
In the weeks since the PLO-Israeli accord was signed in Washington, a number of issues have come to the fore. Among them are acts of terrorism against Israelis, the roundup of Palestinians wanted for crimes in Israel and the occupied territories and the continued imprisonment of 11,000 Palestinians by Israel. These are the kinds of nitty-gritty issues that can be solved only by negotiating teams, not by violence and terrorism. Mr. Arafat can do his part by making important gestures such as calling and working for an end to the Arab boycott of Israel and its normalization into the Middle East.  Likewise, Mr. Rabin's government can show a willingness to share power with Palestinians when they have shown they can be trusted to govern themselves.

Load-Date: October 10, 1993


End of Document