Dozens killed in India; Officials suspect terrorism in fire on a train bound for Pakistan; at least 65 die
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 19, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a1
Length: 330 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DEWANA, India 
Body


An explosion on a train headed for Pakistan set off a fire that swept through two coaches, killing at least 65 people in an attack early today that an official said was aimed at undermining the peace process between India and Pakistan.
Authorities say two suitcases packed with unexploded crude bombs and bottles of gasoline were found in train cars not hit in the attack, leading them to believe the fire was set off by an identical explosive device.
"It appears to be a case of sabotage," said the general manager of the Northern Railway, V.N. Mathur.
India's junior home Minster, Sriprakash Jaiswal, said the homemade bombs were not powerful, and were simply intended to start a fire on the train one day before Pakistani Foreign Minister Khursheed Kasuri was to arrive in New Delhi for talks on the ongoing peace process.
Jaiswal called the attack part of a "conspiracy ... to disturb communal harmony, India's stability and to disturb the peace process between India and Pakistan."
The fire engulfed two coaches of the Samjhauta Express, one of two train links between rival India and Pakistan. Because of security concerns, the train is kept sealed, and passengers might have been trapped inside the burning cars.
The train fire broke out just before the train reached the station in the village of Dewana, about 80 kilometers (50 miles) north of New Delhi.
At least 30 passengers who were burned or injured in the blaze have been hospitalized in the nearby town of Panipat, Mathur said. The dead included both Indians and Pakistanis, officials said.
The enmity between India and Pakistan centers around Kashmir, a largely Muslim Himalayan region divided between the two countries but claimed by both nations.
More than a dozen militant groups - most based in Pakistan - have been fighting in Indian Kashmir for nearly two decades, seeking independence for the region or its merger with mostly Islamic Pakistan. More than 68,000 people, most of them civilians, have died in the violence.

Load-Date: February 19, 2007


End of Document