Dr. Seuss soft on terrorism? Santorum runs risk with dig at Cruz
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
January 8, 2016 Friday


Copyright 2016 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 467 words
Byline: by ERIC HEYL
Body


Horton hears some hubris. 
Plenty of it exists in former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum's first "” and perhaps only "” presidential campaign commercial now airing in Iowa, available online and probably popular among misguided Oregon militia members. 
The commercial is perplexing not because of its target, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who swiped the ultraconservative hammer Santorum once wielded like an ideological Thor. It's puzzling because the commercial unnecessarily risks alienating the millions of fans of one of one of the most enduring authors in American literature: Dr. Seuss. 
The commercial ridicules Cruz for reading during a 2013 symbolic Senate filibuster the Seuss masterpiece, "Green Eggs and Ham" "” a work as critically acclaimed as, and far more accessible than, James Joyce's "Ulysses." 
Whatever you think of Cruz's incendiary politics, his recitation of Seuss' magnum opus arguably was the most sensible utterance on the Senate floor in decades. Yet the commercial mocks Cruz for being "wonderful at reading children's fairy tales" and implies that someone who thinks highly of Sam-I-Am is incapable of standing up to ISIS. 
Is Santorum kidding? Sam-I-Am badgers as ruthlessly as ISIS beheads. Ten minutes alone with Seuss' master manipulator and the terrorists would throw down their weapons and announce their jihad was now a jihadn't: 
"We now like peace as much as Islam 
We're now non-violent, Sam-I-Am!" 
Does Santorum want to potentially alienate a large segment of voters by implying Seuss was soft on terrorism? The risk is real. 
Although the good doctor died in 1991, he remains enormously popular. According to The Wall Street Journal, he sold 4.8 million books in 2013. That's the equivalent of 2.4 million Thing One and Thing Twos each. 
I don't know the place's current population, but it's reasonable to assume that not all of the book buyers hail from Whoville. There's a statistical probability some Seuss readers are Iowa Republicans. 
Perhaps Santorum believes he needs to act aggressively to build on his recent momentum. According to Real Clear Politics, aggregate polling numbers as of Thursday had the former Penn Hills resident favored by 0.8 percent of Iowa Republicans. 
That puts Santorum well ahead of Lindsey Graham and George Pataki, both of whom have dropped out of the race. But given that he trails 10 other GOP candidates, the Hawkeye State appears ambivalent at best to Santorum's candidacy. 
Will the bewildering anti-Cruz, anti-Seuss commercial change that?  
Santorum's chances probably can be summed up in a paraphrased quote from another Seuss classic, "The Lorax": 
"Unless (Iowans quickly start caring) a whole awful lot, 
Nothing is going to get better. It's not." 
Eric Heyl is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7857 or eheyl@tribweb.com 

Load-Date: January 10, 2016


End of Document