Draft to fight war on terrorism not likely
University Wire
September 11, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Daily Aztec via U-Wire
Length: 514 words
Byline: By Leslie Hackett, The Daily Aztec
Dateline: San Diego
Body


For 35 years, the U.S. military services were involved in an active draft program.
The draft was instated during a time of peace before World War II broke out and lasted until 1973, when the Vietnam peace pacts were signed.
Prior to World War II, the U.S. Army was compiled of a force of 175,000 men. After the first peace-time draft in the summer of 1941, this number increased eightfold and reached 1.4 million men.
San Diego State U.
With the start of the Korean War in 1950, the draft was reinforced to expand the U.S. Army again. The force increased to reach 1.5 million officers and soldiers. Of these, 142,000 lost their lives during the war.
The draft encountered the most resistance during the Vietnam War. During the late 1960s, the U.S. Army reached an enrollment of more than 1.4 million men. Between 1961 and 1973 more than 56,800 of these men were killed and an additional 153,300 were seriously wounded.
Now, as the United States reaches the one-year anniversary of the terrorist attacks, questions of war are sweeping across the nation.
Many Americans are aware of the threat of entering into war with Middle Eastern countries.
In a recent poll conducted by The Daily Aztec, an overwhelming number of respondents -- 94 percent -- said yes, the United States should declare war on Saddam Hussein.
"Rest assured, America will prevail in the fight against terrorism," said Secretary of the Army Thomas White in a press release the day after the Sept. 11 events. "Our Army is prepared to do its part."
If the United States did enter into war, would the return of the draft be in the nation's future?
"There's nothing out there that indicates the United States will go back to the draft," said Stan Cordell, chief of Public Affairs for the Southern California Recruiting Battalion. "At this point, the army is making its admissions as directed by the commanding general."
San Diego State University economics junior Ritchie Sturdevant said the chances of the United States bringing back the draft are slim to none.
"I think a draft should be used if the U.S. military feels it is necessary to defeat Iraq and remove Saddam Hussein from power," Sturdevant said. "I also feel that the probability of that is low, given the fighting capability of our forces."
If confronted with the draft, would students face up to their duties or run to their nearest boarder?
"While I wouldn't volunteer to fight before a draft was enacted, if drafted I would not hesitate in serving my country, even if that required combat," Sturdevant said.
Undeclared San Diego State freshman Nick (last name withheld) said he wouldn't be happy if the draft was brought back, but he would understand if it was absolutely necessary.
Nick also said if he was chosen in the draft he would unwillingly serve.
Col. Barry Abbott of the San Diego State Air Force Reserve Officers' Training Corps said there has been a long-term increased interest in AFROTC.
"To directly attribute any recent increase in interest to the terrorist attack is speculation," Abbott said.
(C) 2002 The Daily Aztec via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 11, 2002


End of Document