Drama delves into terrorism and bureacracy
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 12, 2010 Friday
JERSEY-C Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES WEEKEND; Inq Weekend; Pg. W25
Length: 545 words
Byline: By Howard Shapiro

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


I was all set to tell you how implausible the new play Language Rooms is, given that at its midpoint, it asks us to believe that a U.S. government interrogator/translator would be forced to give a most improbable prisoner the third degree. 
And then I realized, whoa, this may be an abrupt surprise - and indeed, it changes the heretofore oddly amusing nature of Arab American playwright Yussef El Guindi's new drama, which opened Wednesday in an impressively designed, well-acted world premiere at the Wilma Theater. But the plot twist - to describe it further would spoil the play - is not wholly unbelievable.
That's because Language Rooms - about an American Muslim translator who interrogates terrorism suspects at a U.S. detention center in an unnamed part of the world - sets up a bureaucracy where it's impossible to tell fact from fiction; try it, and you become a suspect yourself. And it's also because the play seems to accurately reflect the go-for-broke, at-any-cost attitude that has been our government's stance in these matters. Language Rooms is colored in shades of Abu Ghraib.
El Guindi's dialogue percolates at a rapid boil, but the script has flaws. A massage scene in the first half ends in bizarre confusion; it's otherworldly and out of place. And after what could have been a highly effective ending, the playwright has a character remembering a time long ago - a gratuitous coda that quickly drops the play's dramatic arc and tries the audience's patience. 
Still, El Guindi is a deft writer. (His Jihad Jones and the Kalashnikov Babes played to strong reviews last season at InterAct Theatre.) He has many threads of thought to account for, and for the most part he knots them by the end - the divergent strings that make the immigrant experience so different for a parent than for a child; the dangerous intersection of assimilation and self-hatred; the deadening effect of a bureaucracy that deals in secrets, extremist behavior, and self-perpetuation even as it purports to be a neutral fact-finder for a higher cause. 
It also looks at the paradoxes built into being a citizen of dual heritage, in this case Muslim Americans, two of whom are characters in Language Rooms. The two (Sevan Greene, excellent as the play's main character, and the convincing J. Paul Nicholas) make up the entire unit of Arabic-speaking translators at this compound, where the African American boss (a facile Peter Jay Fernandez) is a paranoid whose many Kumbaya moments underscore the cracks in his personality and the deeper voids in his management style. 
The fine cast, led with a clear storytelling vision by Blanka Zizka, the Wilma's co-artistic director, is rounded out by Julienne Hanzelka Kim as a talky masseuse, and the superb Nasser Faris as a detainee. Russell Chimpa's lighting (check out his between-scenes work) and Ola Maslik's black-and-white set provide an aptly eerie feel in a world of perplexing gray. 
 Language Rooms 
Through April 4 at the Wilma Theater, 265 S. Broad St. Tickets: $36-$65. Information: 215-546-7824 or www.wilmatheater.org.Contact staff writer Howard Shapiro at 215-854-5727 or hshapiro@phillynews.com. Read his recent work at http://go.philly.com/howardshapiro. Listen to his reviews on The Classical Network, www.wwfm.org.  

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: March 12, 2010


End of Document