Driver plows car into Melbourne crowd; no known terror ties
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 22, 2017 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 505 words
Byline:  By TREVOR MARSHALLSEA Associated Press  
Body


SYDNEY - The driver of an SUV that rammed into a crowd in central Melbourne on Thursday, injuring 19 people, is an Australian citizen of Afghan descent with a history of drug use and mental illness but no known links to terrorism, police said.
Police said the driver, 32, who was not identified, was arrested and had been known to police for minor assault and traffic offenses. The motive for the attack was not immediately known.
"We don't at this time have any evidence or any intelligence to indicate there's a connection with terrorism," Victoria state police acting commissioner Shane Patton said.
The streets outside the city's iconic Flinders Street railway station were crowded with Christmas shoppers Thursday afternoon when a white Suzuki SUV ran a red light and sped up to slam into pedestrians crossing the road before crashing into a traffic barrier.
Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews confirmed that 19 people had been taken to hospitals. Four were listed in critical condition and were believed to include a preschool-age child, Australian media reported.
Andrews described the incident as "an act of evil and an act of cowardice, perpetrated against innocent bystanders."
Witnesses described a horrific scene.
"I was crossing Flinders Street on the way to the train station. I heard an engine rev behind me and heard a thump," one man identified only as David said on ABC TV. He said he turned around and saw "people literally getting thrown into the air as it hit them."
Bystanders rushed to drag the driver out of the vehicle before police arrived to arrest the man. Early reports said there were two men in the car, but Patton confirmed the suspect was driving alone.
Confusion had arisen when a second man was seen being apprehended alongside the driver. Patton said he was a 24-year-old man seen filming the incident on his mobile phone and found carrying a bag with three knives.
Patton said that man was taken into custody to determine whether he was connected.
"At this stage, we don't believe that to be the case," he said.
Patton said that the investigation would involve the force's counterterrorism unit to ensure "that there isn't that connection, and that there is no ongoing threat" but that the attack was being treated as a singular incident.
He said that police were working with Australian intelligence agency ASIO and Australian Federal Police and that there was no intelligence to suggest the man was a person of interest to those agencies.
"We understand he's on a mental health plan and receiving treatment for a mental illness," Patton said.
It is the second time this year that Melbourne, regularly ranked one of the world's most livable cities, has been traumatized by a car attack.
In January, six people were killed and more than 30 were injured when a car was driven up a footpath in Bourke Street, near Thursday's incident. Police arrested the driver, who was known to police for a history of illicit drug use, family violence and mental health problems.
Police said that case was not terrorism-related.

Graphic

 
 A damaged vehicle is seen at the scene of an incident on Flinders Street, in Melbourne, Thursday, December 21, 2017. Police have arrested a driver after a car drove into pedestrians on a sidewalk in central Melbourne. (Joe Castro/AAP Image via AP) 

Load-Date: December 22, 2017


End of Document