Drone strikes in Pakistan carry heavy price, rewards
USA TODAY
October 28, 2013 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 299 words
Body


Last week, human rights groups called for more transparency and accountability regarding the CIA drone strikes targeting al-Qaeda leaders in Pakistan.
Do al-Qaeda leaders care about collateral damage? No. Besides, if those leaders got turned in by their own people, there would be no need for drones.
Richard Sherry McLellan
If Pakistan were flying drones over the U.S. and dropping bombs on American citizens, do you think we would consider those acts terrorism and war crimes?
Michael Kadinger
War is hell. And if the bad guys are hiding out and using your country as a haven, don't be surprised when the bombs drop.
That said, the real crime is President Obama using drones to assassinate U.S. citizens abroad without due process.
Rick Button
Drone strikes aren't war crimes; they are outright terrorism. If a country killed American citizens on American soil for any reason, we would be after it in a second.
Al Herriman
The harsh reality is that when it comes to urban warfare, civilians are sometimes collateral damage.
Keith Mathis
One person commented that critics should just "get over it" because we're fighting a war. Get over it? I guess it's easy to have that gung-ho, cowboy attitude when you're not in the crossfire. I wonder if you could get over it if your house caught fire from a bomb targeting your neighbor. And I wonder if you could get over it if a stray bullet hit one of your loved ones.
Jonathan Spooner
Life isn't fair, and we have to do everything needed to exterminate those people who challenge us. There's no such thing as a fair fight. Never has been, never will be.
Lee Shropshire
I think we are missing the big picture here. Since when can anyone say which methods of killing people are acceptable and which ones are not? The whole conversation gives me chills.
Steven Hubschman 

Load-Date: October 28, 2013


End of Document