Drone missile strikes al-Qaeda's No. 2 man; U.S. cheers 'degradation' of terror group
USA TODAY
June 6, 2012 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 526 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


A U.S. drone strike in northern Pakistan killed al-Qaeda's second-in-command, U.S. officials said Tuesday.
Abu Yahya al-Libi, a terrorist who escaped from an American military prison in Afghanistan seven years ago, was killed when a drone missile struck a house in the jihadist haven of North Waziristan.
Al-Libi was elevated to al-Qaeda's No. 2 spot after Ayman al-Zawahri rose to replace Osama bin Laden shortly after the terrorist leader was killed May 2, 2011, by Navy SEALs.
He made a number of videos calling on Muslims to join jihadist movements in various parts of the world.
White House spokesman Jay Carney called al-Libi's death a "major blow" to the terror network and said he had a range of experience that will be hard to replicate.
"His death is part of the degradation that has been taking place to core al-Qaeda during the past several years, and that degradation has depleted the ranks to such an extent that there's no clear successor," Carney said.
Pakistan reacted angrily to drone strikes that occurred this week, calling Deputy U.S. Ambassador Richard Hoagland to the Foreign Ministry on Tuesday to protest.
"He was informed that the drone strikes were unlawful, against international law and a violation of Pakistan's sovereignty," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
An American official, speaking to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity to discuss intelligence matters, said the strike that killed al-Libi happened Monday morning.
The State Department's Rewards for Justice program had set a $1 million reward for information leading to al-Libi, who had filmed numerous propaganda videos urging attacks on U.S. targets.
The United States has carried out a flurry of drone strikes recently -- seven in less than two weeks -- some of which may have been trying to target al-Libi.
Al-Libi, an Islamic scholar, was captured in 2002 and held by U.S. forces at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan until he escaped in 2005. The Rewards for Justice program described al-Libi as using his "religious training to influence people and legitimize the actions of al-Qaeda."
In a 2009 profile of al-Libi in Foreign Policy magazine, terrorism expert Jarret Brachman described al-Libi as "media-savvy, ideologically extreme and masterful at justifying savage acts of terrorism with esoteric religious arguments."
Al-Libi was one of thousands of men from around the Muslim and Arab world who flocked to Afghanistan in the 1980s to battle the Soviet Union. According to Brachman, he later went to Mauritania for advanced religious studies that he used in repeated videos and other al-Qaeda outreach designed to attract followers and justify terrorism.
Al-Libi was influential and popular within al-Qaeda because of his "scholarly credentials, street cred from having escaped from Bagram, charisma and his easygoing, tribal speaking style," said Brachman, who has studied al-Libi for the past seven years. "People may have revered Zawahri, but they loved Abu Yahya," Brachman said.
Al-Libi was the latest in the dozen-plus senior commanders removed in the U.S. war against al-Qaeda since Navy SEALs killed bin Laden in a raid on his compound in Pakistan. 

Load-Date: June 6, 2012


End of Document