Drop 'war on terror' imagery; The threat of terrorism has become part of the fabric of modern life.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 15, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A11
Length: 788 words
Body


Richard N. Haass
is president of the Council on Foreign Relations
The arrests of 21 alleged terrorists last week in London in a plan to blow up airplanes over the Atlantic offers an opportunity to take stock, nearly five years after 9/11.
At best, the effort to curb terrorism has had a mixed record. Terrorist attacks have occurred subsequently in Indonesia, Madrid, London, Egypt and Bombay. There is also the steady drumbeat of terrorist violence in Iraq. But the terrorists have not done anything on the scale of 9/11.
The reason for this is worth thinking about. It may reflect the ouster of the government of Afghanistan and the elimination of al-Qaeda's haven there. Improved and better coordinated intelligence and law enforcement have made it more difficult for terrorists to succeed.
Also, as the recent arrests in London suggest, it seems possible that the desire to accomplish something more dramatic than the 9/11 attacks may have complicated terrorists' ability to implement their plans without detection.
None of this should make anyone sanguine. Globalization makes it easier for terrorists to acquire the tools of their trade and to move about. Technology, possibly including weapons of mass destruction, increases the chance that any terrorist success will cause damage of great magnitude.
In addition, Iraq is producing a new generation of experienced terrorists along the lines that Afghanistan did two decades ago.
So what needs doing? One answer put forward by the Bush administration is to promote democracy. The thinking is that young men and women will be less likely to become terrorists if they are members of societies that provide them with political and economic opportunities.
Unfortunately, the evidence does not support this. Individuals growing up in mature democracies such as the United Kingdom can still become radicalized. A more democratic Iraq has become a more violent Iraq. Similarly, elections in Palestine did not persuade Hamas to turn its back on violence any more than elections in Lebanon dissuaded Hezbollah from initiating the current crisis in the Middle East.
Moreover, even if democracy were the answer, it is extraordinarily difficult to bring about, as Iraq shows. Building a true democracy (as opposed to simply holding elections) requires decades or even generations. In the meantime, however, we need a policy to deal with the terrorism that confronts us.
What is more, democracy is irrelevant to those who are already terrorists.
So, again, what needs doing? First, let's drop the metaphor of a "war on terrorism." Wars are fought mostly on battlefields between soldiers of opposing countries. Wars have beginnings and ends. None of these characteristics applies here.
Terrorism can now be carried out with box cutters and airplanes as easily as with explosives. Office buildings and commuter trains and coffee shops are today's battlefields. There are no uniforms, and often those doing the killing are acting in the name of causes or movements. There is no end in sight.
Here's the key point: Terrorism is now part of the fabric of contemporary life.
There is another reason to jettison the martial vocabulary. Terrorism cannot be defeated by arms alone. Indeed, intelligence, police work and diplomacy are likely to play a larger part in any effective policy.
Second, it is essential to distinguish between existing and potential terrorists. Existing terrorists need to be stopped before they act.
But much more can and should be done to persuade young men and women not to become terrorists in the first place.
Terrorism must be stripped of its legitimacy, seen as neither acceptable nor necessary. Those carrying it out must be shamed. Arab and Muslim leaders need to make this clear, in public pronouncements, lectures, or fatwas. The initial critical reaction on the part of several Arab governments to Hezbollah's kidnapping of Israeli soldiers is a sign that such criticism is possible, as are comments by a number of Muslim religious leaders.
But terrorism also needs to be stripped of its motivation. This means that the United States and others must spell out the gains Palestinians can expect in a peace agreement with Israel and what Sunnis and Shiites can reasonably expect in Iraq's new political order. Bringing about a lasting cease-fire in Lebanon will also help to calm emotions.
The way ahead is clear: vigilance against violence coupled with political possibility. Such a policy will not eliminate the scourge of terrorism any more than modern medicine can eliminate disease. But it could reduce it to a scale that won't threaten the openness, security or prosperity of modern societies.
Richard N. Haass is a former director of policy planning in the State Department.

Load-Date: August 15, 2006


End of Document