DROUGHT BRINGS MORE PROBLEMS TO PEOPLE OF PERU
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 1992, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6D
Length: 569 words
Body


LIMA, Peru (AP) - Summer in fashionable Miraflores used to be a time of birds singing and flower-scented breezes. This year, as elsewhere in Lima, it is one of roaring generators and the reek of gasoline.  The worst drought in 70 years has forced water and electricity rationing in the capital, making life even more miserable for 7 million residents already burdened with terrorism and an economy in tatters.  ''Sometimes we don't have water for a week, and we're forced to bring water in buckets from a tap in another neighborhood,'' said Yolanda Pinillos, a housewife in La Molina, an upper-class district.  Millions of poor migrants from the Andes have lived for years without power or water in the shantytowns that ring Lima, but only recently has the pinch been felt in the more comfortable neighborhoods.  This summer, food spoils in warm refrigerators, and the lawns of the wealthy are dying.  ''We have our electricity and water cut off every day, which makes the bathrooms stink and the meat go bad,'' said Anita Lozano, who owns a restaurant in Miraflores. ''You get used to almost anything, but our clients won't drink warm beer.'' Cold showers are the order of the day. There is a run on thermos flasks, gas cookers and generators.  Even when water is available, there often is no power to pum p it into the tanks of a house or apartment building.  Blank traffic lights cause chaos. Police do not direct traffic after 6 p.m. for fear of being ambushed by leftist guerrillas.
Lima sits on Peru's coastal desert and gets its water from the Rimac River, which descends from the Andes. Hilda Abuid, spokeswoman for the government water company, said the river was running at half its normal volume.  Because this year's drought in the mountains follows one in 1990 - the worst in a half-century - reservoirs already were below normal levels.  The capital's fresh-water table is dropping by 3 feet a year, and civil engineers now drill wells down to 1,000 feet. Sea water has invaded wells in districts near the shore.  Most of Lima's power is generated at hydroelectric plants in the Andes. The drought has cut 25 percent from a supply already severely curtailed by years of power-line sabotage by the Shining Path, a Maoist guerrilla group.  Throughout the country, industries lose $150 million a month in orders they cannot fill for lack of electricity, according to a study by the Private Businessmen's Confederation.  ''Peruvians have always enjoyed dirt-cheap electricity,'' said Julio Vento of Electrolima, the government power company. ''Now they're going to have to learn how to cut back.'' Rates were heavily subsidized for decades before President Alberto Fujimori took office in 1990 and ordered the state-owned utilities to pay their way.  Now, electricity bills in Lima are among the highest in South America.  Electrolima plans to build a $40 million, 100-megawatt thermal plant next year, which will drive the capital's electricity rates even higher.  Hector Grimaldo, manager of the Garden Hotel in the San Isidro district, invested in a generator and an underground water tank to keep the air conditioning, elevators and kitchen running.  ''It was a real blow,'' he said. ''Tourism is already rock-bottom because of terrorism and the economic crisis, so we couldn't even raise our rates to cover the cost.'' Night-time robberies and murders have doubled in streets left dark by the rationing.

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document