Drug Trafficker Convicted Of Blowing Up Jetliner
The New York Times
December 20, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 978 words
Byline: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN 

By ROBERT D. McFADDEN 
Body


A Colombian said to be the most feared assassin of the Medellin drug cartel was convicted by a Federal jury in Brooklyn yesterday of blowing up an Avianca jetliner over Bogota in 1989. All 107 people aboard, including two United States citizens, were killed in one of the worst acts of drug-trade terrorism.
The 29-year-old defendant, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera -- who reputedly killed 50 police officers, judges and other officials in a ruthless career launched at age 12 -- was also convicted of smuggling tons of cocaine into the United States over a decade, and of racketeering and conspiracy that included murders and other acts of terrorism to promote international drug trafficking.
Found guilty of all 13 counts by a jury that had heard stunning testimony of death and destruction and had deliberated over the weekend, Mr. Munoz-Mosquera faces up to life in prison without parole when sentenced on March 3 by Judge Sterling Johnson Jr., who presided at the two-month trial.
Prosecutors called it the nation's first conviction under a 1956 Federal law that made it a crime to bomb a civilian aircraft, and the first under a 1986 terrorism statute that made it a crime to kill a United States citizen abroad. It was also a breakthrough for drug-enforcement officials frustrated for years by major drug traffickers operating with impunity from sanctuaries in Colombia.
Witnesses said Mr. Munoz-Mosquera had arranged to place a bomb aboard Avianca Flight 203 on Nov. 27, 1989, because he believed that two informers who were cooperating with Colombian authorities were on board. The aircraft exploded shortly after takeoff from Bogota on a domestic flight to Cali.
The unusual prosecution in this country of crimes committed in Colombia and other countries was made possible by the deaths of Americans in the Avianca bombing, and by the suspect's 1991 arrest in Queens by Federal agents who learned that a notorious Medellin killer had come to New York just as President Bush and other world leaders were arriving to address the United Nations.
Since then, investigators said they had unmasked Mr. Munoz-Mosquera as the Medellin cartel's top killer, a fugitive who planned the killing of a Colombian presidential candidate, destroyed the headquarters of Colombia's intelligence service with a car bomb, mounted a rocket attack against the United States Embassy in Bogota and escaped from jail in Colombia twice.
"We are enormously gratified with the verdict," the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, Zachary W. Carter, said after the jury's midafternoon decision. "It sends an unequivocal message that murderous acts of narco-terrorism will not be tolerated."
And Thomas A. Constantine, administrator of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration, which had spearheaded a three-year investigation by American and Colombian authorities in the case, called it "a tremendous victory" against the Medellin cartel, one of the world's most violent and powerful criminal organizations.
The conviction was also hailed by David S. Stempler, executive director of the Air Line Passengers Association, which monitors airline safety around the world and had cautioned its 110,000 members in 150 countries against flying to Colombia except on major airlines because of risks posed by drug terrorists.
The jury's verdict, delivered to a crowded courtroom shortly after 3:30 P.M., ended a trial that began Oct. 17 in Federal Court in Brooklyn. The prosecution, led by Cheryl L. Pollak and Beth A. Wilkinson, presented a total of 35 witnesses, including many Colombian officials and criminal associates of the defendant.
In often-dramatic testimony, the witnesses portrayed Mr. Munoz-Mosquera as a paid assassin and drug smuggler of the cartel headed by Pablo Escobar, who was also indicted for the bombing of the Avianca jet but who was slain in a shootout with Colombian security forces last December.
"A number of Colombian police officers came to this country and testified at great risk to their own safety," James McGivney, a spokesman for the Drug Enforcement Administration, said.
Mr. Munoz-Mosquera was said to have actually placed the bomb on board the plane. All 101 passengers and six crew members were killed, as well as three people on the ground.
Other witnesses said Mr. Munoz-Mosquera had been instrumental in smuggling "tons and tons" of cocaine into the United States between 1981 and 1991, and other testimony described patterns of racketeering and conspiracy that included scores of murders and other acts of terrorism to promote the drug trade.
Mr. Munoz-Mosquera did not take the stand, and the defense called only one witness, a Federal agent who signed an affidavit when the suspect was arrested in 1991.
But the defendant's lawyers, Richard M. Jasper and Kenneth Ranseur, sharply cross-examined many of the prosecution witnesses, some of whom, they said, had testified in hopes of obtaining lighter sentences for themselves. They also contended that their client was being tried as a scapegoat for Mr. Escobar.
Traveling on a false passport and a wallet stuffed with counterfeit $100 bills, Mr. Munoz-Mosquera, a short, muscular man with the unlikely nickname of La Quica -- "fat girl" in Colombian slang -- was arrested at a pay phone in Queens by Federal agents who had been tipped off to his whereabouts.
The report of an assassin in town -- his trail had led through Miami and Los Angeles -- had unnerved security agents concerned about President Bush and other arriving world leaders. Though identified as a killer, he could be charged only with lying to a Federal officer about his name. He was eventually convicted of that and is still serving a six-year term.
Indicted in 1992 on the charges for which he was convicted yesterday, Mr. Munoz-Mosquera was first brought to trial last April, but the case ended in a hung jury in July, leading to a second trial in the fall.

Graphic

 
Photo: Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, who was convicted yesterday. (Drug Enforcement Administration)

Load-Date: December 20, 1994


End of Document