DRUNKEN DRIVERS SHOULD BE TREATED AS TERRORISTS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
September 10, 1996, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion,; GUEST COLUMN; Column
Length: 473 words
Byline: Greg Galbraith
Body


In response to the downing of TWA flight 800 and the bombing at the Olympic games in Atlanta, I would like to focus attention on America's version of terrorism occurring daily along our roadways and streets. The ''terrorists'' that I am referring to are America's drunken drivers.
This terrorist uses automobiles instead of pipe bombs, but the effect is very much the same. Each sends explosive fragments of metal into crowds of innocent people. The result oftentimes leaves its victims dead or severely injured. The mental trauma that follows such senseless killings is deep-rooted and long-lasting. The impact of these acts leaves the families and witnesses forever scarred and searching for answers to the question ''why?''
Galbraith lives in Deerfield.
With that in mind, I am writing in response to a recent State Journal story regarding Lori Kasten of Madison, convicted of homicide by drunken driving in the Feb. 24 death of an 11-year-old girl on Highway 12-18 east of Madison. Although the story was informative, it did little to draw attention to the severity of her crime.
As Americans we will not tolerate terrorism of any kind, whether it comes from within or outside the boundaries of our great nation. Why, then, should we accept defeat against the drunken drivers' form of terrorism? Why does the American court system allow the drunken driver terrorists to go free to kill again? Why is our judicial system so forgiving and lenient to the perpetrator of this form of terrorism?
Some will argue that there are differences between these two acts of terrorism, and to that I would have to agree. I see a few differences between these acts of terrorism. One occurs rarely and draws worldwide attention, while the other occurs daily and seems to go unnoticed or appears to be accepted in our society. One will result in the president's intervention and public denunciation to stop reoccurrence, while the other does not. One act receives swift, appropriate ''no tolerance'' attention in the court system; the other may not.
Is each of these acts of terrorism not equally devastating to both the victims and their families? Then we must impose justice equally in both cases. I think that it is time for all Americans to stand up and be heard. It is time that we stop all terrorism in America.
If you share my views or agree with any of my thoughts or opinions, let your elected officials know. Help send a clear message to President Clinton, Gov. Tommy Thompson, as well as to your local and state officials that drunk driving is a crime and will not be tolerated. We must treat drunk driving as the domestic form of terrorism that it is. Offenders should receive punishment to the fullest extent that the law will allow.
Only then will we send an appropriate message to those who chose to drink and drive, ''Break the law, go to jail.''

Load-Date: September 11, 1996


End of Document