Due deliberation;
Congress slows a stampede on 'anti-terror' legislation
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 3, 1995, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; EDITORIAL
Length: 599 words
Body


After an initial push to pass anti-terrorism bills at breakneck speed, both the Clinton administration and Congress now are indicating a willingness to slow down to analyze and debate the measures.
''Be careful -- there is no big rush,'' Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole cautioned when the Senate Judiciary opened hearings last week. That is sound advice.
The wave of public anger and revulsion that followed the Oklahoma City federal building bombing must be tempered by careful study and deliberation to avoid hastily enacting laws that could undermine personal freedoms without making terrorism easier to detect.
Attorney General Janet Reno told the Senate Judiciary Committee that if the Clinton administration's anti-terrorism proposals had been enacted earlier, they almost certainly would not have prevented the Oklahoma City bombing.
Moreover, the White House wisely has withdrawn a proposal to liberalize Justice Department guidelines for authorizing FBI investigations of domestic organizations suspected of terrorist activities. There is no convincing evidence that the FBI needs expanded powers to combat domestic terrorism.
FBI Director Louis J. Freeh told the Senate Judiciary Committee that he was ''entirely comfortable'' with the authority the FBI has under existing guidelines, as long as they are ''interpreted broadly.''
Existing guidelines -- adopted by the Ford administration in 1976, after Senate hearings uncovered abuses by the FBI under J. Edgar Hoover -- authorize FBI investigations for domestic security purposes ''when the facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that two or more persons are engaged in an enterprise'' whose goals are to be achieved through force or violence. That would seem to be sufficient.
Several proposals in the package implicate privacy and free-speech rights. The White House, for example, wants to extend wiretapping authority to all 1,300 federal felonies. Under present law, the FBI may, with court approval, use wiretaps for only a handful of felonies. Any expansion in that list should be a measured one.
The bill also would empower the FBI to access credit, hotel and airline records not now available to investigators in counterterrorism cases. Again, some greater latitude may be necessary, but the case must be made.
Also worth serious scrutiny is a proposal to revise an 1878 law that prohibits the use of military forces in domestic law enforcement, except in domestic threats involving nuclear weapons. The administration is requesting an exception for terrorist cases involving chemical or biological weapons.
Finally, we are troubled by a proposal that would permit the government to deport aliens suspected of terrorist activity on the basis of secret information that could be withheld from defendants.
There are other proposals in the package that are clearly sensible and deserve prompt support. Among them are requests for 1,000 new FBI agents, prosecutors and other personnel; a special FBI terrorism fund; and the creation of an inter-agency counterterrorism center.
Worthwhile, too, are measures that would make it illegal to possess stolen explosives and increase the penalty for transferring firearms or explosives used to commit violent crimes. And Congress should speedily enact a law requiring the ''tagging'' of explosives. Taggants are chemicals that are added to explosives that permit their tracing once the product has been detonated.
Congress should give law enforcement agencies the legitimate tools they need to investigate and combat terrorism. But it cannot -- and need not -- barter civil liberties for safety.

Load-Date: May 18, 1995


End of Document