Due process right of all Americans ; Terrorism: 'Enemy combatant' is held nine months without benefit of his Constitutional rights
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 21, 2003 Friday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a4
Length: 354 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


For nine months, Jose Padilla has been sitting in a cell in a South Carolina Navy brig.
He has not been before a grand jury, nor is any trial scheduled.
He has not been charged with any crime.
He has not been allowed to speak to his attorney.
Padilla has been labeled an "enemy combatant" by the president, though the evidence supporting that has not been revealed to Padilla or his attorney.
Jose Padilla is an American.
That is not to say he is a model citizen.
Padilla has been accused of plotting to set off of a "dirty bomb" and conspiring with members of al-Qaida. These are frightening allegations that might well be true.
But in America, accusations do not give the government the right to lock someone up indefinitely.
Shoe bomber Richard Reid received due process under the law. So did Zacarias Moussaoui. So did John Walker Lindh.
Jose Padilla might be a terrorist. But he was not caught by special operatives in an Afghan cave. He was arrested at Chicago O'Hare airport. The U.S. government has denied him his right to due process, his right to a speedy and public trial, his right to counsel. If the Bill of Rights does not exist for Jose Padilla, how can we be sure it exists for any of us?
While Padilla awaits his fate, the Justice Department is busy writing legislation that could justify its actions. The Patriot Act II proposes vast changes that would cripple our civil liberties. For the first time in our nation's history, it would allow secret arrests under the law. Those arrests would remain secret until criminal charges are filed. And it would reserve the right to never file charges.
Dozens of groups have raised concerns about the content of the Patriot Act II. Surely the United States would not take steps to move its government closer to tyranny. But in the case of Jose Padilla, such Constitutional protections have all but disappeared.
As an American citizen, Padilla deserves his day in court. Denying him that is a mistake on the part of our government. Making the Patriot Act II law would compound that mistake. We cannot let the threat of terrorism revoke the very freedoms we are striving to protect.

Load-Date: March 21, 2003


End of Document