Duquesne, Point Park alum named ambassador to Yemen
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
November 17, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 409 words
Byline: Matthew Santoni
Body


Duquesne University and Point Park alumnus Gerald M. Feierstein is the new U.S. ambassador to Yemen, the top diplomatic post in an area that is increasingly important in the fight against terrorism. 
Feierstein, a Philadelphia native who earned his bachelor's degree in philosophy from then-Point Park College and a master's degree in international relations from Duquesne, said he hopes he and the U.S. embassy can develop long-term strategies for helping the Yemeni government deal with terrorism, piracy off its coasts and societal and economic woes. 
The Yemen-based terrorist group al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula took credit for mailing bombs from Yemen last month that were stopped before any detonated. The group claimed responsibility for the failed Christmas Day bombing attempt aboard a Michigan-based airliner, and the U.S.S. Cole was bombed by al-Qaida in October 2000 while docked in the Yemeni port of Aden. 
The International Maritime Bureau, which tracks piracy, crime and fraud for international nautical shipping, says the Gulf of Aden between Yemen and Somalia is prone to attacks by Somali pirates. 
Beyond security issues, the United States is stepping up its efforts to fight the poverty and instability that make Yemen prime territory for groups like al-Qaida to operate from. State Department officials said helping Yemen fight terrorists and solve social issues were "inextricably linked." U.S. spending on security programs such as training Yemeni soldiers went from $73 million in 2009 to $174.8 million in 2010; civilian projects such as economic support and health programs went from $47.4 million to $121.8 million. 
Shortly after receiving his master's degree, Feierstein joined the Foreign Service in June 1975. He served in Islamabad, Pakistan (first in 1976 and again before moving to Yemen); Peshawar, Pakistan; and in the countries of Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Israel and Lebanon. 
"I'm proud to be an alumnus of Duquesne and some of my fondest memories are of my time in the international relations program there," Feierstein said. "There's no doubt in my mind that the education I received at Duquesne was key to my successful application to the State Department." 
Feierstein served in Washington at the State Department's Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism from 2006-08; was deputy director of the Office of Arabian Peninsula Affairs; and directed the Office of Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh Affairs. 

Load-Date: November 17, 2010


End of Document