DURBIN PASSES UP MEETING WITH ARAFAT TO PROTEST TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 16, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 255 words
Byline: Philip Dine Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


By supporting terrorism, Palestinian officials are risking their chance to be a real player in achieving peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and jeopardizing chances for stability in the Middle East, Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill. says.
Speaking by telephone Monday from Uzbekistan, Durbin criticized Palestinian Authority leader Yasser Arafat and said he had skipped a meeting with Arafat to protest the authority's involvement in terrorism.
"I think the Palestinian Authority has to realize they cannot be seen as a legitimate nation and sponsor terrorism at the same time," said Durbin, a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
Durbin cited Israel's recent capture of a ship on which Palestinian officials were allegedly transporting weapons and explosives, despite Arafat's claims that he had ordered a stop to terrorist attacks on Israel.
"This arms shipment contains weaponry which is part of the arsenal of terrorism, some 3,000 pounds or more of plastic explosives," Durbin said. "This is not used by police forces, it is used by terrorists to blow up buses and to put bombs in sneakers."
Arafat could demonstrate his good faith to a "skeptical" Israel by doing more to dismantle Hamas and Islamic Jihad, groups that carry out terrorism, Durbin said.
Along with Durbin, three House members are on a two-week trip that ends Saturday. They have met with leaders of Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel and the West Bank. On Saturday, they began a tour of Central Asia that includes stops in Tajikistan and Afghanistan.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - (Sen. Dick) Durbin, "Arms shipment is part of arsenal of terrorism"

Load-Date: January 16, 2002


End of Document