During visit to Arizona, Bachmann ties border security to terrorism in speech
The Arizona Capitol Times
October 17, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 471 words
Byline: Luige del Puerto
Body


Embracing a hawkish approach to confronting illegal immigration, presidential candidate Michele Bachmann said today that she wouldn’t have sued Arizona over SB1070 and lauded the state’s efforts to curb illegal border crossings. Bachmann, a Republican congresswoman from Minnesota, is in town to raise her profile in Arizona. And while she didn’t mention it, the presidential aspirant is obviously courting local politicians’ endorsements. Sen. Steve Smith, who authored the state initiative to build a border fence on the U.S.-Mexico border with private money, and Senate President Russell Pearce were among several Republican lawmakers who joined her for a media briefing inside the historic Capitol building. “I backed the law that Senator Russell Pearce had introduced here in Arizona,” she said, referring to SB1070. “I don’t diss this law. I thank this law and I want everyone to know that as president of the United States, I would not sue the state of Arizona. ” The congresswoman was referring to the U.S. Department of Justice lawsuit against Arizona for passing the controversial state-level immigration law. Most of the strict provisions in SB1070 are on hold while the case is on appeal. Bachmann also sought to tie terrorism to border security. “We know that 59,000 other than Mexicans have come across America’s borders. Those include people from the states (that) sponsor terror. That would be the state of Syria, and also we know those that (have) come in from Sudan, another state sponsor of terror. Also from Yemen,” she said. She complained about the “magnets” attracting illegal aliens to the U.S. Those “magnets” include free medical care and free education assistance, she said. She even claimed that illegal aliens would benefit from the federal health care overhaul, which Republicans derisively dubbed “Obamacare. ” She promised that if elected president, she would solve illegal immigration “once and for all” and panned the federal government for failing to secure the border. “It’s important that we actually do complete the fence in every portion,” she also said. Bachmann also seized on the occasion to snipe at fellow presidential candidate Herman Cain over his suggestion that he’d be in favor of a deadly electric fence on the southern border. Cain later said it was a “joke. ” But Bachmann said it’s not a laughing matter. “We’ve seen jokes made by presidential candidates about the fence. It is not a joke,” she said. “It’s a serious issue. ” But Democrats said Bachmann’s visit to Arizona merely highlighted Congress’ failure to resolve this complex issue. "Instead of meeting with Arizona Republican legislators as part of her presidential campaign, perhaps Bachmann should go back to Congress and actually do something about it,” Senate Minority Leader David Schapira said in a news release.

Load-Date: January 21, 2012


End of Document