Dutch Police Arrest Seven Men Suspected of Plotting Terror Attack
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 27, 2018 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 289 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The seven men were arrested in the central city of Arnhem and southern municipality of Weert on Thursday afternoon by anti-terrorism teams from the country's Special Interventions Service .
Dutch police arrested seven men suspected of plotting to carry out a "major terrorist attack" at a public event using explosive belts and an AK-47 assault rifle, on Thursday, the public prosecutor's office said.
Prosecutors believe the suspects wanted to carry out twin attacks involving a bomb and gun attack at an event and a auto bomb detonated elsewhere.
An investigation into other potential targets is continuing.
Three of the seven suspects had previously been detained after trying to join foreign militants overseas.
Those arrested ranged in age from 21 to 34.
Mars' Moon Phobos May Have Formed in Giant Impact
Scientists think this meteorite broke off from an asteroid of the same type suspected to have formed the moons. But the shapes and angles of the moons' orbits do not fit this capture scenario.
The men were attempting to stockpile AK47s, handguns, suicide vests, grenades and raw materials for bombs and were looking for opportunities to train with the weapons, according to the statement.
'Jihad networks are also active in the Netherlands with the intention to plot attacks in Europe, ' the office said.
Prosecutors said that the investigation gathered pace this month because of the suspects' "advanced preparations".
'They weren't so far that it was a danger to society, in the sense that it was almost too late.
The men will be brought before a judge on Friday at a closed-doors hearing.
The arrests took place almost a month after an Afghan man was shot by police at Amsterdam's central station after stabbing two American tourists.

Load-Date: September 27, 2018


End of Document