Duterte slams Facebook after military-linked accounts purged
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 29, 2020 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: HI TECH; Pg. 1
Length: 404 words
Byline: Sandy Mccarthy
Body


"Now, if government can not espouse or advocate something which is for the good of the people, then what is your objective here in my country", Duterte said in a public address of Monday evening.
Facebook also uncovered posts in Filipino and English which focused on domestic politics, military activities against terrorism, on youth activists, and criticising communism.
"If you can not help me protect government interest, then let us talk".
House Speaker Alan Peter Cayetano on Tuesday urged Facebook to "introspect" and "reflect on the soundness of its actions" after the Philippine government tagged as "censorship" its move to take down propaganda networks allegeldy linked to the Philippine military.
The country's National Privacy Commission last week said that it would be demanding an explanation from Facebook over the massive takedown, which did not include police or military forces' official social media accounts, like that of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I allow you to operate here. "You can not bar or prevent me from espousing the objectives of the government", an incensed Duterte said.
"We need new policies to level the playing field on Facebook", Roque said, adding Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg himself has called for regulation of online content.
Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson endorses Joe Biden, Kamala Harris
Dwayne Johnson has entertained the idea of running for POTUS in the past , and he still hasn't ruled that out entirely. During the conversation, Johnson pressed the pair on how they'd earn the respect of their fellow Americans.
Duterte also delivered a veiled threat against the social media giant: "Is there life after Facebook?"
Duterte accused the social media giant of "encouraging the left" and "inciting rebellion" by shutting down the alleged fake accounts and pages.
Facebook said last week it had removed a Philippine network of fake accounts whose operators tried to hide their identities and used "coordinated inauthentic behavior" to mislead people.
Presidential spokesman Harry Roque said Duterte was among those opposed to Facebook's shutdown of the group's account, which he said amounted to censorship.
Platforms like Facebook have become political battlegrounds and have helped strengthen Duterte's support base, having been instrumental in his election victory in 2016.
Facebook and Rappler did not immediately respond to a request for comment, while Vera Files declined to comment.

Load-Date: September 29, 2020


End of Document