E. EUROPEAN GANGS SPILLING INTO WEST;
CRIMINALS LEARN FROM MAFIA METHODS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 4, 1994, FRIDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 384 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body


LONDON (AP) - Gangsters try to sell Russian plutonium to German undercover agents. Airline passengers from Russia try to smuggle 600,000 cigarettes into Sweden. Russian gangs gain control of more than 40,000 businesses.
The breakup of the Soviet Union has spawned an Eastern European crime wave, washing over Western Europe as gangsters steal cars and art, sell drugs and smuggle immigrants and plutonium for nuclear weapons, a new study says.
International anti-crime efforts are insufficient to stop them, said the study for the Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism.
"The region between Russia and Western Europe has now become . . . 'a common market of crime,' with Germany as the focal point," said Christopher Ulrich, the study's author. An American, Ulrich worked for the U.N. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
FBI Director Louis J. Freeh, visiting Moscow this summer, warned that Russian and Eastern European gangs were a threat to the United States and to Russian democracy.
There were 5,700 criminal groups in Russia in July, according to estimates quoted in the study. More than 160 operated internationally in some 30 countries. The Russian groups reportedly have been cooperating with large criminal groups in Italy, South America, the United States and Britain.
The Russians and Eastern Europeans learned from the Italian Mafia, which moved into Eastern Europe after the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, said retired Maj. Gen. Richard Clutterbuck, author of Terrorism, Drugs and Crime in Europe After 1992.
Economic crimes such as bank fraud, extortion and the expansion of black markets "have dramatically increased over recent years," the new study said.
In Russia, businesses under gang control include more than 2,000 government industries, it said. As many as half of the American dollar bills in Moscow may be counterfeit.
Swedish authorities say cigarette smuggling rose by almost 50 percent a year between 1991 and 1993.
In Lithuania, the report said, a gang stole a government jeep - from in front of the president's office. The government bought it back for $ 3,000.
Organized crime groups in Moscow, St. Petersburg, the Baltic states, Poland and Ukraine charge Africans, Chinese and other immigrants $ 3,000 each to be smuggled into Germany, Sweden and Finland, the report said.

Load-Date: November 5, 1994


End of Document