Eagle on the watch: Seeds of Steven Forsyth's military career were planted by Troop 4
High Point Enterprise (North Carolina)
December 28, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 High Point Enterprise
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 563 words
Byline: Jimmy Tomlin, High Point Enterprise, N.C.
Body


Dec. 28--It wasn't that many years ago that Steven Forsyth was a High Point Boy Scout, trying to earn his Eagle Scout award.
That's a far cry from the job Forsyth holds today -- he's a counter-terrorism operations officer for the Defense Intelligence Agency -- but those who knew him during his scouting years say Forsyth laid the groundwork for his success in High Point.
"To see how he's turned out, it doesn't surprise us -- it just makes us feel good," said Bob Amos, who was assistant scoutmaster of Troop 4 at Wesley Memorial United Methodist Church when Forsyth was there. "It gives me a good feeling knowing we've got guys like him up there who really take their job to heart and they love it."
Forsyth, a 1998 graduate of High Point Central High School, joined the DIA's Warning and Fusion Center in October 2009.
"Basically, I manage a 24/7 watch operations center, where we monitor intelligence traffic from all over the world," Forsyth said during a recent visit to High Point. "...We monitor that traffic and look for impending threats to the United States or its interests."
Forsyth says much of his success can be traced to the experiences he gained as a Boy Scout.
"Getting my Eagle Scout was one of the big things that helped get me into West Point (the U.S. Military Academy)," he said. "That's a huge thing to have on your resume."
Forsyth studied computer engineering and electronic systems engineering at West Point, with intentions of becoming a military intelligence officer. However, the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, changed his mind, and he volunteered for the infantry instead. After graduating in June 2002, he went through officer training and U.S. Army Ranger training, then led a platoon during the initial phase of the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
He earned a Bronze Star for planning and leading more than 200 combat patrols, resulting in the destruction or capture of multiple local insurgent cells.
Forsyth then was selected to command a new army company, building it from the ground up, and then served on a military advisory team. He then got out of the army and took a job doing contract work for the Department of Defense, holding that job for two years before joining the DIA.
Meanwhile, Forsyth is also a student at Georgetown University, pursuing his master's degree in security studies, terrorism and sub-state violence.
As an operations officer with the DIA, Forsyth said he enjoys the ever-changing dynamics of his job, and he's confident in this nation's ability to protect itself against terrorism.
"I'm fairly confident we can get most of the bigger threats with the resources we have," he said. "The more advanced aspects of our government are very good at what they do -- I've seen it firsthand."
Amos, Forsyth's former scout leader, says that kind of enthusiasm and confidence should give a level of assurance to the American people.
"Steven really believes in what he's doing," Amos said, "and that's one of the things that makes me sleep a little better at night."
jtomlin@hpe.com -- 888-3579
To see more of the High Point Enterprise, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.hpe.com. Copyright (c) 2010, High Point Enterprise, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: December 28, 2010


End of Document