Early Debate On Terrorism Insurance
The American Banker
March 15, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1
Length: 859 words
Byline: By MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Some lenders are already clamoring for Congress to extend the government's terrorism insurance program beyond 2005, but key policymakers are far from committed to renewing what many had envisioned as a stopgap measure.
"Right now there is not a whole lot of chatter" on Capitol Hill "about revising the act once it expires, but that could change," House Financial Services Committee Chairman Michael G. Oxley, R-Ohio, said last week. "We're waiting to see what Treasury will decide."
Though the Treasury Department has not closed the door, an official signaled a few months ago that renewal would be a hard sell.
"We want to make sure that it stays a temporary program," Wayne Abernathy, the Treasury's assistant secretary for financial institutions, said at a Consumer Federation of America conference in December.
"I would call on your help to be sure that this program does not become a permanent program, carrying with it the risk of just becoming a government subsidy that is provided to people that do not need a government subsidy," Mr. Abernathy said. "That it doesn't become a program that occupies a place in the insurance marketplace that used to be carried by the industry itself."
Indeed, policymakers will not make a final assessment for more than a year, and it will be based on how well the market has adjusted.
The so-called reinsurance backstop was designed after 9/11 to give private insurers three years to adjust to the new risk and ensure the availability of terrorism insurance by requiring that the federal government pay 90% of claims stemming from such acts that exceeded $10 billion in 2003, $12.5 billion in 2004, and $15 billion in 2005.
To help lawmakers decide whether to renew the program, the law requires the Treasury to report to Congress by June 30, 2005, on its effectiveness, on whether property/casualty insurers will have the capacity to offer terrorism risk policies, and on the availability and affordability of such coverage.
Brian Roseboro, the Treasury's acting under secretary for domestic finance, said in a speech at a Mortgage Bankers Association government affairs conference last week that "in order to provide Congress with a comprehensive and useful report," the agency will not make a recommendation before the June 30, 2005 deadline.
"Any earlier decision would be based upon incomplete information and could provide an inaccurate assessment," Mr. Roseboro said.
The Treasury has started the first of what will be a three-stage evaluation, he said, collecting data from policyholders and insurers on coverage they purchased and premiums they paid for terrorism risk.
Lenders say they would like to know what the agency will recommend earlier than next year to guide their underwriting decisions. More immediately, they want to know if the Treasury will extend a program requirement set to expire this year that insurers offer terrorism coverage.
Last week the Mortgage Bankers Association announced the results of a survey it conducted of its 40 largest commercial and multifamily lenders. It said that all 29 respondents want the program extended because they believe "that a failure to do so would adversely impact" their markets.
Gail Davis Cardwell, a senior vice president at the trade group, said it plans to release its own data on the benefits of the program "sooner rather than later, so we can ask Congress to more expeditiously reauthorize" it. "We are not seeing the private market provide the in-fill," she said.
Insurance industry representatives pointed to the terror attacks in Madrid on Thursday to bolster their case that the federal government should continue to serve in some capacity as a backstop for private insurers.
"You didn't need the bombing in Madrid, as horrific as it was, to know that terrorism remains a threat," said Gary Karr, the director of federal media relations for the American Insurance Association.
"It is still a risk that is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to underwrite. There has got to be some sort of backstop mechanism" after the current program expires, Mr. Karr said. "Exactly what that will look like remains to be seen."
An early sign of the Treasury's recommendations will come in September, when it must decide whether to extend for another year the program's "make-available" provision, which requires insurers to sell terrorism risk coverage and is to expire at yearend. Mr. Roseboro said the agency would seek public comment later this month on that extension.
Other signals have come from Capitol Hill. Last month the House Financial Services Committee used its annual "views and estimates" for the fiscal 2005 budget of agencies under its jurisdiction to question a Bush administration request to increase the administrative costs of the program to $11 million. They were $4 million in FY 2003 and $9 million this year.
"Given the program's planned expiration, the committee finds that the increased budget allocation for the program's general administrative costs warrants closer examination," the panel said in the nonbinding document.
 
Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Oxley, Roseboro

Load-Date: March 12, 2004


End of Document