East Valley could see funds to fight terrorism cut in half
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
January 10, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 719 words
Byline: Katie McDevitt, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Body


Jan. 10--East Valley municipalities could lose more than half their federal counterterrorism funds budgeted next year for programs designed to protect local residents from terrorist threats.
The Bush administration wants to reduce Homeland Security spending in 2009 across the country by more than 50 percent, according to budget documents obtained by The Associated Press. Under that plan, states would receive $1.4 billion instead of the originally intended $3.2 billion to protect against terrorist attacks.
Although East Valley agencies already have purchased high-tech rapid response trucks that can cut through concrete, special drugs to counteract the effects of chemical weapons and many other counterterrorism-related items, public safety organizations may not be able to maintain the equipment years down the road without budgeted funds.
"It's always in the back of my mind: 'What are we going to do if it doesn't come in?'" said Mesa assistant fire chief Gil Damiani.
The federal funding wasn't meant to be permanent and was intended to bring cities nationwide up to a more uniform standard of security since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, federal officials have said.
Still, Mesa fire officials said some equipment, such as chemical-resistant hazardmaterial suits, loses its effectiveness over time, and other equipment has to be replaced after it's used.
"Once they expire, you want to have something that is useful on those response trucks," Damiani said. "Without that grant funding, we may not be able to replace them."
Tempe officials agree. Tempe police Cmdr. Bob Gage said his department has received more than $2.3 million since 2004 through various federal grants related to homeland security. The department has used nearly half the money for its bomb squad, and other funds were used for a "terrorism liaison program" that gathers intelligence and responds to major public safety threats. Now, the money is mainly needed to maintain equipment.
"If that homeland security money goes away, it will either have to come out of city money somehow or we'll have to do without it," Gage said.
Mesa has received about $12.5 million in federal funds for its counterterrorism efforts, but officials speculate cities such as Phoenix and Glendale, with its new stadium, would hold a higher priority in the future.
"I believe you have to prioritize where your vulnerability is," said Mesa police bomb squad Lt. Kevin Kazmaier. "We have been grateful to get the money we have."
About $23 billion has been doled out to the 50 states since the homeland security program began. The Bush administration has doubts over whether that money has been well spent.
But while critics complain some cities nationwide have wasted their money on gyms and deserted towns or used the funding frivolously, Mesa officials said their grants have gone to good use.
"We could, technically, send two different teams to different locations with breathing apparatuses, and we've got robots and bomb suits and X-ray equipment," Kazmaier said.
Also, Mesa is prepared to respond to anywhere needed with its equipment and its firefighters, cross-trained in extrication, medical response and hazardous materials situations.
Scottsdale officials said their police and fire departments are also prepared to respond to a terrorist attack.
Since 2001, the city has received about $1.1 million from the federal government to allow emergency responders to work toward interoperability with other Valley agencies, said Scottsdale police spokesman officer Dave Pubins.
Also, the police department's SWAT team has purchased an armored vehicle and two robots that can help in search and rescue situations.
"We've relied in the last few years on going away from individually obtaining items, focusing more on the larger group," Pubins said. "If the funding is lessened, we're still going to find benefit as a region and what we can all do."
To see more of The Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.eastvalleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2008, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: January 11, 2008


End of Document