EAST-WEST RIVALRIES DOMINATE WOMEN'S MEETING
The New York Times
July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 725 words
Byline: ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya, July 20
Body


East-West rivalries dominated the United Nations women's conference today as delegates began discussing paragraphs about world peace included in the official conference documents.
The only male member of the United States delegation, Alan L. Keyes, who had earlier warned against politization of the conference, introduced a paragraph calling international terrorism ''a major obstacle and fundamental threat to international peace and security.''
It said that the ''primary goal of international terrorism is to make individuals and nations live in fear by preying on innocent people'' and that terrorists were ''often aided and abetted by a small group of outlaw states which have no respect for underlying principles of civilized behavior or international law.''
''Innocent women and children are made the primary targets and victims of this reign of terror,'' the paragraph concluded.
East-West rivalries dominate United Nations women's conference in Nairobi, Kenya, as delegates begin discussing paragraphs about worldpeace included in official conference documents; although United States delegation has repeatedly said it will discuss only 'issues of unique concern to women,' Alan L Keyes, only male member of delegation, has introduced paragraph scoring international terrorism (M)
The representative from the South-West African People's Organization, which is fighting South African control of South-West Africa, asked for a definition of terrorism before the paragraph could be considered.
Boris G. Mayorsky, of the Soviet delegation, said, ''State terrorism is undoubtedly one of the obstacles to the exercise of the rights of women.''
He added, however, that if the ''aim of the text is to invite certain states to civilized behavior, some of the language of the text seems not to resemble civilized behavior very closely.''
The Soviet bloc's usually uses the expression ''state terrorism'' to refer to United States support for the anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua.
The United States delegation, led by Maureen Reagan, President Reagan's daughter, has repeatedly said that it was willing to discuss only ''issues of unique concern to women.''
When Dr. Keyes was asked why he proposed the paragraph on terrorism, he said: ''Why not? We've been through a lot. I don't need to get into semantics. Just ask the people who were its last victims.''
Advisers to the American delegation said the catalyst for the introduction of the paragraph on terrorism was the hijacking to Beirut last month of a Trans World Airlines jetliner.
World peace is the most politically divisive issue between the Western and Eastern blocs here. The subject is so sensitive that the committee meeting today, unlike those earlier in the week, where equality and development were discussed, was dominated by male delegates, many of them members of their foreign ministeries.
The jousting became intense, and at one point the delegate from Trinidad and Tobago, Lenore Dorset, criticized the superpowers for dominating the discussions. ''The small fish don't get a chance to speak,'' she said.
Another acrimonious exchange came during an attempt by the United States to excise a reference to preventing the expansion of the arms race to outer space, an allusion to Mr. Reagan's ''Star Wars'' research program.
Dr. Keyes, without naming the Soviet Union, said, ''There is now a major power that has 800 satellites in space, which, unlike those of Western countries, are mostly for military purposes.''
''For the last week,'' Mr. Mayorsky replied, the United States ''has been trying to persuade us this was a women's conference. We have got statistics as well. We can count.''
Angola interrupted Pakistan's delegate, Munir Akram, in midsentence when he began to introduce a paragraph attacking the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan ''as a cause of immense destruction and serious suffering especially for women and children.''
Mr. Akram mentioned neither the Soviet Union nor Afghanistan by name. The Soviet Union then issued a veiled threat to prevent Mr. Akram from speaking by means of procedural maneuvers.
The committee was able to agree on only 3 of 21 paragraphs discussed today. The rest will be discussed in closed session by regional groups.
To complicate matters, some delegations reopened for discussion several paragraphs agreed to before the conference began last Monday.


End of Document