East Valley students grill Rep. Nethercutt on terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 1, 2001 Thursday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: VALLEY VOICE; Education Notebook; Pg.V14; COLUMN
Length: 784 words
Byline: Stacy Schwandt Staff writer
Body


East Valley High School had a special guest on Friday.
 On a weekend trip to Spokane, U.S. Rep. George Nethercutt, R-Spokane,
 stopped by the school to speak to students about terrorism.
 ''My own children are asking a lot of questions about my job and the state
 of the country," said Nethercutt, the father of two. ''I thought I'd come to
 try to ease your mind."
Nethercutt spoke to a gathering of about 80 juniors and seniors during the
 school's sixth period. It was the fourth time the congressman has visited East
 Valley High School.
 The EV students proved to be an astute audience, ready with sharp questions
 about the length, strength and aftermath of the U.S. bombing campaign in
 Afghanistan.
 Some also expressed a typical high schooler's cynicism afterward,
 criticizing Nethercutt for dodging their questions.
 ''He knows how to repeat a question instead of answer it," said Nick
 Oakley, who asked the congressman how the military could be sure they weren't
 killing innocent civilians in the bombing campaign.
 Though Nethercutt said he softened some of his responses to avoid
 frightening the students, he began his speech with a strong proclamation.
 ''Our country has not faced this kind of threat in our history," he said.
 Nethercutt reminded the students that the right response to the threat was
 to celebrate freedom.
 ''We have an obligation to understand the principals of our country and
 embrace them," he said.
 He told the students that they are witnessing a ''clash of civilizations,"
 and that, as future leaders, they must study both civilizations.
 ''We need to be a serious country," he said. ''Not only a powerful
 country, but a serious country."
 Nethercutt had no reason to doubt the students' earnestness as they asked a
 range of questions.
 ''Do you think the events of Sept. 11 will cause a change in our foreign
 policy in the Middle East," asked Dru Swaim.
 It already has, Nethercutt replied. He pointed out that the Bush
 administration has offered former foes like North Korea and Sudan the chance
 to side with the U.S. against terrorism.
 Matt Desjordin asked whether Nethercutt would still support military action
 in Afghanistan if the war dragged on or turned sour as happened during the
 Soviet invasion.
 Nethercutt said he saw no comparison between the two situations.
 ''They were bogged down in a low-tech war," he said. ''We are fighting a
 high-tech fight. I don't see us getting into a 10-year war with Afghanistan."
 The students were also concerned with civil rights.
 ''What types of changes will we see in the next five years as a result of
 Sept. 11?" Stephanie Boorman asked. ''I know that the phone tapping law has
 already been passed,"
 ''We need to modernize our law enforcement to get terrorists," Nethercutt
 said, reminding Boorman that the anti-terrorism bill signed by the President
 that afternoon requires review after four years.
 ''None of us wants to be spied on," he said.
 After the discussion, history teacher Lori Merkel said she was proud of her
 students but wasn't surprised by the questions they asked.
 ''We've been talking about (the attacks)," she said. ''They better be well
 informed."
 St. Mary's hosts theater group
 More than 50 students from St. Mary's Catholic School will team up with the
 Missoula Children's Theater to present an original musical adaptation of Red
 Riding Hood.
 The local cast features Dawn McSwain as Red Riding Hood, Katie Metzger,
 Jackie Fitzgerald and Amanda Hesseltine as her friends, Patrick Mealey as the
 Little Lovable Wolf, Chad Hagerty as the Woodsman, Jedd Breckenridge as the
 Locksmith, Conner Johnson as the Boy Who Cried Wolf and Nathan Diehl, Molly
 Garrity, Delaney Dorsey and Bryson Nitta as the Hood family.
 The show will take place at 3  and 7 p.m. on Saturday in the auditorium at
 Trent Elementary School, 3303 N.  Pines.
 Tickets cost $7 for adults, $5 for seniors and $3 for children. A $30
 family pass will also be available that will admit two adults and two children
 to both performances.
 Tickets are available at St. Mary's Catholic School and at the door.
 College fair set for Tuesday
 The National College Fair is coming to Spokane on Tuesday.
 Admissions representatives from more than 125 colleges and universities
 from 30 states and British Columbia will be present to discuss course
 offerings, financial aid requirements and other college selection issues.
 Last year, more than 7,000 parents and students in the Spokane area
 attended the event.
 This year's fair will take place at the Spokane Convention Center, 334 W.
 Spokane Falls Blvd., from 8:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 6 to 8 p.m.  Students
 interested in the morning session should check with their high school
 counselor. The evening session is open to all.

Notes

Education Notebook is a regular feature of the Valley Voice. If you have news about activities or special events at Spokane Valley schools or about the achievements of Valley students, teachers or school staff, please let us know. Write: Stacy Schwandt, Valley Voice, 13208 E. Sprague, Spokane, WA 99216. Call: 927-2166. Fax: 927-2175. E-mail: stacys@spokesman.com.  

Graphic

 
Photo; Rep. George Nethercutt answers questions from students at East Valley High School last Friday.  Photo by Torsten Kjellstrand, The Spokesman-Review

Load-Date: November 2, 2001


End of Document