Eco-terrorism possible in W. Jordan fire; Graffiti: The initials of a militant group of greens were found painted in 3 places at the lumberyard
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
June 16, 2004, Wednesday


Copyright 2004 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Sports; Pg. B4
Length: 361 words
Byline: Matt Canham , The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


WEST JORDAN -- The graffiti is now just a faint green impression on the white stone wall. Much of the charred rubble has been hauled away. The building supply store has replenished its stock of wood posts.
But the investigation into the arson at Stock Building Supply early Monday -- and possible links to domestic terrorism -- is just getting under way.
On Wednesday, KSL News Radio 1160 received a fax, whose sender claims to be with the Earth Liberation Front.
The fax, received at 4:44 p.m., indicates the ELF started the fires, which destroyed a warehouse at 1300 W. 9000 South, because the company failed to decrease the pollutants released by their forklifts.
"We will continue in our mission to stop large companies from destroying the environment," the fax reads.
The fax also named four Salt Lake area companies that are future targets. The companies include a car dealership and a lumber store.
KSL gave the fax to the FBI and other law enforcement agencies, which are investigating the arson, said news director Russ Hill.
Investigators found the letters "ELF" spray painted in green twice on the back of the company's main building and once on a delivery truck when they were called to the blaze at about 1:40 a.m. on Monday.
The ELF is a loose alliance of militants who promote illegal actions in defense of the environment and have been linked to vandalism and arson at SUV dealerships, timber companies and construction sites.
FBI special agent Ray Mey said eco-terrorists have recently become more violent.
"We see their conviction becoming more focused," he said. "They are very dangerous."
The FBI issued a bulletin last week to all of its offices warning about potential ELF attacks, prompted by the recent conviction in Oregon of an arsonist with ties to the ELF.
Federal authorities say the ELF and an affiliated animal rights group called the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) have committed more than 1,100 illegal acts since 1976, causing more than $ 110 million in damage.
Detectives say they are not focusing their investigation solely on the group.
Fire officials are asking anyone with information about the case to call 1-877-57-ARSON.
mcanham@sltrib.com  

Graphic

 
Agent Ray Mey, of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, ducks under police tape at Stock Building Supply, 1300 W. 9000 South in West Jordan. Arson is suspected in a fire that destroyed a warehouse early Monday.

Load-Date: June 16, 2004


End of Document