ECO-TERRORISM POSSIBLE CULPRIT IN MINK FARM FIRE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 28, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE,
Length: 307 words
Byline: DAN NEPHIN, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


Eco-terrorism cannot be ruled out as the cause of a fire at an Erie County mink farm, because a radical environmental group has claimed responsibility for two other area fires this year, the FBI said yesterday.
 "Knowing that [the Earth Liberation Front] has been responsible for some mink-releasing across the country, coupled with the fact that there have been prior incidents … we are keeping our eyes open," said FBI Special Agent Bob Rudge.
 Investigators don't yet know what started the fire at a building on the farm operated by Hunter Mindek and his two brothers in Harborcreek. As of yesterday afternoon, no one had claimed responsibility for Tuesday's fire. About 1,200 minks, which are kept in pens elsewhere on the farm, were unharmed and no one was injured.
"They think that it bothers us, but all it does is give us all new equipment," Mindek said yesterday. He declined to discuss the fire or his business further.
 The Earth Liberation Front has claimed responsibility for an Aug. 11 fire at the unoccupied Northeast Research Station in the Allegheny National Forest near Warren that caused about $700,000 damage.
 On March 24, a $500,000 construction crane at a bridge work site in Erie was torched and in the preceding weeks, a dozen 9-inch spikes were driven into several trees. The Earth Liberation Front claimed responsibility for the vandalism in an effort to stop construction on a $31 million highway project.
 The group said construction would threaten the biological health of the Lake Erie watershed.
 There don't appear to be any other area fires for which the ELF may be to blame, Rudge said. Investigators are, however, re-examining a May incident in which about 200 mink were taken and released from the Mindek farm. Most were captured, but some young mink died. At the time a local investigation turned up no information.

Load-Date: December 2, 2002


End of Document