ECOWAS Lifts Sanctions On Mali
The Will (Nigeria)
October 6, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 The Will Newspaper All Rights Reserved
Length: 524 words
Body


National Security Adviser (NSA), Babagana Monguno SAN FRANCISCO, October 06, (THEWILL)  The National Security Adviser, NSA, Major General Babagana Monguno, retd, on Tuesday disclosed that the Federal Government is reviewing the National Cyber security Policy and Strategy (NCPS) to effectively address some of the major security challenges currently confronting the nation. The policy is reviewed every five years and is due for its first review after it was implemented in 2014. While inaugurating a multi-stakeholder Committee to review the NCPS, 2014, on Tuesday, Monguno said the review was part of efforts to reposition the country to better exploit the benefits of the Internet and cyber domain to enhance national peace, security and socio-economic wellbeing.
 The NSA said that recent advancements in the digital era have transformed the cyber domain to a centre stage for new businesses, innovations, government functionalities and social interactions. He, however, highlighted that despite the benefits of the cyber domain, there are inherent threats and risks associated with the evolving nature of cyberspace.
He stressed that it is crucial for the Nigerian cyberspace and entire cyber ecosystem to undergo major periodic reforms to set new clear directions for progressive use of the country's cyberspace.  Monguno noted that the review of the NCPS would provide an opportunity for Nigeria to redefine its national objectives and address some of the major developmental challenges currently confronting the nation, including the emergence of new forms of criminality and terrorism perpetrated through cyberspace.
 He said. "this Committee was constituted to identify the current gaps in the National Cybersecurity Strategy and Policy 2014, articulate the various inputs of stakeholders and develop necessary frameworks to effectively mitigate evolving cyber threats and enhance Nigeria's productive engagements in cyberspace.
" Monguno also said that the review of the NCPS was in line with the provisions of Section 41(1b) of the Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act, 2015, which mandates the Office of the National Security Adviser to coordinate the formulation and effective implementation of a comprehensive cybersecurity framework for Nigeria. He added that the new cybersecurity initiatives proffered by the Committee would be formulated in support of Nigeria's National Security Strategy, facilitate positive transformations in the Nigerian economy, cater for new emerging technologies, engender collaboration between stakeholders, foster capacity development and institutionalise the protection of critical national functions and data privacy.
 According to the NSA, "the success of this Committee in developing a comprehensive and purposeful National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2020 will strengthen the security and adaptability of Nigeria's cyberspace and facilitate the projection of our digital economy". He expressed optimism that the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2020 will reflect global norms as well as foster cooperation with Nigeria's allies in the areas of security and economic development.

Load-Date: October 6, 2020


End of Document