EDITORIAL: Should acts of terror nullify constitutional rights?
The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
April 25, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 443 words
Byline: The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
Body


April 25--The attempts to jettison the Constitution in the face of terrorism began last Friday afternoon with a flurry of tweets from Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.
"If captured, I hope (the Obama) Administration will at least consider holding the Boston suspect as enemy combatant for intelligence gathering purposes," Graham wrote as the surviving Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev lay hunkered in a shrink-wrapped boat in Watertown, Mass., while thousands of police officers hunted him.
"The last thing we may want to do is read #Boston suspect Miranda Rights telling him to 'remain silent,' " Graham later tweeted, calling Tsarnaev a potential "treasure trove" of information about terrorist organizations.
When Tsarnaev was captured hours later, he was questioned without being read his Miranda Rights under an exception invoked when public safety is threatened. It was a reasonable decision based on legitimate concern that Tsarnaev and his dead 26-year-old brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev might have orchestrated further destruction or had other accomplices.
Thankfully, the Obama Administration ignored the knee-jerk reaction of Graham and others, including Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., who asserted Tsarnaev should be plucked from the criminal justice system and held as an enemy combatant despite being a United States citizen. On Monday, at a bedside hearing a judge read 19-year-old Tsarnaev his rights and listed charges that accuse him of using a weapon of mass destruction and maliciously destroying property that resulted in death. Those charges carry a maximum sentence of the death penalty.
Charging Tsarnaev in civilian court upholds the nation's confidence in the criminal justice system to fairly and justly try terrorism suspects. It sends a much-needed message to the world that the U.S. respects the rule of law. For centuries, the American justice system has handled those seeking to destroy and terrify, including the Weathermen, Black Panthers and Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh. Tsarnaev's case should be no different.
There are many things to be proud of in the wake of the deadly marathon blasts and the days of uncertainty that followed. From the courage of those who rushed to help victims and the police who staged the massive manhunt to the financial help from strangers to bombing victims, Americans stepped up to show despicable acts of hatred won't divide us. Neither should we allow those acts to become a convenient excuse to chip away the fundamental rights we value.
___ (c)2013 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 26, 2013


End of Document