EDITORIAL: Crime, not terrorism, should be target of police cameras
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
July 21, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6
Length: 452 words
Body


Annapolis residents and all who visit our fair city should feel a lot safer knowing that someone is keeping a sharp eye out for terrorists.
The city police now have the help of four cameras installed in public places around the commercial district. The cameras are not always monitored, but police will have tapes to show, say, a terrorist blowing himself up aboard a cigarette boat in Ego Alley. People may still die, but at least there will be dramatic footage of the event.
Yes, we do take terrorism seriously. It's just that with this - and the bomb squad robot, and the armored vehicle - this small city seems overprepared for terrorism while it's still struggling with plain old crime, its chief problem.
The only reason Annapolis has the cameras and the other pricey gear is that the Department of Homeland Security has a large pot of taxpayer money to throw around.
The city's four new cameras were quietly installed five months ago at a cost of $65,000. The city hopes to get additional grant money for 40 more cameras in busy locations. But public housing and high-crime areas don't qualify, as terrorists presumably steer clear of rough neighborhoods. Perhaps they fear for their safety.
If cameras in high-crime areas are more likely to protect the safety of city residents, why isn't that where our tax dollars are going?
City officials say they don't have this choice. As federal money hasn't been available for camera surveillance of high-crime areas, why should they miss the chance to spy on tourists and other innocent downtown passers-by? That sort of reasoning may make sense in government, but is hardly comforting to taxpayers who just want their tax money spent on protecting them from drug-crazed thugs.
To their credit, the police and the city are considering putting cameras in public housing and high crime areas. Although some residents are concerned about their privacy being invaded, we suspect most law-abiding citizens would sacrifice some privacy in exchange for the reassurance that a criminal could be caught or a crime prevented.
The cameras themselves aren't the greatest threat to privacy; it's how the police use the videotapes. We hope the aldermen and mayor persist in the effort to get cameras in public housing, but that they also insist on a written policy setting down the proper use of what the cameras record.
Although it wasn't exactly the use the federal government envisioned, one of the cameras did help police identify a thief who was taking money from parking meters. But we suspect these cameras would be more helpful in solving crime in communities where witnesses are afraid to come forward. Cameras, like police, should go where the crime is - not where the money is.

Load-Date: July 22, 2008


End of Document