EDITORIAL: America responds to terrorist act
High Point Enterprise (North Carolina)
April 17, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 High Point Enterprise
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 374 words
Byline: The High Point Enterprise, N.C.
Body


April 17--Again, we mourn the dead and we grieve for the injured and their families.
Again, we hunt for terrorists as we seek understanding of what happened and why.
And again, we pray for strength and resolve to carry on in a battle against our enemies.
On Tuesday, as the city of Boston and the entire nation reeled from the shock of Monday's Boston Marathon bombings, we began moving on, trying to resume some semblance of normalcy. That's what we do in our society, our nation that cherishes the freedom to go and do and see with little restriction.
But as was the case after 9/11 nearly a dozen years ago, normalcy now has a revised definition.
Security analysts have told us over the last few years there was the potential for terrorist attacks and bombings such as we have seen in Europe, the Middle East, the Far East and elsewhere to come to our shores. On Monday, April 15, 2013, they did.
As President Obama confirmed Tuesday what we had suspected on Monday, this was a "heinous cowardly act" of terrorism. He said the investigation was still in its early stages and that investigators do not know if the bombings were the work of an international or domestic organization, or perhaps committed by a "malevolent individual." Additionally, the president said this act of terrorism will not go unpunished.
And he also made it clear: "The American people refuse to be terrorized."
On Monday, a terrorist -- or a group of terrorists -- through some warped reasoning used powerful, homemade bombs to kill three people and injure nearly 200 during a popular event ingrained in the American fabric and that carries international acclaim. Now, we go forward with the realization that this kind of terror attack can happen here, too, not just in some distant place overseas. And we go forward with the understanding that we must be more vigilant, that we must be more aware of our surroundings, that we must be on guard for the terrorists among us.
Our people and our nation were wounded on Monday, just as we were after 9/11. But we survived then, and we will again. That is the American way.
___ (c)2013 The High Point Enterprise (High Point, N.C.) Visit The High Point Enterprise (High Point, N.C.) at www.hpe.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 17, 2013


End of Document