EDITORIAL: Well, at least Omaha is safe from terrorism
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
June 8, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by Knight/Ridder Tribune News Service
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 474 words
Byline: The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Body


Jun. 8--Let's cut the U.S. Department of Homeland Security sort of a break on its security spending formulas. No law enforcement or security agency is going to tell the department, "No, thanks, we don't need any more federal money. We feel our security and response provisions are more than adequate." There is always something more to spend it on. And it's another fact of the security business that no amount of security is ever enough. Security planners spin endless scenarios -- remember anthrax? -- and would plan for all of them. No official wants to be the one who said "enough" and then was blindsided by a terrorist incident.
That said, Homeland Security's latest formula for allocating $1.7 billion in anti-terrorist funds seems more than strange and more than a little politically driven. All the details of DHS' decision process are not out yet, but what little that has become known is bizarre.
The department ranks the District of Columbia -- hit by one hijacked airliner and saved from assault by a second -- in the bottom quarter for risk of terrorist attack. It would get less money than South Dakota.
Arizona's share dropped by nearly half and Phoenix's funding went from nearly $10 million last year to $3.9 million. It's unlikely our security risks have fallen that far, given our location in a border state and a large metro area that includes the nation's largest nuclear power plant and one of the busiest international airports.
By contrast, other jurisdictions received generous increases, as a Washington Post columnist acidly noted, "the horses of Louisville, the cattle of Omaha and five cities in Jeb Bush's Florida." Phoenix Mayor Phil Gordon is so angry he's demanding a personal meeting with President Bush. So far, Gordon has only gotten a commitment to see a top Homeland Security official.
The new numbers don't make the spurned cities automatically right in this dispute nor DHS automatically wrong. But DHS's defense of the allocation of security funds has so far been opaque. One criterion was how well a city was "able to articulate the allocation of resources."
The irony of this is that the new formula replaces its much-criticized predecessor, a straightforward per capita distribution that saw money going to crossroads towns where the threat of terrorism was negligible.
Homeland Security must fully explain and defend itself and hiding behind "national security" or "that's classified" won't cut it.
To see more of The Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.eastvalleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2006, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz. Distributed by Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: June 9, 2006


End of Document