EDITORIAL: Americans need a sensible approach to airline security
The Capital (Annapolis, Maryland)
January 6, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 595 words
Byline: The Capital, Annapolis, Md.
Body


Jan. 6--Airline passengers are a tolerant lot. They volunteer their photo IDs without complaint, stand in long lines to have their carry-on luggage X-rayed, give up their nail clippers and pen knives and even remove their shoes -- all in an effort to stay alive and keep terrorists off planes.
What happened on Christmas Day aboard a plane from Amsterdam to Detroit has left passengers wondering whether any of their sacrifices made a difference. While grandmothers and children are subjected to random searches for the sake of political correctness, a terrorist from a foreign country passed through security unchallenged and with enough explosives to blow a plane out of the sky. What's wrong with this picture?
Had it not been for a bit of luck and an apparently incompetent Nigerian terrorist, this country would have experienced another shattering act of terrorism. Despite all the safeguards, and all the inconveniences for innocent Americans, the security system collapsed.
President Barack Obama admits there was enough evidence to put Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab on a no-fly list and that airport security was not adequate to prevent explosive devices from being carried aboard a plane. It should not have taken an actual attempted act of terrorism to discover this.
No set of humans and machines can be infallible. But you would think that the failed attempt by shoe-bomber Richard Reid in 2001 would have at least sufficed to prevent a similar incident from recurring. But instead of developing a new tactic, terrorists just moved the hiding place for their explosives from a shoe to underwear. That this nearly worked is proof of a serious breakdown of security.
Passengers should brace for another round of inconveniences that may include further sacrifices of freedoms and privacy. But citizens who have willingly subjected themselves to intense scrutiny at airports are not likely to complain about further protection measures -- our Sunday story found that most travelers our reporter talked to at BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport had no problems with pat-downs and stepped-up security.
The Transportation Security Administration took a step toward more sensible policies Monday by going to a new plan built not on universal pat-downs but on extra scrutiny of travelers from 14 countries. This may be politically incorrect, but it's sensible.
Israel targets passengers coming from terrorist-supporting states and gives them more scrutiny than its own citizens. There hasn't been one attempt at terrorism on an Israeli plane, and no one going through that nation's airport security even has to remove his shoes. Meanwhile, in this country, senior citizens are routinely pulled aside by TSA personnel -- and we've had two serious terrorism attempts on U.S. planes in eight years. Whose system is more effective in protecting lives?
Airports also should move forward with the whole-body imaging that most likely would have spotted Abdulmutallab's bomb material. Yet better security devices at the airports are no guarantee that bombs will not be smuggled aboard planes. Better intelligence and greater scrutiny of foreign visitors are equally important.
To see more of The Capital or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.hometownannapolis.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Capital, Annapolis, Md. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: January 7, 2010


End of Document