EDITORIAL: Vigilance and resilience in wake of attack
The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
April 17, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 546 words
Byline: The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
Body


April 17--Questions outnumbered answers one day after a fiendish act, an act of terror at the Boston Marathon shattered hundreds of lives and radiated fear across the nation.
Were the perpetrators affiliates of al-Qaida or another group antagonistic to the United States? Or was this a case of home-grown terrorism?
Was this the act of a single zealot? Or was it the result of a conspiracy?
Will it happen again?
Or, as many are asking, when will it happen again? And where?
Boston police, the FBI and other investigative agencies vowed to find those responsible for detonating two bombs packed with nails and ball-bearings near the finish line of Monday's Boston Marathon. ""We will go to the ends of the Earth to identify the subject or subjects who are responsible for this despicable crime, and we will do everything we can to bring them to justice," said Richard DesLauriers, the FBI agent in charge in Boston.
If history is any guide, they probably will.
But a primary goal of terrorism is to sow fear, to leave people wondering about their safety and that of their loved ones wherever they may be. Swift justice will help, but it won't erase the anxiety.
That will linger as Americans are reminded about risks, warned about terrorist threats and asked to accept additional security measures just as we have since 9/11.
Our challenge continues to be finding an agreeable balance between security and our right to freely assemble in ballparks, concert halls, public buildings and public spaces such as Copley Square in Boston, where Monday's bombings killed three people and injured 175 others, many of whom lost limbs in the blast or underwent amputations later.
Investigators say the bombs shared characteristics with the improvised explosive devices responsible for so much carnage in Iraq and Afghanistan. Yet as horrible as the scenes of wounded and fleeing people were, the human toll was a small fraction of the losses 13 years ago in Washington and New York. For that, we're thankful.
Some commentators are counseling against stringent new security procedures or fear-driven responses like the color-coded threat warnings that followed 9/11. As Steve Chapman wrote in the Chicago Tribune, the explosions in Boston "are a reminder of our vulnerability. But they are also a reminder of how extraordinarily rare terrorism is in this country."
Indeed, intelligence and law enforcement efforts have thwarted numerous terrorist plots since 9/11.
But rare doesn't mean immune. The United States has a long history of bombings; among the recent ones are the World Trade Center in 1993, the Oklahoma City federal building in 1995 and the Atlanta Olympics in 1996.
Each brought fear, and each demonstrated that this country is more resilient than any terrorist. People accept stepped-up security at the airport. We submit to searches before entering courthouses and stadiums. Perhaps we'll see more security in Santa Rosa at next year's Tour of California.
The bombings in Boston are no different. A day later, runners already were pledging to be there for the 2014 marathon.
Expect them to be alert, reverent and resilient as ever.
___ (c)2013 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 17, 2013


End of Document