Editorial / Iraqi Children Attacked;
No justification
 Philadelphia Inquirer
July 15, 2005 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14
Length: 403 words
Body


The nature of terrorism is horrific enough with the targets of violence being civilians caught in a war they neither sought nor started. But terrorism is at its most twisted when children are the bull's-eye.
No grievance provides a fiber of cover for the Baghdad suicide car bomber who Wednesday drove into a group of children, knowing many of them would be killed.
At least 24 youngsters had died from the blast as of yesterday. Expect that number to increase from among the seriously injured. (There is no great demand in land mine-laden countries for child-sized prostheses because most young victims do not survive their wounds.)
Two levels of outrage erupt from the deaths of these children.
Assassinations, particularly by suicide bomb, of Iraqis associated with the United States have become common in post-Saddam Hussein Iraq, though the tactic is not confined to that country. Long used for attacks in Israel, suicide bombers caused last week's explosions on three London trains and one double-decker bus during a morning rush hour, British authorities say.
Suicide bombings are a terrorist favorite, not only because they are low-cost and relatively easy, but because they are infuriatingly hard for law-enforcement authorities to prevent. That is what terrorism is all about: exploding the daily calm of life in a cloud of fatal possibilities.
If the quick condemnation of the London bombs by Muslim organizations and clerics is any indication, terrorists will find fewer and fewer sympathizers.
That certainly should be the case in Iraq. The largest heaping of outrage following the Baghdad bombing belongs to those who purposefully killed and maimed the most innocent among humanity - children.
American soldiers committed no crime if they, as residents near the bomb attack report, were handing out candy and toys to children. The military denies that was the case. But if, in fact, they were, our men and women in uniform were showing the finer side of humanity by celebrating children's delight at being treated like the treasures they are.
It is an unfortunate reality of Iraq, for now, that being the center of attention carries a high risk.
In any war zone anywhere, children are the most vulnerable, for they are least able to protect themselves. Terrorism piles unpredictability onto that vulnerability.
The depth of terrorists' viciousness is now on full display - alongside the bodies of their young victims.

Load-Date: July 15, 2005


End of Document