EDITORIAL: Don't forget: Thank a vet
Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Kentucky)
November 10, 2012 Saturday


Copyright 2012 Messenger-Inquirer
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 288 words
Byline: Messenger-Inquirer, Owensboro, Ky.
Body


Nov. 10--There are times when a simple "thank you" is all that's necessary when it comes to showing an appreciation for someone's work or services.
For most of our local military veterans, those two words carry great meaning even though they never seek them out.
Sunday is of course Veterans Day, a national holiday set aside to pay tribute to all U.S. military veterans.
Nationally, there are 22.7 million veterans. That breaks down to 335,000 in Kentucky and 9,000 here in Daviess County.
Those veterans range from World War II (1941 to 1945) to Operation Enduring Freedom that's still ongoing to rid the world of terrorism.
One of the special ways Daviess County has honored its local veterans has been with the annual Veterans Day Parade that will be held downtown at 2 p.m. Saturday.
The tradition of the parade began in 1918 as an impromptu celebration at the end of World War I.
This parade has played a role in allowing the citizens to cheer and recognize the sacrifices these servicemen and women have made to this country.
We also applaud parade coordinator Lou Drawdy and all of those on the Owensboro-Daviess County Veterans Organization Committee who have organized this special event for the past 26 years.
This year's parade will feature nine World War II veterans who will act as the grand marshals, leading the procession of an anticipated 55 to 60 units.
Let's not forget what these nine men and all other veterans have fought for -- and that so many of us take for granted today.
They've given us freedom. The least we can do is offer a simple thank-you.
___ (c)2012 the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) Visit the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) at www.messenger-inquirer.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: November 10, 2012


End of Document