EDITORIAL: We should account for the costs of our responses to terrorism
The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
September 11, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 461 words
Byline: The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
Body


Sept. 11--One of the more remarkable commentaries prompted by the 10th anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks appeared under the byline of John Yoo in The Wall Street Journal this week. He was a top Justice Department official with a hand in national security under President George W. Bush.
The column makes much of the fact that there has been no large-scale attack on U.S. civilians in the intervening decade, and that our special forces are performing well in other parts of the world. Yoo credits the policies of the Bush administration while offhandedly disparaging Democratic Presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama.
The remarkable thing about the column is not Yoo's aspersions but the fact that his 1,100-word account is entirely silent on a signature subject of the decade: Nowhere in his review of the last 10 years does the word "Iraq" appear.
In a way, that omission reflects a disturbing aspect of the variously described war on terror that is larger than any single person's opinion. It reflects a failing to account for important elements of the enterprise, in Iraq's case that being the possible distraction by our misadventure there from the search for Osama bin Laden and the duration of the war in Afghanistan.
But that is not the only case where consequence goes unacknowledged. Here's another: Despite all the battles and military procurement of the last decade in Iraq and Afghanistan, there has never been a war tax to pay for them. Indeed, had there been such a surcharge, which taxpayers surely would have shouldered in the name of national security, the nation's current fiscal problems would not be what they are today.
A decade after 9/11, policy makers go about their justifications and ordinary citizens go about their lives in seeming silos. They either refuse to acknowledge damaging international repercussions from, say, imprisoning alleged combatants forever without charge, or they seemingly fail to even recognize that we have soldiers at war. Is there evidence of either concern on Main Street, beyond earnest but modest Saturday morning protests? Are there discussions about them around the dinner table?
The challenge facing this country, 10 years after 9/11, is for Americans to reckon with the cost of the fight -- and by that we mean more than carp about airport screening. The new world has brought a lot of change, some of it requiring significant response. We must openly acknowledge the cost of that response, along with the other consequences of what we do, to understand where we have been, how it affects us today, and what it might mean for us in the future.
___ (c)2011 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: September 13, 2011


End of Document