EDITORIAL: OUR VIEW: Given excesses, ranking terror targets prudent
The Bakersfield Californian
September 6, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 The Bakersfield Californian
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 283 words
Byline: The Bakersfield Californian
Body


Sept. 06--The U.S. government might have gone a little overboard in its quest to protect Americans from terror attacks in the wake of 9/11. Or a lot overboard.
It was an understandable reaction, perhaps, but from the safe distance of a decade, it's clear that homeland defenders did an iffy job of differentiating vulnerable, high-risk terrorism targets from sites that al-Qaida and other potential enemies were not likely to have considered in a million years.
A recent survey by the Los Angeles Times suggests that efforts to protect anything and everything from terrorism resulted in overblown, eccentric and expensive responses.
Take, for example, the grant for anti-terrorism equipment to a Nebraska county, which asked for and received thousands of dollars for cattle nose leads, halters and electric prods as protection against a biological attack on cows.
It's difficult to rate the value of that and other anti-terror steps because evildoers did not, in fact, attempt to wage war on Nebraska bovines. This much is certain: Some anti-terror expenditures made more sense than others, based simply on the subjective plausibility of the potential attack in question.
We can learn from these misplaced fears. Security planners should establish specific criteria for anti-terror spending. Resources should go to high-value targets that can make a real case, not to the jurisdictions exercising imaginative paranoia. That doesn't mean rural targets should be automatically excluded. It simply means restraint is a nice virtue.
___ (c)2011 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: September 6, 2011


End of Document