Editorial;
A tool against terrorism;
Georgia needs laws to fight hate crimes
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 19, 1998, Monday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 06A
Length: 746 words
Series: Home
Body


The funeral last week of Matthew Shepard, a gay college student who was beaten, burned, tied up and left for dead in Wyoming, has renewed debate over whether "hate-crime" legislation is needed to discourage attacks motivated by hatred based on a person's race, creed or sexual orientation. Georgia is one of eight states with no law aimed at stopping hate-related violence.
Some conservatives oppose hate-crime bills, saying they give certain groups "special rights." They worry that such a law might make it a more serious crime to beat, say, a gay person than a straight one. Some liberals worry that hate-crime legislation might diminish free speech and thought. In other words, an attacker could get extra punishment for having politically incorrect ideas while committing a crime.
But hate-crime legislation doesn't create "special" groups or punish mere thoughts. Rather, it recognizes reality: Some minorities are consistently singled out for attacks launched with fists, guns and other weapons. Hate-crime laws don't limit speech or thought; instead, they curb the violence intended to silence certain groups.
Such laws are not new. This century, hate crimes often took the form of lynching. The South, Georgia in particular, had a horrifying history of lynching minorities. For example, in 1915, a Marietta mob lynched Leo Frank, a Jewish factory supervisor.
At the time, homicide was illegal. So one could have argued then that Georgia had no need for anti-lynching laws. Why create "special" protection for Jews, blacks and other minorities when homicide laws already were on the books?
Because law enforcement officers and judges routinely ignored homicide laws when white Christian Georgians were throwing a rope around the neck of a minority member. Only when the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and its allies pushed for anti-lynching laws was awareness raised about the hate-motivated killings. The drive to win anti-lynching laws helped dramatically reduce the violence by mid-century.
Today, gays often are the target of violence from heterosexuals who think it's socially acceptable to teach "faggots" a lesson. In the typical gay bashing, a group of young straight men beat up a gay man to remind him of his low place in society. These crimes are intended to silence gays who may want to assert more political or social power. According to the FBI, hate crimes against gays are up, swelling to 11.6 percent of all reported hate crimes from 8.9 percent in 1991.
But gays aren't alone. The total number of hate crimes doubled during the same period, with nearly 8,000 crimes a year tied to race, creed or sexual orientation.
Boosting punishments for hate crimes does appear to reduce this violence. After Cook County, Ill., passed a hate-crime measure in 1995, hate-related problems decreased three years in a row. The county's teenagers have been put on notice that police officers will no longer look the other way if the youths decide to have some fun by roughing up a "queer" or defacing a temple with swastikas.
Recognizing the existence of violence against minorities is entirely within our tradition of treating crimes differently depending on their target or their motivation. For example, in 1996, Congress passed the Church Arson Prevention Act to boost prosecution of people who "burn, desecrate or otherwise damage religious property."
Did that law create "special rights" for religious people? No, it simply recognized that churches were being targeted for hate crimes and that stiffer penalties were needed.
Lynching, gay-bashing, church-burning and other hate crimes are not just attacks on individuals or buildings. They are crimes that use terror to limit the freedoms of people based on their race, religion, national origin or sexual orientation.
Such crimes against our society must be taken extremely seriously. For example, we acknowledge that every human life has value. Still, we impose much stiffer penalties on a criminal who shoots a police officer than on a drunk who gets into a barroom brawl and kills his friend. Why? Because shooting a police officer harms not just an individual, but also our society.
Passing hate-crime legislation doesn't impinge on political thought or speech; anyone can say or think any hateful thing in the world. But when a hater takes the next step and uses violence to harm another person, that is terrorism. It requires the kind of harsh punishment spelled out in hate-crime legislation.

Graphic

 
Photo :
 The parents of slain student Matthew Shepard, Judy and Dennis Shepard,
 read a statement before their son's funeral Friday.
 Photo :
 America has known other hate crimes this century, including lynchings of
 blacks and Jews (Leo Frank was lynched in 1915, left)
 Photo :
 Firemen hosing water on a burning church.
 Graphic :
 TARGETS OF HATE
 Hate crimes reported in 1995* in the United States
 Race........................4,831
 Religion....................1,277
 Sexual orientation..........1,019
 National origin or ethnicity..814
 Other...........................6
 Total.......................7,947
 Source: Federal Bureau of Investigation
 *most recent statistics available


Load-Date: October 20, 1998


End of Document