Editorial: Fighting Terrorism; Key difference: Iraq
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 28, 2008 Sunday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Inq Currents; Pg. C04
Length: 783 words
Body


The economy has taken center stage in the presidential race - spurred by the housing market's collapse and subsequent tug-of-war surrounding the taxpayer bailout of the financial industry. 
Indeed, the next president will have his hands full trying to steer the country through the economic mess - and likely recession - left behind by the Bush administration. 
But the next president also faces huge foreign-policy decisions in dealing with the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, fighting terrorists worldwide, and controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
The most pressing nondomestic issue for the next president will likely be how to end the war in Iraq. 
Taxpayers are rightly upset with the $700 billion bailout of Wall Street. That's on top of the almost $600 billion spent so far on Iraq. And the Iraq tab continues to mount to the tune of about $10 billion a month. The total cost, including health care for the 160,000 soldiers injured so far, may top $3 trillion. 
Of course, the much bigger cost to this nation has been the loss of more than 4,000 soldiers and tens of thousands of innocent Iraqi citizens killed as a result of the war. An unquantifiable cost has been the United States' loss of trust and moral standing in the world - destroyed by a rush to war based on faulty intelligence and mismanagement of the invasion's aftermath. 
Barack Obama's presidential candidacy was buoyed in large measure by his opposition to the Iraq war from the beginning. Five months before the Iraq invasion, the Democratic Illinois senator spoke out against what he called a "dumb war" and a "rash war." Obama described the run-up to Iraq as "based not on reason but on passion, not on principle but on politics." 
Obama correctly concluded that Saddam Hussein was a "brutal" and "ruthless" man but "poses no imminent and direct threat to the United States." He pointed out that "even a successful war against Iraq will require a U.S. occupation of undetermined length, at undetermined cost, with undetermined consequences." 
Obama also pointed out that "an invasion of Iraq without a clear rationale and without strong international support will only fan the flames of the Middle East, and encourage the worst, rather than best, impulses of the Arab world, and strengthen the recruitment arm of al-Qaeda." 
Republican nominee John McCain, in contrast, has strongly supported the war and even said he would stay in Iraq for 100 years, if that's what it takes to win. Conversely, Obama has been consistent in his support for a time horizon to withdraw forces, while shifting troops and resources to Afghanistan. 
Give McCain credit for supporting "the surge" of additional U.S. troops to Iraq even when his fellow senators opposed it, including Obama. The surge - along with other strategies that fostered friendlier relationships with the Iraqi people - has helped reduce the violence. 
On Afghanistan, Obama was criticized last year for calling for cross-border raids into Pakistan without that government's support. But that's a move the Bush administration has since adopted. 
Strangely, McCain's running mate, Sarah Palin, has also said U.S. troops should pursue terrorists across the border, whether Pakistan approves or not. But McCain told TV interviewer Larry King, "I'm not going to go there and here's why: because Pakistan is a sovereign nation." 
Obama and McCain agree on some key issues in the terror fight. Both have called for more humane interrogations of terrorism suspects and closure of the Guantanamo Bay detention facility. Both voted, wrongly, for the administration's overly intrusive domestic surveillance program. And both have advocated for diplomacy, economic aid and intelligence - and not just military power - to confront militant jihadism. 
The candidates have differed on Iran, with Obama favoring direct talks, with some preconditions, and McCain opposing any direct talks. 
Both men have shifted on other foreign-policy issues as they try to collect votes. McCain rarely talks about a "league of democracies," an idea that didn't sit too well with conservatives. Neither is saying much about free-trade agreements, a staple topic during their primaries. Both have strongly criticized Russia's invasion of Georgia. 
On Iraq alone, though, there is plenty of contrast between McCain and Obama for voters to make a decision about who would best serve this nation in a world where might alone is no guarantee of safety. 
Editorial: Campaign Issues Editorials 
(Previously Published) 
The Economy 
The Environment 
Health Care 
The Supreme Court 
Education 
Taxes and Social Security 
(Forthcoming)
Our Endorsement 
Find other editorials in this series at: http://go.philly.com/CampaignIssues 

Load-Date: September 28, 2008


End of Document