EDITORIAL: President Obama and the prosecution of terrorist suspects
The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
March 27, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 497 words
Byline: The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
Body


March 27--The Obama administration has been putting out mixed messages regarding the prosecution of suspected terrorists held in American custody.
In the first week of March, the president said he would resume military tribunals for suspects at the Guantanamo prison in Cuba; he had suspended such proceedings two years ago.
Then, in mid-March, his top advisor on terrorism matters said that the administration actually prefers civilian courts and ultimately hopes to close Gitmo.
Separately this week, the Wall Street Journal reported that the administration is now giving terrorism interrogators expanded authority to delay reading suspects their rights.
This mess was not on the canvas two and-a-half years ago, back when then-candidate Barack Obama was pledging to use a federal court to try Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the 9/11 mastermind, and saying he would shift all Gitmo detainees to a maximum security prison in the United States.
There was clarity of consistent purpose then, but not now. What happened?
A couple of events interceded, not least a campaign of intimidation by Dick Cheney sound-alikes who apparently lack faith in the American system of civilian jurisprudence. They sowed fear in the hearts of ordinary Americans about lawyered-up terrorists getting off scot free in civilian courts. The campaign was so effective that it led a Democratically controlled House to deny funds for civilian trials for terrorist suspects, and it prompted officials in New York to drop their support for a key terrorism trial there.
These developments hobbled the administration, to the considerable disappointment of those who had shared Obama's belief that (a) the American legal system works and (b) the very fact of that capacity is a hallmark of American strength.
Yes, the system works. Consider the recent case of Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani. The Tanzanian terrorist was put on trial in a federal court last year. He's now serving life in prison without parole.
We grant that some terrorist prosecutions can be difficult -- even impossible -- thanks partly to irregularities in the way some suspects were treated early in their custody. Torture is the word we mean to use. But those situations should not be allowed to derail all efforts to use the court system.
President Obama deserves much of the blame for the way things have turned out. He did not stand up to the critics of the courts when they went rabid, and he shied from using his eloquence to speak over them to the American people. The resulting muddle on the handling of terrorists rests as one of the greatest disappointments amidst the accomplishments of his administration.
To see more of The Keene Sentinel, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.sentinelsource.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Keene Sentinel, N.H. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: March 28, 2011


End of Document