EDITORIAL: America's latest long war and the fight against terrorism
The Anniston Star (Alabama)
September 20, 2016 Tuesday


Copyright 2016 The Anniston Star
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 530 words
Byline: The Anniston Star, Ala.
Body


Sept. 20--The civilized world's long war against violent jihadists never went away, but bombings over the weekend in New York and New Jersey jolted Americans back to its reality.
On Saturday, a bomb exploded during a 5K road race in Elizabeth, N.J.; no one was injured. Later that same day, an explosion in New York City injured 29 people. Another explosive device was discovered and disarmed before it could harm anyone. On Sunday, a backpack containing explosives was also discovered in Elizabeth. Authorities detonated them before they could cause casualties.
Following a shootout on Monday, police detained a man suspected to be behind the bombings -- Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28. The details behind Rahami sound vaguely familiar. A native of Afghanistan, he resettled to the United States as a young boy. His family operated a popular restaurant in Elizabeth. It seemed the story of hard-working immigrants making their way in their adopted country.
Then came a pair of extended visits to Pakistan and Afghanistan by Rahami this decade. Friends speaking after Rahami's arrest this week say that he seemed different after his sojourns. "It's like he was a completely different person," one childhood friend told The New York Times. "He got serious and completely closed off."
If the pattern that follows other terrorist incidents holds, it's possible we will learn much more about Rahami's travels overseas, and much of it will be unsettling.
We're already hearing declarations from Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump that get-tougher policies are all that's needed to defeat terrorists. What is required, he and others say, is to ban the right people, bomb the right people and bash the right people. Then the nation will be safer.
The problem is this strategy ignores the conditions and the culture that created radical jihadists and it does nothing to stamp that out. In fact, indiscriminate bombings that target both terrorists and innocents alike will only produce more terrorists.
The hard reality is that the West is in for a long war against jihadists. It's a type of conflict that Americans have experienced.
From 1877 until 1950, almost 4,000 African-Americans were victims of a form of terrorism known as lynchings, according to the Equal Justice Initiative.
The violent zealots behind these murders were just as much terrorists as the radicals who indiscriminately killed in places like Orlando, Paris, San Bernardino and elsewhere. Their minds were poisoned by hatred and most surely cloaked their actions in religious fervor.
The collapse of these terrorists, most of whom called the South home, took decades. The war covered the majority of the 20th century. The battle was waged by progressive lawmakers and tough-minded law-enforcers as well as activists who bravely called out wrongdoing and appealed for peace and nonviolence. Yet, another ally was time and cultural changes, the sort that made violence based on racism unacceptable.
The war against terrorists is long, but as history shows, it is winnable.
___ (c)2016 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: September 21, 2016


End of Document