EDITORIAL: Political correctness won't defeat terrorism
The Janesville Gazette (Wisconsin)
November 2, 2017 Thursday


Copyright 2017 The Janesville Gazette
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 609 words
Byline: The Janesville Gazette, Wis.
Body


Nov. 02--The cowardly killing of eight innocent people by a self-proclaimed ISIS follower in New York City on Tuesday proves again this nation's leaders must strengthen our immigration programs.
The suspect, 29-year-old Sayfullo Saipov, reached the U.S. in 2010 through a little-known diversity visa lottery. Created in 1990, the program is a relic of the melting-pot mythology created by Pollyanna lawmakers. But let's get real. There's no room for naivety in the age of global terror.
If not walls, then we must at least erect tougher measures to keep out the likes of Saipov. To think this man was able to plot and carry out a plan to run a truck over people in the heart of New York City should send chills down the spines of freedom-loving Americans. And it should scare lawmakers--scare them into taking action.
We are at a crossroads on immigration, facing a relentless enemy plotting to destroy America by any means possible. This enemy is not beneath renting a truck and plowing over innocent people. He is not beneath walking into a crowded stadium or mall and blowing himself up while killing hundreds--perhaps thousands--of people. This enemy knows no boundaries.
Meanwhile, this government is giving away "golden tickets" to people from far-flung places such as Uzbekistan. Why are we taking such risks? Our first priority should be to protect American citizens. The notion that we would risk a single America life to help out a radicalized Uzbekistani--who, by the way, reportedly wanted the ISIS flag hung in his hospital room!--is revolting.
The time for political correctness is over. We have to stop pussyfooting. Someone needs to stand up for the American way of life and say, "Enough!"
The first step Congress must take is to eliminate the diversity visa lottery program. The axiom guiding lawmakers on immigration should be to put American lives first. Period.
The U.S. should be bringing in only immigrants with the skill sets this economy needs to grow. Immigrants should demonstrate--long before gaining entry to the U.S.--that they're employable in career fields that Americans cannot fill entirely themselves.
The government must start vetting immigrants to ensure they cannot turn into carbon copies of Saipov, filling their heads with ISIS propaganda advocating for the slaughter of innocent life. Extreme vetting is not too much to ask.
The fact is--and, again, we cannot afford the luxury of political correctness while under attack by Islamic extremists--too many lawmakers, Democrats and Republicans alike, remain sympathetic to the melting-pot mythology. ISIS knows this mythology is America's Achilles heel. Slowly and methodically ISIS and other terror groups are plotting a U.S. takeover--not a geographical one but a psychological one.
ISIS has spread fear throughout Europe by turning trucks into weapons of mass destruction, and it has now set its sights on the U.S.
How will our lawmakers react? They must stop rolling out the red carpet for terrorists, and they must give law enforcement the tools it needs to monitor others like Saipov who are already here, lurking and waiting to strike.
We hope politicians find the courage to act as they did in the wake of 9/11 to protect Americans through tougher security measures. We hope Tuesday's attack is not indicative of this nation's future.
Terrorists have been hiding too long behind political correctness, and they are banking on political paralysis on Capitol Hill to set the stage for another cowardly attack.
___ (c)2017 The Janesville Gazette (Janesville, Wis.) Visit The Janesville Gazette (Janesville, Wis.) at www.gazetteextra.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: November 3, 2017


End of Document