EDITORIAL: 'Justice has been done'
High Point Enterprise (North Carolina)
May 2, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 High Point Enterprise
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 461 words
Byline: The High Point Enterprise, N.C.
Body


May 02--Hell has a new resident.
Thanks to the U.S. military, U.S. intelligence services and a president who sometimes has been questioned as to his toughness on terrorism, Osama bin Laden is dead. President Obama appropriately said during a late-night news conference Sunday that "Justice has been done."
As news about the secretive strike by elite U.S. forces against bin Laden's fortified compound in Pakistan began to emerge late Sunday, many Americans reacted with jubilation and appeared in public places chanting "USA, USA." A large crowd showed up outside the White House fences late Sunday and lingered through the night. And many others celebrated quietly in their own ways.
Certainly, news of the death of the 9/11 mastermind, who also was responsible for other successful and unsuccessful terrorist attacks, will boost Americans' spirits. The decades-long hunt for bin Laden became intense after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, with the Bush administration pursuing him. And then after his election in 2008, President Obama identified bringing bin Laden to justice as one of the top objectives of his administration.
Details of the operation to get bin Laden began to emerge during the early morning hours Monday, and surely will continue for weeks. We're certain Sunday's exploits of the two-dozen members of Navy SEAL Team Six and the entire operation will be discussed and dissected for ages. Without doubt, it will be recorded as one of the greatest military operations in U.S. history.
The death of bin Laden provides some measure of closure for America, in general, and especially for loved ones of those killed on 9/11 and in bin Laden's previous terrorist attacks. But his death only closes one chapter in America's War on Terrorism. It does not end this fight.
America immediately must ready itself for the possibility of reprisal attacks and a re-energizing of the global network of support for al-Qaida and the Taliban in Afghanistan. And going forward, the United States cannot ever again let itself fall asleep and allow another 9/11.
But for a moment, every American can take pride in the fact that those in whom we place our trust to defend us have scored a monumental blow for our freedom and our security. And at the same time, America has sent a message that even though presidential administrations may come and go, our nation's resolve to mete out justice to those who do us harm does not.
To see more of The High Point Enterprise, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.hpe.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The High Point Enterprise, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document