EDITORIAL: Fair shares cost plenty: The high price of fighting terrorism comes home
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
October 8, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 464 words
Byline: St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Oct. 8--The City Council is set to give the green light to a special ordinance that will clear the way for the city's Homeland Security Team to tap into a federal funding pipeline.
The first installment promises $85,000 if the council will first front the costs while the federal dollars roll through the State Emergency Management Agency. The team is planning on another $150,000 in federal money for more equipment and training eventually.
The offer is just too good for the council to resist. And the truth is that the city will be basically collecting on its fair share of the federal Homeland Security spending. If St. Joseph passes on this deal, some other team will get the money.
Our complaint has always been that the Northwest Missouri Region H Hazardous Materials Team already operates out of St. Joseph. Officials with the city's new Homeland Security Team promise to not "reinvent the wheel" with the federal money.
Our worry is that taxpayers will be buying a fifth wheel. While the established team focuses on hazardous materials, the city's team will respond to weapons of mass destruction and urban search and rescues.
There's more. The feds also are ready to fund new variations on the teams in Rock Port, Chillicothe and Bethany. Each team will be assigned to a unique mission. Rock Port, for example, will specialize as a radiological team because of potential incidents from the Cooper Nuclear Power Station in Brownville, Neb. That adds up to five teams to cover roughly 15 counties in Northwest Missouri.
We have pointed out in the past that sparsely populated Northwest Missouri is probably a low priority for most Islamic extremists looking for a prime terror target. Apparently, our lawmakers are happy with a program that distributes the federal pork fairly if not prudently.
We also have warned that taxpayers will get upset at the prospect of funding what amounts to competing (they call it cooperating) teams in the same city. We have seen no revolt so far, however. We still think it is important that everyone remember that your tax dollars fill this funding pie.
Our main worry now is whether Northwest Missouri can come up with enough missions so that every community can get a share of the federal funding pie. We've come up with some suggestions to help. The San Antonio Homeland Security Team can brace for political assassination teams. The team from Siloam Springs can specialize on espionage aimed at our water supply. It's just taxpayers' money.
Copyright (c) 2006, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: October 8, 2006


End of Document