EDITORIAL: End Gitmo's costs, failures
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
August 22, 2018 Wednesday


Copyright 2018 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 367 words
Byline: The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Aug. 22--Amilitary judge issued yet another blow Friday to the government's attempts to prosecute terrorism suspects outside the conventional U.S. justice system.
Army Col. James L. Pohl's ruling raised another warning against the use of torture and highlighted the costly futility of maintaining the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Even though prosecutors in the civilian justice system have been more effective than their military counterparts in securing convictions against terrorists, the Trump administration insists on keeping open Guantanamo and conducting war court trials of terrorism suspects.
Since Sept. 11,2001, civilian prosecutors have secured more than 600 convictions against terrorists, whereas only eight suspects have been convicted in the proceedings at Guantanamo, and several of those have been overturned. The Obama administration attempted to close Guantanamo and move to civilian court the trials of suspects, but was blocked by Congress.
Trials for alleged 9/11 planner Khalid Sheik Mohammed and four others are scheduled for next year but hearings on preliminary motions have begun.
Military justice rules preclude the use of evidence obtained through torture. Mohammed and the others all were tortured under the direction of the CIA. To evade the prohibition, prosecutors brought in FBI "clean teams" who did not know what information had been divulged, to interrogate the suspects.
The judge ruled that prosecutors cannot use "clean team" evidence, either, not necessarily because of what the defendants might have divulged, but because secrecy surrounding torture precludes defense lawyers from questioning those involved.
Meanwhile, taxpayers have spent about
$6.5 billion on Guantanamo since 2002 and will spend another $454 million this year, about
$11 million for each of 41 inmates. It costs about $78,000 per inmate to operate the "supermax" prison at Florence, Colorado.
Guantanamo was built as a temporary expedient. For the sake of effective criminal justice and taxpayers, the government should close it.
___ (c)2018 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: August 22, 2018


End of Document