EDITORIAL: Dealing with terrorism in school halls
The Janesville Gazette (Wisconsin)
October 4, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Janesville Gazette
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 594 words
Byline: The Janesville Gazette, Wis.
Body


Oct. 4--It's far worse than a recurring nightmare. The recent spate of school shootings involves real life and death. The shootings are hitting way too close to home.
In years past, shootings took place in faraway places, such as Colorado or Kentucky. We hoped the copycat nature of these incidents had waned and that tougher security had restored order to classrooms and again made schools safe havens for our children.
That notion has been shattered again and again in recent days.
-- Late last month, authorities charged three teens with plotting to kill students at a Green Bay high school. A student tipped off a school official to a plan involving a small arsenal of guns and bombs that apparently had been in the works for two years.
-- Last Wednesday, a gunman took students hostage at a Colorado high school before assaulting several and killing one girl.
-- On Friday, Wisconsin was back in the national news when a freshman entered Weston School in rural Sauk County with two weapons. A janitor wrestled away a shotgun before the boy used a handgun to kill his principal.
-- On Monday, a gunman apparently working off a two-decades-old grudge walked into an Amish schoolhouse in Pennsylvania and killed five girls and wounded five others before killing himself.
The Bush administration has called for a summit on school violence. Next week, educators and law enforcement officials will discuss possible federal action to help prevent such violence and deal with its aftermath.
Such unspeakable tragedies should be a call for educators and law enforcement in every community to reconvene and revisit school safety plans. As two of the most recent shootings illustrate, it's not just students turning on students that authorities must consider. Are all side doors locked once classes begin? Have emergency plans been rehearsed and updated?
The shooter in Weston School claimed he was retaliating for being bullied. Several shooters through the years have made similar claims. School officials everywhere must do all they can to prevent bullying and teasing.
Next year, the Legislature should reconsider legislation introduced last session by Sen. Neal Kedzie, R-Elkhorn. The measure would have required the Department of Public Instruction to craft a model policy for dealing with bullying. It would have maintained local control by requiring districts to adopt the DPI model or draw their own.
Families can play roles in preventing violence, too. Parents, talk to your children. Keep lines of communication open. Encourage kids to alert adults to any discussions of shooting plots. That could avert tragedy, as the Green Bay arrests illustrate well.
Parents also should consider buying trigger locks. In Sauk County, the boy apparently pried open his family's gun cabinet. Trigger locks might have prevented the bloodshed.
The focus on school safety can't hurt. But unless we make our school buildings into fortresses with metal detectors and armed security guards, all at extra taxpayer cost, they will remain susceptible to unthinkable violence.
As we send our children off to school each day, we can only hope and pray that our trust in school officials to do the right things, to do enough, will be rewarded when smiling faces return home in the afternoon.
Copyright (c) 2006, The Janesville Gazette, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: October 5, 2006


End of Document