Editorial: Work remains on terrorism relief
Business Insurance
June 24, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 8
Length: 480 words
Body


Now comes the hard part.
That may sound a bit odd, given the struggle that getting a terrorism insurance bill through the Senate entailed. After all, the House moved quickly and passed a bipartisan terrorism insurance bill in November. But it took risk managers, insurers, producers and other members of the business community another six months to persuade senators that the federal government should serve as a backstop to private insurers in the event of a future catastrophic terrorist attack. Doing so wasn't easy, and more than once it looked as though the issue would die in the Senate.
But it's precisely because it took the Senate so much longer than the House to move on legislation that actually getting a bill that President Bush will sign is far from being a done deal. The two bills define the federal government's role in widely divergent ways. While each measure has commendable provisions, reaching agreement on the shape of the final bill isn't going to be easy.
And because the Senate didn't pass its bill until last week, the window of opportunity for reaching an agreement in conference committee is closing a bit more every day. The congressional calendar is riddled with recesses and, with only a little more than four months before elections, lawmakers will want to spend more time with the folks back home than with their colleagues, hashing out the details of a terrorism insurance bill.
So it's up to those who support the federal government acting as reinsurer of last resort if private insurers sustain large terrorism-related losses to keep pushing.
We believe the ideal bill would combine the Senate approach of having the government share with insurers the cost of losses above a certain trigger with the House bill's provision that protects the victims of terrorism themselves from becoming the target of punitive damages. We also think the section of the Senate bill that would allow insurers that suffer a disproportionate loss to share costs with the government, even if the industrywide trigger isn't activated, belongs in whatever final bill emerges from the conference committee.
As Michael Phillipus, vp-communications and external affairs for the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc., notes in our story starting on page 1: ''The ongoing reports of possible future terrorism events point to the need to resolve this issue quickly and fairly. We're not going to sit on the sidelines now that we've gotten this far.''
We couldn't agree more. Getting both houses to pass terrorism legislation was a difficult task, and all involved deserve to take a deep breath and pat themselves on the back for a job well done-so far. Hard as it might be, proponents of terrorism insurance legislation must keep persuading lawmakers of the need for such a federal role. Those efforts can only abate when the president signs a terrorism insurance bill into law.

Load-Date: June 28, 2002


End of Document