Editorial: Congress should get behind terrorism cost-sharing bill
Business Insurance
December 17, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 8
Length: 717 words
Body


WE ARE discouraged that federal lawmakers have been so slow to reach agreement and approve a plan to provide insurers and insurance buyers with much needed financial relief from possible future terrorism losses.
The need for this relief is great, and both it and the preferred course of action can be summed up in one paraphrased sentence: ''It's the economy, so keep it simple, stupid.''
The fact that no terrorism insurance legislation has reached the president's desk more than three months after the Sept. 11 attacks means that a risky game of political chicken has gone on far too long on Capitol Hill.
Action was needed weeks ago because many U.S. businesses are running out of time before they have to arrange their 2002 insurance protection. They already know that their coverage costs will be sharply higher, as insurers make up for the terrorist losses and reappraise their exposures. But without some sort of federal guarantee to pick up some of the insurance industry's future terrorism losses, insurers either will raise rates even higher or simply refuse to underwrite certain risks. That's exactly what an already fragile economy doesn't need.
The delay and failure to reach legislative agreement can't be blamed on discord in the insurance industry, and the confusion that arises from lobbyists backing different approaches.
This time, the insurance industry came together and produced a consensus proposal that every major insurance trade group could support. Insurers claimed that it was the best proposal out there-and they were probably right-but even then they remained flexible and willing to work with lawmakers.
Unfortunately, lawmakers have been unable to reach agreement among themselves.
The measure passed by the House late last month casts the federal government in the role of a lender of first resort, issuing loans to insurers that would that have to be repaid. The Senate, in contrast, favors a risk-sharing approach, which is also favored by the Bush administration.
Proponents of the House bill claim that without a payback provision, a federal guarantee is nothing but an unwarranted bailout. We beg to differ. Unlike the airline industry, for example, insurers did not rush to Capitol Hill seeking compensation for Sept. 11 losses. They're paying them without federal aid.
What insurers are asking for is federal backup should a future catastrophic terrorist attack further drain their already-diminished surplus.
We think the Senate proposal-which we hope has been introduced and approved by the time you read this-is far preferable. Under the Senate approach, insurers would continue to pay claims up to a multibillion-dollar trigger, and then share additional loss costs with the government. At no point do insurers avoid any portion of the risk.
It makes sense that the government should share the risk, as a chief function of government is to protect against internal and external attack. The events of Sept. 11 mean that function was not fulfilled.
Lawmakers need to get over what we can only assume is their distaste for the insurance industry and do what's right for the economy.
Without some form of federal backup, which we hope would never be triggered, insurers will balk at writing coverage. Without insurance coverage, economic activity sputters.
Unfortunately, this simple fact has been obscured in the congressional debate by a variety of factors.
One of the more notable distractions is the inclusion of tort reform provisions. Attempts to use the terrorism insurance legislation as a vehicle for broad tort reforms could jeopardize the underlying bill.
While we have long argued for tort reform, and we certainly agree that some limits on punitive damages are needed to cap federal and insurer terrorism coverage payouts, we would regretfully jettison those reforms rather than lose the financial relief this bill would afford insurers and their policyholders. Tort reform can be addressed in other legislation, but the time for relief of insurers' terrorism exposures is now, as policy renewals loom.
The debate over this issue has dragged on far longer than it should have. For the sake of the country's economic well being, Congress should close ranks behind a cost-sharing terrorism insurance bill and get it to the president.
The simpler-and the sooner-the better.

Load-Date: December 21, 2001


End of Document