EDITORIAL: Goodbye and good riddance to bin Laden
The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
May 3, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 512 words
Byline: The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
Body


May 03--We're loathe to celebrate the death of anyone. But we'll make an exception in the case of this man, Osama bin Laden, the architect and financier of the 9/11 attacks and the man responsible for the deaths of thousands of innocent people across the globe.
If ever there was cause for celebrating someone's demise, this is it.
Bin Laden, son of a wealthy Saudi Arabian businessman who grew to become the most hated and hunted man in the Western world, was killed Sunday. He died during an assault by a small team of U.S. Navy SEALS on a heavily fortified compound where bin Laden was hiding in northern Pakistan. Also killed were one of his sons, two couriers and a woman who was used as a human shield.
Military officials then wisely and quickly disposed of bin Laden's body at sea, conforming to the 24-hour time frame for burials set by Islamic law while also eliminating the possibility of his burial site becoming a shrine to his supporters.
What should not be forgotten is that the firefight that claimed bin Laden's life is the final strike in a war that he himself began, not on September 2001 but five years before that. It was in 1996 that he and al-Qaida, the terrorist organization of his making, declared war against the United States.
It was a war that escalated with the attacks on the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 which left 224 people dead and more than 5,000 people wounded.
Most gratifying is that his demise comes before the 10th anniversary of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, which claimed the lives of nearly 3,000 more lives. Those who lost friends and family members on that horrific day will be spared the open wound of the open questions: Where is bin Laden, and how has he managed to avoid capture all of these years?
As President Barack Obama said during his nine-minute address late Sunday, "(We) can say to those families who have lost loved ones to al-Qaida's terror: Justice has been done."
Obama plans to visit New York City on Thursday to mark the death of al-Qaida leader.
The president's solemn and measured address on Sunday reporting on the slaying of bin Laden set the right tone for a nation unsure of what this means in the timeline of our nation's war against terrorism. While it's true, as the president said, "There is no doubt that al-Qaida will continue to pursue attacks against us," it is also true that the next head of this snake called al-Qaida will not be so revered nor recognized in some corners of the world.
Obama had achieved an aura unparalleled in the annals of terrorism, a chapter we can thank a team of Navy SEALs for now closing so forcefully. To bin Laden, the civilized world says: goodbye and good riddance.
To see more of The Press Democrat, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.pressdemocrat.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document