EDITORIAL: The new week
The Anniston Star (Alabama)
April 22, 2013 Monday


Copyright 2013 The Anniston Star
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 290 words
Byline: The Anniston Star, Ala.
Body


April 22--Americans embraced the beginning of this week because it meant last week was over: A needed respite from bombings, explosions, manhunts and death tolls. Thank God Monday arrived.
Alas, Monday wasn't terror-free. Canadian authorities arrested two men, a 30-year-old from Montreal and a 35-year-old from Toronto, and charged them with plotting to attack a passenger train with the help of al-Qaida representatives in Iran.
Expectedly, the 24-hour news channels went bonkers over the breaking news. It's a two-sided sign of the times, almost Pavlovian: arrests are made in terrorism cases and cable news erupts in wall-to-wall coverage.
In Boston, it was justified. In Toronto, not so much. Authorities even said danger was not imminent; on Twitter, caustic pundits had quite a bit of fun Monday making light of Canadians' trademark laid-back personalities. (In Canada, even our breaking terrorism plot news is pretty boring."
But it was real.
Seven days of Boston-bombing saturation has been quite enough. The story is a stew comprised of tragedy, despair, grief and heroism. The pain was, and is, authentic. Grant, too, that similar emotions would be felt in Canada had a similar terrorism attack killed and maimed people in Ontario or Quebec.
Man has killed man since the beginning of time and, sadly, we're still searching for a cure for evil and violence. It's an eternal work that's in progress. As has happened so many times, the most recent events have reminded us that vigilance against the planet's malevolent never ends. Last week Boston, this week Canada. We wonder what's next.
___ (c)2013 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 23, 2013


End of Document