EDITORIAL: Debates focus divided country on shared concerns
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
September 25, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 478 words
Byline: St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Sept. 25--By now it should be obvious the 2016 presidential election, at the minimum, will reveal we are a deeply divided America with a lot at stake and great uncertainty about how this will work out.
Is this the best argument for tuning in to the series of three presidential debates that debut in primetime on Monday, Sept. 26?
It's for sure one of the reasons, but history has proven the motivation to focus on the candidates and make a decision most often comes down to specifics of our personal situations and concerns.
On this score, we will be a united country as we listen for the answers that Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton give to the big questions posed to them. And beyond their words, we will be united in looking for a measure of conviction and confidence that, yes, they really can and will follow through with what they pledge to do.
Consider the topics of post 9/11 terrorism and national security. Prospective voters in Northeast Kansas and Northwest Missouri will approach these issues from different perspectives and, in many cases, from markedly different life experiences.
No doubt, many will disagree about the ideas offered and about the trust we place in the candidates. But the debate subjects are compelling for one and all.
This formula applies to topic after topic -- applying even to the so-called social issues such as transgender rights that stir passions in smaller segments of the electorate. No matter your position, you care if someone's beliefs appear to be overtaking yours.
Polling data from the Pew Charitable Trust and the Gallup organization give us guidance on where to focus the majority of our debate attention. The polls find Americans in both parties rate the economy, terrorism, jobs and healthcare as the most important among issues studied.
Overall, the Pew study found 84 percent of registered voters say the issue of the economy will be very important to them in making their decision on a president. Slightly fewer -- 80 percent -- say the issue of terrorism will be very important.
Beyond the top areas of agreement, Republicans put priority on the size and efficiency of the federal government, immigration, foreign affairs, the federal budget deficit and taxes. Democrats give higher marks to climate change, the distribution of wealth and income, and government regulation of Wall Street and banks. Both groups rate education as a topic of average or greater interest.
As the surveys show, we're far along in taking sides on the sides, but that's not the same as choosing a president. Except for single-issue voters, the rest of us have work ahead of us that starts with focusing on what we see, hear and take away from the coming debates.
___ (c)2016 the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) Visit the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) at www.newspressnow.com/index.html Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: September 25, 2016


End of Document