EDITORIAL: Terrorism harms reputation of Islamic faith
The Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wisconsin)
April 27, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 The Leader-Telegram
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 572 words
Byline: Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis.
Body


Apr. 27--The issue: New threats by Islamic militants against people who are of no threat to them.
Our view: The global Muslim community is far too passive about the evil inflicted in the name of their religion.
A main reason Adolf Hitler and the Nazis were successful for as long as they were was their use of fear to force would-be internal dissidents to continue to say "Heil Hitler" as an alternative to they and their families being tortured or killed.
Thanks in large part to America's Greatest Generation, Hitler's madness finally was stopped. Unfortunately, the globe hasn't been rid of those who would use murder and fear to try to force their vision for the world upon the rest of us.
Two reports in recent days remind us of the danger that lurks. First, the creators of the animated farce "South Park" have been threatened by the group Revolution Muslim after they depicted the Muslim prophet Muhammad in a bear costume. Militant Muslims say anyone who depicts Muhammad, apparently even behind a costume, should be killed. The group couched its threat by calling it a prediction, comparing the "South Park" creators to Dutch filmmaker Theo Van Gogh, who was killed by a militant Muslim in 2004 after making a film that discussed the abuse of Muslim women in some Islamic countries.
Which brings us to the Associated Press report this week of dozens of Afghan girls becoming sick in three different schools within miles of each other after a strange odor was reported in their classrooms. The Muslim extremist Taliban oppose girls being educated, and their episodes of terror against girls who go to school and their teachers are well-documented.
Certainly after nearly nine years in Afghanistan, we are tiring of our "nation-building" efforts in what appears to be a hopeless situation. But maybe our efforts would be enhanced if all of the Muslims educated enough to know not to threaten or kill people over religious differences would speak up and rise up against the totally brainwashed minority in their flock.
Every bombing, subway attack, assault against girls who want nothing else but to go to school, death threat and murder of people for what they read and write further isolates the Muslim faith from what its members say it truly represents.
The war in Afghanistan triggered by the deaths of 3,000 of our countrymen on Sept. 11, 2001, isn't about America trying to impose its will on Muslim-dominated countries. It was and is a war about protecting ourselves and others from Islamic terrorists who claim their religion gives them carte blanche to inflict mayhem.
Unlike Hitler, this global band of murderers uses a religion to justify their actions, so defeating it is far more difficult than isolating the Nazis. In truth, it's a struggle without end.
But what might help is for the majority of Muslims who reject the lunatic minority to get much more serious and vocal in their anger at how their religion is increasingly becoming synonymous with intolerance and evil.
-- Don Huebscher, editor
To see more of the Leader-Telegram or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.leadertelegram.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: April 28, 2010


End of Document