EDITORIAL: Obama speech on terrorism fell short
Midland Daily News, Mich.
December 9, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 398 words
Byline: Midland Daily News, Mich.
Body


Dec. 09--South Carolina Senator and Republican presidential hopeful Lindsey Graham had an interesting reaction after listening to President Obama's address to the nation Sunday on the topic of terrorism.
The president's 13-minute address was prompted by last week's mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI confirmed that the two killers who committed the murders (14 people died and 21 were seriously injured) were well-armed Islamic terrorists, who not only had automatic rifles and pistols but also planted three pipe bombs in the office building in which the killings occurred. The woman involved, according to authorities, had pledged her allegiance to ISIS.
Graham was eager to hear the president outline an aggressive approach for defeating homegrown terrorism. But that did not happen.
"We are at war and President Obama is fighting crime," Graham said.
Graham is not the only one with this sentiment. Many have been critical of the president's speech, saying it fell flat in words, action and tone. One news website (NJ.com in New Jersey) published a poll question that asked, "Do you find President Obama's address on terrorism reassuring?" Nearly 85 percent responded, "No."
"Ramping up the rhetoric is not the same as ramping up action." David Gergen, who served as an adviser to presidents Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Clinton, told CNN. "There was no new action here. This was a stay-the-course speech. He thinks the course is going to lead to victory. There is not evidence that that's the case."
Americans are concerned. Nationally, according to polls, a terrorist attack in the United States is the No. 1 fear of Americans. Locally, that seems to be the case as well. On the Daily News' website, www.ourMidland.com, we asked: What concerns you most? A. Terrorism; B. Gun violence; C. Neither; D. I don't know. This morning, terrorism ranked No. 1 at 57.1 percent, while gun violence was second at 28.7 percent.
In his speech, Obama laid out his administration's plan for fighting terrorism and urged Americans to not fall to "the fear of terrorism." Judging by the wide-spread reaction to his speech on Sunday, a large number of Americans are still fearful of experiencing another terrorist attack in our country.
___ (c)2015 the Midland Daily News (Midland, Mich.) Visit the Midland Daily News (Midland, Mich.) at www.ourmidland.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 10, 2015


End of Document