EDITORIAL: Terrorism no excuse; decide on judges
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
January 07, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: Opine; Pg. A-5
Length: 453 words
Body


Sept. 11 may be a valid excuse for many failings in the months following the attack on America -- but as an all-purpose cop-out for routine failure and bad behavior, it's wearing a bit thin.
Consider the judicial-appointments logjam in the U.S. Senate. Whenever the upper house of Congress is controlled by the party opposing that of the presidency, White House appointees to the federal bench go unconfirmed for months, even years. Rarely is there good reason for such delays; almost invariably, it's a matter of mere spitefulness.
Democrats and Republicans alike are guilty of such childishness -- so, over the decades, appointment time has become payback time for the party in charge of the Capitol's north wing.
Back at the beginning of Bill Clinton's second term, Chief Justice William Rehnquist called his fellow Republicans on the carpet for holding up the confirmation of Democratic nominees. It was an act of principle and courage -- and it gave Rehnquist credibility for his most recent remonstrations.
As part of his state-of-the-judiciary report to Congress at the beginning of this year, Rehnquist urged the Senate to take overdue action on several judicial appointments. Approve them or reject them, said our nation's number-one judge -- but make your decision.
We'd love to, replied Vermont's Sen. Pat Leahy, chairman of the Judiciary Committee -- but that darn Osama bin Laden … Well, the senator didn't go that far -- but he did blame the delays on the "tumultuous year for the nation and also for the Senate" -- which is the same nonsensical thing. He's been sitting on three dozen judgeships -- a good 30 of which haven't even been given hearing appointments. Many go back to the early weeks of the Bush presidency, when America was at peace.
Rehnquist responded with rhetoric of similar silliness: The federal courts, he noted, "have functioned through wars, natural disasters and terrorist attacks" -- and if they're to keep doing so, "judicial vacancies must be timely filled with well-qualified candidates."
Coming from a chief justice who had stripes sewn on his robe for the Clinton impeachment proceedings, this verbal flag-wrapping may have come as no surprise. But it isn't terrorist trials the Democrats threaten to hinder; it's justice in the hundreds of criminal and civil proceedings already before the federal judiciary.
The Senate's bare majority should heed Justice Rehnquist's words. After all, the Democrats are the second party to hear his plea for decency toward judicial appointees -- and for common sense when it comes to conducting our nation's courts.
Terrorism isn't the issue; partisan pettiness is. The Democrats would be doing themselves, and our nation, a favor by overcoming it.

Load-Date: January 7, 2002


End of Document