EDITORIAL: Terrorism on planes still a risk
The Bemidji Pioneer (Minnesota)
December 27, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 492 words
Byline: The Bemidji Pioneer, Minn.
Body


Dec. 27--The Christmas Day celebration by Americans across the country came so very close to becoming another tragic event to rival the 9/11 plane crashes into the Twin Towers, the Pentagon and a Pennsylvania field.
Through the heroic actions of passengers and perhaps a malfunctioning bomb, Northwest Airlines Flight 253 safely landed Christmas Day in Detroit, but not after some type of explosion occurred and passengers subdued the supposed perpetrator, Ulmar Farouk Abdul Mutallab.
At first thought to be firecrackers, Mutallab allegedly was trying to trigger off a bomb with a mixture of powder and a liquid, but passengers stopped him from succeeding.
From Nigeria, Mutallab claims to have been working for al-Qaeda with instructions to detonate the bomb over U.S. soil, a bomb he received in Yemen, according to media reports.
Rep. Peter King, the senior Republican on the U.S. House Homeland Security Committee, said that Mutallab does appear in U.S. intelligence databases as a person with terrorist connections.
The flight originated in Nigeria and stopped in Amsterdam before heading to the United States.
While the U.S. government, spurred by 9/11, has steadily increased homeland security, it cannot control foreign airports. Thus, we still have a major weakness in foreign flights coming to the U.S. And it leaves virtually all major U.S. cities at risk as many, such as Minneapolis/St. Paul, offer non-stop overseas flights.
U.S. officials immediately tightened up security Friday with more bomb-sniffing dogs and other measures, but flights originating overseas still present a great risk to this nation. Also disturbing is that Mutallab was allowed entry onto a U.S.-bound flight if his name showed up on the terrorists' list U.S. intelligence officials maintain.
At the least there should be a congressional investigation into what happened and how to prevent future such incursions. But the administration also needs to increase diplomatic efforts with other nations to urge them to upgrade their screening and airport security measures at least to the level done by the United States.
Another area of concern is the entry of cargo from other nations. We are woefully behind in ensuring that all containers are scanned for explosive or radioactive material, and that effort needs attention.
The 278 passengers and 11 crew members of Flight 253 were able to reach their families on Christmas Day safely. That just as easily could have been a tragedy.
It's also a sign of the times. We must remain ever vigilant and prepared.
To see more of The Bemidji Pioneer, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.bemidjipioneer.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Bemidji Pioneer, Minn. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: December 27, 2009


End of Document