EDITORIAL: The disaster in Iraq
The Anniston Star (Alabama)
June 13, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 The Anniston Star
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 410 words
Byline: The Anniston Star, Ala.
Body


June 13--A crisis in Iraq, a spot on the Middle Eastern map most Americans would just as soon ignore, is quickly turning red hot.
A radical group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), is creating chaos across Iraq. All or parts of several major Iraqi cities -- including Tikrit, Samarra, Mosul, Fallujah and Ramadi -- are under control of these violent extremists. All this in less than six months. The fighters are said to be closing in on Baghdad.
Iraq was already a dangerous and unstable place before ISIS launched its offensive. More than 8,000 Iraqi civilians were killed by sectarian fighting in 2013. This April, the one-month death toll was more than 1,000. The country's ruling government is way too cozy with Iran, the region's largest supporter of terrorism.
It almost makes the world long for the days when Saddam Hussein ruled Iraq with a harsh fist. Almost.
In the early 1990s, Saddam was swiftly punished for invading Kuwait and threatening Saudi Arabia. He was neutered, a weakened dictator whose military was smashed. The world kept a wary eye on Iraq, watching for hints that Saddam was cranking up his war machine or attempting to aid jihadists.
Iraq and Saddam were mostly contained, a Cold War diplomatic strategy that boxed in would-be aggressors and checked their power without firing a shot. The arrangement, while not perfect, was preferred to a costly war and destabilizing occupation.
Then post-9/11, the Bush administration promoted the theory that toppling Saddam and installing a democracy in Iraq would produce a more peaceful Middle East. The results are before us. A nation that waged a nearly decade-long war with Iran in the 1980s is now on friendly terms with the Islamic state. A generally secular Iraq was replaced by one ripped apart by sectarian fighting among Muslims. An unending series of terrorism has made normal life difficult. Into this chasm, the ISIS is sweeping across the country. Tens of thousands of civilians are dead. Many times more Iraqis are deeply scarred by the last 11 years. And then there are the U.S. casualties.
The verdict on the Bush administration's role in this fiasco is already in. It failed. The lesson for presidential administrations and members of Congress -- both current and future -- is to apply U.S. military firepower with more care.
___ (c)2014 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: June 13, 2014


End of Document