EDITORIAL: NYPD surveillance efforts go too far
Midland Daily News, Mich.
August 29, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 289 words
Byline: Midland Daily News, Mich.
Body


Aug. 29--On Sept. 11, 2001, New York City was the site of the largest foreign attack on U.S. soil in history.
Those events have taken the country to some difficult places. We have been at war.
At home, things such as the controversial Patriot Act and recent scandals with the National Security Agency have forced Americans to weigh the price of security. Efforts by the New York Police Department bring those questions up again.
The New York Police Department has secretly labeled entire mosques as terrorist organizations, a designation that allows police to use informants to record sermons and spy on imams, often without specific evidence of criminal wrongdoing.
Designating an entire mosque as a terrorism enterprise means that anyone who attends prayer services there is a potential subject of an investigation and fair game for surveillance.
Since the 9/11 attacks, the NYPD has opened at least a dozen "terrorism enterprise investigations" into mosques, according to interviews and confidential police documents. The TEI, as it is known, is a police tool intended to help investigate terrorist cells and the like.
American citizens worship at these mosques and we believe they are being unconstitutionally monitored. Blanketing a group like this for monitoring is fishing with too wide of a net.
The revelation of this program will further damage relations with Muslims in that community. Who from the New York Muslim community would trust the NYPD after being labeled a terrorist enterprise?
Sacrifices do need to be made for security, but this use of police power goes too far.
___ (c)2013 the Midland Daily News (Midland, Mich.) Visit the Midland Daily News (Midland, Mich.) at www.ourmidland.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: August 30, 2013


End of Document