EDITORIAL: Caution on terrorism bill
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
September 12, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 292 words
Byline: The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Sept. 12--     Sep. 12--Some of the recent mass murders across the country clearly were acts of domestic terrorism, but there is no federal domestic terrorism statute.
Rep. Adam Schiff, the California Democrat who heads the House Intelligence Committee, seeks to create a federal charge for domestic terrorism, with the Confronting the Threat of Domestic Terrorism Act.
He cited three mass murders in arguing for a domestic terrorism law. The alleged killer of 22 people Aug. 3 in El Paso, Texas, had warned of a "Hispanic invasion." The suspect in the murder of 11 people in October at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh trafficked in anti-Semitic conspiracy theories. Dylann Roof, who killed nine people in June 2015 at a church in Charleston, South Carolina, was an avowed white supremacist.
The suspects in those cases all have been sentenced to death or face potential death sentences in pending prosecutions. But the proposed law would not be limited to cases resulting in murder. It also would cover other aspects of domestic terrorism, as when there are foiled plots or conspirators besides the shooters.
Although a domestic terrorism charge would make sense in such cases, Schiff's bill might be too broad. It would require the attorney general to certify that a crime was intended to intimidate or coerce a civilian population or to influence government policy.
Almost all public protests are intended to influence government policy, so the bill opens the door to misuse of the law to stifle protest.
Schiff should tighten the bill to prevent its misuse against First Amendment rights.
___ (c)2019 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: October 2, 2019


End of Document