EDITORIAL: Tree spiking won't deter forest policy
The Bemidji Pioneer (Minnesota)
November 29, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 398 words
Byline: The Bemidji Pioneer, Minn.
Body


Nov. 29--A form of environmental terrorism has arrived in our region, and we abhor it.
As reported over the Thanksgiving holiday, Cass County authorities are investigating a case of tree spiking near Backus. Protesters drove 6-inch nails into hundreds of red pine trees on county-managed land north of Backus.
The pole barn nails have been driven into about 500 trees which had been sold at a public timber auction.
While no group has claimed credit for the action, and authorities at this point are calling the culprits "vandals," tree spiking is signature action of eco-terrorists. It was first used in the modern era in the early 1980s by Earth First! to deter logging of redwoods in the Pacific Northwest.
The theory is to deter logging by driving in nails that will damage the chain on a chainsaw, thus stopping a timber harvest.
In the Backus case, the nail-studded trees were discovered by a Cass County forest research manager prior to the logger moving on site. The plantation is thinned every 10 to 15 years, and about 100 of the 600 trees were slated to be harvested this winter.
The action, however, backfired, as the studded trees are now considered hazardous and dangerous. A Cass County sheriff's spokesman said if a saw hit one of the nails, "it would explode like a gun going off" and cause serious injury.
As a result, the whole plantation will now be clear cut and replanted.
We are sad and angered that this type of statement must be made to protest forest harvesting policies and practices. This could easily happen here, as arguments continue over timber harvest policies affecting Three Island County Park and Movil Maze.
But we cannot say strongly enough that tree spiking is a form of civil disobedience that illegal, dangerous and unwarranted.
A good public discourse between the public, our elected officials and our professional forest managers is the best process of determining the best public policy. Eco-terrorism has no place in that discourse.
To see more of The Bemidji Pioneer, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.bemidjipioneer.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Bemidji Pioneer, Minn. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: November 29, 2009


End of Document