EDITORIAL:
Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)
August 15, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Valley Morning Star
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 517 words
Byline: Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas
Body


Aug. 15--Terror plot should
lead to rethinking
It isn't a certainty, but the fact that several of those arrested in London last week, combined with the apparent sophistication of the plot, suggest that al-Qaida is alive and operational. It is likely that its capacities have been degraded by cutting off finances and capturing some top leaders, and the fact that the London and Madrid subway bombings seemed to be the work of locals "inspired" by al-Qaida rather than connected, left some wondering whether it had the capacity to pull off another major terrorist operation.
The safest bet would be to assume that it has.
The most heartening aspect of the thwarting of the plot to blow up airliners with virtually undetectable liquid explosives and commonplace electronic devices was that it was done with competent and persistent police work, rather than with police-state tactics.
News stories say the investigation began with a tip to the authorities from a young British Muslim concerned about the kinds of activities a friend seemed to be getting into. That tip led to further evidence and further investigation and eventually to closing down the plot.
The plot was not detected because of massive surveillance of all Britons, or even all Muslim Britons, or from data-mining of telephonic or financial information. It was more like good luck followed by routine police work.
It seems virtually certain that such a tip in the United States would have led almost any judge in the country to issue a warrant to authorize further surveillance and investigation, and that further evidence would have justified further warrants. The Patriot Act would not have been needed.
The fact that stateless terrorism, facilitated through the Internet, remains the most signal threat to the safety of Americans in this sad era should precipitate a thoroughgoing reassessment of U.S. foreign policy.
The war in Iraq was an inappropriate response to stateless terrorism and it is almost certainly breeding, inspiring and, in some cases, giving active experience to more future terrorists than it is killing.
Whether the conflict devolves into a civil war or not, it is time to begin the process of letting Iraqis run Iraq (for better and for worse). Democracy and the institutions of a civil society necessary for it to succeed cannot be imposed from the top by an outside force. They must grow upward from the people, rooted in local desires and aspirations.
In the short run, surveillance, intelligence and heightened security will be necessary. In the long run, however, the United States can best thwart terrorism by providing an example of how well freedom improves the lives of people -- especially when a free country reconsiders the sometimes understandable temptation to try to run the rest of the world.
Copyright (c) 2006, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: August 15, 2006


End of Document