Editorials: Arab-American unfairly excluded
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 22, 1999, Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial; Pg. 18A
Length: 607 words
Byline: Staff
Body

In the Middle East, Jews and Muslims are talking face to face, trying to find a way to end decades of mutual pain and suffering. But here in the United States that discussion has been silenced by suspicion and distrust.
Earlier this month, after harsh criticism from several American Jewish groups, House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt withdrew his nomination of Salam Al-Marayati to a congressional committee studying terrorism. The American Jewish Committee and other groups claimed that Al-Marayati, head of the Muslim Public Affairs Council, had expressed support for Muslim terrorist groups and thus had no place on the panel.
Constitution
To bolster its case, the Jewish group compiled five statements by Al- Marayati and four other statements attributed to members of his organization. Those statements --- the worst the committee could find going back 10 years -- - do not come close to justifying Al-Marayati's removal.
For example, here's the first statement cited by the committee:
"Most Islamic movements have been branded as terrorists as a result of the rising extremism from a handful of militants," Al-Marayati wrote in 1996. " American freedom fighters hundreds of years ago were also regarded as terrorists by the British."
And that's as inflammatory as he gets. In fact, Al-Marayati is far more passionate when he explicitly condemns terrorism as contrary to true Islam, writings not mentioned by the American Jewish Committee.
"The Koran, the authoritative source of Islamic law, established that . . . harming innocent people for any end, political or otherwise, is an unjust act violating Koranic morality," Al-Marayati wrote. "Like Christianity and Judaism, Islam has no room for terrorism. And like Christianity and Judaism, Islam has followers who violate its code of ethics in its name."
The committee also cites a 1996 statement on the MPAC Internet site from Dr.  Maher Hathout, a MPAC board member:
"The previous Palestinian intifada will be replaced by a global one. Israel is not a global power, but the United States is; hence, American interests will be subjected to a wave of anger, despair and deeply wounded national and religious sentiments. If we here, in a relatively cool environment, want to hold parents accountable to what their children do, under heated emotions the United States will be held responsible for what the current extremist government of Israel is doing."
Quoted that way, the statement sounds very much like a threat. But that impression is incorrect. The paragraph was extracted from a much longer, very moderate piece in which Hathout warned that the policies of the Netanyahu government in Israel were dashing the hopes of Palestinian moderates, and making Palestinian terrorism more likely. At the time, some Israeli newspapers and politicians were making that very same point.
In addition, the American Jewish Committee raised questions about its own credibility and good faith when it chose to drop the very next sentence in the excerpt it took from Hathout's article. After pointing out the danger that Netanyahu was creating by his policy, Hathout noted, "As a committed American Muslim, I never wished more that my analysis turns out to be wrong." Eliminating that sentence changes the sentiment he was expressing.
Surely, those who actively or even passively support the use of terrorism as a political tool should not sit on a congressional panel studying the problem. But if Al-Marayati was removed from the panel based on this material, he was done a grave injustice. His viewpoint, and the viewpoint of other responsible Arab-Americans, should not be excluded from public discussions.

Load-Date: July 22, 1999


End of Document