Editorial: Industry must lobby Congress now on terrorism coverage
Business Insurance
November 12, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 8
Length: 751 words
Body


ALL IN THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY are holding their breath, waiting to see what federal lawmakers will do next.  The question of whether and how the U.S. government will alleviate the burden of insuring future terrorism risks is central to nearly all impending discussions of renewals among buyers and sellers of commercial insurance and reinsurance. Renewal negotiations must begin soon for 2002 programs to be completed by Jan. 1, but without knowing how the government might step in, it is impossible to discuss pricing and capacity for terrorism insurance. This looming question also creates uncertainty for all other coverage discussions.
Pair this deadline for commencing renewals with the fact that Congress will be adjourning some time in the next few weeks and, simply put, time is running out. Given that urgency, the insurance industry coalition that formed to seek federal help should be lobbying lawmakers now for the relief plan that would best meet its needs, rather than waiting to see what might emerge as lawmakers consider competing proposals.
Everyone is familiar with the expression ''beggars can't be choosers.'' Nonetheless, we believe that there is too much at stake for the industry to politely wait to see what Congress offers it before the industry voices its preferences and needs.
The insurance industry clearly favors the Senate's proposed approach over a measure that was passed by a House committee last week, and it needs to make that choice known to lawmakers and their staffs, as well as to enlist broader support for this plan from other sectors of the industry. There are many other sectors of the economy that are seeking federal assistance to cope with terrorism losses, and the insurance industry needs to make the case to lawmakers that any assistance it receives would benefit all businesses, from airlines to commercial real estate developers.
The Senate proposal, which reflects a Treasury Department plan, would have the federal government and the insurance industry share the burden of responding to terrorist threats. While we view the idea of a $10 billion industry loss aggregate as unworkable-it also would require individual insurers to bear significant risks and pay claims before reinsurance kicks in-that could be addressed through a risk pooling arrangement, such as the industry itself has suggested. The Senate approach seems to be better suited to assure insurance availability than is the House approach. Unfortunately, members of the Senate Banking Committee remain divided over some aspects of the proposal, and a bill has yet to be formally introduced.
In contrast, the House measure would, in essence, create a government loan program for insurers, with a low trigger of either $100 million or $1 billion-or possibly somewhere in between. Although the House Financial Services Committee approved the measure on a voice vote last Wednesday after a day of wrangling, some of the details of how the plan would work may not be ironed out until the measure reaches the House floor. While the House approach would provide quick relief for insurers, the loan repayment provisions could hamper surplus growth and, thus, insurance availability. That development, of course, would defeat the purpose of the legislation.
The Senate approach is preferable because it would provide only catastrophic protection. It also would call for the government to provide true coverage of losses rather than simply loans with potentially onerous repayment terms, as under the House measure.
It's clearly in the industry's best interests to urge the passage of legislation to provide backing for terrorism coverage now, while a proposal can be shaped and acted on before Congress adjourns.
Now is also the time to act because there exists a united front of all the various insurance industry trade associations. They are showing the same type of unity that allowed the often-quarreling groups to unite behind last month's industry consensus proposal to create a mutual reinsurance company to respond to terrorism losses.
Unfortunately, the longer this matter drags on, the greater the risk that the coalition could fall apart. Some groups already are starting to identify conflicting goals among the coalition members. Some also are growing wary of lobbying Congress for anything insurance-related, for fear of inviting greater attention from lawmakers and, ultimately, federal regulation of their industry.
So the time for the industry to be heard-and to be heard with one voice-is now.

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document