EDUCATION; The Legal Aspects Of Fighting Terrorism
 The New York Times
October 28, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1131 words
Byline:  By COREY KILGANNON 
Dateline: WHITE PLAINS  
Body


THE terrorist attacks on Sept. 11 have changed many things, including the curriculum at Pace University Law School.
     After the attacks, many professors, especially those teaching constitutional, criminal and international law, began incorporating examples drawn from the disaster into their lessons, David S. Cohen, dean of the law school, said. 
 "Professors have been spending an inordinate amount of time on this because they are able to bring to their classroom lessons a real-life, important situation," he said, adding that there has been so much interest in the attacks and the war on terrorism that school officials decided to offer a seminar on national security next semester. They are also considering a class on the legal ramifications of the disaster.
"The students are extremely interested in the legal dimensions of this," he said. "They're using their legal skills and knowledge to explore what is really a laboratory in real life.'
Students at Pace, the county's only law school, have organized a wide-ranging response to the attacks, from mobilizing dozens of students to help with legal clinics in Manhattan to organizing public forums at the school to discuss the legal consequences of a changed world.
The largest forum has been a three-part discussion series on "The Law and Terrorism," which was organized to stimulate discussion on how the war on terrorism will affect the constitutional balance between government power and personal freedoms.
At the first discussion, on Oct. 18, Prof. Ralph Stein leaned into the podium and said that the Constitution would not provide a security blanket to terrorists.
"The Constitution is not a suicide pact," Professor Stein said loudly into the microphone, invoking the oft-quoted dictum of a past United States Supreme Court Justice, Robert H. Jackson.
Professor Stein, an expert on national security law, told students that "a wider range of lawyers will be involved in government than ever before, because more people will bring lawsuits citing the First Amendment."
He and his co-panelists, Bennett L. Gershman and Randolph M. McLaughlin, both Pace Law School professors, all warned that constitutional protections may be subordinated to the war on terrorism. But they said a balance must be maintained so the protections of the Constitution are not permanently undermined.
The country's law enforcement bodies are aggressively pursuing terrorism suspects, they said, and vigilant law enforcement is bound to tread on some human rights.
"Watch the signs," Professor Stein said. "Be aware." The Constitution "can be watered down in times of a national security crisis."
Several hundred people, mostly students, attended this first panel in the moot courtroom of the school's library. The event, open to the public, drew mostly students, but others attended, including three members of the military reserves, dressed in military fatigues and tall black boots.
Students asked provocative legal questions regarding terrorism, acts of war, civil liberties, racial profiling, national security and international law.
Professor McLaughlin presented a sample scenario to provoke discussion:
F.B.I. agents receive a tip that two men -- "apparently of Middle Eastern origin" driving a red van -- have just dumped chemicals into the Croton Reservoir. Agents stop a red van with two men matching that description. They search the van and find a map of the reservoir and empty chemical barrels. Then the agents search the Ossining motel where the men are staying, and find a link to a Scarsdale doctor who is then arrested for leading an Al Quaeda terrorist group in Westchester.
But the evidence was obtained illegally. The van and motel were searched without a warrant, and the F.B.I. used illegal wiretaps to catch the Scarsdale doctor.
These unconstitutional arrests would likely invalidate a case against a routine criminal suspect.
Participants discussed whether to set terrorists free in such a case, honoring their constitutional rights above the nation's security.
Professor Stein said the Constitution allows "extraordinary measures at extraordinary times." This could include allowing the use of "black bag operations" to catch terrorists whose plans go "so far outside our law and morality," he said.
Robyn A. Scopteuolo, a second-year student, asked what effect more aggressive policing could have on "expectations of privacy."
Robert Sullivan, also a second-year student, alluded to John Adams helping get a fair trial for the officers accused of the Boston Massacre in 1770, and he asked, "Are we still going to have a fair trial when these men are brought to justice?'
Professor McLaughlin, an expert on civil rights, expressed his doubts, saying, "It's going to be hard to find a fair and impartial jury" of Americans.
He also warned that the police might begin a new form of racial profiling, pulling over drivers who look Middle Eastern.
The professor, who is black, told students that the police at certain city bridge checkpoints seem to take an extra long look at him. 
"They're wondering: Am I black, Latino, or am I Egyptian?' he said, noting that Americans of Middle Eastern descent are now speaking up about racial profiling.
"All of a sudden black folks got a leg up on everyone else," he quipped. "We're not getting pulled over anymore. Funny how times change."
Pace Law School, which opened in 1975, has a history of being a liberal, progressive institution. One of its graduates, Stanley L. Cohen, a Port Chester native who works in Manhattan, is a radical lawyer who has defended terrorism suspects and has said he would consider representing Osama bin Laden. In the mid-1990's, Mr. Cohen defended Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, leader of the political wing of the militant Palestinian group Hamas. He recently defended Moataz Al-Hallak, who was questioned by law enforcement officials last month in connection with the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and then released.
Many Pace students and faculty members volunteered to provide various types of assistance at Ground Zero. And over the first two weeks of this month, more than 75 students volunteered to set up a booth at the New York State Bar Association in downtown Manhattan to help victims get the appropriate legal assistance.
Jennifer B. Corcoran and Michael J. Vatter, second-year law students at Pace, said that many more students there volunteered than could be used. The students used their knowledge of the law to get proper information from victims and get the legitimate and most pressing cases heard by lawyers.
Pace was recognized last week for the efforts. The National Association for Public Interest Law in Washington awarded Pace and New York Law School the PSLawNet Pro Bono Publico Award, which is given to law schools for outstanding examples of public service.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Participants, above, at forum on "The Law and Terrorism" at Pace Law School. Leaders of the discussion are, in foreground, Prof. Randolph M. McLaughlin; Prof. Ralph Stein, left; Prof. Bennett L. Gershman; and Dean David S. Cohen, standing. (Photographs by Richard L. Harbus for The New York Times) 

Load-Date: October 28, 2001


End of Document