EDUCATION WON'T STOP TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
May 15, 2007 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8
Length: 536 words
Body


It's too bad Kevin Mack's theory about educating terrorists, outlined in his Friday guest column titled "Time to try educating 'terrorists,'" doesn't hold water. It would make things so much simpler.
Unfortunately, as opposed to animals, when human beings reach the age of reason we begin to ask about where we've came from, where we're going, and where we'll end up. Some call this critical thinking, others call it religion. People like Lenin, Stalin, and Mao tried to stamp out this kind of thinking and millions were tortured, oppressed and killed.
History, too, says that education alone doesn't change the heart, breed compassion or instill a good conscience. Those brilliant Nazi doctors who used Jews as human guinea pigs proved that point.
Sorry, but religion is here to stay, and education won't change terrorists. But he can go to the Middle East and try his theory first hand; I'll bet he comes back wiser.
- Ray Unger, Madison
Notes enhance MSO experience
Regretfully, the Madison Symphony Orchestra season came to a climatic conclusion last weekend. The quality of performance, programming, individual musicians, guest soloists and conductors, the Overture Hall, and the community support have made this one the best reasons to live in Madison.
However, it wasn't until this last presentation that I realized that there is an unsung individual who contributes much to the total MSO experience. That is Michael Allsen (who plays base trombone in the orchestra), whose program notes contain scholarly research of composers and their music.
As a subscriber, I receive via e-mail an advanced transcript of the notes and have been able to study and share these with friends and guests, thus making classical music more enjoyable. This adds to the MSO's total package of great music performance and education.
Next September, there is something to look forward to in addition to football.
- Mick Faulhaber, Fitchburg
Bush is Reagan's true heir
It was interesting that during the recent Republican debate, the candidates reached back to President Ronald Reagan while trying to diminish their ties to President Bush. I think the people have forgotten what Reagan stood for.
He was for tax cuts all the time, deregulation of all business, control of the individual, privatizing government functions, unilateral foreign policy and the concept of the unitary executive. He dismissed most science as junk, was anti-union and believed in extending the power of the federal government over the states.
It seems to me that President Bush is the true heir to this legacy. The difference is that President Bush had a compliant Congress and was able to accomplish more than President Reagan.
Look what Bush has done: taken unilateralism to new heights, achieved more deregulation, cut taxes and increased spending, used signing statements to further the power of the presidency, had cabinet-level departments selectively enforce government rules and regulations regarding labor and the environment, privatized government functions including the military, and has shown time and again how government doesn't work (because the administration doesn't let it) from the inaction in natural disasters to running the war.
- Derek Popp, Mount Horeb

Load-Date: May 16, 2007


End of Document