Educate our troops
University Wire
March 22, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 811 words
Byline: By Steve Meck, Daily Targum; SOURCE: Rutgers U.
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J. 
Body


Ever since the phrase "Support our Troops" was coined, it took on the twisted meaning of supporting the troops as blindly as they follow orders. For some reason, cheering for these disillusioned troops as they destroy other countries and in turn endanger America is the politically correct thing to do. If the troops were educated about the damage they are causing, perhaps the men and women who are willing to risk life and limb for the people of this country could actually put their efforts toward defending the American people.
The first thing that the troops need to learn is that their actions in Iraq and Afghanistan are not "defending our freedoms" or "deterring terrorism." The truth, by the government's own research, is that the wars are making the United States less safe by turning Iraq into a breeding ground for terrorists. The CIA report, "Mapping our Future," details how the war in Afghanistan, and Iraq especially, is creating and emboldening new terrorists and, thus, making America less safe.
But even before America invaded Iraq, the United States was aware that the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq would increase the country's risk of terrorism. All 15 U.S. intelligence agencies warned that an invasion of Iraq would increase the risk of terrorism, but the United States ignored its intelligence because causing another Sept. 11 would be a shame, but not controlling Iraq and Afghanistan would be even worse. Ignorant of how they are carrying out orders that are spreading terrorism, American troops fight on, sowing the seeds of terrorism with every order they follow.
As Sgt. Paul Dominguez explained, "These people here are a bunch of lunatics willing to die for their God. They won't give up, no matter how many bombs you drop. They're not right in the head. Obviously, they don't think the way normal people think." Asked immediately following his response if he would die for God, he replied, "Yes."
It is ironic that the average American soldier would have so much animosity for the average Afghan or Iraqi fighter since they both share so much in common - both believe they are fighting for justice and against tyranny. The American soldier believes he is fighting terrorism as he spreads it and the Afghan or Iraqi combatants fight to avenge U.S. terrorism but are simply causing more. Both have been led to believe, by their higher powers, to fight for what seems to be a just cause, but both are just causing more injustice.
But whether the murder of civilians is done under the guise of American freedom or under Islamic jihad, it is still, by definition, terrorism. Until U.S. soldiers realize the lies they are being fed, they will only continue to add to the cycle of terrorism.
Another question the troops have to ask themselves is why are they fighting for a government that has continually been against their well being? Only true indoctrination has kept the troops willing to actually support - in fact die for - a government that continually disregards the well-being of its own soldiers. The past provides an exuberant amount of examples of disregard for soldiers' lives, with everything from washing soldiers' brains with LSD to the injection of plutonium on unknowing soldiers, but a recent example of the United States disregard for soldiers' well-being is just stunning.
During the Persian Gulf War in 1991, 17 American pilots were captured and tortured by Saddam Hussein. After some legal problems, the government of Iraq was finally held responsible and forced to pay nearly $1 billion to the 17 pilots in July 2003. But before the pilots had time to celebrate, former President George H. W. Bush's administration stepped in to overturn the case. Now that Iraq was a useful puppet regime, Bush decried that it no longer had to pay for its crimes. For all of Bush's rhetoric of righting the injustices of Hussein's torture chambers, Bush actually broke international law by absolving Iraq of the liability of the torture of prisoners of war.
When asked why the Bush administration had blocked the judge's orders to award the victims of Hussein's torture, White House spokesman Scott McClellan seemingly mocked the soldiers by answering, "No amount of money can truly compensate these brave men and women for the suffering that they went through at the hands of this very brutal regime and at the hands of Saddam Hussein."
We are not doing U.S. troops any favors by supporting them to fight for the same government that oppresses them and forces them to carry out policies that put all Americans at risk. When the troops are educated about the terrorism they are unwittingly supporting, they can finally fight to end it.
Steven Meck is a Cook College senior majoring in biology. His column, "Humanitarian Intervention" appears on alternate Tuesdays. He welcomes comments at smeck@eden.rutgers.edu.
(C) 2005 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 22, 2005


End of Document