EDUCATION;
COLLEGES COURSES STUDT TERRORISM
The New York Times
February 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk
Length: 1177 words
Body


ERIC LIEBLER allows his imagination to run freely. He has just hijacked a planeload of Americans to Sicily.
''I didn't intend to kill anyone,'' he says, ''but the American and Italian Governments didn't respond to my demands. I ended up shooting one passenger every five minutes.''
Mr. Liebler, a college senior, was simulating a hijacking at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., one of a growing number of schools across the country using a variety of ways to teach about international terrorism.
Professors of politics and experts in terrorism estimate that more than a dozen colleges and universities now offer classes in international terrorism, in contrast to only a few in the late 1970's.
''It is a pioneering field,'' said Yonah Alexander, director of the Institute for Studies in International Terrorism at the State University of New York in Oneonta. ''We are trying for the first time to provide a framework in which to understand the atrocities. If you are not going to study and talk about terrorism, how will you deal with it?''
For all the eagerness on the part of students to understand such events as the murder of a wheelchair-bound American, the fledgling academic field of terrorism is a tricky one. Few disciplines pose so many unanswered questions, the experts say. Is terrorism a historical phenomenon or has modern technology made it a contemporary concept? Is it a study of politics or psychology, conflict or criminology? Is the topic too politically loaded for classroom discussion?
As a result, methods used to teach terrorism are diverse. Some professors, for example, construct courses based on readings from a range of academic journals, while others focus on the memoirs of terrorists. Some rely on simulations, others on photographs and videotapes of terrorist attacks.
Critics of Terrorism 101-type courses, on the other hand, argue that beaming a spotlight on terrorism may promote it. Others maintain that the phenomenon cannot be isolated from regional circumstances and, for example, that it is impossible to understand terrorism in El Salvador without learning about land distribution and military factionalism in that country.
A. R. Norton, a professor of political science at the United States Military Academy at West Point, for instance, integrates discussion of terrorism into a broader course on Middle East politics. ''If someone learns about Lebanon, political factions, the Shiite movement and its objectives,'' he said, ''they will be better prepared to understand the T.W.A. hijacking of last year than if they were schooled in international terrorism.''
 
Studies Began in 1890's
The study of political terrorism has ebbed and flowed with the tide of current events, according to experts in the field. It began in the 1890's, hit a peak of interest before World War I and tapered off in the early 1930's, according to David Rapoport, a professor of political science at the University of California at Los Angeles. Interest in the subject was revived in the late 1960's with the emergence of violent protest movements in the United States and Europe, the experts say. It grew in the 1970's after the massacre of 11 Israelis at the 1972 Olympic games in Munich.
International terrorism increased sharply in the last year, including the hijacking of a T.W.A. flight from Athens last June, the seizure of the Achille Lauro cruise ship in October and airport attacks in Rome and Vienna. Student interest in the subject is now higher than ever, according to a number of professors, who noted that for every person admitted to a course on terrorism, about 10 are turned away for lack of space.
Some of the students' interest, the experts add, may arise from the belief that career opportunities and financing for research in the field will be plentiful because of the urgency of the topic. But they say it is still too early to determine whether this will be the case.
 
Perspectives and Goals
With the field still loosely defined, courses on terrorism depend to a larger than usual degree on the perspectives and goals of those who teach them.
Martha Crenshaw, a professor of political science at Wesleyan University, for example, wants her students to analyze terrorism theoretically, as they would in another scholarly discipline. ''We borrow theories used to study politics, history, psychology and sociology,'' she said. ''We'll use a psychological study of Nazi leaders, let's say, and see how it applies to a modern-day terrorist.''
Professor Rapoport at U.C.L.A. built his course on terrorism on the memoirs of terrorists - basic readings for his class include ''The Revolt,'' by Menachem Begin, the former Israeli prime minister who has been accused of using terrorism in his years as a leader of the war for the establishment of Israel, and ''My Home, My Land,'' by Abu Iyad, a Palestinian. ''You can much more easily identify with and remember things when they are in the narrative form,'' Dr. Rapoport said. ''We examine how terrorists are similar and how they are different.''
At the State University of New York, Dr. Alexander uses visual materials in an attempt to make terrorism real to his students. He has produced a videotape of interviews with experts in the field and he shows his students graphic posters printed by terrorist groups. The institute also reaches out to the general public with publications, lectures and symposiums on terrorism.
Lawrence Freedman, chairman of the Institute of Social and Behavioral Pathology at the University of Chicago, approaches the classes he teaches on terrorism from a behavioral point of view. ''We examine questions like, why does terrorism terrorize?'' he said. ''As a military incident it is minor. There is a disproportion between the injury inflicted and the worldwide concern it evokes.''
What one professor called the ''visceral and ignorant'' responses that students had to the T.W.A. hijacking last June prompted him to teach a course in international terrorism. The professor, Sherman Teichman, who teaches political science at the Experimental College at Tufts University, said, ''Their response was 'nuke 'em,' or 'mail your garbage to the Arabs.' It is important to diffuse emotions and preconceptions and see concrete policy imperatives.''
As part of Mr. Teichman's course, which began last October, Mr. Liebler and 29 other students spent a day acting out the hijacking of a T.W.A. plane by Palestinian and Italian terrorists. Some students were terrorists, others were government negotiators and reporters. A similar simulation will take place the weekend of Feb. 28, when the school is sponsoring a conference on terrorism for scholars and government officials.
Amir Soltani, a senior at Tufts, played the role of an American negotiator seeking the release of the captives. ''My immediate concern was national interest,'' he said. ''But when I got to the scene, my priority became to secure the safety of the hostages. I would think about revenge later.''
''You start to realize,'' he said, ''how many really complicated things we lump under this one word terrorism.''


End of Document