Edwards Answers His Critics With Attack on 'Terror Doctrine'
The New York Times
June 8, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 483 words
Byline: By CONRAD MULCAHY and MARC SANTORA
Body


Former Senator John Edwards struck back yesterday at Republican critics who have called him soft on the war on terrorism, saying the party's candidates ''seem intent on trying to one-up each other in trying to be a bigger, badder, George Bush.''
  Mr. Edwards, a Democrat, has argued that the Bush administration uses the phrase ''global war on terror'' as a ''bumper sticker'' slogan that serves as a shield to pursue dangerous policies like the war in Iraq, which has come back to haunt the United States by increasing the threat of terrorism.
 That assertion has prompted former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York to accuse Mr. Edwards and other Democrats of being ''in denial'' about the threat.
  At an appearance yesterday in Manhattan, Mr. Edwards said President Bush's ''terror doctrine'' had proved counterproductive.
  ''If Mayor Giuliani believes that what President Bush has done is good and wants to embrace it, and run a campaign for the presidency saying 'I will give you four more years of what this president has given you,' then he's allowed to do that,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''He'll never be elected president of the United States, but he's allowed to do that. I think Americans are looking for something different, they want us to be tough, they expect their president to be tough and to lead, but they expect us to be smart.''
  Mr. Edwards repeated his calls to go beyond the use of force to undermine the threat of terrorism, and to adopt a more multilateral approach to combat ''the long-term forces of terrorism.''
  But Mr. Giuliani said on the campaign trail Wednesday, and repeated at an event yesterday, that President Bush deserved some credit for helping keep America from being attacked again and that to deny that was rank partisanship.
  Mr. Giuliani's communications director, Katie Levinson, said in a statement yesterday that ''John Edwards's track record of predicting election outcomes speaks for itself.''
  Even before Mr. Edwards's comments about Mr. Giuliani, the former mayor had been increasingly critical of the Democratic field. On Wednesday, Mr. Giuliani stepped up his criticism, pointing to two domestic terrorism plots the authorities have recently reported they uncovered.
  ''The Democrats are ignoring terrorism,'' he said. ''When I lived through Sept. 11, and I don't just mean the day, I mean a period of time, I was at the center of it,'' he said, adding that he was warned repeatedly that another attack was probably unavoidable.
  After a town hall meeting, Mr. Giuliani was asked about critics who said the decision to go to war in Iraq was already providing inspiration and a training ground for extremists and that this in itself countered the idea that America was safer today.
  ''But here is the reality,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''The reality is we haven't been attacked. And I have to tell you this truthfully. I did not think that was possible.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 8, 2007


End of Document