Effects of terrorism felt by U. Toledo students
University Wire
June 23, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 The Independent Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 1056 words
Byline: By Alia Orra, The Independent Collegian; SOURCE: U. Toledo
Dateline: TOLEDO, Ohio 
Body


Driving a military truck back and forth between Iraq and Kuwait, Ryan Call remembers the routine he was given as a Marine becoming acquainted with the realities of a war zone.
When a soldier receives sniper fire, "you just keep rolling." They tend to aim for the drivers, some of the other servicemen told him.
"I couldn't [imagine what it was like to be fired at]," Call said. "[But] you start to just relax mentally a little bit. I didn't think that would happen, but it did. It's not like I'm like a 'tough guy' or anything ... After you're there for a little while, I think anybody would get accustomed."
For a Marine like Call, deployed to Iraq in the spring of 2003, camouflage becomes the bullseye for terrorists.
And as a University of Toledo student, uniformed or not, he's one representation of the different experiences undergraduates have had with this particular kind of politically charged violence since the September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center.
According to the National Counterterrorism Center, there were 651 attacks that killed 1,907 in 2004. But how does terrorism affect the average UT student? Here the experiences and attitudes of three different students.
Ryan Call, junior, criminal justice
His first thought after answering a phone call from his platoon's sergeant was that he must have been slapped with weekend duties that would interrupt his four-day weekend at the North Carolina base where he was stationed.
Instead the sergeant ordered him to the medical center for anthrax shots -- he was to be shipped to Iraq within the next few days.
"I was like 'whatever.' I mean that's what I said to him but not really what I felt. I was feeling kind of surprised," Call said. "I'm not gonna lie, I mean I don't know what the place is like. I mean once we got there my worriedness and all that, it kind of went away."
He began a more personal relationship with terrorism, if it can be called that -- from watching the attacks of Sept. 11th from his Defiance High School classroom to joining the war on terror.
"We get off the plane and like immediately there was like an alarm so we had to put on our chemical gear and our gas mask and I was flipping out," he said.
He was overseas for 61 days. He got back on May 25, his sister's birthday. And after those 61 days he feels the U.S. presence in Iraq is needed
"I was all about [the war]. I was like hey, it needs to happen, we need to get rid of these people, people that commit terrorist acts," Call said. "I think it's a good thing that we're taking care of it now instead of like waiting and waiting and waiting for another attack to happen. Being in Afghanistan and being in Iraq, I think they're equally important.
"If I die in the process, then it's my choice. That's what a lot of people don't understand ... it was my choice to sign the contract and join the Marine Corps. So if I want to join the Marine Corps and go to war, and do that, then that's not the public's choice to say, oh you shouldn't be able to do that. Well, yeah I should."
Francisco Aguilar, senior, political science
When Francisco Aguilar's parents decided to move the family to the United States, he was only five years old, the son of a Nicaraguan involved in rebel fighting who feared Francisco would someday be recruited to participate in the politically-charged violence.
It is this personal history that forms Aguilar's opinions on war and terrorism.
"In [my father's] case, they were freedom fighters, but if they were on the other side of the coin they would be insurgents," Aguilar said.
In Nicaragua, political strife affected the citizenry in a way that meant most people had chosen a side and gotten physically involved, Aguilar said. In his experiences in Ohio, though, Aguilar sees an emotional removal of the average person from the impact of terrorism.
"People live a life of apathy, they don't care," Aguilar said. "You've got too many things to worry about."
Living in Toledo, Aguilar faces the same feelings of disassociation because of the demands of his daily life and the lack of direct violence happening in the U.S. since the attacks in 2001. He doesn't agree with the war on terror -- "It's not cool what's going on over there, people are dying," he says with genuine distress.
"I don't know, I just never thought about [my personal vulnerability to terrorism], I just don't walk around paranoid," Aguilar said. "Maybe I think if it's gonna happen, it's gonna happen, whether I walk around paranoid or not. What can I do? That's an international issue; I'm just a guy trying to make it in this nation."
Katie Katafias, junior, early childhood education
Katie Katafias is the embodiment of the future Navy wife -- the coifed, short blonde hair, the tank top with a small American flag printed on it, and the delicate engagement ring from her fiance, Joel Whitcomb.
He's off somewhere in the Pacific around Guam, and Katafias says though she feels lucky he's relatively out of harm's way, the long absences are difficult.
Terrorism may not be on her mind the way it would for the fiance of a soldier in Iraq, but his insights into the military world have made her feel confident in America's capacity to defend itself.
"It is so exciting, because you'll see how many people there are. It is very Americana, and to see all those ships lined up ... I mean to know that we have the capacity to do that makes me feel a lot more secure in America. When you see that many men, you're like, 'Wow, this is just one city, this is one base, we have bases all over the world and we have a ton in the United States,'" she said. "I feel very safe because of Joel and because of being exposed to more of the military."
She still gets upset thinking about the attacks of September 11th, even though terrorism is low on her list of worries today. Her vote went to George W. Bush. She thinks that in this case, war was necessary.
"They came on our land and attacked us, and if we just let it go they would just keep coming over."
Who are "they"?
"The people that are so upset with America, the people that have so much anger towards us, I don't know where the anger comes from, but it's built up towards us, and I'm not sure what their reasons are for why they don't like us ... I mean why do people hate people, it's just a hard question to answer."
(C) 2005 The Independent Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 23, 2005


End of Document