Effort to Derail Anti-Terrorism Bill Fails
The New York Times
April 17, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 4;  National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 756 words
Byline: By STEPHEN LABATON 

By STEPHEN LABATON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 16
Body


The Senate tonight narrowly defeated an attempt to derail counterterrorism legislation, clearing the way for a final vote this week.
The legislation, a product of a joint House-Senate conference, has as its centerpiece a group of provisions that would sharply limit the ability of state death-row inmates and other convicts to ask Federal courts to review their convictions.
Both supporters and opponents said that if these provisions were adopted and withstood court challenges, they would drastically accelerate executions around the country by sharply reducing the years of appeals pursued by inmates convicted of capital crimes.
The legislation would also give the Federal Government more power to deport aliens suspected of terrorist ties and to prosecute foreign terrorist organizations, designated by the Administration, that attempt to raise money in the United States.
Republican leaders in the House and Senate have vowed to pass the measure by Friday, the first anniversary of the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Senior Administration officials have said that although the legislation does not include all the provisions recommended by the White House, President Clinton would sign it. Mr. Clinton had also sought unsuccessfully to expand the authority of Federal agents to use wiretaps and to permit law-enforcement authorities to consult with military officials in certain kinds of cases.
Republicans beat back an effort tonight by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, to return the measure to the conference committee to have the military provision re-inserted. The Senate voted 50 to 46 to defeat Mr. Biden's motion. The vote was strictly on party lines, with two exceptions: Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, voted for the Biden motion, and Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, voted against it.
Last June, the military and wiretap provisions were in the legislation when it was approved by the Senate by a vote of 91 to 8. But after House Republicans removed those provisions last month at the urging of the National Rifle Association, the Senators scaled back their bill.
The provisions limiting death-row appeals would generally impose deadlines of six months following final actions by state courts for inmates to file habeas corpus petitions. Other inmates would generally have one year to file such petitions. Currently, there is no Federal deadline.
The bill would also raise the standard of review for habeas corpus petitions and would make it very hard to file subsequent petitions.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Utah Republican who heads the Senate Judiciary Committee and co-sponsored the legislation, said that the changes affecting appeals was crucial to combatting terrorism and represented "one of the most important changes in criminal law in this century."
But Mr. Biden, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee, said that gutting the habeas corpus provisions had nothing to do with fighting terrorism. He noted that most terrorists were prosecuted under Federal law and in Federal courts and that the provisions in the legislation would have their greatest impact on state prisoners, convicted under state laws in state courts.
For months, an unusual coalition of gun groups and civil liberties organizations have fought the legislation, but that alliance fractured today.
Having eliminated the provisions its members found objectionable, the National Rifle Association announced that it would now support the measure. Among the provisions eliminated was one that would have made it easier for the victims of guns to sue their distributors.
A number of civil rights and lawyers groups have said the legislation would subvert a fundamental right of defendants. The opponents of the measure include the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the American Civil Liberties Union.
A recent study by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York found that death-row prisoners bringing Federal habeas petitions succeeded almost 40 percent of the time in demonstrating that significant constitutional flaws undermined the reliability of their convictions or sentences. Many of those appeals would be forbidden under today's legislation, the group said.
In a recent letter to Congress, Wade Henderson, the director of the Washington office of the N.A.A.C.P., said that the measure would "virtually strip the Federal courts of the authority to issue" writs of habeas corpus and that blacks would suffer the most as a result.

Load-Date: April 17, 1996


End of Document