EFFORT TO RESTART PEACE TALKS STALLED stalled stalled
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
April 08, 1997, Tuesday tuesday tuesday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A P1A
Length: 523 words
Byline: Barry Schweid schweid schweid
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - With Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at
his side, President Clinton agreed Monday that Israel should never
"have to bargain to be free of terrorism." But their White House
meeting failed to produce an immediate formula to resume stalled
Mideast peace talks.
Clinton said he would explore "any reasonable opportunity" to end the
impasse. A Palestinian delegation will come to Washington later in the the the
week to broaden the discussions.
"We keep our commitments; they violate theirs," Netanyahu said at the
end of the day, signaling that divisions remain.
However, he affirmed that new homes for Palestinians should be built
in Jerusalem, a gesture designed to offset the harsh criticism
surrounding Israel's project for 6,500 new Jewish housing units.
The statement was welcomed by the Clinton administration. "That's
obviously positive," State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said.
The Israeli leader also pledged to carry out commitments for a three-
stage pullback on the West Bank whether or not the Palestinians accept
his proposal to move quickly into negotiations over Jerusalem,
refugees and other tough issues.
Still, Hasan Abdel-Rahman, the chief Palestine Liberation Organization
representative in Washington, reiterated the Palestinian position that
the talks would not be resumed until Israel stopped construction of
the Har Homa project.
The Palestinian official also dismissed Netanyahu's attempt to focus
attention on terrorism.
Clinton described his two-hour meeting with Netanyahu as "very
thorough," but gave few details.
At the outset of their meeting, the president renewed his call for a
statement from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat of "zero tolerance"
for terrorism.
Clinton said he would consider "any reasonable opportunity" to get
peace talks up and going again. But he indicated he was not prepared
to set up a summit meeting. between Netanyahu and Arafat under U.S.
auspices.
or make any other dramatic move right away.
"It's important not to jump into this," Clinton said. His chief
mediator, Dennis Ross, also suggested there would be no quick fix,
said the United States could not impose a solution.
"We can't wave a magic wand and put things back on track," Ross said
at the annual conference of the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee, a pro-Israel lobby. "But we can serve as a bridge to put
this process back on track."
Netanyahu began the day with a speech to an enthusiastic gathering of
thousands of Christians and Jews who held their fourth annual unity
conference in support of Israel.
"If they want peace, they must fight terrorism," the prime minister
said.
He ridiculed a Palestinian assertion that Israel's decision to build a
new Jewish neighborhood in Jerusalem amounted to a declaration of war
against the peace process. "It's the terrorism of walk-up rentals,"
Netanyahu said as many in the audience whooped their approval.
In a serious vein, Netanyahu said 75 percent of the land on which Har
Homa was being built was owned by Jews and that Israel was building 10
neighborhoods for Arabs, as well.
"What is wrong with this?" he asked. "Nothing. People get married,
have kids, build homes." homes." homes."

Load-Date: April 8, 1997


End of Document