EGOYAN'S 'ADORATION' EXPLORES VARIETIES OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 18, 2009 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; MOVIE REVIEW; Pg. W-17
Length: 384 words
Byline: Carrie Rickey, The Philadelphia Inquirer
Body


Atom Egoyan makes movies in the key of melancholy, movies that end with the belated lifting of a crushing emotional weight.
Often his characters are survivors of tragedies that have robbed them of loved ones. First and last, his movies are about the mystery -- and arduous emotional work -- of getting derailed lives back on track.
"Adoration," Egoyan's most affecting film since "The Sweet Hereafter," begins pretty much at the bottom of this deep well of grief. Mourning is particularly challenging for Egoyan characters as his movies also show how the communications devices designed to bring people together -- cell phones, Internet chatrooms -- inevitably end up polarizing them.
Set in Toronto, "Adoration" centers on Simon (Devin Bostick), a high-schooler with questions about the death of his parents years ago. Was his father, Sami (Noam Jenkins), a Lebanese terrorist who planted an explosive device on his Canadian mother (Rachel Blanchard) before she boarded an airplane back in 2001?
As a school assignment, the sad-eyed youth writes a speculative account of his parents' last days. Simon's essay turns out to be a litmus test, one that measures the received wisdom of each listener. For one skinhead in the blogosphere, it is an endorsement of Arab terrorism. For one concentration camp survivor, it exposes the cultural failure to melt the iceberg of intolerance. A Muslim who comments on the story takes pains to distinguish the practice of Islam from Islamic terrorism. In Egoyanworld, people are individuals, not representatives of their ethnicities, nationalities or creeds.
What all this has to do with the troubled boy, his overinvolved teacher, Sabine (Arsinee Khanjian, Egoyan's real-life spouse), and his lugubrious uncle (Scott Speedman, surprisingly powerful) is a secret hidden inside this puzzle-box of a film.
Before revealing that secret, Egoyan considers the many varieties of terrorism that wound his characters, from the psychological to physical. The process of watching the film with its haunting violin score by Mychael Danna is cathartic. Feels awfully good to get that weight off the chest.
Opens Friday at Regent Square Theater.
b> 'ADORATION'
/b>
* Critic's Call: Three Stars
* Starring: Arsinee Khanjian, Scott Speedman and Devin Bostick.
* Rating: R for profanity, mature themes.

Notes

WEEKEND MAG / Movies are rated on a scale from one (bomb) to four (classic) stars

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sophie Giraud: Rachel Blanchard and Noam Jenkins play a couple headed for danger in "Adoration."

Load-Date: June 19, 2009


End of Document