Egyptian Court Clears 24 Fundamentalists of Murder
The New York Times
August 15, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 737 words
Byline: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,

By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: CAIRO, Aug. 14
Body


An Egyptian civilian court today cleared 24 Muslim fundamentalists of murder charges in the assassination of the Speaker of Egypt's Parliament in 1990, citing evidence that some confessions in the slaying had been extracted under physical abuse.
Prosecutors had demanded death sentences in the slaying of Rifaat al-Mahjoub, a decision that is bound to aggravate the enmity between supporters of secular government and their fundamentalist opponents in Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world.
Fourteen of the accused were fully acquitted, and the remaining 10 were given prison sentences ranging from 5 to 15 years on related charges.
Wahid Mahmoud, president of the High Security Court, said he had decided to overlook the confession of one defendant, Mohammed el-Nagar, as well as that of several others who admitted taking part in the slaying because, he asserted, medical examinations showed the defendants had been tortured. He said that was "contrary" to the spirit of Egyptian law.
The court charged the defendants with possessing arms used in the killing and fake identity papers, among other charges, but said it would ignore their confessions in the killing.
 
Followers of Jailed Sheik
 All the accused in the two-year-long trial are members of the militant Islamic Group, whose spiritual leader, Omar Abdel Rahman, is jailed in the United States on immigration charges.
Other followers of Sheik Abdel Rahman are under arrest in New York and New Jersey on charges of taking part in the bombing of the World Trade Center in February and plotting other terrorism, including plans to blow up the Lincoln and Holland tunnels.
Mahmud Abouhalima, an Egyptian-born taxi driver who is a suspect in the Trade Center bombing, also accused the Egyptian authorities of torturing him while he was held here.
Immediately after the judgment was pronounced this morning many of the defendants and relatives attending the court session triumphantly shouted the name of Sheik Abdel Rahman, hailing him as their spiritual leader.
The High State Security Court had been widely expected to hand down 10 to 12 death sentences. Instead, its leniency today stood in sharp contrast with rulings by specially appointed military courts in the last six months.
Those courts, authorized by the Government to speed up dealing with acts of terror by fundamentalists, have passed 21 death sentences in cases of slayings and terrorism committed by followers of Sheik Abdel Rahman and other fundamentalist groups against Egyptian politicians, policemen, Christian Copts and foreign tourists.
 
170 Killed in 2 Years
 In the last two years, more than 170 people have died in acts of terrorism attributed to fundamentalists.
The killing of Mr. Mahgoub, an academician who was slain along with his driver, an assistant and three police officers, marked the start of the fundamentalist campaign of violence in 1990.
Since then the terrorists have killed several police generals, a noted Egyptian intellectual advocate of secularism, and the writer Farag Fodah, and have vowed to kill President Hosni Mubarak.
Murder attempts and death threats have also been made on judges, Cabinet ministers and prominent secularist actors and writers. Some Egyptian newspapers say the tactic of intimidation explains the reluctance of civilian courts to deal with fundamentalist terrorists more harshly.
A similar campaign of violence peaked with the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in October 1981, but was eventually brought under control by the Government.
 
Military Trials Likely
 Today's judgment is bound to push the Government to resort to further military trials, abandoning civilian court procedures, which have been lengthy and viewed as subject to manipulation by lawyers and judges with fundamentalist sympathies.
Resorting to broad attacks on leading figures and advocates of secularist views has become an increasingly popular tactic of fundamentalists in the region, particularly in Algeria, the Sudan and Egypt.
In the last few weeks a score of Algerian intellectuals and journalists who champion a secular society were killed. In Egypt, several actors have reported phone calls warning them to stop acting, which fundamentalists view as a sin, and writers have been threatened for championing secularist themes.
Many -- including Naguib Mahfouz, the Nobel Prize-winning author, and Adel Emam, a popular actor -- have been given police protection by the Government.

Graphic

 
Photo: Muslim fundamentalists celebrating after a court in Cairo announced that 24 defendants had been cleared in the 1990 killing of the Speaker of Egypt's Parliament. Ten of the defendants, including Safwat Abdel-Ghani, left, were given prison sentences for related charges, and 14 were fully acquitted. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: August 15, 1993


End of Document