Egypt's army chief hints at crackdown; He wants mandate to address 'violence and terrorism'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 25, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 25
Length: 283 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: CAIRO  
Body


The military chief who ousted Egypt's elected president called on the public Wednesday to take to the streets to give him and the police a mandate to tackle violence and terrorism.
He delivered that message in an address that indicated a possible move against supporters of the Islamist leader.The call by Gen. Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, made in a speech to a graduation ceremony for military cadets, underlined how the military chief is the source of real power in the country despite the creation of a civilian government after the coup July 3 that removed Mohammed Morsi.His comments appeared designed to secure a public cover for what could be a move to dismantle sit-in camps by Morsi's supporters in Cairo and elsewhere as well as a campaign against Islamic radicals who have stepped up attacks on security forces in Sinai. El-Sissi called for a massive turnout in Friday rallies to give him a mandate to do what is necessary to stop bloodshed.
A coalition of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood and allied factions denounced his speech, calling it an open invitation to civil war. Their coalition plans protests and marches of its own for Friday, raising the potential for violence between the two camps.
El-Sissi removed Morsi after four days of massive protests by millions of Egyptians demanding his ouster after a year in office, and the military says its goal is to set the country on a path to democracy. But the move has set top ally Washington in an uncomfortable position: The United States has implicitly accepted Morsi's removal, even as the Obama administration reviews whether it constitutes a military coup, which under U.S. law would require the end of $1.3 billion in annual aid to Egypt's army.

Load-Date: September 24, 2013


End of Document