Egyptian Journalists Protest Editors' Pledge Not to Criticize State
The New York Times
November 3, 2014 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 604 words
Byline: By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK
Body


CAIRO -- Hundreds of Egyptian journalists objected on Sunday to a pledge by newspaper editors to refrain from publishing reports critical of the government, calling the curb on freedom of expression ''a victory for terrorism.''
More than 350 journalists signed an online statement responding to the editors. It was a rare instance of public dissent since the military takeover 16 months ago and the first hint of discontent within the news media over its near-unanimous support for the government.
In a statement issued on Oct. 26, top editors from 17 state and private newspapers said they would refrain from publishing criticism of the government to support the fight against militant extremists. They rejected ''attempts to doubt state institutions or insult the army or police or judiciary in a way that would reflect negatively on these institutions' performance.''
Issued days after an unusually deadly militant attack on a military checkpoint, the editors' statement effectively made formal de facto censorship that was already in place: Hypernationalist public sentiment and an escalating crackdown on dissent had already virtually silenced the voices of both the secular and the Islamist opposition.
The editors' statement ''does not distinguish between fighting terrorism and initiating a new fascism,'' the journalists said in their response on Sunday. Asserting that the Egyptian press had been ''the people's shield'' against corruption and tyranny under the two previous presidents, Hosni Mubarak and Mohamed Morsi, the journalists argued that sacrificing freedom of expression amounted to capitulating to the goals of militant extremists.
''The terrorists will win when they can control the media, and the state will fall when it agrees on the same goal,'' the journalists argued. ''Confronting terrorism is a duty and an honor, and it has nothing to do with the nationalization of the press or the voluntary abandonment of freedom of speech.''
Khaled el-Balshy, a prominent journalist who helped draw up the statement, said it grew out of an informal meeting held over the weekend and reflected accumulating fears.
''I have attended a meeting for journalists with the minister of interior in which he suggested that the news media should even stop criticizing the minister of health or any other minister,'' Mr. Balshy said in an interview. ''It shows the government's attitude toward the freedom of press.''
Private Egyptian television networks, most controlled by a small elite of moguls, have also vowed to avoid criticizing the government. ''Freedom of expression cannot ever justify belittling the Egyptian Army's morale,'' one network, Al Nahar, said in a statement last weekend. It suggested that topics like ''freedom, democracy or human rights'' may be ''used for the purpose of deception, to justify positions whose aim is to threaten national security.''
All the statements were made against the backdrop of escalating militant violence. Since the military takeover last year, Islamist militants based in Sinai have killed hundreds of Egyptian soldiers and police officers, and a fierce military crackdown there has so far failed to stop the attacks.
Since newspaper editors and owners of media outlets control the presses and the airwaves, the effect of the journalists' objections was unclear. Mr. Balshy said the journalists behind the statement planned to form a professional association to advocate freedom of expression. He is a board member of the official journalists' syndicate, but he said he had organized the drive on his own because other syndicate leaders had endorsed the editors' self-censorship.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/03/world/middleeast/egyptian-journalists-protest-editors-pledge-not-to-criticize-state.html

Load-Date: November 3, 2014


End of Document