Egypt- Khartoum welcomes USA intent to remove Sudan from terrorism list
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 24, 2020 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 521 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"New government of Sudan, which is making great progress, agreed to pay $335m to United States terror victims and families".
"Once deposited, I will lift Sudan from the State Sponsors of Terrorism list", he added.
Al-Bashir was toppled in a military coup previous year following mass protests, and a transitional government led by Hamdok was put in charge.
Sudan is now led by a three-year transitional government comprising the military after dictator Omar al-Bashir, 76, was finally toppled last year following mass protests.
Sudan always denied any involvement but agreed to the settlement to fulfil USA conditions for its delisting.
A US official told Reuters the delisting of Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism could begin the process of normalizing diplomatic relations between Sudan and Israel.
At least one protester in his 20s was shot dead and more than two dozen others wounded in Khartoum, according to the Sudan Doctors' Committee, which also campaigned for al-Bashir's ouster.
Check Out the PlayStation 5 Retail Box
These apps include Apple TV, Disney+, Netflix , Spotify, Twitch, YouTube , Amazon Prime Video, Hulu , MyCanal, Peacock, and more. In a blog post published this week, Sony has confirmed that the next-gen console will launch with a few popular streaming apps.
He said that the African country's year-old transitional government had agreed to pay a $335 million ((EURO)285 million) package to American victims of attacks and their relatives.
A number of writers and newspapers were optimistic about this step as a "diplomatic success" to be attributed to Prime Minister Abdullah Hamdok and his transitional government, considering it as a prelude to Sudan's return to the global community and reviving its troubled economy. "At long last, Justice for the American people and big step for Sudan", Trump tweeted. Nour, it was the main categories of Eritrean and Sudanese sanctions resulting from designation under these authorities include restrictions on USA foreign assistance; a ban on defense exports and sales; certain controls over exports of dual use items; and miscellaneous financial and other restrictions. That's not likely to happen, but Congress will have to resolve ongoing claims against Sudan in legislation that re-establishes its "legal peace" - a legal term that means as a sovereign country, it can not be sued. In late September, mostly Arabic-speaking Mulsim-majority Sudan said it would not accept tying its removal from the terrorist sponsors list to normalizing relations with Israel. An agreement to resolve those issues fell apart last month, sources told ABC News at the time.
The US's terror blacklist was established in 1979 for countries that "repeatedly provided support for acts of worldwide terrorism", according to the State Department website.
"Thank you so much, President Trump!"
Rapprochement between Israel and another Arab country would give Trump a new diplomatic achievement as he seeks re-election on November 3.
Aldin also denied reports that Sudan had accepted a USA condition to normalise relations with Israel in exchange for its removal from the terror blacklist.

Load-Date: October 24, 2020


End of Document