Egypt urges Arafat to speak with clear voice on Israel
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
December 5, 1988, Monday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 12
Length: 660 words
Byline: By Jane Friedman, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Cairo
Body


As the UN General Assembly prepares to go to Geneva Dec. 13 for Yasser Arafat's speech, pressure is building on the PLO leader to go further than the Palestine National Council in clearly recognizing Israel and in renouncing terrorism.
Mr. Arafat arrived in Cairo yesterday for the latest in a series of strategy consultations with Egyptian leaders in the wake of the PNC's November meeting in Algiers.
Egyptian officials are pressing the PLO chairman to be more explicit in Geneva on both the recognition and terrorism issues and to de-escalate the latest dispute with Washington, which was set off by Secretary of State George Shultz's refusal to grant Arafat a visa to address the Assembly in New York.
Osama Baz, adviser to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, says that the Geneva speech would be ''an opportunity to make his case clear in the most unambiguous terms.''
''Of course, we cannot dictate to Arafat what he is going to say,'' Baz adds, ''but we can give him our advice, and that is precisely what Egypt, Jordan, Iraq and many Arab countries are contacting the Palestinian leadership about.''
A foreign ministry official says, ''There's no need to escalate the conflict with the USA. We are telling him he must reap the fruits after the refusal of his visa. When he adopted this moderate line (at PNC in Algiers), he got all this international support. We have to keep that momentum going.''
On Nov. 15 in Algiers, the PNC declared an independent Palestinian state in Israeli-occupied territories. It also endorsed UN Resolutions 242 and 338 as bases for Mideast peace negotiations, resolutions that are considered to contain implicit recognition of Israel. The PNC also reaffirmed a 1985 declaration renouncing terrorism.
But the US administration, with whom the PLO would like to begin a dialogue, said the organization did not go far enough in recognizing Israel or in renouncing terrorism. Resolution 242 guarantees security for all states in the Mideast region, but does not explicitly mention Israel. The 1985 Cairo declaration renouncing terrorism did not include terrorist acts inside Israel.
One week after the US expressed its reservations, Mr. Shultz barred Arafat from New York and called him an ''accessory'' to terrorism. In a resounding rebuff to Shultz, the UN General Assembly last Friday voted to move the debate on Palestine to Geneva. Only the US and Israel voted against the resolution; Britain abstained.
Tahsin Bashir, an foreign policy adviser, says Egypt is urging Arafat to refer explicitly to Israel in his Geneva speech. Cairo also wants him to announce a PLO commitment that, at the outset of peace negotiations, it would both recognize Israel and suspend the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories. This would be done in return for Israel accepting the PLO as a negotiating partner and for an Israeli pledge to end political repression in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
''The Israelis would resort to normal peacekeeping and the Palestinians would stop violence against Israelis,'' Bahsir explained. ''And I believe Arafat will accept this.''
An end to Israeli repression in the territories would presumably have to include the release of political prisoners, an end to nighttime searches and the blowing up of Palestinian homes, the right to free assembly, and an end to deportation.
Informed Egyptian sources say that Arafat had already written a speech tailored to New York, but is now revising it. The speech will open, they say, ''with the American position towards his visa'' and a plea to the new US administration to be fair to the Palestinians. Arafat is not likely to reply to Shultz's allegations.
Egyptian officials say they will not advise Arafat on how to dress for the speech. The PLO leader shocked the West in 1974 when he addressed the Assembly with a gun holster at his hip.
''A long time ago we advised him to remove his beard,'' said one Egyptian official, ''but we won't advise him now about his image.''

Graphic

 
Picture, Arafat in Egypt for consultation, AP


End of Document