Egypt's finding on jet crash conflicts with others'; They've found no sign of terrorism, statement says
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 15, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 4
Length: 426 words
Byline: NOUR YOUSSEF

The Associated Press
Dateline: CAIRO  
Body


Egypt said Monday it has not yet found any sign of terrorism in the deadly Oct. 31 crash of a Russian passenger jet in the Sinai desert, a preliminary finding that conflicts with Russian, U.S. and British statements that they believed a bomb on the aircraft probably was to blame.
The vaguely worded Egyptian statement reflected the deep reluctance among government authorities to point to the possibility of a bomb, and the implication of lax security at the Sharm el-Sheikh airport, where the Metrojet plane took off.
The Airbus A321-200 broke apart 23 minutes after departing the Red Sea resort for St. Petersburg, killing all 224 people aboard. The crash led Russia to halt all flights to and from Egypt, while Britain suspended flights to and from the resort. The actions inflicted a heavy blow to Egypt's vital tourism industry.
Several officials involved in Egypt's investigation told The Associated Press that security gaps at the Sharm el-Sheikh airport were making finding a culprit more difficult, including poor video surveillance and the number of people who could enter the facility with only limited searches.Soon after the crash, the U.S. and Britain said the plane probably was brought down by a bomb, in part citing chatter among militants in Sinai. On Nov. 17, Moscow also announced a bomb was to blame, saying its tests had founds traces of TNT on luggage, personal effects and fragments of the plane. In response, Egyptian Prime Minister Sherif Ismail said only that his country would bear in mind the Russian conclusion.
A local affiliate of the Islamic State group claimed responsibility and released an online photo of what it said was the bomb used to bring the plane down - a soft-drink can packed with explosives with wires that appeared to be a kind of detonator.Chief investigator Ayman el-Muqadam, the head of Egypt's main investigation, run by the Civil Aviation Ministry, said its inquiry so far has found no evidence of any illegal or terrorist act.
The ministry-led investigation, in which Russia and several other countries are taking part, has so far focused on technical aspects of the plane, including analyzing cockpit voice and flight data recorders. The prosecutor's office has a separate inquiry involving the Interior Ministry, which is supposed to determine whether a criminal act took place.But two officials involved in the investigations said Egyptian police had run their own tests of wreckage that had come up positive for traces of explosives, and that the results were received even before Ismail made his comments.

Load-Date: December 15, 2015


End of Document