EGYPT BATTLES TERRORISM - BADLY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 4, 1995, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B; EDITORIAL
Length: 471 words
Body


On two fronts that may stem from similar frustrations, the Egyptian government is under violent attack by Muslim extremists. In the first case, on Nov. 19 a suicide bomber, apparently culled from a gang called the Islamic Group, drove a vehicle laden with explosives into the Egyptian embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan. Two blasts followed, the second greater than the first. The toll: 15 people dead, including four Egyptian citizens; about 60 injured; and the prestige of the Arab world's largest country and the United States' closest Arab ally.
The terrorist attack on the embassy marks a distinct escalation in assaults on a country that is nominally secular, ruled by an authoritarian president and parliamentary system and superficially on the side of progress as defined by the West. Egypt also is widely known as a corrupt plutocracy where friends of the president do well and many millions of Egyptians are left to fend for themselves in a very rough environment. The overwhelming victory of the National Democratic Party in the present parliamentary elections, amid charges of ballot-box stuffing and other irregularities, lends the impression that the electoral system also is corrupt.
If Egypt has become a target beyond its borders for terrorist activities, the consequences for its security around the world could be serious. Embassies, ambassadors, peace with Israel and the alliance with the United States - all are subject to violent attack. A major problem is that President Hosni Mubarak, who took over after Anwar Sadat was murdered in 1981, is not imaginative about reforming his country to benefit the poor in a society burdened by a small middle class and a festering problem with Islamic extremists.
Case in point is the second front: Domestic terror and Islamic extremism are never-ending headaches for the Mubarak government. For several years, its response has been to kill or lock up indefinitely the leaders and followers of radical groups that want to overthrow the ruling order. The latest such effort came recently, when members of the outlawed but usually tolerated Muslim Brotherhood were tried and convicted for acts against the state. Fifty-four members got from three to five years at hard labor; 28 were acquitted. At the end of the trial, the defendants chanted ominously: "The Koran is our constitution; the prophet is our leader; holy war is our way; death for the sake of God is our most valued hope."
Such words should send a shiver through Mr. Mubarak. Though the brotherhood has given governments grief for decades, it cannot be ignored. Nor can it be suppressed indefinitely. Only the kind of social reform that wipes out poverty, ignorance and corruption can take away the brotherhood's fertile ground for recruiting and action. In Egypt, such reform, unfortunately, is as remote as ever.

Load-Date: December 4, 1995


End of Document