Egyptian with UI ties held in probe;
 Former student also connected to Islamic group suspected;
 of supporting terrorism, investigators say
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 14, 2003 Friday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 874 words
Byline: Bill Morlin, Staff writer
Body


A second Middle Eastern suspect with ties to the University of Idaho has
 been arrested by FBI agents investigating a suspected terrorist web.
 Former UI student Bassem K. Khafagi was arrested earlier this year in a
 hotel near New York's LaGuardia Airport and has been returned to Michigan to
 face bank fraud charges, authorities confirmed Thursday.
 Khafagi and current University of Idaho student Sami Omar Al-Hussayen both
 are affiliated with the Islamic Assembly of North America, public records
 show.
 Federal investigators allege the nonprofit organization, which says it was
 formed to promote Islam, funneled money to activities supporting terrorism.
Investigators also have identified a third former University of Idaho
 student, who now lives in Detroit, as an associate of IANA. He has not been
 charged.
 IANA is affiliated with Help the Needy, another nonprofit organization
 based in New York, also under investigation by the FBI. Four Arab men are
 accused of raising $2.7 million for unnamed individuals in Iraq through Help
 the Needy.
 A former Washington State University student, Ismail Diab, who lived in
 Moscow, Idaho, as recently as last August, is being held as a material witness
 in the Help the Needy investigation, sources say.
 Khafagi and Al-Hussayen are being held on suspicion of violating U.S.
 immigration laws while awaiting separate trials on federal fraud charges.
 Al-Hussayen, a Saudi national, was arrested in Moscow in late February,
 about a month after Khafagi's arrest. Al-Hussayen is being held in Boise on
 charges of visa fraud and lying to federal agents.
 His attorneys and friends in Moscow strongly dispute the government's
 contention that Al-Hussayen has led a life on the fringes of terrorism. They
 say he's a peace-loving family man who deplored the violence of Sept. 11,
 2001.
 But investigators and private researchers say Al-Hussayen and IANA provided
 Web sites for two radical Saudi sheiks, Salman Al-Awdah and Safar al-Hawali,
 who have direct contact with Osama bin Laden.
 ''IANA has become a glorified al Qaeda recruitment center," according to a
 report posted on the Internet by the SITE Institute, a nonprofit research
 group based in Washington, D.C.
 ''For the most part, IANA has attempted to mask its vitriolic propaganda,
 publishing its most-radical content solely in Arabic," the SITE report said.
 The SITE Institute is composed of private researchers working for families
 of victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States.
 IANA operated more than a dozen Internet sites, many of them managed by
 Al-Hussayen.
 ''Backed with copious Saudi funding, IANA has created a series of Web sites
 respected by al Qaeda members from around the world," the SITE report said.
 Khafagi and Al-Hussayen, investigators allege, had contact with the two
 radical sheiks, jailed for a time in Saudi Arabia. The sheiks' phone numbers
 were listed in an address book seized from Al-Hussayen's Moscow apartment.
 The sheiks received telephone calls from Mounir el Motassadeq, recently
 convicted in Germany of assisting hijackers who carried out the Sept. 11
 attacks.
 The FBI says al-Hawali also is linked to an al Qaeda cell responsible for
 the 1998 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Kenya.
 ''It's an unbelievable web we're following," one FBI agent familiar with
 the Khafagi and Al-Hussayen investigations said.
 Khafagi, an Egyptian national, enrolled at the University of Idaho in 1986
 and earned a master's degree in civil engineering in August 1988, school
 officials say.
 His speciality was structural engineering.
 His master's thesis, on file at the university's library, was on the
 ''design and reliability of pre-stressed girders" such as those used in
 high-rise buildings and bridges.
 After getting his degree, Khafagi remained enrolled at the university in
 Moscow. He worked as a teaching assistant in the engineering college and took
 post-graduate classes from the fall of 1988 through the spring of 1990,
 records show.
 He moved from North Idaho to East Lansing, Mich., where he enrolled at
 Michigan State University in the fall of 1990, MSU records show.
 He received his doctorate in civil engineering, specializing in structural
 engineering, in 1993.
 But Khafagi was not working in the engineering field at the time of his
 arrest.
 He was community affairs director of the Council on American-Islamic
 Relations, based in Washington, D.C. He lectured last fall at the Muslim
 Center of New York, according to a report in Newsday.
 Khafagi was a founding member of the Islamic Assembly of North America,
 which was incorporated in 1993 and is now based in Michigan, public records
 show.
 His student visa expired in July 2001. He had been living in Virginia and
 was illegally in the United States at the time of his arrest, authorities say.
 The CAIR organization, researchers say, is affiliated with the Islamic
 Association of Palestine.
 IAP activities are now under scrutiny following the arrest of one of its
 founders, Sami al-Arian, a computer engineering professor at the University of
 South Florida.
 Al-Arian faces federal charges for aiding suicide bombings in Israel and
 the Palestinian territories. The FBI says he has served as a leader of the
 Palestinian Islamic Jihad terrorist organization.

Load-Date: March 15, 2003


End of Document