Egypt Detains More Than 200 In Attacks on Tourist Industry
The New York Times
May 2, 2005 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 637 words
Byline: By MONA EL-NAGGAR and HASSAN M. FATTAH; Mona el-Naggar reported from Cairo for this article, and Hassan M. Fattah from Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Dateline: CAIRO, May 1 
Body


Egyptian authorities swept through villages on the outskirts of Cairo on Sunday, detaining more than 200 people after attacks on Saturday that left seven people wounded and three attackers dead. 
 The police said most of the detainees, from the neighboring villages of Ammar and Ezbet al-Gabalawi north of Cairo, were being investigated for connection to local terrorist networks. Government officials said the three dead attackers -- Ehab Yousri Yassin; his sister, Negat Yassin; and his fiancee, Iman Ibrahim Khamis -- were from the area, The Associated Press reported. 
 Authorities said Mr. Yassin, who was a suspect in a deadly bombing April 7 at Cairo's main bazaar, had been spotted by security officers and chased into a central tourist area Saturday afternoon. He then leaped from a bridge behind the popular Egyptian Museum and blew himself up, wounding three Egyptians, an Israeli couple, a Swedish man and an Italian woman. 
 Less than two hours later, two veiled women, whom security officials later identified as Ms. Yassin and Ms. Khamis, attacked a tour bus packed with Israeli tourists near Cairo's Citadel, firing several shots at the bus but not hitting anyone.
 Ms. Yassin then shot and killed Ms. Khamis and then herself, the authorities said, ending what was believed to be the first instance of a terrorist attack by a woman in Egypt. 
 On Sunday, Egyptian officials sought to allay fears that the violence was part of a new wave of terrorism aimed at the country's tourism industry. 
 In the mid-1990's, a wave of attacks against tourists by militant Islamic groups resulted in a harsh crackdown throughout the country. In the worst incident, in 1997, militants opened fire on tourists in Luxor, killing 58 foreigners and 4 Egyptians.
 Unlike those attacks, officials said, the latest incidents were committed by a small militant cell of only eight people; seven of them have either been captured or are dead. 
 The police said that two suspects in the April 7 bazaar bombing, Asharaf Saeed Youssif and Gamal Ahmed Abdul Aal, were detained Saturday and that officers were closing in on Mr. Yassin before he fled and detonated his bomb.
 Officials said the deaths of Ms. Yassin and Ms. Khamis left only one other suspect in the bazaar bombing: Mr. Yassin's brother, Muhammad, who was still at large. 
 Two militant groups, the Mujahedeen of Egypt and the Abdullah Azzam Brigades, claimed responsibility in the attacks on Saturday, but it was unclear whether the attackers had any links to the groups. Some analysts say the incident reflects a growing trend away from attacks by large and politically oriented groups.
 ''Before, we had political organizations that had a military arm. Now we seem to have groups of just martyrs'' without a clear agenda, said Abdel Monem Said, director of the Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies. ''This is a new kind of terrorism by small groups, committed in a primitive way.'' 
 While the attacks threaten Egypt's tourist season, they may also have a notable effect on the opposition's campaign to lift the country's state of emergency laws, Mr. Said said. 
 ''There has been pressure to lift emergency laws, which were meant to fight terrorism, but now there is terrorism again,'' he said. ''Some people are saying we should wait before we lift them; others are arguing that the emergency laws have not stopped the terrorism at all.'' 
 In an official statement issued Sunday, the opposition party Al Ghad said the attacks were a result of an ''environment of oppression and depression'' caused by the state of emergency in Egypt. 
 In recent months, growing protests by Egypt's opposition movement have called for the lifting of the emergency laws, which have been in place since the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981.                                 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 2, 2005


End of Document