Egyptians buoy army
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
July 27, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 715 words
Byline: by Betsy Hiel
Body


CAIRO -- Huge crowds on Friday heeded a general's call to oppose "violence and terrorism," a sign that Egypt's military remains popular and potent three weeks since deposing a president. 
Prosecutors said they are investigating ousted leader Mohamed Morsy on charges of espionage, murder and kidnapping. 
Lt.Gen. Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the army's chief and Egypt's defense minister, called for a nationwide demonstration to give the army and police a clear public mandate. 
Hundreds of thousands did so, filling the capital's Tahrir Square and mobbing the main presidential palace. The turnout nationally was estimated as in the millions. 
Many hailed Sisi as a national hero. 
Morsy's supporters from the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamist parties held competing rallies, and only minor scuffles were reported in this city of more than 20 million. 
In coastal Alexandria, however, clashes killed five and injured about 150. 
"We are all here to support what Sisi is doing to alleviate terrorism," said Samar Kandil as she walked with her family to a pro-military rally at the presidential palace. 
The homemaker said, "The army and the people are here to save Egypt from any kind of conspiracy," adding that she is not afraid of the Brotherhood or "anybody else who is a terrorist." 
At the palace and in Tahrir Square, demonstrators held signs praising the military and urging it to "save" the country from the Brotherhood. They waved national flags and posters of the general. 
Children and young men wore Sisi masks; men wore T-shirts with his photo and the words, "Your sons authorize you against terrorism." A kite with Sisi's likeness sailed overhead. 
One man's sign portrayed Sisi and former Presidents Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat, both soldiers, too, as "The falcons of the Arabs, the leaders of Egypt." 
Army helicopters flew low overhead to the delight of the cheering, whistling crowds. Young men rushed to snatch Egyptian flags dropped from the craft. 
But Brotherhood protesters scornfully chanted "We don't want flags, we want Morsy" and "Down with military rule!" when helicopters hovered over them. 
The unabashed support for Sisi is not altogether surprising -- although what he intends to do with his sudden popularity is unclear. 
The military has long been Egypt's most-respected institution. After a 2011 revolution toppled another regime, its popularity suffered only briefly when it bloodily repressed continued protests. 
When Morsy and the Brotherhood took power in 2012, street crime and other lawlessness escalated. And since Morsy's ouster, political unrest has claimed the lives of more than 200 people and injured thousands -- leaving Egyptians weary, afraid and desperate for security. 
Al Azhar, Egypt's center of Islamic teaching, and the Coptic Christian church endorsed the general's call for demonstrations. 
Despite the deep political divisions, all sides seem unified against the United States. 
In Tahrir Square, one man held a poster of President Obama with an Islamic fundamentalist's beard and the words: "A message from the Egyptian people to Obama, stop supporting terrorism." 
At a Brotherhood rally, demonstrators accused the Obama administration of abandoning the democratically elected Morsy. "Why are Americans agreeing with the coup?" one man asked. 
"Please tell Obama, we love our Sisi," said Shahinaz Ahmed, 36, an art director. "We support Sisi to fight against terrorism in the Sinai. Every day we lose our best people from the army there. Every day here there is violence." 
She said she hopes soldiers sweep Brotherhood protesters off the streets. 
Indeed, the Interior Ministry announced it would clear two Brotherhood sit-ins in the capital "soon" and in a "legal" manner, according to the government daily Al Ahram. 
Earlier in the day, Egyptian authorities said they are investigating charges that Morsy conspired with Hamas, the militant Palestinian organization, and other Islamists on a 2011 prison escape. He and about 30 other Brotherhood members were freed when Hamas gunmen attacked the prison northwest of Cairo, killing 14 guards. 
The case includes murder and kidnapping allegations. 
Morsy has been held incommunicado since he was deposed July 3. 
Betsy Hiel is the Tribune-Review's foreign correspondent. Email her at bhiel@tribweb.com 

Load-Date: July 29, 2013


End of Document