Egyptian envoy killed, al-Qaida says
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 8, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 645 words
Byline: Bassem Mroue The Associated Press
Body


BAGHDAD, Iraq - Al-Qaida's wing in Iraq claimed Thursday that it has killed Egypt's top envoy, who was abducted by gunmen last weekend, and warned that it will go after "as many ambassadors as we can" to punish countries that support Iraq's U.S.-backed leadership.
Iraq's chief government spokesman said the killing and Thursday's bombings in London show that terrorism "is not only targeting Iraqis, but everyone." An Egyptian official in Cairo said Egypt temporarily will close its mission here and has recalled its staff.
The country's president, meanwhile, called for a "war of annihilation" against foreign Islamic extremists as at least eight people were killed in violence Thursday.
The announcement from Iraq's most feared terrorist group appeared on an al-Qaida-linked Web site and featured a brief video showing the blindfolded diplomat, Ihab al-Sherif, wearing a polo shirt. The video did not show his death, but the statement promised more details later.
"We announce in the name of al-Qaida in Iraq that the verdict of God against the ambassador of the infidels, the ambassador of Egypt, has been carried out. Thank God," a written statement in posting said, adding "Iraq is no longer safe for the infidels."
The Iraqi foreign ministry offered condolences for the "assassination" and an Egyptian diplomat who spoke to Egyptian reporters in Cairo said government officials were sure "from our own means" that al-Sherif was dead. He spoke on condition of anonymity and did not elaborate.
News of the killing marked a dramatic escalation in a campaign to discourage Arab and Muslim governments from sending ambassadors and strengthening ties with Iraq, as Washington wants. Last month, Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari announced that Egypt would be the first Arab country to upgrade its diplomatic representation by appointing a full-fledged ambassador.
Government spokesman Laith Kubba said the apparent killing coupled with the explosions Thursday against the subway and a double-decker bus in London, which killed at least 37 people and wounded hundreds, "confirms that terrorism in not only targeting Iraqis but everyone."
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak insisted that his country will continue to support Iraq.
"This terrorist act will not deter Egypt from its firm position in support of Iraq and its people," the statement said. Al-Sherif "lost his life at the hands of terrorism that trades in Islam but knows no nation and no religion."
Al-Sherif, 51, was seized Saturday in Baghdad. Three days later, gunmen fired on senior envoys from Pakistan and Bahrain, two Muslim nations with close ties to the United States, in apparent kidnap attempts.
In its latest statement, al-Qaida said it did not announce al-Sherif's kidnapping until after the subsequent attacks "to be able to capture as many ambassadors as we can."
In Najaf, President Jalal Talabani, a Kurd, called for a "war of annihilation" against al-Qaida and other groups that include foreign Islamic extremists.
"They have declared a war of annihilation against Iraqis, Shiites and Kurds, as well as Sunni Arabs who don't agree with their acts," he said. "Let us launch a war of annihilation against foreign criminals who came from abroad to fight the Iraqi people."
Iraqi officials, meanwhile, sought to assure foreign governments that their diplomats will be safe. Officials said al-Sherif, a former deputy ambassador to Israel, was grabbed in a dangerous neighborhood while traveling without armed escorts.
"All Arab and Muslim states are invited to prove their seriousness in fighting terrorism by sending their ambassadors, which is a message in itself to show their keenness to in fighting terrorism," the Iraqi Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
According to the Iraqi Foreign Ministry Web site, there are 46 foreign missions in Iraq, including 14 from predominantly Arab or Muslim countries.

Load-Date: July 9, 2005


End of Document