Eight arrested in British terror raids;
Half-ton of fertilizer taken; Muslims decry publicity
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 31, 2004 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 594 words
Byline: DON MELVIN
Body


London --- Hundreds of British police raided sites across southeast England on Tuesday, arresting eight terrorism suspects and seizing half a ton of a fertilizer that can be used to make bombs.
The eight men, between the ages of 17 and 32, were all British citizens. News reports said they were Muslims of Pakistani descent but police would not comment.
Cox International Correspondent
The men were arrested on suspicion of being involved in committing, preparing or instigating terrorist acts. Under British anti-terrorism laws, they can be held for up to 14 days without charges being filed.
The fertilizer, which was found in a rental storage unit in West London, was ammonium nitrate, a common compound that can be turned into an explosive. It is believed to have been used in the attack on the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1998, the terrorist bombing in Bali in 2002 and recent terrorist attacks in Turkey.
Two and a half tons of ammonium nitrate were used in the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people.
The anti-terrorism operation Tuesday, which involved 700 police officers in 24 raids, was Britain's largest in recent years. And the half-ton of ammonium nitrate, discovered in a 6-foot-tall plastic bag, was the largest seizure of explosive materials in the United Kingdom since the Irish Republican Army called off its bombing campaign in 1997.
Britain's Home Secretary, David Blunkett, said the arrests provided "a timely reminder that the [United Kingdom] and its interests abroad remain a target."
Still, it was unclear Tuesday what kind plot may have been afoot; what links, if any, the suspects had to international terrorist organizations; and what the targets might have been.
Peter Clarke, Britain's national anti-terrorism coordinator, said the operation was not linked to the March 11 commuter train bombings in Madrid, which killed nearly 200 people. Nor, he said, was it linked to Irish republican terrorism. And he said there had been no danger to the public.
Although some of the suspects were arrested near each of London's two major international airports --- Heathrow and Gatwick --- police would not comment on whether that was significant or what, if any, the target was.
Although police did not identify the men in custody by religion or ethnicity, the chairman of the Islamic Human Rights Commission complained about the publicity surrounding the arrests, saying it "demonized" the Muslim community.
"These raids are usually given a lot of importance when they are taking place," Massoud Shadjareh said. "But when people are released without charge, it is not news."
Clarke would not comment on the men and said only that police were aware that the "overwhelming majority" of Muslims are law-abiding people who reject all forms of violence.
Britain, one of the United States' closest allies, has been on heightened alert since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in New York and Washington. Alarm in this country increased further after this month's terrorist bombings in Spain, another of the United States' allies in the invasion of Iraq.
Sir John Stevens, Britain's most senior police officer, warned this month that an attack on Britain is "inevitable" --- although Blunkett, his superior, disagreed.
Meanwhile, Clarke on Tuesday called on Britons to be vigilant.
"Today's operation is part of continuing and extensive inquiries by police and the security service into alleged international terrorist activity," Clarke said. "And I must stress that the threat from terrorism remains very real. The public must remain watchful and alert."

Graphic

 
Photo: A police officer stands by as forensics officers prepare to enter a house Tuesday in Crawley, West Sussex, England, following raids in which eight terrorism suspects were arrested. / GARETH FULLER / Associated Press

Load-Date: March 31, 2004


End of Document