EIGHT YEAS OF PHILIPPINE ACHIEVEMENT
The New York Times
July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 360 words
Body


To the Editor:
 The articles on the Philippines by John B. Oakes (July 4, 5 and 6) are so unbalanced and so vicious that one wonders what ax he has to grind beyond a liberal's concern about conditions in my country. It is impossible to refute Mr. Oakes point by point within the limited space of a letter to the editor, so I shall merely make a general statement. t the very least, an impartial observer of the Philippine scene must draw a parallel between the conditions obtaining in 1972 and the present. In September 1972, when President Marcos invoked his constitutional power to declare martial law, the country was in chaos; civil disorder and terrorism were rampant; the legislature was impotent; there was no coherent program to alleviate the plight of the masses; foreign policy was hostage to ''special relations,'' foreign trade was limited to traditional products. And at that time, oil was not yet a crisis commodity.
AN-A
The last eight years have brought about the following developments: * At the political grassroots, the Barangay was institutionalized as a base for participatory democracy to insure the fullest development of self-reliant communities. On the national level, the Interim Batasang Pambansa (I.B.P.) is functioning as transitional parliament.
* Despite the substantial increase in oil prices, the Philippine economy continues to grow, although now at a pace slower than that in 1978. Agriculture, construction and manpower-based services were the main sources of economic strength. Dislocation in the international economy and adverse prices for traditional exports have led to diversification and the search for new markets.
* Proper nutrition levels, population control and modern hospital facilities form an integral part of the Government's health-delivery system, whose impact would be most felt in the rural areas.
Much has been achieved but much remains to be done (regrettably, it can neither be done overnight nor to Mr. Oakes's satisfaction).  President Marcos is aware of this, and the people, to whom he is accountable, support him in his efforts.  ERNESTO C. PINEDA Consul General of the Philippines New York, July 7, 1980


End of Document