Election Update: How Will They Handle Terrorism?
Horizons: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
September 28, 2016 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FINAL-APPROACH; Pg. 1
Length: 609 words
Byline: Wesley Stine
Body


According to the Pew Research Center, terrorism ranks second only to the economy among issues that matter most to this year's voters. Watch the news even briefly and you'll see why. So it's only natural that one of the most common questions asked about the two presidential nominees is "How will they handle terrorism?"
Upon hearing of last weekend's bombing, Donald Trump's response was blunt. "I should be a newscaster because I called it before the news," he said. "This is something that will happen, perhaps, more and more all over the country," Trump said, "[b]ecause we've been weak. Our country's been weak."
Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, has a more conventional way of talking about the Islamic State. "Defeating ISIS will be one of the most important challenges facing our next Commander-in-Chief," she says. "I've laid out a three-part plan to take on this urgent threat.
"First, take out ISIS's stronghold in Iraq and Syria. To do that, we have to intensify the air campaign against its fighters, leaders, and infrastructure... Second, dismantle the global network that supplies ISIS with money, arms, propaganda, and fighters... Third, harden our defenses and build our resilience at home."
Criticism of Secretary Clinton's terrorism policy rests on the fact that it was mainly during her time leading the State Department that the Middle East reached its present condition. The Obama administration's response to the Islamic State is seen by many Americans as inadequate, and concerned voters believe that if they elect Clinton, they'll see four more years turning out like the last four, which went like this:
October (2015) - 224 killed in bombing of Russian airliner.
November - 137 dead after horrific nightlong massacre in Paris.
December - 14 killed in San Bernardino shooting spree.
January (2016) - 13 tourists shot to death in downtown Istanbul.
February - 60 killed in bombing of Nigerian refugee camp.
March - 35 dead after airport bombing in Brussels, Belgium.
April - 18 Filipino soldiers killed in battle with Abu Sayyaf, a local terror group loyal to ISIS.
May - 123 people killed in string of car bombings near Russian bases in Syria.
June - 49 killed in Orlando nightclub massacre. 41 dead after Istanbul airport bombings.
July - 84 killed, including an 11-year-old Texan boy, in Nice truck massacre. 15 wounded in suicide bombing at German wine bar. French priest beheaded while leading mass.
August - 12-year-old suicide bomber kills 54 people at Kurdish wedding.
September - 29 wounded in New York pressure-cooker bombing. Nine wounded in Minnesota mall stabbing spree, which ends with attacker shot dead by concealed-carry advocate Jason Falconer.
At this point, voters can see that the only alternative to the status quo is to elect Trump. Not that the Republican doesn't have his own problems. Unlike Clinton, Trump is loath to lay out specifics, claiming at times that it's best for nobody to know his plan, though there's plenty of room to suspect he just doesn't have one. Still, when he says things like what follows, many Americans like what they hear:
"We're hitting them every once in awhile. We're hitting them in certain places. We're being very gentle about it. We have to be very tough and you have other countries who are getting devastated far more than we are and you have to get them together. It's called leadership. They have to fight. They have to fight the battle. The battle is over there. And we have to fight the battle and we can't let any more people come into this country."
In a year when voters are desperate for a change, Mr. Trump's attitude toward terrorism has become one of his chief selling points.

Load-Date: January 9, 2017


End of Document