Elite Iraqi troops in forefront when U.S. pulls back
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 26, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 488 words
Byline: By Qassim Abdul-zahra The Associated Press
Body


Baghdad » As Iraqi security services prepare to take back their towns from the Americans on Tuesday, the sharpest arrow in their quiver is an elite, American-trained force with a reputation that leads many Iraqis to call it "the dirty brigade."
Its real name is the Counter Terrorism Bureau, and its commander insists it's professional, nonsectarian and not dirty at all.
Violence is already rising and will likely continue after the handover as different factions test the government's ability to manage without American backup. But Kalib Shegati al-Kenani, the Iraqi Army general who heads the bureau, is confident his force can cope and that his country will not slide into renewed sectarian warfare.
The elite units, armed with high-tech U.S.-made equipment, often pair up with American special forces to go after Iraq's most wanted foes -- al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants alike.
They are thought to have been the main force that assisted the Americans during an offensive in Baghdad's Sadr City quarter last year to rout Shiite militias, and on operations targeting Sunni insurgents.
Formed soon after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, the force became known as the "Dirty Brigade" because it was secretive and until recently operated outside the Iraqi chain of command, reporting directly to its U.S. handlers.
It was so little known that it even was rumored to be used against the Shiite-dominated government's opponents in the political mainstream-- a charge denied by the Iraqis and the Americans.
Originally numbering about 4,500 members, it is reported to have doubled in size and now reports directly to Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.
"We are professional and not sectarian forces, and we bring together people from all sections of the population. Each member of the bureau signs a document vowing not to speak about sectarianism, partisan affairs and nationalities. Their commitment is only to Iraq," al-Kenani told The Associated Press in an interview this week.
Al-Kenani, a 59-year-old veteran of the eight-year Iran-Iraq War and the first Gulf War, is a Shiite, his deputy is a Sunni and one of his top generals is a Kurd.
The force has sought to reinforce its nonpartisan makeup by refusing to accept recruits who previously served in sectarian militias. Also, says Maj. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saedi, a senior commander, it "does not allow any minister or government official to enter its headquarters to prevent any interference in investigations and security operations." More motorcycles being used in attacks
Motorcycle bombs killed at least 20 people in separate attacks in Baghdad on Friday, at least 19 of them in a crowded bazaar, part of an apparent trend toward increased use of motorcycles to thwart stepped-up security measures. The attacks were the latest in a week of violence that has killed more than 250 people, with just four days to go before the deadline for U.S. combat troops to withdraw from cities.

Graphic

 
In this photo released by the U.S. military and taken on April 26, 2009, an Iraqi special operations soldier conducts a hostage rescue exercise in Baghdad, Iraq.The commander of Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Bureau feels that his elite American-trained special operations units can replace U.S. troops after they withdraw next week major urban areas and said he was confident his country will not again slip into sectarian warfare.The troops, disctinctive because of the high-tech U.S.-made equipment they carry, have made a reputation for themselves as the most highly trained and effective troops in the Iraqi arsenal, often pairing up with American special operations forces to go after Iraq's most wanted on all sides of the sectarian divide _ both al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants.(AP Photo/US Military, Capt. Tommy Avilucea)
In this photo released by the U.S. military and taken on April 26, 2009, Iraqi special operations forces conduct a hostage rescue exercise in Baghdad, Iraq. The commander of Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Bureau feels that his elite American-trained special operations units can replace U.S. troops after they withdraw next week major urban areas and said he was confident his country will not again slip into sectarian warfare.The troops, disctinctive because of the high-tech U.S.-made equipment they carry, have made a reputation for themselves as the most highly trained and effective troops in the Iraqi arsenal, often pairing up with American special operations forces to go after Iraq's most wanted on all sides of the sectarian divide _ both al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants.(AP Photo/US Military, Capt. Tommy Avilucea)
In this photo released by the U.S. military and taken on April 26, 2009, an Iraqi special operations soldier conducts a hostage rescue exercise in Baghdad, Iraq.The commander of Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Bureau feels that his elite American-trained special operations units can replace U.S. troops after they withdraw next week major urban areas and said he was confident his country will not again slip into sectarian warfare.The troops, disctinctive because of the high-tech U.S.-made equipment they carry, have made a reputation for themselves as the most highly trained and effective troops in the Iraqi arsenal, often pairing up with American special operations forces to go after Iraq's most wanted on all sides of the sectarian divide _ both al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants.(AP Photo/US Military, Capt. Tommy Avilucea)
In this handout photo released by the U.S. military and taken on April 26, 2009, Iraqi special operations forces conduct a hostage rescue exercise in Baghdad, Iraq. The commander of Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Bureau feels that his elite American-trained special operations units can replace U.S. troops after they withdraw next week major urban areas and said he was confident his country will not again slip into sectarian warfare.The troops, disctinctive because of the high-tech U.S.-made equipment they carry, have made a reputation for themselves as the most highly trained and effective troops in the Iraqi arsenal, often pairing up with American special operations forces to go after Iraq's most wanted on all sides of the sectarian divide _ both al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants.(AP Photo/US Military, Capt. Tommy Avilucea)
In this photo released by the U.S. military and taken on April 26, 2009, Iraqi special operations forces conduct a hostage rescue exercise in Baghdad, Iraq. The commander of Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Bureau feels that his elite American-trained special operations units can replace U.S. troops after they withdraw next week major urban areas and said he was confident his country will not again slip into sectarian warfare.The troops, disctinctive because of the high-tech U.S.-made equipment they carry, have made a reputation for themselves as the most highly trained and effective troops in the Iraqi arsenal, often pairing up with American special operations forces to go after Iraq's most wanted on all sides of the sectarian divide _ both al-Qaida extremists and Shiite militants.(AP Photo/US Military, Capt. Tommy Avilucea)

Load-Date: June 27, 2009


End of Document