Elk Grove native accused of plot Authorities say he planned to bomb Oklahoma churches
Chicago Daily Herald
October 7, 2012 Sunday


Copyright 2012 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 314 words
Byline: By Madhu Krishnamurthy , mkrishnamurthy@dailyherald.com,  By Madhu Krishnamurthy , mkrishnamurthy@dailyherald.com
Body


A former Elk Grove Village man has been arrested after police in Miami, Okla., said they found bomb-making materials and notes about destroying dozens of area churches.
Authorities on Friday charged 23-year-old Gregory Arthur Weiler II with possession of an explosive or incendiary device and violation of Oklahoma's anti-terrorism law.
Weiler's family members in Elk Grove Village could not be reached for comment Saturday.
The Oklahoman reported Weiler was being held without bail at the Ottawa County jail.
Miami police said the targets were churches in Ottawa County and that there were no further threats. An arrest affidavit says Miami police found detailed maps and torn-up notes that included a list of 48 churches in Weiler's motel room.
Police said empty bottles, duct tape and a gasoline can were found in the motel room.
It is unclear if Weiler has a lawyer.
FBI spokesman Rick Rains in Oklahoma City confirmed Saturday night the bureau has taken over investigation of the case, though Weiler is still being held by state authorities on local charges.
"We are not releasing anything further because our investigation is ongoing," Rains said. "They have turned that investigation over to us. It's certainly the norm that they would contact us. We're trying to determine whether or not there's federal violations."
Rains would not elaborate whether Weiler could be charged under federal anti-terrorism laws. Charges are likely from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Miami police also found a journal in Weiler's motel room. An entry read, "Self Promote for the next 4 years while beginning list of goals written out in Oklahoma having to do with destroying and removing church buildings from U.S. a tiny bit at a time — setting foundation for the years to follow," according to the arrest affidavit.
* The Associated Press and Oklahoman contributed to this
report.

Graphic

 
Oklahoman Gregory Arthur Weiler II

Load-Date: October 8, 2012


End of Document