Ellmers talks terrorism, Syrian refugee crisis
Sanford Herald (North Carolina)
December 10, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 Sanford Herald
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 696 words
Byline: Zach Potter, The Sanford Herald, N.C.
Body


Dec. 10--WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Sanford's voice in the U.S. House of Representatives, Republican Rep. Renee Ellmers, joined an overwhelming majority of House members from both parties this week in approving legislation that will, according to Ellmers, close a number of gaps in the United States Visa Waiver Program.
The Visa Waiver Program allows citizens from 38 countries to enter the United States for up to 90 days without having to apply for a visa, and Ellmers said the legislation aimed to disqualify foreigners with ties to "terrorist hot spots" from the program.
"There are 38 countries that participate with this program," Ellmers said Wednesday. "As you can imagine, that leaves us very vulnerable. There are individuals who could be coming from one of the countries that we know has terrorist ties, and they could simply go through one of those 38 countries and come to us without the need for a visa for 90 days."
In addition to closing the program to foreigners who have visited or been in contact with countries with known terrorist ties since 2011, the visa waiver reform bill, which passed 407-19 on Tuesday, allows the U.S. secretary of homeland security to revoke countries' participation in the program if they fail to share counter-terrorism information.
"If a particular country is not sharing counter-terrorism information," Ellmers said, "that becomes grounds for suspension [from the program]. ... It [also] requires all visa waiver countries to use fraud resistant e-passports that use biometric data. ... There are some countries that do not require passports to have those, and we are basically saying that unless you have this capability, you cannot participate in the Visa Waiver Program."
The visa waiver bill comes on the heels of the American Security Against Foreign Enemies Act of 2015, which passed in November with Ellmers's support and aims to temporarily stop the influx of refugees from Syria.
"We know there are thousands of refugees that are slated to come to the U.S. from Syria," Ellmers said. "And our top intelligence leaders are saying quite simply that we do not have the appropriate vetting process in place. ... Until those things are put in place, we simply cannot be accepting refugees into the country any more. There are some that are already here."
N.C. Rep. Robert Reives II, D-Lee, Harnett, said he is not well versed enough in the federal procedures regarding refugees to comment but agreed that the problem of how to deal with Syrian refugees is complicated.
"I don't know enough about how the federal program works to say what they can do to change or fix things," Reives said. "But I can say it's a huge problem, and I hope we really pay attention to it. I hope it doesn't become a partisan issue because it's a big issue for everyone."
N.C. Sen. Ronald Rabin (R-Lee, Harnett, Johnston) took what he called a hard-line approach to Syrian refugees.
"There is no doubt in my mind, because I am concerned with our security and our nation's security, that we should put a screeching halt to any Syrian refugee coming into this nation," Rabin said, "until we can put in place a solid vetting process, which we are told by our own federal officials is non-existent right now. There isn't any doubt that our enemies will use [the refugee crisis] as a vehicle for importing terrorism to this country."
N.C. Rep. Brad Salmon (D-Lee, Chatham) did not immediately return calls for comment.
Ellmers said she felt compelled to discuss Congress's anti-terrorism efforts after receiving numerous calls from residents of N.C.'s Second Congressional District, which includes Alamance, Chatham, Cumberland, Harnett, Hoke, Lee, Moore, Randolph and Wake counties, about what Congress is doing to bolster national security.
"The number-one purpose for the federal government, the number-one reason for me to be in office, is to protect the American people and the people of District 2," Ellmers said. " ... We have to do everything we can to be ready take [any and all] types of threats seriously."
___ (c)2015 The Sanford Herald (Sanford, N.C.) Visit The Sanford Herald (Sanford, N.C.) at www.sanfordherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 11, 2015


End of Document