Elzahabi charges are split into two cases
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 17, 2007 Tuesday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7B
Length: 289 words
Byline: Dan Browning, Staff Writer
Body


A federal judge in Minneapolis issued an order Monday that severs the two most serious charges pending against terrorism suspect Mohamed Kamal Elzahabi from three relatively minor immigration charges.
Elzahabi, a Lebanese national who has been in custody since 2004, faces three immigration counts alleging that he entered into a fraudulent marriage in 1984, then used the marriage to obtain a green card in 1986 and fraudulently obtained immigration documents to get jobs in Minnesota in 2001 and 2002.
Elzahabi also faces two more serious charges of making false statements to the FBI in April 2004. The government alleges that Elzahabi lied about his role in shipping radios and other telecommunications devices to Pakistan. And it accuses him of lying to investigators about helping a terrorism suspect obtain a driver's license.
U.S. District Judge John Tunheim sided with Minneapolis defense attorney Paul Engh, who argued that the false statement charges were distinct from the immigration counts and should be tried separately to avoid prejudicing a jury. Engh said in a recent letter to Tunheim that Elzahabi has already spent more time in custody than he would likely receive as a sentence if convicted of the immigration charges.
Tunheim "adopted our analysis, and for that we're grateful," Engh said Monday. "He removed an appellate issue, which is what judges do."
Elzahabi is scheduled for trial July 30. He also faces a hearing to determine whether he should be deported.
Jeffrey Paulsen, chief of the criminal division at the U.S. attorney's office in Minnesota, responded: "Although we stand by the arguments made in our pleadings, we respect the judge's decision and are prepared to try the case" on the immigration counts.

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document