EMERGENCY OFFICIALS GATHER FOR SEMINAR ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 1, 2001, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 423 words
Byline: M. FERGUSON TINSLEY, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


The possibility of a biological attack on the United States is a threat that needs to be taken seriously, two physicians said at an anti-terrorism conference yesterday.
The seminar, "Mitigating the Terrorist Threat," drew more than 600 emergency workers, law enforcement officers and other leaders to the Sheraton Inn Pittsburgh North in Cranberry.
Those attending belong to a 13-county regional anti-terrorism working group.
Dr. Thomas Stein, medical director at Allegheny General Hospital, and Dr. Michael Allswede, an emergency physician at UPMC Presbyterian, talked about why the program was important.
Allswede said a terrorist attack on the United States likely would involve biological weapons. That's because they are relatively easy to transport and hard to detect.
Allswede and Stein said a major danger to the American public would be an outbreak of smallpox, which Allswede said was developed by the ton in the former Soviet Union before its breakup.
He said danger exists because people have left Russia and moved to other countries, like Iraq, where terrorism is practiced.
"The bombing of Iraq's installations, as we did recently, reinforces the image of women and children being bombed and killed, whether it's true or not," Allswede said. "Which creates justification for the killing of American women and children [in the mind of the terrorist]."
Diseases like smallpox become potent weapons in the hands of terrorists because American medical schools no longer teach about its mitigation.
Allswede said the only option is quarantine. He said the seminar enlightened civic leaders to that reality.
Allswede said many within the counterculture who venerate figures like Timothy McVeigh will look at April 19 -- the day of the Oklahoma City bombing and the burning of the Branch Davidian compound -- and May 16 -- the day McVeigh is scheduled to be executed -- as red-letter days for terrorism.
Richard B. Lohr, emergency management coordinator for Somerset County, said the seminar would make people aware of the potential for terrorism.
"The key thing with terrorism is that it is not meant to destroy property. It is meant to destroy lives and is poised to destroy lives in mass quantities," he said.
Region 13 of the Anti-Terrorism Working Group includes the counties of Allegheny, Armstrong, Beaver, Butler, Cambria, Fayette, Greene, Indiana, Lawrence, Mercer, Somerset, Washington and Westmoreland. Pittsburgh is also an individual member. It was formed about 18 months ago with more than $ 1 million from several federal agencies.

Load-Date: March 1, 2001


End of Document