Emergency teams prepare for terrorism;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 21, 1999, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: FLORIDA/METRO,
Length: 425 words
Byline: JOHN WING, of The Tampa Tribune;
Body


TAMPA - Following recent threats of anthrax attacks in the Los Angeles area, law enforcement and  emergency response personnel are faced with a chilling reality. No longer is it a question of if an  act of chemical or biological terrorism will occur, but rather a matter of when and where.
And as domestic preparedness expert J. Peter Farlow said Thursday during a training session for  local emergency response units, no city is immune.
Farlow is a team coordinator for the Domestic Preparedness program, a federal initiative  designed to train local emergency response teams in incidents involving nuclear, biological and  chemical terrorism.
The key to successful response is being prepared, Farlow said.
According to Tampa Fire Rescue spokesman Bill Wade, more than 350 personnel from throughout  Hillsborough County were trained this week by the U.S. Army Soldier and Biological Chemical  Command. The courses, held at the Tampa Fire Academy, have raised awareness of the particular  challenges faced in responding to a chemical or biological threat, Wade said.
"The focus is on what kind of terrorist attack might occur and what types of items terrorists  might use," Wade said.
While Farlow said federal authorities once focused on preparing major metropolitan areas such as  New York and Washington, D.C., to fend off terrorist attacks, places like Tampa are now considered  equally appealing targets.
"Here in Tampa, there is MacDill Air Force Base, a major international airport, some large  stadiums and arenas," Farlow said. "Those are the types of things we're looking for people to attack.  It's a terrible cliche, but these people are looking for the most bang for their buck."
In addition to first-response training, the courses included instruction for medical personnel.  Michael Hunt, medical director for the Littleton, Colo., Fire Department, shared his experiences  helping victims of the Columbine High School shootings in April. Hunt said lives were saved in  Littleton because medical personnel responded appropriately.
"It was controlled chaos, but we are trained to deal with that," Hunt said. "We relied on what we  do on a daily basis, which is the whole idea behind domestic preparedness."
But Hunt said the threat of biological or chemical attacks poses frightening problems compared  with shootings or bombings.
"It's not easy, but with some diligence and background in chemistry, a high school student could  release something like anthrax," Hunt said. "If a scenario like that had occurred, the outcome would  have been much worse."

Notes

LOCAL FOCUS

Load-Date: May 22, 1999


End of Document