Emergency crews prepare for attacks;
Drills in St. Paul focus on handling terrorism here
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 22, 1999, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 444 words
Byline: Heron Marquez Estrada; Staff Writer
Body


The Twin Cities continued to prepare for the unthinkable on Wednesday as hundreds of firefighters, police officers and paramedics received training in St. Paul to deal with nuclear, biological or chemical terrorist attacks.
     The training, conducted by the U.S. Army Soldier and Biological Chemical Command, is part of a national effort to provide hands-on exercises to the largest 120 cities in the country this year.
     The federal government is spending about $130 million to train emergency personnel throughout the country. St. Paul is the 61st city to receive the training. Participants came from as far as Rochester and Duluth.
   "They'll come out of this better prepared," Jim Warrington, director of the Army unit conducting the training, said Wednesday before several demonstrations at the St. Paul Fire Department training center.
     Warrington said one of the things setting St. Paul apart is the number of nurses, doctors and hospitals taking part. This week, he said, about 150 nurses and physicians are being trained.
     "That's a good sign for St. Paul," he said.
     The training is intended to teach people new methods to detect chemical agents, how to use more sophisticated equipment and how to plan for a terrorist attack. Warrington and others said the idea is for participants from the Twin Cities and greater Minnesota to return to their departments and educate others.
     The Fire Department expects to have its firefighters and paramedics trained by the end of the year, Assistant Fire Chief Al Bataglia said.
     Although most everyone believes that a nuclear, biological or chemical attack on the Twin Cities isn't imminent, Warrington and others said Wednesday that such an attack is more and more likely somewhere in the United States.
     "Let's hope we don't have to deal with a biological attack," Deputy Mayor Susan Kimberly said. "The reality is that it could happen here. So we have to be prepared."
     This week's training, which concludes Friday with an exercise meant to have participants simulate an attack and their responses, comes on the heels of a catastrophe exercise that Ramsey and Hennepin counties conducted last month.
     That exercise, involving a fake sarin gas attack, took up the entire day as hundreds of volunteers, firefighters and paramedics sought to evaluate how Minneapolis and St. Paul would handle an attack.
     Bataglia said the counties are working to conclude a report of that exercise to see how responses can be improved. Among the expected changes, he said Wednesday, is making the communications center bigger to handle more people and adding phones to avoid busy signals and delays.
      

Load-Date: July 24, 1999


End of Document