Emergency responders talk about preparation
Daily Gazette (Sterling, Illinois)
June 28, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 Daily Gazette
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 368 words
Byline: Emily K. Coleman, Daily Gazette, Sterling, Ill.
Body


June 28--DIXON -- The money is just not there, Illinois Emergency Management Agency officials told area emergency responders Wednesday.
As the Sept. 11 attacks move further into the past and the state faces growing budget problems, money to buy equipment is dwindling.
The emergency services coordinator for Winnebago County, Dennis Lolli, remembers a similar spike and subsequent lull after the Cuban Missile Crisis, he told a gathering of first responders, health services representatives and others.
The group was brainstorming for the state's updated homeland security strategy, going over their successes over the last 10 years, their goals for the next 10 years and the impediments to meeting those goals.
The state is among the best in terms of its homeland security preparedness, IEMA Assistant Director Joe Klinger said, and it wants to keep it that way.
A lack of money, Illinois Terrorism Task Force Chairman Don Kauerauf said, is the obvious roadblock.
He had already written it on the oversized white paper he was keeping notes on before turning and asking the group for ideas.
As entities cope with tighter budgets at local levels, they're expected to deal with more issues, said Julie VanMelkebeke, the emergency preparedness coordinator for Mercer County.
The focus has changed, she said, from terrorism to a broader range of issues, including medical issues and natural disasters.
Despite this, ILEAS Regional Planning Coordinator Robert Springer said, some teams are so specialized and the events they've been trained to respond to haven't happened and aren't likely to.
Training needs to be interdisciplinary and usable in different situations, he said.
The consensus by the end of the 3-hour session in Dixon's Loveland Community Building: The No. 1 priority is maintaining equipment and personnel, and finding new funding sources such as the zero-interest loans fire departments get from the state.
These ideas will be combined by the IEMA with those submitted at other town hall meetings into a final presentation for a September summit in Springfield.
___ (c)2012 the Daily Gazette (Sterling, Ill.) Visit the Daily Gazette (Sterling, Ill.) at www.saukvalley.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: June 29, 2012


End of Document