Emerson Begolly to plead guilty in terrorism case
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
August 3, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 446 words
Byline: Brian Bowling
Body


An Armstrong County man indicted on terrorism-related charges in  Virginia and assault charges in Pittsburgh will plead guilty to at least  one of the terrorism charges, court documents show. 
Emerson Begolly, 22, of Redbank agreed on Tuesday to moving the  Virginia case to Pittsburgh so he could plead guilty to soliciting  crimes of violence. A federal grand jury in Alexandria, Va., indicted  him last month on that charge and another of distributing information  relating to explosives, destructive devices and weapons of mass  destruction. 
Prosecutors say Begolly repeatedly used the Internet to incite  Islamic extremists into attacking police stations, synagogues and other  facilities in the United States, and provided links showing them how to  build bombs. Searches of his parents' homes turned up a small arsenal of  weapons. 
Bruce Antkowiak, director of the criminology and law program at St.  Vincent College, said that while it's unusual for someone to be under  indictment in two different federal districts at the same time, it's  common to transfer one of the cases to the other district if the  defendant agrees to plead guilty. 
Prosecutors are less accommodating about combining cases when the defendant wants to go to trial, he said. 
"That's extremely unusual in the federal system," Antkowiak said. 
A federal grand jury in Pittsburgh indicted Begolly in February on  assault and gun charges from a January scuffle he had with two FBI  agents who sought to detain him in a parking lot while other agents  searched his father's home in Redbank and his mother's home in Natrona  Heights. Prosecutors say Begolly was armed and bit the two agents during  the altercation. 
The evidence seized in those searches is part of the evidence used for the Virginia indictment. 
U.S. District Judge Maurice Cohill scheduled a guilty plea hearing for Tuesday. 
Begolly's attorney and a spokeswoman for the FBI couldn't be reached  for comment. A spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney's Office declined  comment. 
Joan Kowalski, Begolly's mother, declined comment. Shawn Begolly, his father, couldn't be reached. 
Shawn Begolly has made several requests in court seeking the return  of computers, software, weapons and other items the government seized  during the search of his home. The government has since returned much of  the material, according to court documents. 
Damien Schorr, the attorney representing Shawn Begolly, said he has  calls into the prosecutors and Emerson Begolly's federal public defender  to find out what's happening. 
"It would seem to me that the case is done," he said. 
If so, then Shawn Begolly should get the rest of his property back, Schorr said. 

Load-Date: August 3, 2011


End of Document