Emergency personnel attend terrorism seminar;
Training has increased in Maine since Sept. 11 events
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
February 27, 2002 Wednesday, ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 2002 Bangor Daily News
Section: B; Pg. 1
Length: 711 words
Byline: SHARON KILEY MACK, OF THE NEWS STAFF
Dateline: AUGUSTA
Body


The very characteristic that makes firefighters, police officers, emergency medical technicians and other emergency response personnel so good at their jobs may be the trait that gets them killed, Maine State Trooper Sgt. Joseph Poirier told nearly 200 rescue personnel gathered Tuesday in Augusta.
At a daylong seminar held to prepare for terrorism and disasters, the emergency workers listened closely. The images of hundreds of New York firefighters and EMTs rushing into the World Trade Center buildings only to die in the towers' collapse were all too fresh in their memories.
"The way we responded in the past - get in quick and fix the situation - is not the way it is anymore," Poirier said. "We must learn to manage the chaos [of a major incident] and remember that well-intentioned people can become part of the problem. We need to take precautions at an incident to keep ourselves safe. We need to rethink our response."
As emergency workers acknowledged after Sept. 11, nothing ever will be the same again.
Brig. Gen. William Libby, deputy commissioner of the Department of Defense and Emergency Management, told those gathered that "September 11th created a new normalcy."
Throughout the day, fire chiefs, nurses, doctors and others discussed terrorism and how to deal with it - from calling the right people to respond to the scene, to recognizing the difference between a spider bite and the first signs of anthrax exposure.
It wasn't a day for the faint of heart. The discussions were scary: biological terrorism, nuclear attacks, bombs and chemical terrorism. Those attending came from small towns such as Palmyra, which has a chief but no fire department, to larger cities with full-time firefighters and emergency response teams.
Firefighter-EMT Ralph Eugley of the St. George Fire Department is a volunteer, one of 30 on-call firefighters. "This is my fourth seminar since September 11," said Eugley. "There is just so much information out there."
Eugley said some of those New York firefighters were his friends. "I still have one friend missing," he said. "I traveled to New York and saw firsthand the effect the attacks had on that city. I take these seminars even more seriously now."
Jay Bradshaw, director of Maine's Emergency Management Agency, which co-sponsored the seminar with Maine Emergency Medical Services, said the seminar was the third one conducted across the state dealing with terrorism and disaster planning.
The talks centered on learning whom to call for assistance, where to reach them, and when to ask for help.
"Today's focus is on the emergency response people, the pre-hospital people, and the roles each plays," said Bradshaw. "It is also providing a chance for them to meet and network with their counterparts."
Gen. Libby explained that Maine has not received "a single penny directly related to September 11" from the federal government. "And yet, Maine's 400 communities have run up significant costs since September 11."
Libby said feedback from emergency personnel on exactly what their departments and organizations need is critical to directing money that will come in the future.
In either June or November, voters will decide on a $10 million homeland security bond, said Libby. "This is a multiyear initiative and is intended to be spent at the local level," he said.
In addition, President Bush has proposed $3.7 billion in spending for next year for homeland security. "Maine's share of $3.7 billion is a big number by any standard," said Libby. "The money is coming. If you don't clearly articulate to us what your needs are, we cannot allocate resources efficiently. This is a critical opportunity for you to provide us with feedback."
Other presenters at the morning session of the seminar included State Fire Marshal John Dean; Phil Haines, deputy director of the Bureau of Health; Anthony Thomassoni of the Maine Poison Control Center, Lt. Col. Gerald Dunlap of the Civil Support Team, and Geoff Beckett of the Bureau of Disease Control.
In the afternoon, individual workshops were held on weapons of mass destruction training, MEMA resources, bomb detection and identification, disaster planning, what to do when an emergency department becomes overwhelmed, and the role of the mental health community in preparedness.

Load-Date: March 1, 2002


End of Document