EMORY MEMORIAL; Emory U. honors '16 victim of terrorism
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 22, 2018 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO; Pg. 4B
Length: 526 words
Byline: Fiza Pirani

For the AJC, Staff
Body


During this year's businessschool commencement on May 12, Emory University paid tribute to a student killed in the 2016 Bangladesh terror attack, renaming the school's core values award in his honor.
Faraaz Ayaaz Hossain was killed in the militant attack at the Holey Artisan restaurant in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on July 1, 2016. The tragedy left 29 dead, including Hossain's childhood friend and fellow Emory student Abinta Kabir, as well as University of California-Berkeley student Tarushi Jain.
Hossain, Kabir and Jain had gathered at the cafe for a cup of coffee when, around 8:45 p.m., a group of militants stormed in and seized the site. The militants targeted non-Muslims and foreigners.
While Hossain, a rising junior who had transitioned from Emory's tight-knit Oxford College campus to Emory University's Goizueta Business School, was held hostage, gunmen gave the Bangladeshi Muslim the chance to escape.
But Hossain refused to leave his friends behind and was found dead the following morning.
On May 12, Emory University's Goizueta Business School honored Hossain. "This award has been renamed to honor Faraaz Hossain, who would have been a member of your class but died tragically and heroically, defending his friends in a terrorist attack in Bangladesh," the university announced during the ceremonies. "The Core Values award is therefore particularly poignant to us and is presented to a senior who embodies our most noble principles."
The first Faraaz Hossain Core Values Award was granted to graduate Gurbani Singh, "an inspiring leader and a community builder who possesses a generosity of spirit and the moral compass that is inherent in the designation of this award."
Singh, who served as president of the school's student government association in her final year and helped found Emory's undergraduate disability studies initiative, navigated political and financial obstacles to use her power "as a force for good."
After the Bangladesh attack, Hossain was awarded the 2016 Mother Teresa Memorial International Award for Social Justice, instituted in 2005 by the Harmony Foundation of India. Past honorees have included the Dalai Lama and Malala Yousafzai.
PepsiCo Global also introduced the Faraaz Hossain Courage Award with a $200,000 endowment. The accolade would be presented annually to citizens of Bangladesh under age 30 who exemplify personal courage and ethical values. Honorees would win a $10,000 cash prize.
"He was admired by all for his humility, kindness, and leadership," Hossain's former graduate adviser Judy Sunshine wrote in 2016. "What a privilege it was to know this young man."
Before college, high school friends told CNN that Hossain was humble and caring, voted prom king and class president at his school.
"Everyone would just say (Hossain and Kabir) were the sweetest, nicest people. Both of them were known for it," Sultana Begum, outgoing president of Bengal Association for Students at Emory, told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution after the attacks.
Kabir, a rising sophomore who hailed from Miami, Florida, had dreams of starting an NGO for children in Bangladesh after graduation, according to her mother, Ruba Ahmed.

Load-Date: June 22, 2018


End of Document