Emotional departure for Russia; Team heads to Rio without more than 100 banned athletes.; RIO OLYMPICS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 29, 2016 Friday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. C2
Length: 467 words
Byline: Wire services
Body


Members of Russia's Olympic team arrive Thursday in Rio de Janeiro ahead of the Games, which begin Aug. 5.
A depleted Russian team departed for the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro on Thursday, missing dozens of athletes who were excluded amid the country's doping scandal.
Team members left on a charter flight from Moscow's Sheremetevo airport to Brazil, a day after an emotional farewell ceremony with Russian President Vladimir Putin in the Kremlin.
More than 100 athletes from what was originally a 387-strong team have been barred from competing in Rio by international sports federations under sanctions that most Russian athletes consider unfair.
"We're after medals, that's it," handball player Anna Sen said as she prepared to board the flight. "We need to fight for those athletes who were disqualified."
Volleyball player Sergei Tetyukhin, a four-time Olympic medalist, will be Russia's flagbearer for the opening ceremony in Rio, according to pole vaulter Yelena Isinbayeva.
Isinbayeva, a two-time Olympic gold medalist, has become a de facto spokeswoman for Russian athletes excluded from the Olympics and gave a tearful address to the team in the Kremlin on Wednesday.
No track and field athletes were among the contingent heading for Rio, since the entire track team is banned from competing, except for a single U.S.-based long jumper, following revelations of widespread doping.
Rio readies in hopes of thwarting terrorism: A half-million foreign tourists, dozens of heads of state and the attention of the world's media. If there were ever a headache for anti-terror forces, it's the Olympics.
In the aftermath of deadly attacks by the Islamic State group in France and elsewhere, Brazil, which has almost no experience com-batting terrorism, is beefing up security for the games that start in Rio de Janeiro on Aug. 5. Plans include doubling the number of security forces on the streets, erecting more checkpoints and working closer with foreign intelligence agencies than Brazilians did in the 2014 World Cup.
But will it be enough?
Richard Ford, a retired FBI anti-terror expert who lives in Brazil, said that while the government has a robust program to keep athletes and venues safe, he worries that authorities aren't taking the threat of a lone-wolf or suicide attack seriously enough.
He cited comments by Justice Minister Alexandre de Moraes, who surprised many last week by saying the chances of a terror attack at the games were "next to zero" and that the bigger concern is street crime. Just a day later, the federal police overseen by Moraes arrested 10 Brazilians allegedly belonging to an amateur cell that had professed allegiance to ISIS over the internet.
"It's very naive to think that the risks for terrorism are minimal," said Ford, who has worked on security at several Olympic Games.

Load-Date: July 29, 2016


End of Document