EMOTIONAL TERRORISM
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 7, 1993, Sunday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1D
Length: 1133 words
Byline: MARIA D. VESPERI
Body


One of the first things I can recall about television was my father pointing  to Sen. Joseph McCarthy on the screen and telling me, "That's a very bad  man." I must have been 3 or 4 years old at the time, but today I recognize  the moment as the beginning of my political education.
Other lessons were soon to follow. Nicola Sacco had lived and worked in our  hometown of Milford, Mass., when my dad was a boy, and I was treated to vivid  memories of the outrage stirred by his trial and execution. Walking home from  school one day, I stood in the little square where people had once gathered to  lament the immigrant shoemaker's fate. I understood that their grief was not  just for the death of a man whom they judged innocent, but for the slandered  innocence of "aliens" who dared speak out.
MODEM
From the earliest days of the New England colonies, emotional terrorism has  haunted American life. Witch, abolitionist, communist, freedom rider,  pacifist, feminist - each label has been used to divide and intimidate  like-minded people, to rob them of their livelihood and freedom, even of their  very lives.
 I used to think that this nation would be a better place once all of the  major labels had been laid to rest. No one believes in the Salem brand of  witchcraft anymore, women can vote and racial equality is law, if not always  fact. The Cold War is history; not only has the red scare retreated to the  dusty shelf it deserves, but communism itself is all but dead.
 Emotional terrorism is still alive and well, though. It succeeds at  social control in a backhanded way that no legal sanction can achieve, largely  by shifting the burden of proof. It keeps people preoccupied with proving what  they're not, leaving them little time to explore the potential of who they  are.
  Sex is a frequent focus of alleged transgressions against the social  order. In societies around the world, witches are often accused of incest,  consorting with animals or other prohibited behavior. Accusations of  promiscuity have been used to intimidate reformers and outspoken members of  minority groups. Homosexuals, Americans are told, pose a threat to national  security if allowed to enter military service.
  A related feature of emotional terrorism is that moral outrage is often  used to justify brutality against someone who has been labeled. In an article  on witchcraft in the highlands of Chiapas, Mexico, anthropologist Manning Nash  observed: "The identification of a witch is a social process of validation of  somebody's aggressive activity against a witch. . . . The problem of social  order rests on the consensual meshing of public opinion about an act of  violence which is either a favor to the society as a whole, or the most  flagrant violation of its moral equilibrium."
  Nash wrote about this in 1961, but his description of the validation  process remains disturbingly fresh. Without the xenophobic belief that  communist conspirators from abroad were plotting the demise of life as we knew  it, Joe McCarthy was simply "a very bad man" who abused the power of his  position. Without sexism, more rapists would get the jail time they deserve.  Without an assertion by the Joint Chiefs of Staff that homosexuals have no  rightful place in the military order, three Marines might not have felt moved  to pummel a stranger, Crae Pridgen, outside a North Carolina bar.
 During a recent television interview, Pridgen's mother made it clear that  she wasn't just afraid for her son and herself. "I'm afraid for all Americans  who stand up for what they believe in," she said.
 Bill Clinton said he believed in letting gay people serve in the  military. Pridgen, a civilian, took a whipping for it. "Clinton must pay,"  his attackers allegedly said.
Emotional terrorism can take a circuitous path. Those caught up in it  rarely set their sights on a president or Supreme Court justice. Instead, they  make do with a Crae Pridgen or an Allen Schindler, the young sailor who was  murdered in Japan last fall, allegedly by a Navy comrade.
Gay-bashers who kill their victims, like the lynch mobs of the past, take  terrorism to the physical extreme. Sometimes they are punished. Sometimes they  walk away.
 "The crucial factor here is that a man, together with a small number of  his friends or kinsmen, have decided to kill another man as a witch," Manning  Nash wrote. "The problem facing the community is was the killing justified?  That is, did a witch get destroyed, and therefore a source of potential evil  removed, or did a man indulge a personal grievance, or a drunken impulse?"
 Joseph Steffan, a 28-year-old Navy midshipman, was expelled from  Annapolis in 1987 for simply confiding to two friends that he is gay. Steffan  ranked in the top 10 of his class, and he was only two weeks from graduation  and commission when the military threw him out. In a recent interview with the  New York Times to promote his book, Honor Bound, he explained that he went  along with anti-gay jokes and abstained from sex while studying at Annapolis.  His classmates, in contrast, put stickers on their doors to brag about how  many women they had managed to sleep with.
 So why was this studious, Midwesterner perceived as a threat?
 "Heterosexual men have an annoying habit of overestimating their own  attractiveness," he quipped.
 Taken broadly, such jokes hold a grain of truth.
 Occasionally, on my way home from fourth or fifth grade, young men with  greased-back hair would match my stride. "I know ya fadda," they would  invariably announce in soft, husky voices. "How'ze doin?"
 "Er, fine," I would say, smiling thinly and trying to look casual. At  that point they would usually ask to be remembered by name and then leave me  behind, the metal taps on their pointy shoes clicking smartly against the  sidewalk.
 I was always relieved to see them go because these fellows, to my mind,  were Genuine Juvenile Delinquents. All of them had spent time in reform  school; none had little sisters I counted among my friends.
 My father, who died in 1985, worked with such fellows from 1939 to 1974  as a truant officer and juvenile court advocate for the public schools. Every  time I saw his obvious concern for them, my sense of relief rang hollow. He  acted on his knowledge of how they grew up poor, stigmatized from first grade  on, made to feel shame for realities beyond their control. My self-centered  worry, I had to admit, was simply that I might be seen with the "wrong" kind  of person.
 Real advocates, I learned from watching my dad, were largely immune to  emotional terrorism and contemptuous of its practitioners. Secure in their own  identities, they were free to stop checking the mirror and take the true  measure of someone else.
Maria D. Vesperi is an editorial writer for the Times.  

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press; COLOR CARTOON, Clay Bennett; Sen. Joseph McCarthy, testifying May 5, 1954 about a disputed memorandum from the FBI to the Army; a man wearing a hat labeled 'Jobs' caught in a downpour shields himself with a newspaper with a headline reading 'Economic Forecast: Sunny & Fair

Load-Date: February 12, 1993


End of Document