Employee with knife kills four at Paris police HQ
Chicago Daily Herald
October 4, 2019 Friday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: WORLD_; Pg. 2
Length: 287 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


PARIS — A civilian employee raged through Paris police headquarters with a knife Thursday, stabbing four police colleagues to death before he was shot and killed, French authorities said. The man, a technology administrator in the police intelligence unit, launched the attack in his office then moved to other parts of the large 19th century building across the street from Notre Dame Cathedral. Three of the people he killed were police officers, the fourth an administrator, the Paris prosecutor said. 
An officer stopped the attack when he shot the assailant in the compound's courtyard, said a police official. The employee who carried out the attack had worked for the city's police force since 2003 without ever arousing concerns, French Interior Minister Christophe Castaner said. "There were no warning signs," Castaner said. "This man was known inside the computer department, he worked alongside his colleagues and never presented any behavioral difficulties," he added. Paris prosecutor Remy Heitz said authorities opened a murder investigation, for the moment ruling out a terrorism inquiry. He said the 45-year-old assailant's home was being searched. Three of the victims were men and one was a woman, Heitz said. A department employee wounded in the rampage underwent emergency surgery Thursday afternoon, Castaner said. Emery Siamandi, who works at police headquarters, said he was in the stairwell leading to the chief's office when he heard gunshots. "I told myself, this isn't right," Siamandi said. "Moments later, I saw three policewomen crying. I couldn't help them in any way, and their colleagues were crying, too, so I figured it must be serious." He said he saw one officer on his knees in tears.

Graphic

 
Associated Press Police officers stand guard Thursday outside the Paris police headquarters. An employee armed with a knife attacked officers inside the building, killing four before he was fatally shot, a French police union official said.

Load-Date: October 4, 2019


End of Document