End Run to Guatemala
The New York Times
May 18, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 394 words
Body


Retired General Vernon Walters, an old hand at military diplomacy, is known for his polished skills as a linguist. But he chose peculiar words last week to explain why the Reagan Administration is considering a resumption of arms aid to Guatemala. During a visit there as Secretary of State Haig's special emissary, General Walters said, deadpan, that Guatemala's Government is defending ''peace and liberty'' and ''constitutional institutions.''
Editorial comment discusses recent attempts by Reagan Administration to renew military arms aid to Guatemala
Peace and liberty are indeed imperiled in Guatemala. One threat comes from some 2,000 leftist guerrillas who have been receiving encouragement and possibly arms from Cuba. General Walters noted that peril. But he shrugged off another threat: state terrorism condoned by President Romeo Lucas Garcia. In a decade, as many as 25,000 Guatemalans have been killed, mostly by state security forces; the recent toll includes 76 officials of the opposition Christian Democratic party, scores of trade unionists and at least 6 Catholic priests.
This brutality has brought Guatemala's government a grim reputation as the hemisphere's worst human-rights offender. Particularly hard hit have been the country's 3.5 million Indians, some of whose villages have been totally wiped out, mainly by Government gunmen.
The United States has an obvious security interest in true peace and liberty throughout Central America, and particularly in a nation whose jungles border on Mexico. But that interest is not served by an uncritical partnership with a regime openly at war with its own people. Guatemala wants America's political backing even more than its weapons. The predominantly military regime has found most of the weapons it wants elsewhere - ever since in 1977 it rejected American military aid rather than comply with Congress's human rights standards.
Those standards remain the law, and all aid still has to pass Congressional scrutiny. In its eagerness to renew contacts with the Guatemalan military, the Administration is tempted to dip into contingency funds for $2.5 million in ''non-lethal'' equipment, thus bypassing Congressional review. If the Administration actually attempts such an end run around the budget process, Congress may have to remind it that the United States, too, has constitutional institutions.


End of Document