End dependence on oil and sponsorship of terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
October 13, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; LETTERS
Length: 370 words
Body


It cannot be denied that a percentage of the influx of American dollars to oil-producing Arab nations will end up in the hands of terror-supporting organizations. Millions of dollars are funneled to these groups from the hands of Arab citizens who work in the oil production industry, oil processing industry, shipping industry and from those who make a living providing goods and services to those lucky enough to have jobs in these industries.
One also must assume that money is supplied to these groups by two-faced members of "friendly" Arab governments. As far as I can see, most Arab governments that appear to be friendly to the USA only do so because U.S. support is what tips the balance of power that keeps them in control of their countries.
#REIGHARD.LIB#
Now consider the reason that these countries have American support. The biggest reason by far: oil. Without their oil, our country will fail.
I do not like living with this fact. With knowing that a combined effort by these oil-producing nations can put us on our knees. Remember, the only way that we were able to counter OPEC efforts in the 1970s was by getting Saudi Arabia and Kuwait "on our side."
Now consider the reasons we are so dependent on foreign oil The biggest reason by far: American oil companies and the U.S. government. American oil companies have squashed virtually all efforts at development of alternative power sources and they continue to be able to do so.
What can we do about it? We must develop alternate power sources. There are many alternate power sources available to us. Next to the massive pressure from the oil industry, the biggest problem that keeps people from using them is that currently they are all more expensive than power produced by oil but, as with any product, the price will come down with increased usage and increased availability.
Money we spend on foreign oil is supporting terrorist groups that would destroy it. We must demand that our government commit whatever money is needed to develop and promote the use of alternative power sources.
We must use our power to vote to elect officials who are committed to ending our dependence on foreign oil by developing alternative power sources.
Dan Reighard
Quarryville

Load-Date: October 14, 2003


End of Document