End to terrorism begins in Palestine
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 03, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 814 words
Byline: Mary McGrory
Body


WASHINGTON - When Tom Brokaw put it to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld that he needs a military victory in the slightly bogged-down operation in Afghanistan - words not usually heard in a TV interview - Rumsfeld replied sensibly, "Oh my goodness."
That wholesome expression helps explain why the secretary is unexpectedly turning out to be popular among administration spokesmen. He goes in for limited - and eventual - truth-telling, while the domestic voices, notably in the watch-out and anthrax crowds, never do. Attorney General John D. Ashcroft and company tell us that trouble is coming, although not when and where, whereas all the anthrax spinners tell us is when people are dying. A man like Rumsfeld, who blurts out something we've known all along - that finding bin Laden is like finding a needle in a haystack - acquires fans. Rumsfeld resisting a lecture on his duties from an anchorman strikes a chord.
Realistic expectations of military progress do not flourish. The Taliban are obdurate; our most charismatic Afghan disciple was captured and killed while desperately pleading for CIA rescue. The complexities of ministering to a population we are also bombing were brought home in a Reuters dispatch about our new broadcasts warning people to be careful about picking up yellow packages suddenly in their midst. One kind of package has food; the other, cluster-bombs.
The radio broadcast explains that while we won't be dropping sustenance and death in the same area, too much caution in choosing between lunch and eternity cannot be exercised.
A diplomatic breakthrough seems more doable, although not easy. The Israeli-Palestinian dispute is a target. It, too, is about terrorism, though on a smaller scale.
The mere mention of outside pressure for U.S. interference for an imposed settlement sends Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, not a temperate man in the best times, into paroxysms of rage.
Incensed at being brought into a worldwide anti-terrorist coalition with the Palestinians, whom he regards as terrorists, Sharon compared George Bush to Neville Chamberlain, the apostle of appeasement. Bush was understandably furious, and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell demanded that Sharon apologize.
The Bush administration has declined any role in the bloody stalemate, despite our enormous influence: When Powell protested the presence of Israeli tanks in Bethlehem, they were withdrawn.
American Jews have been remarkably silent about the situation. According to one of them, hardy activist Hyman Bookbinder, they are still operating on the basic premise of the Jewish community - that "it is not our place to tell them how to defend themselves." He says, "Some of us think they would be more secure with different policies."
Jason Isaacson, head of the Israeli Policy Forum, expresses the prevailing view: "This is not the time for pushing for a settlement. It would reaffirm a linkage to terrorists, that if you press hard enough, kill enough people, you will get your way."
But some people think there would never be a better time for Uncle Sam to step in again. Former ambassador Robert E. White (he was our envoy in El Salvador at the time of the nuns' murders) thinks there could be no better moment to show that diplomacy can stop terrorism: The topic is on the table, and the United States is focused on holding together a coalition that has significant Arab participation.
"Solving the Israel-Palestine dispute will not abolish terrorism," says White, head of the Center for International Policy, "but it is an indispensable start. The obvious injustice to Palestine is the one issue that unites all Arabs in the Middle East."
White convened a meeting at the Brookings Institution with three prominent experts on the Middle East: Philip Wilcox, former consul general in Jerusalem; Mary Ann Stein, president of the Moriah Fund; and Landrum Bolling, the legendary Quaker Middle East authority. It was a low-key meeting, most notable for the complete agreement among the speakers. All advocate an end to violence, an end - that is, the elimination - of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, and the founding of a Palestinian state with geographical and political dominion.
President Bush is not hearing much from his party on the subject. Jewish voters traditionally belong to the Democrats. Politicians don't like to rile the Jewish lobby, but Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., bravely spoke out the other day on "Meet the Press" about what many think, saying, "I think our relationship with Israel is fomenting a lot of this hate." He said we shouldn't, of course, yield to it.
Landrum Bolling thinks we should put aside worries that attempts to make peace would be seen as appeasement of Saudi Arabia and other new best Arab friends. "We should do it because it's right, for Israel and Palestine and the rest of the world."
McGrory is a columnist for The Washington Post.

Load-Date: November 3, 2001


End of Document