Ending terrorism involves more than fighting a war
University Wire
April 24, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Iowa State Daily via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 865 words
Byline: By Devin Hartman, Iowa State Daily; SOURCE: Iowa State U.
Dateline: AMES, Iowa 
Body


Terrorism prevention is instantly associated with military operations and domestic security measures. These methods address the problem once it has been created. This reactionary approach assumes such problems do and will continue to exist. This is true, of course, to a certain extent. Yet it only cuts the weed once it has grown, leaving the buried roots to fester, spread and sprout again.
A heavy emphasis has been placed on averting immediate terrorist threats, and rightfully so, but more focus must be put on the circumstances that breed terrorism. The matter demands a proactive plan, for it has no near end in sight. A long-run management plan is essential to conquering terrorism.
First, it's important to note terrorism itself is a tactic, not an ideology. Radical ideology catalyzes acts of terrorism. It's a mindset, in this case deep-seated anti-Americanism, which forms the base of the problem.
Terrorism is a new brand of fight. Conventional tactics - hard power - aren't as effective in traditional inter-state conflicts. The enemy lies hidden, highly mobile and is difficult to account for. The disease is no longer a large, isolated tumor. It's now fragmented, with small barely recognizable pockets recurrently emerging. Surgery is a limited option - internal methods will prove more useful.
The world is a stage. The projection of Americanism abroad plays an integral role in foreign responses, which is particularly applicable to terrorist networks. The legitimacy of their claims is crucial to their recruitment, which comprises the backbone of their sustained support. The more foreign crowds view the United States as imperialistic, evil or a number of other negative traits, the more successful these networks become. In this sense, it's not our intentions that matter, but how they're perceived.
The greatest lesson in the ideological struggle is the detrimental impacts on terrorist prevention from the invasion of Iraq. The 2006 National Intelligence Estimate, released by the CIA last April, precisely affirmed this. It noted the conflict has become the "cause celebre for jihadists," breeding anti-Americanism and "cultivating supporters for the global jihadist movement." Sure enough, polls indicate that support for the United States has dropped considerably within the publics of nearly every Arab state after the invasion.
The foreign public relations nightmare in Iraq serves as a wake-up call to counterterrorism strategy.
The danger is that anti-Americanism continues to grow, as does the appeal of threatening ideologies. It's the young, discontent and vulnerable - but still undecided - minds that will determine future security threats.
The most ethical and practical technique to manage America's global impression is through genuine, benevolent policy. This approach serves American security interests in the long run. U.S. foreign policy has frequently lacked, even contradicted, this principle and felt harsh repercussions.
Look no further than United States-Iranian relations. In the 1950s, a CIA operation overthrew a democratically elected leader and installed the shah, who descended the country into a harsh dictatorship. Needless to say, after leading to the Iranian Revolution and subsequent hostile events, the stage was set for fervid American opposition in Iran. As evidenced by today's headlines, Iran is now a bastion of anti-Americanism.
Today, the Unites States continues a legacy of short-sighted, self-centered foreign policy. America ranks among the lowest of industrialized countries of foreign aid as a percent of Gross National Product.
As of 2006, just 0.17 percent of Gross National Income went to official development assistance. America should start a more responsible path by first meeting the United Nations target of 0.7 percent, followed by the target of the ONE campaign; provide an additional 1 percent of the federal budget to foreign development aid.
Such actions would have a profoundly positive impact on suppressing future terrorist threats. The areas where dangerous ideologies are most pervasive - North Africa and the Middle East - tend to be ones needing drastic political, economic and social reforms. The aforementioned intelligence estimate specifies the lack of these reforms as being underlying factors contributing to the spread of the jihad movement.
Stronger foreign policies to promote democracy, economic stability, poverty alleviation and educational improvement act as a wise national security investment.
If the substance of U.S. foreign policy were to improve in such ways, so would its global image. The capacity of terrorist networks, specifically jihadists, to exploit anti-American sentiment would be strongly diminished.
Their ideological weakness is their vulnerability. America would be wise to better expose this internationally, while improving its own credibility by realigning policy in a morally acceptable manner.
The United States has the opportunity to act in a humanitarian fashion that bolsters national security. Let's hope ethics and pragmatism connect in time to suit both these concerns.
Devin Hartman is a senior in political science from Glen Ellyn, Ill.
(C) 2007 Iowa State Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 24, 2007


End of Document