Ending terrorism a diplomatic mission
University Wire
October 8, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Bruin via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 521 words
Byline: Editorial Staff, Daily Bruin
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


Yesterday, President George W. Bush decided to forego diplomatic efforts and live up to his promise of launching a "war on terrorism." Along with Great Britain, the United States began strategically bombing areas in Afghanistan believed to be al-Qaeda training camps and military sites affiliated with the Taliban.
Now that the United States has committed itself to a military effort, it must ensure that the goal of this operation does not center on trying to stop international terrorism -- this task is impossible. Instead, the military campaign in Afghanistan should focus solely on retrieving Osama bin Laden and Taliban members supporting his network and bringing them to international justice.
U. California-Los Angeles
Once the United States accomplishes this, it needs to withdraw its military presence. This doesn't mean the United States should withdraw altogether; rather, it needs to ensure its main objective is to empower the Afghan people to better their economy and political infrastructure. Too many times, the United States has unilaterally entered a country to advance its own agenda, leaving it politically and economically unstable, as it did in Vietnam.
Repeating this pattern in Afghanistan would be a deadly mistake: terrorizing the entire country to seek out a few men will infuriate the people of Afghanistan and substantiate the calls for the further counter-U.S. retaliation bin Laden's successors will surely call for.
Dropping food, medicine and supplies to the refugees of Afghanistan doesn't justify bombing their country beyond our necessary objectives. When the dust settles and the smoke clears, the only thing left standing will be the country's already existing problems. Afghanistan will still be looking for a stable government that can reconstruct the devastation the country has faced for the last half-century -- both domestically and internationally.
If the United States fails to extend its help, it will find that removing the Taliban government will only make room for the next military regime's oppressive rule. Supporting a major recovery effort in Afghanistan will lead to a long-lasting, stable government.
The country of Afghanistan needs to be healed -- not hurled into the middle of an American military agenda combatting terrorism. A military war against terrorism cannot be won.
President Bush needs to turn away from his anti-terrorist war efforts and re-orient his approach to eliminating terrorism through diplomacy.
Right now, both the Senate and the House overwhelmingly support Bush -- and will likely support him no matter which direction his campaign turns. While it is natural for people to turn to their country's leaders in times of crisis, Americans must consider for themselves whether they support war and to what extent. And if they don't, it is their responsibility to make their positions known through their protest and vote.
Finding bin Laden and the Taliban is a military effort. Ending terrorism is a diplomatic effort. So long as we remember this, America and Afghanistan will hopefully live securely and in peace.
(C) 2001 Daily Bruin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document