Enemies can sometimes turn into friends
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 1, 1990, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 27A; COLUMN
Length: 586 words
Byline: MIKE ROYKO
Body


While most families were spending the long Thanksgiving weekend eating, swapping memories, shopping, watching football games or just loafing, Daniel and Susan Cohen were writing a letter to President Bush.
 
    I don't know if Bush has seen the Cohens' letter. But this is what it says:
 
    "Mr. President:
 
    "Many Americans are spending this long weekend with their families, and that is what we should be doing. However, on this day we are alone because our only child, our daughter Theodora, was killed in the terrorist bombing of Pan Am 103, along with 269 other innocent people, most of them Americans.
   "Because of the bombing, there were a lot of empty places around Thanksgiving tables in America this year. You spent the day after Thanksgiving with a man without whom this act of mass murder would not have been possible, Hafez Assad, dictator of Syria.
 
    "You said, with obvious pride in your voice, that you had "no problem' meeting in friendship with this master of terrorism, so long as he aided in the coalition against Iraq that you are trying to hold together.
 
    "This is cynical, amoral and unforgivable. There must be some limits to realpolitik, but apparently you do not know what they are.  Assad is more than "the enemy of our enemy.' He is our enemy.
 
    "You said you were almost moved to tears by pictures of the victims of atrocities in Kuwait. Not long ago, pictures of the victims of the atrocity at Lockerbie were produced at the inquiry being held in Scotland. They were so horrible that family members of the victims had to prove that they had received psychological counseling before they were allowed to see the photos. If you wish, we could arrange to have these photos sent to you. Perhaps they would bring the horror of the Pan Am atrocity home. .
 
    "By sitting down with one of the chief architects of the Pan Am horror, and by playing a game of winks and nods with Iran, the other nation behind the terror, you have dishonored all those who were murdered. And you have dishonored the nation which you increasingly fail to lead."
 
    End of letter.
 
    I can understand the grief and anger of the Cohens. But it is obvious that they don't understand the kind of high-level diplomacy required in this fast-changing world.
 
    True, it was only a few months ago that we, as a nation, hated Assad of Syria more than we now hate Hussein of Iraq. In fact, we kind of liked Hussein because he had fought against the late Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran. And we hated the ayatollah even more than we hated Assad of Syria.
 
 
But now we hate Hussein.
 
    But there's always tomorrow. So just because President Bush got together with Assad doesn't mean that he really likes him or that he has forgiven him for encouraging terrorism.
 
    Who knows, if we're patient and the economic blockade against Hussein works, he might back down, and we won't have to hate him as much anymore. Then Assad might become a naked aggressor and maybe we can put him back on top of our hate list.
 
    We must learn to take the long view. Many Americans are still alive who fought against China in the Korean War. And for decades, we were in a Cold War with the Soviet Union.
 
    But now we have been asking the Soviets and China, two of the five permanent members of the U.S. Security Council, to give us permission to let our troops fight and die against Iraq.
 
    That shows how things can change.
 
 Someday, Hussein's children might buy a big Hollywood studio.  Stranger things have happened.
 Chicago Tribune

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document