Energy map full of supply concerns; Possible crisis in Iran is 1 factor
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 6, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a8
Length: 456 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria 
Body


Unrest in Africa. Mideast insurgency and terrorism. Iran's nuclear brinkmanship. Russian pressure politics. South American resource nationalism.
Piece by piece, the global energy puzzle reveals a bleak horizon for a world frantically searching for secure oil and gas supplies.
Concerns over Iran - the world's fourth-largest oil producer - have been the prime factor recently in driving crude prices to record levels and, combined with tight global refining capacity, for pushing U.S. gasoline pump prices above $3 per gallon in many places.
With the U.N. Security Council deadlocked and Tehran refusing to cease uranium enrichment, there is no end in sight to the struggle or the upward price spiral.
A barrel of crude was trading around $70 per barrel Friday. But Iranian officials this week predicted prices as high as $120 - a forecast some experts share.
"I don't think that's far-fetched, assuming that the crisis with Iran will escalate," said Michael Klare, author of "Blood and Oil: The Dangers and Consequences of America's Growing Petroleum Dependency."
There also is plenty of gloom elsewhere on the energy map.
In Africa, violence roils Nigeria, Chad and Sudan. In the Middle East, there's insurrection and terrorism in Iraq. Ethnic and geopolitical tensions persist in the Caspian Sea region. Russia's government is using its energy clout for political ends. In Asia, conflicting claims to the energy-rich South China Sea are sharpening Sino-Japanese tensions. And energy nationalism by South American nations is spooking markets.
Tough rhetoric reflects the rising frustrations. U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney accused Russia on Thursday of using its energy reserves as "tools of intimidation or blackmail."
By even the most conservative estimate, more than a quarter of the 80 million barrels of oil pumped per day worldwide comes from regions or countries where security of supply is in some way at risk. The situation is even more dire for natural gas, with close to half of global supplies potentially affected.
With daily crude supply already barely keeping pace with demand - and producers stretched - any major disruption would send a shock ripple across the world. A decision by Iran alone to withhold its 2.5 million barrels per day earmarked for export soon would force consuming nations to dip into emergency stockpiles.
Daniel Yergin, head of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, told the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Energy & Commerce on Thursday that the present oil market is "fueled by the threat of terrorism, instability in some exporting nations, a nationalist backlash, fears of a scramble for supplies, geopolitical rivalries and countries' fundamental need for energy to power their economic growth."

Load-Date: May 6, 2006


End of Document