Engineer gets 10 1;
2 years in terrorism case;
The Norristown man admitted going to Pakistan
after 9;
11 to train for insurgency. He apologized.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 18, 2003 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 764 words
Byline: Jennifer Lin INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA, Va.
Body


Muhammed Aatique, a Norristown engineer who traveled to Pakistan after Sept. 11, 2001, to train with a terrorist group in the mountains of Kashmir, was sentenced yesterday to 10 1/2 years in federal prison.
At a brief sentencing hearing, Aatique told U.S. District Court Judge Leonie M. Brinkema that he had pleaded guilty to terrorism-related charges and was cooperating with prosecutors "to try to mend the harm I've caused."
Aatique is the fourth of 11 defendants to plead guilty in the "Virginia jihad" case involving an alleged network of Muslim men training here and overseas to support insurgents trying to drive India out of Kashmir.
At least two defendants sentenced last month - Yong Ki Kwon and Khwaja Mahmood Hasan - said they had planned to go to Afghanistan to help the Taliban battling U.S. forces after traveling to Pakistan. Instead, they returned to the United States when it became clear the Taliban were facing defeat. Kwon was sentenced to 11 1/2 years, while Hasan is serving 11 1/4 years.
Aatique, 31, a slight, bearded man with glasses whose wife and two young children have returned to Pakistan, appeared wan in court. "I apologize to society for my conduct, and I apologize to my family for their pain and suffering," he said.
He had agreed to plead guilty to aiding and abetting a conspiracy to wage violence against a nation that was at peace with the United States - in this case, India - as well as using firearms to advance that conspiracy.
Just days after the Sept. 11 attacks, Aatique, a permanent resident of the United States, left the Philadelphia area to travel to the Kashmir camp run by Lashkar-e-Taiba - according to the Bush administration, a terrorist organization.
Aatique spent four days at the camp, learning how to fire an anti-aircraft gun, a machine gun and an AK-47.
Many of the 11 defendants knew each other from the Muslim community in northern Virginia. Eight of them had traveled over the years to Pakistan or Afghanistan for military training. In Virginia, meanwhile, they played paintball war games on weekends and went to firing ranges for target practice as part of their training.
In asking for leniency, Aatique said he wanted "to again be a useful human being and provide for my wife and child."
Assistant U.S. Attorney Gordon Kromberg said Aatique had assisted in the ongoing investigation. "In our view, Mr. Aatique was cooperative from the first moment we approached him," Kromberg said in court.
Kromberg told Brinkema that Aatique was "less culpable" than Kwon or Hasan, who spent more than a month at the camp.
On the surface, the bookish Aatique seemed unlikely to be pegged as a terrorist. A standout scholar in Pakistan, he traveled to the United States in 1996 to attend graduate school in electrical engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute. An expert in wireless communications, he has worked for a number of high-tech companies, including Qualcomm Inc. in California and AT&T in Virginia.
He eventually joined True Position Inc. in King of Prussia in the summer of 2001.
Aatique did not explain in court why he felt a need to train with the militant Lashkar-e-Taiba, but his lawyer, Alan Dexter Bowman, said he was sincerely repentant.
The Virginia jihad investigation is part of the a broad governmental legal war against terrorism. As with investigations in Lackawanna, N.Y., and Portland, Ore., prosecutors in the Virginia case are trying to thwart militant activity before it starts.
In those three investigations, defendants have not been charged with plotting specific terrorist action, but with supporting jihad, or holy war, by training for battle here or overseas.
In the Lackawanna case, defendants traveled to Afghanistan for military training, and one of them had a brief encounter with Osama bin Laden before Sept. 11.
In Oregon, six men went to China after Sept. 11 in a failed attempt to get into Afghanistan to help the Taliban.
A total of 16 defendants from Lackawanna, Portland and Virginia have entered guilty pleas, receiving sentences ranging from three to 18 years. In Virginia, seven defendants are challenging the government's charges. Six of them go on trial Feb. 2.
David Cole, a constitutional-law expert at Georgetown University, criticized the government's preemptive legal strategy as "dubious."
"No longer are you held liable for your own wrongdoing but for your connection to a group, without the need to show any nexus between your activities and any illegal - much less terrorist - activities of that group," Cole said.
Contact staff writer Jennifer Lin at 215-854-5659 or jlin@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Muhammed Aatique in a courtroom sketch. He is the fourth of 11 to plead guilty in the "Virginia jihad" case.

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document