england to enter new lockdown; U.K. virus cases pass 1 million
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 1, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 392 words
Body


aw_201101_world rdp
^$^LONDON - British Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Saturday announced a new month-long lockdown for England after being warned that without tough action a resurgent coronavirus outbreak will overwhelm hospitals in weeks.On the day the U.K. passed 1 million confirmed COVID-19 cases, Johnson made a sudden about-face and confirmed that stringent restrictions on business and daily life would begin Thursday and last until Dec. 2.
He said at a televised news conference that "no responsible prime minister" could ignore the grim figures.
"Unless we act, we could see deaths in this country running at several thousand a day," said Johnson, who was hospitalized earlier this year for a serious case of COVID-19.
Under the new restrictions, bars and restaurants can only offer takeout, nonessential shops must close and people will only be able to leave home for a short list of reasons, including exercise. Activities ranging from haircuts to foreign holidays must once again be put on hold.
Sudan says deal blocks more claims
CAIRO- Sudan says it has signed an agreement with the U.S. that could effectively stop any future compensation claims being filed against the African country in U.S. courts, following Washington's decision to remove the country from its list of state sponsors of terrorism.
The deal restores in U.S. courts what is known as sovereign immunity to the Sudanese government, and comes after a year of negotiations between the Trump administration and Sudan's new leadership, the Sudanese Justice Ministry said.
A transitional government led by a mix of military and civilian figures currently rules Sudan, after the overthrow of former leader Omar al-Bashir in April 2019 led to the country seeking better ties with the U.S.
Sudanese Justice Minister Nasredeen Abdulbari said that the agreement will allow Sudan "to resolve historical liabilities, restore normal relations with the United States, and move forward toward democracy and better economic times."
Sudan's transitional government has agreed to pay $335 million in compensation for victims of the attacks that were carried out by Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network while the militant leader was living in Sudan. The ministry said the money would be held in an escrow account till the U.S. finalizes the restoration of Sudan's sovereign immunity.
From wire reports

Load-Date: November 1, 2020


End of Document