Enough … terrorism is done
University Wire
September 12, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 376 words
Byline: By Charles Mayer, Daily Evergreen
Dateline: Pullman, Wash.
Body


America is at war. If the fact was not clear before it is now abundantly clear after Tuesday's terrorist attacks upon New York and the Pentagon.
We cannot stand idly by and allow things to continue as they have in the past. The United States must show the world what a war against terrorism is.
Washington State U.
We screamed for justice when the World Trade Center was first attacked in 1993 and six people were killed. We yelled and shook our fists in the air but allowed the terrorists to hide and plan.
Now we know what was being planned, and have seen how thoroughly and successfully it was carried out. We stood back and gave them time and space to do their worst, and they have.
President Bush must respond in kind. With all the intelligence tools at our disposal we must eliminate all training camps and strong holds that we know about.
Our government knew about training camps run by terrorist friendly countries and never pushed to eliminate them. Countries have been allowed to continue their training while denying their activities.
No more.
America must rally and retaliate. The most powerful military force in the world must be mobilized to eliminate the possibility of further attacks.
We have stood by and done nothing for too long.
Countries across the world are stating their support for America during this tragedy and we must accept their support, especially terrorist sponsoring countries.
Give up your terrorists or be counted among them.
Any countries that harbor terrorists are no better then the cowards that they protect. The president must make it completely clear, terrorism has been tolerated for far too long.
This is the time for America to wipe out the scourge that is terrorism. The use of military force is not only feasible, it's necessary.
Surgical strikes on known camps and headquarters will send a clear and undeniable message. We have the most technologically advanced fighting force in the world, let's put it to work.
A decade ago we tested that technology during Desert Storm and realized just how precise we can be. Use of this technology will save untold lives in the years to come.
By destroying terrorist today we may be saving the lives of our children tomorrow.
(C) 2001 Daily Evergreen via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 12, 2001


End of Document