Enshrining a wrong Our view • The president now can legally shred individual rights.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 21, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14
Length: 634 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


The current Congress has given President Barack Obama something President George W. Bush never got from the congresses of his presidency: statutory authority to imprison people in military or civilian custody - including U.S. citizens seized on U.S. soil - with no time limit, no charges being filed and no trial taking place.
The power was included in the Defense Department authorization bill passed last week. All that's needed to round 'em up is an official claim that the targets are connected to terrorism and threaten national security.
It goes without saying that indefinite detention without charges or trial betrays the principles of the United States of America, or that the military should play any role in domestic law enforcement. Indeed, prior to the bill's passage, the nation's top military and law enforcement officials denounced its detention sections as unnecessary and unwise.
But members of Congress of both parties - although predominantly Republicans - apparently fear terrorism more than they revere the limits on government power and the guarantees of individual rights in the Constitution and Bill of Rights.
Mr. Obama could - and he should - veto this reckless codification of presidential power, as he once threatened to do. But he withdrew the threat after Congress revised the bill to clarify presidential discretion in determining how and where terrorism suspects may be handled.
The defense authorization bill builds upon and expands the war-making power of the Authorization for Use of Military Force enacted in the wake of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. That law specified action against those who had planned or carried out the 9/11 attacks or had assisted the attackers.
The new law reaches far beyond 9/11 to include anyone "who was a part of or substantially supported al-Qaida, the Taliban, or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the United States or its coalition partners, including any person who has committed a belligerent act or has directly supported such hostilities in aid of such enemy forces."
The bill explicitly affirms indefinite military imprisonment as an option, but exempts U.S. citizens and legal resident non-citizens. But it requires military imprisonment for suspected terrorists "captured in the course of hostilities."
The bill doesn't specify that such hostilities must occur overseas nor does it exempt U.S. citizens involved in such hostilities. For them, military custody is optional, not mandatory. It also gives the president the power to waive the military-custody requirement for any individual.
True, the defense authorization bill doesn't alter the status quo of indefinite imprisonment so much as it stamps it with Congress' seal of approval. But that is no mere formality.
President Bush and his administration unilaterally ran roughshod over the law when it came to war-making and prisoner-taking, seeing no need to seek congressional approval for powers they insisted presidents inherently possessed. Several decisions by the U.S. Supreme Court eventually corrected their faulty thinking.
During his election campaign, Mr. Obama promised to do better. After he was elected, he ordered an in-depth review of all prisoners in the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, in preparation for closing it. But in the end, there were several dozen prisoners who couldn't be tried because of a lack of admissible evidence and who were considered too dangerous to release.
The constitutionality of the new law eventually could be tested in court, but in national security matters, judges tend to give the executive branch the benefit of the doubt. They would be even more likely to do so now that Congress has added its approval.
Wiser leaders in some future Congress will have to remedy the excesses of this new law.

Load-Date: December 22, 2011


End of Document