Entrapment defense raised as possibility in terrorism case
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 11, 2007 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 450 words
Byline: By Geoff Mulvihill THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHERRY HILL, N.J. 
Body


He railed against the United States, helped scout out military installations for attack, offered to introduce his comrades to an arms dealer, and gave them a list of weapons he could obtain, including machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
These were not the actions of a terrorist, but of a paid FBI informer who helped bring down an alleged plot by six Muslim men to massacre U.S. soldiers at New Jersey's Fort Dix.
And those actions have raised questions of whether the government crossed the line and pushed the six men down a path they would not have otherwise followed.
It is an argument - entrapment - that has been made in other terrorism cases, and one that has generally failed in court since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
One defense attorney on the case, Troy Archie, said no decision has been made on whether to argue entrapment, but based on the FBI's own account, "the guys sort of led them on."
The six suspects were arrested this week after a 15-month FBI investigation that relied heavily on two paid informers who secretly recorded meetings and telephone conversations in which the suspects talked of killing "in the name of Allah."
U.S. Attorney Christopher Christie defended the government's handling of the case. He and the FBI portrayed the defendants as Muslim fanatics who were nearly ready to strike. They were arrested Monday night during what the FBI said was an attempt to buy AK-47 machine guns, M-16s and other weapons.
Former FBI agent Kevin Barrows said prosecutors appeared to have done things right.
"They corroborated with surveillance, and they had a gun buy set up," Barrows said.
The men are Serdar Tatar, 23; Agron Abdullahu, 24; Mohamad Ibrahim Shnewer, 22; Dritan "Anthony" or "Tony" Duka, 28; Shain Duka, 26; and Eljvir "Elvis" Duka, 23.
The same documents that prosecutors used to build a case against the suspects also depict them as somewhat disorganized, lackluster plotters. And clumsy and amateurish, too: The FBI learned of the alleged plot when the men went to a Circuit City store and asked a clerk to transfer a jihad training video of themselves onto a DVD. Also, they mistakenly thought an AK-47 costs $500, instead of $1,500 to $3,000.
Entrapment occurs when law enforcement officials entice others into committing a crime they otherwise would not have committed. Under the law, people cannot be convicted if they were entrapped. But there is no entrapment if a person is willing to break the law and law officers offer to help.
"If the source talks them into committing a crime, that is entrapment," said retired FBI agent Craig Dotlo, a 32-year veteran. But "if they are predisposed to commit a crime, and you give them the opportunity, that's fine."

Notes

 FORT DIX CHARGES 

Load-Date: May 11, 2007


End of Document