ENVIRONMENTALISTS VEXED OVER SPEAKER;
 ACTIVISTS SAY AUTHOR SCHEDULED TO APPEAR;
 IN REPUBLIC IS LOGGING INDUSTRY SPIN DOCTOR
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 4, 1998, Sunday,
SPOKANE EDITION


Copyright 1998 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION,
Length: 284 words
Byline: John Craig Staff writer
Dateline: REPUBLIC, WASH.
Body


The Kettle Range Conservation Group is crying foul over a scheduled appearance Monday night by a speaker who has written several books that purport to expose terrorist activities by environmentalists.
Author Barry Clausen's appearance Monday at 7 p.m. at Republic Elementary School is sponsored by the Ferry County Action League.
It will be Clausen's second visit to Republic, and local environmentalists are still chafing from the last one, in which he allegedly denounced some of them by name.
No spokesman for the Action League could be reached for comment, but the conservative group's September newsletter said Clausen ''will cover such topics as the history of local environmental groups, their funding and their links to Earth First, and what we can expect in the future from them and other such groups headed our way.''
While the Action League calls Clausen a ''nationally known investigative reporter and consultant,'' the Kettle Range Conservation Group says he has ''made a career of smearing the environmental movement with the charge of 'terrorism.'''
The conservation group calls Clausen ''industry's spin doctor,'' but says the Washington Contract Loggers Association ''terminated Clausen's contract because he failed to produce any actual evidence of environmental terrorism and got into legal trouble with Montana's Park County Sheriff's Department.''
That's ''not true at all,'' said Bill Pickell, manager of the loggers association.
''So far as I know, he is the foremost expert on eco-terrorism in the United States.''
Pickell said Clausen ''got a lot of information that was helpful to us.'' He said the association, far from cancelling Clausen's temporary contract, published his first book.

Load-Date: October 7, 1998


End of Document