ENVOY'S KILLERS STEP UP
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
June 9, 2000, Friday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a2
Length: 603 words
Byline: BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press writer
Body


ATHENS, Greece -- Europe's most elusive terrorist group claimed responsibility today for Thursday's assassination of a British defense attache, saying it killed him because of his role in NATO's "barbaric" airstrikes against Yugoslavia last year.
The Greek group, called November 17, made the claim in a 13-page declaration that appeared in the daily newspaper Eleftherotypia.
The declaration denounced NATO for "Nazi-like crimes and the assassinations of thousands of unarmed people."
The statement came a day after two gunmen on a motorcycle ambushed Brig. Stephen Saunders, 52, in Athens.
They shot Saunders repeatedly as his car sat in a morning traffic jam en route to a meeting to discuss possible tank sales to Greece.
Saunders' slaying was the 22nd claimed by the terrorist group dating back to the 1975 assassination of a CIA station chief.
The .45-caliber handgun used to kill Saunders the group's first British victim was used in four other slayings, police said.
Today's November 17 communique appeared to reflect the group's evolution from a heavily Marxist ideology to a strong nationalistic perspective.
The NATO military action against Yugoslavia was strongly opposed by most Greeks, who objected to the alliance's intervention in the region and felt kinship with fellow Christian Orthodox Serbs.
"We decided to execute (Saunders) because he took part in the planning of the barbaric airstrikes on Yugoslavia," said the statement from November 17, which takes its name from the 1973 student-led uprising against the military junta that ruled Greece from 1967-74.
It said the policies expressed by British leaders, including Prime Minister Tony Blair, "surpassed the audacity and cynicism even of the Americans."
The statement also took credit for a series of attacks last year, including firing rockets at the German ambassador's residence and offices of the governing Socialist Party.
Greek Premier Costas Simitis called top officials to a meeting to discuss the slaying.
Foreign Minister George Papandreou promised a "most merciless" response.
Greek authorities are under enormous pressure to show results against November 17.
In 25 years of bloodshed and violence, the group has killed almost two dozen foreigners and prominent Greeks.
But no suspect has ever been arrested in connection with any of the attacks a fact a U.S. commission considered in its recommendation to put Greece on a short list of countries "not cooperating fully" in fighting terrorism.
The State Department has described Greece as "one of the weakest links" in anti-terrorism efforts in Europe.
Another failure to crack the terrorist cycle here would be an embarrassing blow in a nation desperately trying to shed its image as an unstable corner of Western Europe.
Some critics have alleged the governing Socialists lack the will to crack down on domestic terrorism.
Following the latest killing, some commentators wondered whether Greece has the competence to handle security for the 2004 Olympics, to be held in Athens. "The Greek record on fighting terrorism, whatever its origin or cause, is outstandingly pathetic," said an editorial in the left-leaning British daily The Guardian.
Saunders took few security precautions common among diplomats in Athens. He drove alone in a regular car without bulletproofing. Neighbors said he took walks and visited the market in his neighborhood in Athens' northern suburbs.
"Not only have they killed my husband, they have destroyed me," Saunder's sobbing widow, Heather, said at a news conference today. "We must prevent this type of thing happening again. … These wicked men must be brought to justice."

Graphic

 
The Associated Press * Grief stricken: Heather Saunders, widow of British defense attache Stephen Saunders, left, folds her notes after speaking to media, as her daughter, center, and others stand by outside her home in a northern Athens suburb today. Stephen Saunders was killed Thursday.

Load-Date: June 9, 2000


End of Document