Envoy in Tunis Has Met Many Top P.L.O. Leaders, Bush Aides Say
The New York Times
July 2, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 789 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 1
Body


The United States Ambassador to Tunis has held informal discussions with virtually all of the top leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization, not just the second-in-command, Saleh Khalef, Administration officials say.
An Administration official declined to say exactly whom the Ambassador, Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., has spoken to, but simply noted that ''Tunis is a small town and sooner or later almost all the P.L.O. leaders come through.'' The meetings stopped just below the level of Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chief.
Another Administration official said, though, that the discussions were part of an effort by Washington to persuade the P.L.O. leadership to endorse Israel's proposal that Palestinians in the occupied territories be allowed to elect representatives to negotiate a settlement. He said that they would continue despite the fact that some of the P.L.O. officials involved have been known to be deeply involved in the past in terrorist acts.
Pro-Israeli Congressmen and Jewish organizations have called for a severing of the United States-P.L.O. dialogue now that it has clearly reached the level where it involves officials on the P.L.O. side who had direct involvement in planning terrorist operations. But the Administration official said that in the eyes of the American Government, P.L.O. leaders started with a ''clean'' slate after Mr. Arafat forswore terrorism and recognized Israel on Dec. 14.
 
'The P.L.O. Met Our Conditions'
Until they sully that slate with new acts of terrorism, Washington intends to continue a dialogue with them, no matter what is in their biographies, he said.
The disclosure last week that Mr. Pelletreau had held informal discussions with Mr. Khalef has been protested by groups that support Israel because Mr. Khalef, by his own admission, once played a role in the Black September terrorist organization, which carried out the 1972 Munich Olympics massacre.
Last week, he was indicted in an Italian court in Venice in connection with the supply of arms by the P.L.O. to the Italian terrorist group, the Red Brigades.
Speaking of whether the United States should talk with P.L.O. officials known to have had involvement in terrorism, an Administration official closely involved in policymaking said: ''I think this is an issue that was confronted in December of 1988. Previously, we were not meeting with the P.L.O. because they had engaged in terrorism and had not forsworn it according to the conditions we laid out.
 
Pelletreau's Informal Sessions
''In December 1988, under the previous Administration, the P.L.O. met our conditions,'' said the official, who asked not to be identified. ''We said, 'Fine, they have met our conditions, now we will meet with them.' So that bridge was crossed at that time. Yes, there have been instances in the past where elements of the P.L.O. have engaged in terrorism, but they forswore it and now they start clean. They have not, as far as we know, engaged in terrorism since then - including the specific individual in question - as far as we know.''
The person to whom he was referring was Mr. Khalef, who is also known as Abu Iyad.
Administration officials have said privately they are not ready to hold Mr. Arafat responsible for acts of terrorism or guerrilla raids launched by pro-Syrian P.L.O. factions, which though nominally under the P.L.O. umbrella are clearly not under Mr. Arafat's control. Israel has argued that no distinction should be made between the P.LO. factions and that Mr. Arafat should be accountable for the activities of all of them.
Defending the expansion of the United States-P.L.O. dialogue, the Administration official said Ambassador Pelletreau told Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d: ''I am getting invited out by Arab ambassadors. Tunis is not that big a place. There are always senior P.L.O. officials wherever I go. Why can't I use these informal sessions, sometimes social, sometimes semiofficial working lunches, to reinforce our message?''
It is not whom Mr. Pelletreau was meeting that is important, the Administration official said, it was the message he was conveying, ''and the message that we were passing to the P.L.O. was to sign on to the election proposal.''
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's election proposal calls for the 1.7 million Palestinian Arabs living under Israeli occupation on the West Bank and in Gaza to elect leaders who would negotiate temporary self-government. Israel, the Palestinians, Egypt and Jordan would later negotiate a permanent settlement in a second stage of talks. The Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza will only consider such an offer if they get approval from the P.L.O. and the P.L.O. will only give such approval if it is assured of some kind of role in the process.

Graphic

 
Photo of Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., United States Ambassador to Tunis (Universal Pictorial Press & Agency Ltd.)


End of Document