EQUAL TIME: Civil rights are safe under Patriot Act
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 8, 2005 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Editorial;; Column
Length: 460 words
Byline: DAVID E. NAHMIAS
Body


As Congress and the public begin the debate over renewal of certain provisions of the USA Patriot Act it is important to ensure that our discussion is honest and founded on the facts. Two crucial facts are clear: the Patriot Act has addressed significant vulnerabilities in America's pre-Sept. 11 defenses, keeping America safer from terrorism as well as other serious crimes; and to date, as Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) recently confirmed, there has not been a single verified civil rights abuse under the Patriot Act.
Citizens and the media are certainly free to question the exercise of government power when there is concern that our fundamental liberties may be in jeopardy. Critics of the Patriot Act should be honest, however, about what the statute actually does.
Critics commonly portray Section 215 of the legislation as a scary new tool for government intrusion. Instead, Section 215 extended to agents investigating national security cases a basic tool for obtaining relevant records that agents investigating everyday crimes like bank fraud have had, in the form of grand jury subpoenas, for generations.
Section 215 actually contains more safeguards for civil liberties than subpoenas do, including a strict limitation to international terrorism and espionage cases, the requirement of approval by senior FBI officials, regular congressional oversight of its use, and, most significantly, the requirement of prior approval by a federal judge.
Some critics claim that Section 802 defines terrorism too broadly. But "domestic terrorism" is limited to those whose activities involve criminal acts dangerous to human life committed with apparent terrorist intent. Section 802 clearly does not apply to organizations engaging in nonviolent political activity, as some have claimed.
The Attorney General has stated his desire to conduct a constructive and meaningful discussion on the law as we consider the renewal of many of the Patriot Act's crucial provisions. (Section 802 does not sunset and therefore does not need to be renewed). Before people criticize a law that has helped to keep our nation safer from terrorism and other crimes without infringing upon our civil liberties for more than three years, it is imperative that we speak honestly about what the law really does.
 
* David E. Nahmias is the United States attorney for the Northern District of Georgia.
This column is solicited to provide another viewpoint to an AJC editorial published today. To respond to an AJC editorial, contact David Beasley at dbeasley@ajc.com or call 404-526-7371. Responses should be no longer than 600 words. Not all responses can be published. Published responses may be republished and made available in the AJC or other databases and electronic formats.  

Graphic

 
David E. Nahmias ONLINE FORUM Does the Patriot Act abuse civil liberties? Weigh in at www.ajc.com/opinion. 

Load-Date: April 8, 2005


End of Document