Equal Justice in Israel
The New York Times
May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL
Length: 361 words
Body


Israel has done what decency requires in the case of the two Arabs who were taken alive from a hijacked bus and then killed by security police. Without excuse or equivocation, Defense Minister Moshe Arens confirms the deed and pledges that those responsible shall be held criminally accountable.
Editorial welcomes Israeli Government pledge to prosecute those responsible for death of two Arabs who were taken alive from hijacked bus and later killed by security police but notes that Defense Min Moshe Arens took action only after uproar over attempted censorshipof what happened when security forces stormed busThis follows a Government crackdown against Jewish terrorism aimed at Palestinians on the West Bank. Both actions help Israel demonstrate that it can hear the claims of Arabs for equal justice.
Still, Mr. Arens took action in the bus incident only after an uproar over attempted censorship. The Government tried to suppress or delay a full and truthful account of what happened when security forces stormed a bus captured by hijackers on April 12. Two of the four Arab terrorists were killed in the assault, but a news photograph showed that at least one was still alive after being taken into custody.  For circulating that photograph, and reporting that the Government had established a commission of inquiry, Hadashot, an afternoon newspaper, was closed down for four days. Under a system of self-censorship, other newspapers heeded a Government plea to further suppress the information on the ground that disclosure would jeopardize the lives of Israelis imprisoned in Arab countries. Possibly so, but censorship also served the political interests of a Government heading into a July election.  Nonetheless, this controversy would be unimaginable elsewhere in the Middle East. Try to imagine a defense minister in Syria, say, conceding that his country's security police had broken the rules in murdering detained terrorists and that prosecution lay ahead. By the standards of its adversaries, Israel has reason for pride even as it admits this lapse. By its own standards, it has reason to grieve for all the victims of this hijacking, Arab and Jew.


End of Document