ERADICATING THE 'P.L.O. DISEASE'
The New York Times
July 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 416 words
Body


To the Editor:
I have just returned from a week in Israel and Lebanon that started out to be a vacation but because of rapidly developing events turned into a fact-finding trip at the request of the Israeli Government. I am concerned about some of the reaction to Israel's military operation in the region.
I visited the Beaufort Castle north of Metulla, which the P.L.O.  had used to shell Israeli civilians in northern Israel. I also drove up the coastal highway in the company of an Israeli lieutenant colonel and visited the cities of Tyre and Sidon.
Cal Thomas letter describes his fact-finding trip in Lebanon at request of Israeli Government
In Sidon, I saw hundreds of cases of ammunition, weapons and mortar shells in the basements of churches and hospitals and in underground garages of apartment buildings. These were deliberately placed in areas of high civilian concentration by the P.L.O. and their Communist suppliers (boxes were clearly marked with the names of the ''peace-loving'' nations that provided them - the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, People's Republic of China, etc.). The P.L.O. knew there would be civilian casualties and consequent pressure on Israel should the Israelis launch an attack against them.
The reports of widespread destruction and indiscriminate bombing are false. There is a narrow strip of destruction along the highway which, with the possible exception of Beirut, is confined to areas of P.L.O. concentration and/or ammunition storage areas. Elsewhere, life goes on as best as possible, given the conditions of the past decade. At least the Israelis warned citizens they were coming in, which is more than the P.L.O. did for innocent Israelis it has murdered over the years.
Israel has conducted an apparently successful cancer operation in an attempt to eradicate the P.L.O. disease, which has infected the world with terrorism. Instead of criticizing the surgeon, we ought to be supporting Israel in the operation. Because of what Israel has done, we have a better chance of restoring peace and stability to the Middle East than we have had in years.
Those who have been silent or refused to twist arms to end the terrorism spawned by the Soviet-backed P.L.O. should have the decency to do the same, now that Israel has justifiably sought to bring an end to the matter. For such persons to speak against Israel now is to risk being labeled a hypocrite.
CAL THOMAS, Vice President for Communications, The Moral Majority, Inc.  Lynchburg, Va., June 29, 1982


End of Document