ESPIONAGE IN U.S. KEEPS FBI HOPPING IN ERA OF PEACE
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
February 1, 1997, Saturday


Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 431 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- The FBI is investigating some 200 spy cases nationwide as the end of the Cold War has brought no slackening in foreign espionage against this country, an official said Friday.
''That's a good number,'' replied Raymond A. Mislock, chief of the national security section of the bureau's Washington field office, when asked whether ongoing espionage investigations actually number around 200.
''We have an extremely high number of espionage allegations,'' said Mislock, who supervised the investigation and arrest late last year of former CIA station chief Harold James Nicholson and former FBI employee Earl Edwin Pitts on charges of spying for Russia.
''The Russians are still here,'' Mislock told a gathering of reporters. ''It's no accident that the SVRR and GRU residencies in Washington are the largest in the world. And it's not just the Russians. The threat comes from throughout the world.''
The SVRR is the successor to the Soviet KGB and the GRU is Russian military intelligence. A residency is the Russian term for what the CIA calls a station - a foreign office or bureau.
''Some people in government who should have known better assumed this would die with the end of the Cold War,'' Mislock said, but he noted that the manpower in his office has increased, not decreased, since then.
Mislock handles both counterespionage and counterterrorism cases in Washington and northern Virginia and terrorism cases against Americans in the Middle East, Africa and Europe.
Growing instances of domestic terrorism, like the Oklahoma City bombing, prompted the assignment of more agents to counterterrorism, Mis-lock said.
A year ago, FBI headquarters had one section of agents dealing with terrorism. Now, one section deals with domestic terrorism and another section with international terrorism. Academics are being hired and experts borrowed from the CIA and the Defense Intelligence Agency to staff a terrorism analysis section.
''The domestic threat has become more of a concern than previously,'' Mislock said. ''And the international threat has stayed very high.''
Agents working for Mislock were sent by FBI Director Louis Freeh to Saudi Arabia to help investigate the bombing of a housing complex that killed 19 U.S. airmen last June. All but a handful of the agents were withdrawn as the Saudis kept them from participating equally in the investigation.
Recently, Freeh and Attorney General Janet Reno have publicly criticized Saudi Arabia for failing to answer U.S. questions about more than three dozen suspects in custody, whom Saudi sources have said are linked to Iran.

Load-Date: April 3, 1998


End of Document