ESSAY;
TERRORISM DEFEATS REAGAN
The New York Times
October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-ed
Length: 759 words
Byline: By William Safire
Dateline: Washington
Body


The United States position on international terrorism has just turned to mush. All of George Shultz's fine oratory about ''the ethics of power'' in striking back at vipers' nests that can be shown to be the source of hostage taking and murder stands revealed as so much hot air.
In recent months, Israel intercepted two boatloads of terrorists from the P.L.O.'s ''Force 17'' who were trying to slip into that country to kill civilians. A score of these invaders were killed, a dozen captured.
The P.L.O. struck next where Israel could not defend its nationals, on Cyprus. Two Israeli men and one woman were held hostage on their boat, then brutally murdered, by a hit team that was then taken into custody on that island.
The members of Force 17 already captured by Israel, when shown pictures of the murderers held on Cyprus, triumphantly identified them as fellow members of their elite force. They trained together at the P.L.O. camp in Tunisia, current headquarters of this war against Israel.
Israel's legal and moral justification for national self-defense was unmistakable; the source of the terror was sharply defined; the military necessity for action was clear. Israel's air arm reached out across the Mediterranean and struck back, destroying what the P.L.O. thought to be its sanctuary in Tunisia.
At first, the White House reaction was exactly right: This strike at the source of terror was an understandable, legitimate act of self-defense. In fact, Israel did what Mr. Reagan so often talked of doing, after the bombing of our embassy in Beirut and after the death of 250 peacekeeping marines: hitting the identified perpetrators of crimes swiftly and surgically.
But then the Arab world got to our State Department. Secretary Shultz, heretofore a hard-liner on terrorism, began waffling; although we did not condemn the Israeli retaliation, we did not ''condone'' it. The instruction went from Foggy Bottom to the White House: Let's just shut up. Let the Israelis bear the brunt of terrorist fury.
The reason for tiptoeing away was simple: Mr. Shultz was fearful that any U.S. moral support for the strike might cost the lives of American hostages or encourage demonstrations at U.S. embassies. Simply put, he was afraid of associating our country with toughness toward terrorism.
The moment of truth came at the U.N. Security Council, where Tunisia demanded a vote of censure against Israel for ''an act of armed aggression.'' Cave in, counseled our new Ambassador to the U.N., Vernon Walters, fresh from a ''silent mission'' to Damascus. His excuse: we had asked Tunisia to provide refuge to the followers of Arafat after their defeat in Lebanon, and owed Tunis support when its guests were attacked inside that country.
That is palpable nonsense: Did Mr. Reagan commit the U.S. at the time to the use of Tunisia as safe haven for the launching of terrorist attacks? Any nation that agrees to harbor terrorists takes the responsibility for seeing that its guests remain peaceful.
Israel's Foreign Minister appealed directly to Secretary Shultz to veto the corrupt condemnation, just as the U.S. in the Ford Administration vetoed a similar protest by Uganda after Israel's Entebbe raid. Mr. Shamir pointed out that a state had a lawful right to strike back at centers of terrorism, provided it had given warning about its policy and acted with proportionality. Israel had done both.
Mr. Shultz said that the decision was up to the President. The Israelis found it hard to believe that under Ronald Reagan, the United States would permit the Security Council to condemn its ally and call for reparations - for, of all things, practicing what the President and the Secretary of State have been preaching.
Ambassador Walters, beginning his service at the U.N. by sullying a great career, provided the necessary fig leaf for a sellout by asking the Arab states to remove the words ''state terrorism'' in the resolution, and to change sanctions from mandatory to voluntary.
Mr. Reagan's initial resolve collapsed. He agreed to let our U.N. Ambassador abandon Israel in the Security Council, to abstain rather than to raise his hand to say no to the notion of state sanctuary for killers.
With consummate hypocrisy, Mr. Reagan's Ambassador accompanied his craven abstention with a press release affirming the principle that ''states subject to terrorist acts may respond with appropriate use of force to deter these attacks.''
But we did not put our vote where our mouth was; our ally stands censured and betrayed and our nation stands shamed by moral cowardice.


End of Document