ESSAY;
CHOOSING UP SIDES
The New York Times
July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 844 words
Byline: By William Safire
Body


.2,0,147.2,2,496.8,0WASHINGTON, July 23 - The central fact about Central America is that it is central to the defense of the United States. If our nearest neighbors continue to be subverted and taken over by Communists, the region will offer the Russians a base directly threatening our security and increasing the possibility of nuclear war.
Saber-rattling Al Haig, it turns out, was right; responsible moderates like Senator Richard Lugar, who urged we give hundreds of millions of U.S. aid dollars to the Communists in Nicaragua, were wrong. A regionwide war is going on, and that undeniable fact forces us to choose up sides.
William Safire essay says the central fact about Central America is that it is central to the defense of the United States.
Most Americans do not like that idea at all. They prefer to be on the ''side'' of peace, of negotiation, of talking rather than fighting. But peace is a goal, not a side, and it is not the other side's goal.
The trouble with such wishful thinking is becoming plain: Unless Americans take sides, no chance for negotiation will exist. When one side is out to win, and the other side is eager for peace, the side determined to win will win.
Such an approach is all too simplistic, say those who refuse to resist the Communist tide in Central America. The most self-righteous among them argue that we cannot ally ourselves with ''bloodthirsty'' military regimes; they are willing to permit the triumph of greater evil lest they become tainted by supporting lesser evil. The defeatists among the nonresisters say that it is hopeless for us to stop this wave of the future; as we lost supporting a fight half a world away, we will lose even on our own borders. And some ideologues in that set think that ''social justice'' can be better achieved under communism.
Better to be simplistic than paralyzed. An ''our side'' is forming that understands that military takeovers by Communist guerrillas can be stopped by direct military-economic counterpressures. We need not allow the Communists - whether they label themselves Castroites, Marxists, Sandinistas or some other euphemism -to continue to operate from privileged sanctuaries.
Just as the offensive in El Salvador began in Nicaragua, the defense of El Salvador must begin in Nicaragua. If anti-Communist forces are to win -and a few unreconstructed hawks are not ashamed to use the word ''win'' -then the source of Communist war supplies must be cut off totally, with no hope of being restored.
The only way that supplies to El Salvador will be permanently interdicted is for the exporters of revolution in Nicaragua to have their hands full of internal revolt. If they are busy at home, they will not be busy abroad.  Congressmen are making theological distinctions between aid for the purpose of interdiction versus aid for the purpose of overthrow. In fact, our position should be undiplomatically honest: Here are the guns to coerce the Communists into staying out of El Salvador, which is our purpose. If you use them to overthrow the Communists in Nicaragua, which is your purpose, so much the better.
In pursuit of that policy of dealing with the source of trouble, we have finally cut back on sugar purchases from Nicaragua, which will increase the cost of subsidies to the Soviet Union. We are flexing our military and naval muscle in the area, to remind Managua that unless its terrorism in El Salvador stops, a naval quarantine will be the next step.
At the same time, we must meet the military threat by training an antiguerrilla army in El Salvador and Honduras. Since we disapprove of the customary antiterrorist terrorism, we are required to supply those countries with helicopter gunships and other expensive hardware needed to win that war.
Israel, long the target of Nicaraguan-P.L.O. cooperation, has agreed to work with the U.S. in supplying Soviet arms captured from the P.L.O. and hopes to be assigned a more peaceful task of teaching El Salvador's farmers how to revolutionize agriculture. Consequently, Israel can expect to be vilified by appeasers and defeatists in the U.S.; curiously, a leader of the defeatist crowd in the House, Representative Stephen Solarz, has the largest Jewish constituency in the nation.
The Kissinger commission, say defeatists like Senator Robert Byrd, will provide a bipartisan smokescreen for a hard line; let's hope so. That commission is charged with recommending policy to meet the challenge of aggression, not to satisfy the nation's vocal minority of cut-and-runners.
The Reagan Administration seems to be moving from rhetoric to reality. As a result, for the first time, the Nicaraguan Communists are now calling for ''a total halt to the supplying of arms,'' an idea that they have hitherto treated with contempt.
That's a good sign. After they have offered amnesty and free elections to those fighting for their nation's freedom; after good faith is shown by the reopening of an independent press in Managua, and after the threat to U.S. security recedes, our side should think seriously about agreeing to talk.


End of Document