ESSAY;
BOLT FROM THE BLUE
The New York Times
October 15, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 752 words
Byline: By William Safire
Body


WASHINGTON Eighteen months ago, in the informal talks after a nuclear arms
control session, a Russian negotiator said casually to one of his American counterparts, ''What if Qaddafi got the Bomb?''
In response, the American merely winced - such a prospect is one that all of us hate to face - but he duly noted the Russian's concern about the possession of a nuclear device by a terrorist state.
Today, the successful escalation of terror tactics against the U.S., by fanatics in the Middle East, is the most serious campaign issue raised by the Democratic candidate against Mr. Reagan. At the same time, the close call endured by Margaret Thatcher and her Cabinet at the hands of I.R.A. bombers has driven home to Europeans the rising threat of terrorism.
Project this threat ahead five or ten years. After we figure out a way to stop trucks and hand-delivered bombs, we must expect the terrorists to improve their delivery systems. A West German company has already delivered the components of a medium-range missile to the Libyans; only the most cockeyed optimists think that terror states will not be able to buy intercontinental missiles on the secret arms market by 1990.
Logic suggests that, sooner or later, the terrorists' bombs will be nuclear. So far, this has been the stuff of page-turners, but just as science-fiction writers predicted today's routine space flights, the scary stories of today's paperback pundits presage tomorrow's real crises.
Unrest assured that Colonel Qaddafi - or the successor to the dying Ayatollah, or perhaps some paranoid Sandinista - will one day possess both an atomic bomb and a missile that can take it across an ocean.
In some future extremis, a terror- state leader will tell Washington or Moscow that unless some concession is made, a world capital will be destroyed. Retaliation would mean nothing to a suicidal bomber; he could not be deterred in any way short of surrender to his demands. What could civilized leaders, in their muscle-bound helplessness, do to a canny madman who welcomes mutual assured destruction?
We are running away from that question, finding security in our old thinking that the threat is from a rational superpower and the greatest worry is an escalation of a conventional war. But consider the unthinkable: World War III may not be the Soviet Union versus the Free World, but terrorism versus civilization.
The only serious suggestion put forward so far is that plan so glibly derided and dismissed by scientific doubters and the frozen arms-control establishment as ''Star Wars,'' and so hastily written off by Walter Mondale as ''militarizing the heavens.''
The derogating knee-jerkers live with today's threat, with which they are comfortable, but refuse to deal with tomorrow's threat, which is looming larger. That threat is from superterrorism, armed with atomic missiles in a defenseless world. At the least, superterrorism will be able to hold millions hostage to one bolt from the blue, and, at the most, be able to trigger accidental or mistaken war between superpowers.
Space defense would make it possible for the superpowers - the world's nuclear police - to detect a missile in its booster phase and shoot it down before it destroyed a city. If an M.P. in the sky is ''militarization of the heavens,'' make the most of it: Support your celestial sheriff.
In the Soviet Union, we see signals of a struggle between polemical bureaucrats and more practical soldiers. Marshal Ogarkov's bid for power, based on technological realities, has not been wholly squelched; his protege at the Standing Consultative Commission, Lieut. Gen. Viktor Starodubov, has not been purged.
That suggests to me that although the Russians now in power fear U.S. advances in space defense and are trying to block our antisatellite test scheuled for next month, it could be that the key to offensive arms control will be found in mutual defense against superterrorists and insurance against accidents.
''Could be'' is not ''is,'' nor should we forget that most active terrorists today are supported by the Russians. But Ronald Reagan's offer to share space-defense technology is the most daring peace proposal made by an American President, on a historic level with Eisenhower's warning of a military-industrial complex.
A generation from now, the Reagan Presidency will be remembered for sinking the socialistic Law of the Sea and for launching the world's counterterror space defense. How many of us will be able to say we supported him in his greatest moves?B


End of Document