Estrada denounces trial as 'judicial terrorism'
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 1, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 610 words
Byline: Reuters News Service
Body


MANILA, Philippines -- Former Philippine President Joseph Estrada, unshaven, in slippers and denouncing "judicial terrorism," refused Monday to take part in his trial, but the court swept aside his pleas and let it proceed without defense lawyers.
Compelled by the court's three judges to appear before them on a charge punishable by death, the first former Philippine leader to be criminally prosecuted repeatedly begged for permission to leave, but the judges brushed his appeals aside.
Estrada's defense team of nine lawyers had boycotted the opening of the historic trial, suggesting the Sandiganbayan (anti-corruption) court was trying the case in haste.
Presiding Judge Anacleto Badoy voiced "strong displeasure" at the defense accusation and threatened to cite them in contempt.
Ousted in a "people power" revolt in January, the former film actor is accused of economic plunder for allegedly amassing more than 4 billion pesos ($78 million) during his 31 months in office.
"You can see already that I cannot get a fair trial," a flustered Estrada told Reuters before leaving the courthouse under heavy guard at the end of the proceedings.
None of Estrada's lawyers on record was present -- they said the date for the trial had been set without their consent -- and the former president rejected court-appointed counsel. That lawyer in turn said he did not want to represent Estrada.
The first prosecution witness, a vice chairman of gaming firm Belle Corp., took the stand and will continue testimony when proceedings resume Oct. 17.
Prosecutors said the witness would testify that Estrada forced two state pension funds to buy into the company in exchange for commissions of $3.7 million.
Estrada told radio stations in the morning he would not appear before what he called a "kangaroo court."
He walked in an hour late after being advised by counsel not to resist police who had come to fetch him from a military hospital, where he was being treated for a lung ailment.
Estrada, who has denied the charges against him and has been in police custody since April, told the judges it was his constitutional right not to appear at his trial.
"Forgive me for my attire," said Estrada, who was dressed in crumpled beige pants, a T-shirt and a beige jacket. In contrast to his usual matinee idol image, he was unshaven and in leather slippers.
"I was not prepared."
Hundreds of pro-Estrada loyalists noisily protested outside the court, saying he was being victimized. Scores of policemen blocked their path, but there was no violence.
Estrada, seated in the front row, repeatedly walked up to the bench and appealed to be allowed to leave.
"This involves my life, liberty and honor. I have a right to get counsel of my choice."
At one point, he said, "This is judicial terrorism."
But the judges rebuffed him.
Estrada earlier told a radio station he had decided not to attend the proceedings since the court was biased.
"I don't know if this is a kangaroo court, it is very unfair and biased," he said. "The Sandiganbayan has long humiliated me."
Estrada's lawyers had also appealed to the Supreme Court to postpone the trial, but the court rejected the petition.
Estrada said the government twice gave him the option to leave the country after he was ousted.
"I did not accept that," he told the radio station. "What will the people say, that I ran away, that I escaped? In other words, my conscience is clear and I am ready to face all the charges against me but it seems that the court is not giving me justice in the way it is handling my case and I am sad to say this."
Estrada also faces charges of corruption, perjury and illegal use of an alias, which will be heard separately.

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document