EU anti-terrorism chief wants jihadis rehabilitated, not jailed; He says prisons are 'incubators of radicalization'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 28, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 9
Length: 317 words
Byline: RAF CASERT

The Associated Press
Dateline: BRUSSELS 
Highlight: AP Interview: EU anti-terror chief says rehabilitate returning jihadis, don't imprison them
Body


- The European Union's anti-terror chief called Tuesday for countries to rehabilitate rather than punish returning jihadis with no blood on their hands, saying some prisons have become incubators of radicalization.
EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator Gilles de Kerchove said, If we can avoid prison, let's avoid prison.
At a time when EU nations are still shocked by the attacks in France early this month, many are pushing for swift repressive measures for anyone who has gone off to fight holy war in Syria or Iraq.
And even if true criminals among the returnees need to be punished with jail time, I don't advise to bring them all to court because it would be a mistake, De Kerchove said.
Since the Paris attacks Jan. 7 through Jan. 9 that killed 20 people, including the three gunmen, dozens of people have been charged in France with defending terrorism. Several were almost immediately convicted under special measures for immediate sentencing. Inciting terrorism can bring a five-year prison term - or up to seven years for inciting terrorism online.
We know how much jails are major incubators of radicalization. Much better, provided they accept to do that, they undertake major rehabilitation, De Kerchove said.
France recently expanded prison terms for terrorism-related offenses, but the country was still caught off-guard when a member of a jihadi network worked in tandem with his brother and a former jailhouse acquaintance during three days of attacks in the Paris region.
These people got radicalized in prison, De Kerchove said.
And for those who are convicted, he suggests jails be designed in a way that they are not in contact with petty criminals and instead can meet with moderate imams. Belgium is already working on such plans.
A major challenge facing the authorities is to collect evidence against foreign fighters traveling to conflict-torn Syria that would stand up in European courts.

Load-Date: January 28, 2015


End of Document