EU criticizes nations over secret detentions; Sixteen countries helped the CIA transport terror suspects to overseas prisons, a report said.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 15, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A20
Length: 545 words
Byline: Molly Moore, Washington Post
Body


The European Parliament yesterday approved a report admonishing 15 European countries and Turkey for helping the CIA transport terrorism suspects held in secret or for failing to cooperate in Parliament's investigation of the practice.
The legislative body for the European Union's 27 countries said many member states had been "turning a blind eye" to the CIA-operated flights carrying prisoners who were subjected to "incommunicado detention and torture" during interrogations, violating EU human-rights standards.
"We have opened up a closed door, and there is even more behind this," said Parliament member Claudio Fava, an Italian Socialist who drafted the report. It was approved by a 382-256 vote, with 74 abstentions.
Parliament criticized the CIA renditions - an extralegal tactic by which alleged terrorists have been abducted and interrogated at secret sites overseas - "as an illegal instrument used by the USA in the fight against terrorism," and condemned the "acceptance and concealing of the practices by the secret services and governmental authorities of certain European countries."
Parliament deleted some of the toughest sections of the report, however, including recommendations for sanctions against some countries for human-rights violations. It softened criticisms of some governments, including those of Britain, Germany and Spain, after intense lobbying from those states.
The vote came after a divisive debate among members.
Parliament member Jas Gawronski of Italy criticized the final report as "a blanket condemnation of the secret services" and said it was "predicated on the assumption that there is one chief guilty party, and that is the USA."
President Bush acknowledged in September that the CIA used secret prisons to interrogate some terrorism suspects overseas. He did not say where the prisons were.
A parliamentary committee spent a year investigating the allegations and interviewed more than 200 witnesses, including EU, NATO and U.S. State Department officials as well as individuals who alleged they had been kidnapped by CIA agents in Europe and held in secret U.S. prisons.
The report criticized the EU's foreign-policy chief, Javier Solana, for "omissions" in his testimony before the parliamentary committee.
The report, which repeated basic findings made in a draft released last year, admonished 11 countries for having a role in CIA flights: Germany, Sweden, Spain, Ireland, Greece, Cyprus, Denmark, Turkey, Macedonia, Bosnia and Romania. The report also cited Britain, Austria, Italy, Poland and Portugal as uncooperative in the probe.
The report said that investigators had received no information to "contradict any of the allegations" that the CIA ran a secret prison in Romania, and that Parliament could not "acknowledge or deny" that any of the secret facilities had been set up in Poland. Those two countries have denied hosting CIA prisons.
Separately, the Swiss government yesterday authorized a criminal investigation into a February 2003 CIA flight that reportedly carried the Egyptian cleric Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, known as Abu Omar, from Italy, where he was allegedly kidnapped, to Ramstein Air Base in Germany, crossing Swiss airspace.
Read more about the European Parliament report via http://go.philly.com/cia

Load-Date: February 15, 2007


End of Document