EU LEADERS HAGGLE OVER MIGRANTS IN MARATHON SUMMIT 
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
June 30, 2018 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ASECTION; Pg. A-5
Length: 638 words
Body


BRUSSELS -Italy's rookie prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, negotiated a package of measures at his first European Union summit to stem the flow of migrants into the bloc and spread the burden of handling those who do arrive.
During talks in Brussels that wrapped up after 4:30 a.m. Friday, member states agreed to increase border security, set up holding centers for asylum seekers, and to speed up the process of determining whether people have the right to asylum and expelling those who don't. Leaders also pledged to overhaulrules for distributing migrants when a gateway country is overwhelmed, a key Italian demand.
Within the bloc, deep divisions remain between those with a relatively liberal stance on migration, such as German Chancellor Angela Merkel or Spain's Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez, and leaders like Hungary's Viktor Orban, who told reporters on his arrival that "the invasion must be stopped."
Refugee flows have declined sharply since 2015.
Migrant ship capsizes
TRIPOLI, Libya - More than 100 migrants are feared dead after their boat capsized off the Libyan coast on Friday, an official with the country's navy said.
The coast guard saved 16 others and recovered the bodies of three children under age 1 in the accident off Tripoli, the capital, a spokesman for the Libyan navy, Ayoub Qasim, added.
Between 120 and 125 migrants from Arab and African countries were onboard, the official said.
The boat engine caught fire, triggering a stampede among its passengers, according to Mr. Qasim.
Anti-terror HQ attacked
BAMAKO, Mali - Five people were killed in an attack targeting the headquarters of the G5 Sahel anti-terrorism force in Mali on Friday, army sources said.
Two Malian soldiers and three attackers were killed in the battle, the governor of the Mopti region, General Alassane Sidi Toure, told Radio Nationale.
Another four soldiers were injured. Four attackers were arrested, with three of them also being treated.
By attacking the G5 Sahel force, "a symbol of the battle against terrorism," the perpetrators had wanted to send a message, the governor said. "But it won't diminish in the slightest our determination in the fight against terrorism," he said.
'Catastrophe' in Syria
BEIRUT - The United Nations' human rights chief warned Friday of "catastrophe" in Syria, where government forces are on the offensive against insurgents, forcing tens of thousands of people to flee their homes.
Syrian state TV said troops entered the village of Ibtah in the southern province of Daraa after opposition gunmen handed over their weapons and requested amnesty. They aired footage showing government troops entering the village.
Syrian troops are marching in the last rebel-held areas in the country under the cover of airstrikes.
The Syrian Central Military Media said that besides Ibtah, rebels surrendered their weapons in the nearby villages of Tafas and Dael. Rebels in the villages of Umm al-Mayadeen, Naseeb, Saida and Tiba have also agreed to surrender, it said.
Opposition activists reported that more than 100,000 people have fled their homes since the government offensive began June 19. The U.N. said earlier this week 50,000 have been displaced. Many are moving toward the border with Jordan, which said it would keep its frontier closed.
Cave rescue stretches on
THAM LUANG CAVE, Thailand - The prime minister of Thailand, Prayuth Chan-ocha, offered encouragement Friday to the families of 12 boys and their soccer coach trapped in a flooded cave complex, and pledged to continue the massive rescue operation.
Still, officials acknowledged that they faced many obstacles in finding the boys, ages 11 to 16, and their coach, 25, who have been missing since Saturday afternoon.
Despite a major mobilization of soldiers, park rangers, expert divers, engineers and geologists, the operation has made little headway.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Emilio Morenatti/Associated Press: Exhausted migrants lie on the ground at the port of Tarifa, southern Spain, after being rescued Friday by Spain's Maritime Rescue Service in the Strait of Gibraltar.

Load-Date: June 30, 2018


End of Document