EU report admonishes 16 nations over CIA renditions
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 2007 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 293 words
Byline: By Molly Moore Washington Post
Dateline: PARIS 
Body


The European Parliament approved on Wednesday a report admonishing 15 European countries and Turkey for helping the CIA transport terrorism suspects held in secret or for failing to cooperate in the parliament's investigation of the practice.
The legislative body for the European Union's 27 countries said many member states have been "turning a blind eye" to the CIA-operated flights carrying prisoners who were subjected to "incommunicado detention and torture" during interrogations, violating EU human rights standards. 
"We have opened up a closed door and there is even more behind this," said parliament member Claudio Fava, an Italian Socialist who drafted the report.
The parliament criticized the CIA renditions - an extralegal tactic by which alleged terrorists have been abducted and interrogated at secret sites overseas - "as an illegal instrument used by the USA in the fight against terrorism" and condemned the "acceptance and concealing of the practices by the secret services and governmental authorities of certain European countries."
The parliament deleted some of the toughest sections of the report, however, including recommendations for sanctions against some countries for human rights violations. It softened criticisms of some governments, including those of Britain, Germany and Spain, after intense lobbying from those states.
Parliament member Jas Gawronski of Italy criticized the final report as "a blanket condemnation of the secret services" and said it was "predicated on the assumption that there is one chief guilty party and that is the USA."
President George W. Bush acknowledged last September that the CIA used secret prisons to interrogate some terrorism suspects overseas. He did not say where the prisons were located.

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document