EU, rights group will investigate reports of secret CIA jails Red Cross wants to see any terrorism suspects held by United States.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 4, 2005 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 444 words
Byline: By Constant Brand THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM 
Body


The European Union and the continent's top human rights group said Thursday that they would investigate allegations that the CIA set up secret jails in Eastern Europe and elsewhere to interrogate terrorism suspects, and the Red Cross demanded access to any prisoners.
Human Rights Watch said it had evidence, based on flight logs, that indicates the CIA transported suspects captured in Afghanistan to Poland and Romania. But the two countries -- and others in the former Soviet bloc -- denied the allegations. U.S. officials have refused to confirm or deny the claims.
Such prisons, European officials say, would violate the continent's human rights principles. At work may be a complex web of global politics, in which eastern European countries face choices between the views of the European Union and their interest in close ties with the United States.
The International Committee of the Red Cross expressed strong interest in the claims, first reported Wednesday in The Washington Post, that the CIA has been hiding and interrogating some of its most important al-Qaida captives at Soviet-era compounds.
Red Cross chief spokeswoman Antonella Notari said the agency asked Washington about the allegations and requested access to the prisons if they exist. The Red Cross, which has exclusive rights to visit terrorism suspects detained at a U.S. military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, long has been concerned about reports that U.S. officials were hiding detainees from Red Cross delegates.
Europe's top human rights organization, the Council of Europe, said it, too, would investigate.
Notari said the Red Cross, which also monitors conditions at U.S. detention centers in Afghanistan and Iraq, has been unable to find some people who reportedly were detained. She said the Red Cross was "concerned about the fate of an unknown number of persons detained as part of what is called the 'global war on terror' and held in undisclosed places of detention."
In implicating Poland and Romania, Human Rights Watch examined flight logs of CIA aircraft from 2001 to 2004, said Mark Garlasco, a senior military analyst with the New York-based organization. He said the group matched the flight patterns with testimony from some of the hundreds of terrorism detainees who have been released by the United States.
Garlasco is a former civilian intelligence officer with the Defense Intelligence Agency.
He would not say how the organization obtained the flight logs, but he said two destinations of the flights stood out as likely sites: Szymany Airport in Poland, which is near the headquarters of Poland's intelligence service; and Mihail Kogalniceanu military airfield in Romania.

Load-Date: November 4, 2005


End of Document