Euphoric Over Osama's Demise; The 9/11 Generation Remembers
The Forward
September 9, 2011


Copyright 2011 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Forward Forum; Pg. 7
Length: 390 words
Byline: 
Simi Lampert was 12 in 2001 and a student at Yeshivat Rambam in Baltimore, Md. She is now a senior at the Stern College for Women at Yeshiva University.
Body


When those planes hit the Twin Towers back in 2001, I  was in seventh grade and I didn't know enough about  the world to know that this shouldn't be happening to us.  And in some ways, I'll never know, because I grew up in  a world where terrorism is a possibility that has turned  into a reality far too often.
I remember when I first realized that terrorism could  affect me personally. One of my eighth-grade teachers  was Israeli and she warned us, in her blunt Israeli way,  Now you have to be careful of everything you see. I  always told my kids in Israel, 'Don't pick up anything  on the side of the road, because it can be a bomb.' Now  that applies to you girls, too. Her words were frightening,  but her message even more so: No one is safe from  this evil called mankind.
Living in a world where no one is trusted, where even  carrying a water bottle onto a plane is suspect, may or  may not have shaped me. It's hard to know what would  be in a different reality. But I can tell you that my elation  the night of Osama bin Laden's death was real. I  wasn't so much relieved  terrorism is not the creation  of a single terrorist so much as the idea of many   as I was uplifted. We needed hope, and that night the  American people got it.
My friends and I joined thousands of other euphoric  New Yorkers and tourists at Ground Zero to celebrate  the news. Obama got Osama! we chanted over and  over until dawn. Terrorists around the world continue  to plan the deaths of innocent civilians, but for one  night the rest of the world was united in hope and optimism  for the future.
My memories of September 11, 2001 aren't the stuff
of philosophical meditations.  I was far too young  to understand. But now is
the time for the generation  that grew up with September 11
to think about what happened that  day and what it means. I know enough
to recognize that not understanding  September 11, or the human capacity for evil, is a universal  predicament. I also know that we will never stop  searching both for understanding and for the hope and  faith necessary to ride out the dark times.
These are the times to remember; these are the times  to reflect. And they are also the times in which we gather  ourselves for what's ahead, as we attempt to face the  future with the same amount of hope we found in our  elation over Osama's demise.

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: September 1, 2011


End of Document