Europe juggles freedom, security
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 31, 2005, Sunday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7A
Length: 316 words
Byline: Chicago Tribune
Body


LONDON - Earlier this year, Britain's Appeal Court upheld one of the nation's core values - freedom of religion - by ruling that a 16-year-old Muslim girl named Shabina Begum had the right to wear a head-to-toe jilbab to her high school in Luton.
Acting in defense of that same freedom, the French National Assembly did exactly the opposite: It passed a law banning head scarves and all displays of religious affiliation from public school classrooms.
The Netherlands, one of the first countries to embrace gay marriage, is justly famous for its tolerance. But after the murder of filmmaker Theo van Gogh by a Dutch-born Muslim extremist of Moroccan origin, lawmakers are considering ways to limit Muslim immigration. One idea is aimed at preventing Moroccan and Turkish immigrants from taking brides from back home.
As militant mosques and homegrown jihadists proliferate across Europe, political leaders are confronted with a dilemma: how to defend an open society against internal enemies who hide behind that openness.
In the wake of the attacks on the London transport system that left 56 dead, plus the killing of an innocent man by police who mistook him for a suicide bomber, Prime Minister Tony Blair met Tuesday with opposition leaders to discuss a package of anti-terrorism laws that some critics believe mainly is designed to calm a jittery public.
Italy and France also have announced a host of new anti-terrorism measures. Italy passed laws that allow authorities to collect saliva samples from suspects for DNA testing and to quickly expel undesirables. France, with some of the most intrusive anti-terror laws in Europe, plans to reinforce its information-gathering procedures.
The main provisions of Britain's proposed legislation would toughen existing laws by making it illegal for British residents to attend a terrorist training camp or participate in "acts preparatory to terrorism."

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document