EUROPE NERVOUS ABOUT OUTCOME OF BACKING U.S. AGAINST TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 19, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 422 words
Byline: PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press writer
Body


BRUSSELS, Belgium -- Having pledged to back the United States in its war on terrorism, Europe is now worrying about what that will mean.
"We are in the same boat, but we fear what the captain of the boat will decide to do," said Dominique Moisi of the French Institute for International Relations.
Closer to the Arab world and with larger Muslim populations, Europeans worry that military action by the United States could go too far and possibly trigger more terror that would inevitably hit them as well.
On a continent twice devastated by global conflicts in the 20th century, politicians are loath to use the word "war." Europeans were shocked by last week's attacks in the United States but have little stomach for a major conflict.
Nearly half of Swedes in a poll published Tuesday said it would be wrong for the United States to attack Afghanistan if it doesn't hand over Osama bin Laden, the prime suspect in the attacks.
In Britain, a poll found that 66 percent would support military strikes against the groups responsible for the attacks, while 59 percent backed attacks against countries that harbor terrorists. As many as 300 Britons are believed to be among the missing.
"The sort of crusade that would create a 'clash of civilizations' war really makes Europe really nervous," Moisi said. "We cannot afford that."
European Union leaders called an emergency summit Friday to coordinate their actions and reaffirm unequivocal support for the United States partly in the hope of gaining greater input into Washington's strategic planning.
"Our complete backing also means they will have to take our feelings and opinions into account," said Belgian Foreign Minister Louis Michel, whose country holds the rotating European Union presidency.
As U.S. troops prepare for action, European leaders are seeking to calm nerves and tone down the rhetoric.
"It's not a war," Michel said. "You can't just use words like that. There needs to be a 'mobilization' against terrorism."
Michel said his country would contribute troops if specifically asked, "but not in any which way."
A day earlier, Italian Defense Minister Antonio Martino went even further. He "categorically excluded" the possibility of an "extraordinary call to arms" in Italy, according to a ministry statement.
Italy would reconsider if its soldiers were specifically needed and requested, Martino said, but added that such a situation "is not foreseen at this moment."
French President Jacques Chirac said France would be "totally supportive" once those responsible are identified.

Load-Date: September 19, 2001


End of Document