EUROPEANS BACK U.S. ACT, MUSLIMS RAISE QUESTIONS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 28, 1993, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 509 words
Byline: EILEEN ALT POWELL, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


Muslim nations yesterday denounced Washington's missile strike on Baghdad as part of a Western double standard -- targeting Iraq while failing to take action against attacks on Bosnian Muslims.
European allies generally backed President Clinton's decision to hit Iraq's intelligence headquarters in retribution for a plot to assassinate former President Bush.
Egypt and Turkey, mainstays in the U.S.-led coalition that drove Iraq out of Kuwait in 1991, said Washington should deal just as severely with Serb aggressors in Bosnia.
Egypt has criticized the United Nations for failure to protect Slavic Muslims from attacks and ''ethnic cleansing'' by Bosnian Serbs.
Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller said: ''We have always been for an effective response to international terrorism and cooperation in fighting it, but this should also be seen in Bosnia.''
Among European leaders, British Prime Minister John Major called the U.S. attack an ''entirely justified'' response and had his full support.
A French Foreign Ministry communique said ''France understands the reaction of the United States and the motives of this operation.''
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl called the U.S. action ''a justified reaction to a detestable attempted act of terrorism.''
Major, Kohl and French President Francois Mitterrand were notified by Clinton in advance of the attack, their offices said.
Opposition leaders in the three European countries voiced strong reservations, arguing that the missile attack was not authorized by the United Nations nor valid under international law.
But Russia said the U.N. charter allows for such action, saying the U.S. attack stemmed from ''a state's right to individual and collective self- defense.'' However, a statement from Russia's Foreign Ministry added: ''We hope a mutually acceptable solution of this bilateral problem can be achieved without military escalation.''
The 21-member Arab League, headquartered in Cairo, warned that unilateral action without the support of the U.N. Security Council ''entails dangers that do not fit with the wish to establish a new world order.'' The strongly worded statement called attention to the plight of the Bosnian Muslims and Palestinians living under Israeli occupation and called for ''an end to the double standards of dealing with international conflicts.''
In Saudi Arabia, journalist Khaled al-Maena warned that if the United States acts against Iraq but fails to act against the Serbs in Bosnia it ''will lose whatever credibility it still retains among Muslim people.'' In contrast, Kuwaiti journalist Faisal al-Kenaii, a columnist for Al-Siyassah daily, said that the strike gave Clinton ''credibility, because it showed that he is walking in Bush's steps.''
Among other Middle Eastern states, the reaction reflected their relations with Washington. Sudan condemned the attack as ''terrorism,'' and a Libyan statement decried ''the threat to use force or to actually use it in solving conflicts.''
Iran overcame its enmity with Iraq to condemn what it considers a bigger enemy, the United States.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Kenny Rodger/Reuters: Demonstrators burn the American flag outside the U.S. Embassy in London yesterday in a protest of the missile attack.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document