EUROPE RESTORES IRAN TIES, CUT OVER TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 30, 1997, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 407 words
Byline: WILLIAM DROZDIAK, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: BERLIN
Body


The 15 European Union governments decided yesterday to send their ambassadors back to Tehran, spurning appeals from the United States to break off all political and economic ties with Iran because of its role in sponsoring terrorism abroad.
The decision to restore limited diplomatic relations signaled Europe's desire to sustain lucrative commercial dealings with Iran and fend off American calls for tougher sanctions that would isolate Tehran as a pariah regime.
''You cannot reproach us for following our economic interests,'' said German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel after he and his EU counterparts decided in Luxembourg to return their ambassadors to Tehran in a bid to halt any further deterioration in relations.
Germany, which is Iran's leading trade partner in the West, had successfully urged the recall of EU envoys earlier this month following a Berlin court's verdict that found Iran's highest authorities had approved the assassination on German soil of three Kurdish dissidents and their translator in 1992.
But German diplomats said there was a clear consensus among European Union states that Iran was an important strategic player in the Persian Gulf that should not be ignored by the West. They said Washington's call to impose a diplomatic quarantine would only push Iran into the arms of Russia.
EU foreign ministers declared, however, that all high-level contacts would remain suspended until Iran's leaders show they are willing to ''respect the norms of international law and refrain from acts of terrorism, including against Iranian citizens living abroad, and cooperate in preventing such acts.''
In addition, EU governments said they would maintain an arms embargo against Iran and refuse to grant visas to any Iranians linked to intelligence or security agencies. The ministers stressed that ''under the present circumstances . . . there is no basis for the continuation of a critical dialogue between the European Union and Iran.''
The EU's dual policy of pursuing trade deals with Iran while using high-level contacts to raise sensitive matters such as terrorism and human rights frequently has been attacked by the United States as naive and counterproductive.
 
The dual message delivered by the EU's 15 foreign ministers in Luxembourg yesterday reflects their anguish over how to punish Iran for ordering hit squads to kill the regime's opponents on European territory without ending hopes for a big expansion in trade.

Load-Date: May 1, 1997


End of Document