European Court Rules Spain Must Free Terrorist
The New York Times
October 22, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 686 words
Byline: By RAPHAEL MINDER
Body


MADRID -- The European Court of Human Rights ruled Monday against a Spanish law that has allowed the Madrid government to extend the imprisonment of convicted terrorists and members of ETA, the Basque separatist group.
The court, in Strasbourg, France, ruled on the case of an ETA member, Inés del Río Prada, who had appealed her prolonged prison stay. She was imprisoned in 1989 for taking part in the deadly bombing of a bus carrying police officers. The European court ordered that she be released immediately and receive about $41,000 in damages to cover legal costs.
The ruling is likely to be cited as precedent by other prisoners applying for early release.
However, the government dismissed any suggestion that it would revise its prison policies, insisted the ruling applied only to Ms. del Río Prada and said Spain's national court had to study the ruling to determine whether she should be released. The government also said it would examine any other appeals for early release on a case-by-case basis.
''The policy of the government won't change,'' Jorge Fernández Díaz, Spain's interior minister, said in a televised news conference. ''We will continue until we achieve the definite dissolution of ETA.''
While the government refused to specify how many prisoners could appeal, Mr. Fernández Díaz said last year that 40 of about 500 ETA members held in Spanish prisons could claim to face a situation comparable to that of Ms. del Río Prada.
She was sentenced to 3,000 years in prison for the bus bombing, which killed 12 people. However, Spanish law effectively limits prison sentences to 30 years, which would have made her eligible for parole in 2008.
But the government kept her in prison based on a 2006 ruling by the Spanish Supreme Court allowing restrictions on parole for some inmates. That ruling applies any reduction in sentence for good behavior to the full sentence -- in Ms. del Río Prada's case, 3,000 years -- rather than the 30-year limit.
In its ruling on Monday, the European court found that Spain had breached the European Convention on Human Rights, notably by applying the 2006 precedent to Ms. del Río Prada's sentence retroactively.
Basque activists, who have long called for the government to show leniency toward ETA prisoners as a good-will gesture, cheered the ruling. About 500 people gathered in the center of the Basque city of Bilbao, shouting, ''ETA prisoners, go home.''
Human rights advocates also welcomed the ruling, which followed a similar decision in July 2012 by the lower chamber of the Strasbourg court. The Madrid government had appealed.
''This ruling should serve as a notice to Spain to correct continuing aberrations of justice in the name of fighting terrorism, such as incommunicado detention and limited rights of defense for terrorism suspects,'' said Judith Sunderland, a senior researcher for Human Rights Watch. ''Separatist violence is no excuse for the state to violate fundamental rights, which have only served to deepen grievances.''
In 2011, ETA announced that it would end four decades of violence with a unilateral cease-fire. The group, which has killed more than 800 people in its pursuit of an independent Basque state, has been weakened considerably in recent years by the arrests of its main leaders, to the point that the Spanish government describes it as almost operationally defunct.
Still, Madrid refused to consider ETA's cease-fire a sufficient act of surrender, saying it would continue to hunt down ETA members, in cooperation with the French and other European security forces, until the group handed over all its weapons.
Addressing the news media alongside the interior minister, Justice Minister Alberto Ruiz-Gallardón said he deplored the ruling and the fact that the European court had overturned rulings of Spain's Supreme Court and its Constitutional Court.
Mr. Ruiz-Gallardón said Spain's courts had to study the European ruling and would determine whether Ms. del Río Prada should be released immediately.
''The fight against terrorism that started 40 years ago, and which we have won, will continue with utter firmness,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/22/world/europe/european-court-rules-against-spain-on-terror-sentences.html

Load-Date: October 22, 2013


End of Document