EUROPE'S LEGAL SMORGASBORD HAMPERS WAR ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 28, 2001 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 1997 words
Byline: PETER GUMBEL, THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Body


The city in the video is unmistakably Strasbourg, France. The camera pans across the crowded Christmas market on Place Broglie, up the soaring gothic spire of the nearby 13th-century cathedral and then to a close-up of a Santa Claus playing with children.
 This is no tourist souvenir. The video, complete with Arabic commentary, was discovered by German antiterrorism troops in a raid on an apartment in Frankfurt last December. They also found a cache of arms and 44 pounds of potassium permanganate, a chemical used to make explosives. Investigators say they believe that the video was part of preparations for a Christmas bomb attack in central Strasbourg, a city on the border of Germany and France that is a symbolic heart of Europe and home to the European Parliament.
 In the 10 months since that raid, police in Italy, Spain, France and Germany have arrested two dozen suspects, most of them of Tunisian or Algerian origin, on charges including arms-trafficking and forging documents. The arrests have come in several waves, the most recent of which was two weeks ago.
The foiled Strasbourg plot has been an eye-opener for European antiterrorism investigators. It has highlighted the existence of a series of alleged North African terrorist cells in Europe that investigators say have a lot in common with -- and are likely linked to -- Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network.
 But just as important, the foiling of the alleged Strasbourg plot has underscored some of the significant obstacles that Europe faces as it seeks to tackle terrorism. The North Africans -- like some of the suspected Sept. 11 hijackers -- were able to take advantage of Europe's open borders to live and move freely around the continent. However, there are no open borders for the police and law-enforcement officials in Europe who are trying to detect and catch them.
 Criminal justice is a national issue in the European Union's 15 countries. While there is some cooperation among the police forces and magistrates of different European countries, it tends to be based on personal relationships rather than established protocols. Indeed, different laws, different sentences and different definitions of offenses -- as well as often-differing cultural attitudes toward crime -- hamper law-enforcement efforts.
 Terrorism, for example, is specifically recognized as an offense or an aggravating circumstance in just six EU nations. Most countries refuse to extradite their own citizens and won't hand over foreign nationals charged with an offense that doesn't correspond precisely to their own criminal codes. The result is a cumbersome, leaky system that may be one reason why Europe has become a haven for terror groups.
 "Organized crime is using methods from the 21st century, but police and magistrates in Europe are still operating with procedures from the 19th century," says Giancarlo Caselli, an Italian magistrate who took on the Red Brigades terror group in the 1970s and was the lead anti-Mafia investigator in Sicily in the 1990s. Now he is working to improve pan-European judicial cooperation.
 In the Strasbourg case, there has been some successful coordination in the months since the Frankfurt raid, especially the simultaneous arrests of suspects in different countries. But such breakthroughs have been overshadowed by petty infighting between investigators in several countries, and most especially by the case of one man, a Tunisian-born Belgian citizen named Tarek Maaroufi.
 Effort to improve
 Italian law-enforcement officials believe that Maaroufi is a central figure in the Strasbourg plot, and they have officially asked the Belgians to arrest and extradite him. To their fury, however, Belgium hasn't taken any action so far. Belgium doesn't have legislation specifically targeting terrorism, and a spokesman for the Brussels prosecutor's office says Belgium won't extradite one of its own citizens. The spokesman does say that Belgium would prosecute the case itself if given sufficient evidence, but so far that hasn't happened. Maaroufi has denied any connection to terrorism.
 Were it not for Sept. 11, this disjointed approach might have continued indefinitely. But the attacks on the United States have galvanized a stunned Europe into action. Suddenly, efforts to improve judicial cooperation have leapt to the top of the official EU agenda.
 Most significant are plans now being prepared to create a European arrest warrant. This warrant would replace extradition and effectively overcome many of the problems the Strasbourg investigators are encountering. If law-enforcement officials in Italy were hunting a terrorism suspect in Belgium, they would issue a European warrant, and Belgian police would be required to arrest the person and hand him over within a set period, according to proposals worked out by the EU's executive commission. At a stroke, the politics and national rivalries that currently dog the system would be swept away in what Romano Prodi, the commission president, describes as "a revolution in Europe."
 Political landmines abound. Among other things, European governments would need to agree on common definitions for the offenses covered by the arrest warrant, as well as minimum and maximum sentences. Caselli, the Italian magistrate, says the events of Sept. 11 gave the plans "a formidable push." But he concedes that it is still too early to know whether the surge of support for the warrant is merely an "emotional reaction" that will disappear once the haggling over details starts.
 Cooperation on the Strasbourg case got off to a promising start, according to law-enforcement officials in three countries involved in the case. French magistrates, relying on information from French intelligence, tipped off the Germans about the Frankfurt cell. Italian investigators and intelligence officials, meanwhile, were independently monitoring suspects in a drab northwest suburb of Milan called Gallarate. Law enforcers started sharing some information once they discovered that the sets of suspects were in phone contact with one another.
 In December, because of concerns that the group was about to act, the Germans sent in their crack GSG-9 forces to the Frankfurt apartment, arresting four people. The reaction in Gallarate, as monitored by the Italians, was one of panic. "They have arrested our brothers," was the message in one call intercepted by investigators.
 For four more months, Italian authorities continued closely monitoring the calls and activities of people coming in and out of Via Angelo Dubini 3, a postwar condominium block overlooking a hospital parking lot in Gallarate. Then, on April 3, police swooped in and arrested three people at that apartment and three at another one in Milan at the same time that German police were raiding eight premises in the states of Hesse and Bavaria.
 One of the people arrested in Gallarate, a Tunisian named Essid Sami Ben Khemais and nicknamed "the Traveler," spent four days in Spain in March, a month before his arrest. Spanish investigators are still trying to figure out whether he may have met Mohammed Atta, one of the suspected suicide hijackers who flew into the World Trade Center and who Spanish investigators say was in Spain at least twice this year.
 In June, Spanish police, acting on a tip from French authorities, arrested Mohammed Bensakhria, an Algerian who had narrowly escaped arrest in Germany in the December sweep. He was extradited to France in July at the request of France's top antiterrorism magistrate, Jean-Louis Bruguiere. Spanish police arrested six Algerians last month, principally people who had associated with Essid Sami. Then, on Oct. 10, Italian police issued five arrest warrants: three for Tunisians in the Gallarate area, including one who is already in custody; one for a Libyan citizen who was arrested in Munich; and one for an Egyptian national who has disappeared.
 North African network
 The picture that has been emerging from all this activity, investigators say, is of a loose North African network that appears to have emerged out of the fringes of the Islamic Armed Group, or GIA, which for years has been waging a bloody war with the Algerian government.
 So far, investigators haven't discovered a direct link to al Qaida or bin Laden, though his name was frequently mentioned by cell members in phone conversations tapped by Italian police, according to Claudio Scajola, Italy's interior minister. But some of those arrested spent time in Afghan training camps that investigators say were also frequented by al Qaida members, and their working methods appear similar. The cells were small and highly "compartmentalized," investigators say -- meaning that they operated almost autonomously, with little contact among them and each with its own clearly defined tasks.
 In Gallarate, police found lists of medical supplies to be purchased, including large amounts of penicillin. They also found forged documents, maps and ideological videos about the war in Chechnya. The cell had also set up a small business called Work Service with several bank accounts. Investigators say other cells were supposed to provide weapons, while the group raided in Frankfurt was supposed to carry out the attack.
 Despite the promising start, the Strasbourg investigations were soon dogged by petty rivalries and infighting. Four sets of law-enforcement authorities -- in Italy, France, Germany and Spain -- worked separately on the case. Trust was a rare commodity. Old divisions flared, according to people familiar with the different investigations: The Italians complained that, while they informed the Spanish of Essid Sami's trip to Spain in March, they weren't given back information about the people he met -- until the Spaniards arrested those people six months later.
 The investigation also strained once-close ties. France and Spain often boast about their cooperation in fighting Basque terrorism. But French judicial sources say that Bruguiere, the French antiterrorism magistrate, read the riot act to Spanish law-enforcement officials when they didn't follow up on one of his Muslim terrorist investigations. People close to Bruguiere say that at one point, he threatened to stop all French assistance with Basque terrorists unless the Spaniards helped out with Islamic groups. And the French stepped in to have Bensakhria arrested in Spain after German investigators, tipped off that he was in Alicante in June, didn't react to the tip or alert the Spanish. Bruguiere won't comment on continuing investigations.
 The four countries are now trying to smooth out some coordination issues through Eurojust, a new Brussels-based organization that is bringing together police and investigators from different countries to resolve disputes. The Strasbourg case is one of the 15 terrorism-related dossiers Eurojust has dealt with so far, officials say.
 So far, Eurojust hasn't been able to resolve the biggest hitch in the case: Maaroufi. He was born in Tunisia, but is now a Belgian citizen, with a Belgian wife and children in Brussels. Italian investigators say he was a key figure in the Strasbourg plot, in close touch with the Gallarate cell. Reached by cellphone, Maaroufi first refused to comment, and then said he would only talk if he were paid one million Belgian francs ($22,700). But he recently confirmed to the Belgian newspaper De Standaard that he knows the Tunisians who have been arrested in Italy, and that he has spent time at the apartment in Gallarate.
 Writing in a Tunisian publication called Audace in April, he denied any connection with terrorism, and insinuated that he was being set up by a Tunisian government disinformation campaign. This "could lead to my physical liquidation," he warned, or result in the Tunisian secret service's "committing sabotage or acts of terrorism acts with the goal of implicating me."
 "The Belgians are unmoved. Belgium like most of Europe, doesn't deliver its own citizens to other countries."

Graphic

 
Photo: Santiago Lyon/Associated Press: A demonstrator in Madrid, Spain, holds up a sign urging peace during a small rally yesterday against military action in Afghanistan.

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document