EUROPES ANTI-TERRORISM TIED TO U.S. LIBYA RAIDS
The New York Times
April 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1086 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, April 12
Body


The American raids against Libya that a year ago stirred widespread protests are today widely acknowledged to have galvanized Western European countries to intensify their own anti-terrorist efforts and to coordinate police operations across borders.
The stepped-up anti-terrorist efforts have been given an additional strong impulse by recurrent terrorist activity in several European countries.
Security officials in a number of nations say that in the year that has elapsed since the bombardments of Tripoli and Benghazi, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi appears to have recoiled from sponsoring terrorist operations in Western Europe. At the same time, Syria, once branded a major patron of terrorism in Europe, has apparently staged a similar tactical retreat, according to European and American intelligence sources.
Yet, in terms of the Atlantic alliance and European public opinion, President Reagan's decision to punish Libya for its purported masterminding of a discotheque bombing in West Berlin is frequently portrayed as having had a corrosive effect.
 
Examples of Going It Alone
The Europeans cite the Libyan raids as one example of the Reagan's Administration's inclination to go it alone in foreign affairs. Their other examples are Washington's quest for a space-based shield against ballistic missiles, popularly called ''Star Wars,'' and positions the United States took at the Soviet-American summit meeting at Reykjavik last October, which challenged NATO's doctrine of nuclear deterrence.
''It features in the menu of things that have happened lately that shook opinion over here,'' observed Simon Head, a foreign policy expert for the Social Democratic Party in Britain. ''You have also to take into account the perception of the American position on terrorism since Irangate, which has undermined the authority of the United States to take a lead on it.''
Even while acknowledging that the bold strike against Libya successfully intimidated Colonel Qaddafi - and served as an indirect warning to President Hafez al-Assad of Syria - many European officials continue to hold to their original criticism of the operation.
''We didn't like it then, and we still don't like the idea of using arms in the Mediterranean,'' insisted a senior official in Rome, which has sharply cut back its extensive diplomatic and economic contacts with Tripoli in the last year. ''It certainly had the effect of quieting Qaddafi down, but it brought no long-term resolution of the problem.''
The deployment of British-based F-111 bombers in what many officials today believe was a calculated attempt to assassinate Colonel Qaddafi profoundly shocked Western Europeans, particularly after the extent of civilian casualties became known. Popular outrage may have been deepest in Britain, where Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher stood out in Western Europe by allowing the use of British territory by the American forces and by giving Mr. Reagan cautious political backing.
Now that the dust has settled, European intelligence officials say they still have doubts about the ''proof'' offered by Washington to demonstrate that Libya was behind the West Berlin discotheque bombing. ''Trust is the essential substance of an alliance,'' cautioned a West German official. ''It should not be gambled with.''
A senior American diplomat likened the diplomatic fallout from the Libyan raids to the dispute during Mr. Reagan's first term over Western European involvement in the construction of a Soviet natural-gas pipeline.
That controversy ended with the Administration abandoning its attempt to stop the pipeline deal, but the upshot, the diplomat argued, was a heightened Western European sensitivity to the issue of high-technology transfers to the Warsaw Pact. The same, he contended, applied to terrorism now.
 
'It Came Home'
''I think, too, the Europeans felt the popular depth of American outrage over the terrorism issue, that it wasn't just something from Washington'' noted this diplomat, recalling the special American ire reserved for France after it denied the American bombers overflight rights en route to Libya. ''It came home when you had liquor stores in Vermont boycotting French wines.''
For Western Europe - but particularly for Britain and France - last April's bombing raids were only one chapter in a tumultuous year of terrorism and only one factor that compelled police and intelligence agencies to take tougher anti-terrorist measures.
In September, Paris was shaken by a wave of bombings that seemed to be aimed at freeing a jailed Lebanese terrorist chieftain, Georges Ibrahim Abdallah. He was eventually sentenced to life imprisonment.
In Britain, the trial of a Jordanian convicted of trying to blow up an El Al Israel Airlines airliner in London prompted the Thatcher Government in October to break off diplomatic relations with Syria, which was accused of providing logistical support to the terrorist operation through its embassy. A subsequent trial in West Berlin pointed to Syrian backing for a bombing in the city and prompted West Germany to expel Syrian diplomats.
 
Contacts Were Reduced
As a result of American pressure on the Libyan question - and British calls for solidarity on Syria - the European Community reduced its diplomatic contacts with the two Arab governments and tightened surveillance of Libyan and Syrian nationals.
Paul Wilkinson, an authority on terrorism at Aberdeen University in Scotland, contended that it was this concerted American and Western European action that was decisive in persuading Colonel Qaddafi - and possibly President Assad - to pull back from spectacular terrorist actions in European cities.
''What has been more effective than the air raids in trimming Qaddafi's sails has been the threat of further diplomatic and economic action developing through the European Community and the Tokyo summit,'' said Mr. Wilkinson, referring to anti-terrorist decisions reached by the seven major industrial democracies in the Japanese capital last May.
European security officials, who tend to regard the air raids in a more positive light than do their diplomatic counterparts, say that a far greater sensitivity to terrorism has produced a qualitative breakthrough in cooperation between capitals.
France, which had been allergic to such cooperation, has dramatically shifted its position. Last week, Paris and Bonn signed an agreement institutionalizing anti-terrorist cooperation; the accord calls for French and German liaison officers to be posted in the two nations' security agencies.


End of Document