Euro-terrorism on the run
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 8, 1988, Tuesday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 1
Length: 1250 words
Byline: William Echikson, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Highlight: Stepped up police work, stiffer penalties, and increased cooperation limit terrorist activity in Western Europe
Body


In southwestern France, police raid a villa and nab a Spanish Basque terrorist chieftain, Santi Potros. Off the Brittany coast, French coast guard patrols intercept the Eksun and confiscate its cargo of 200 tons of missiles, guns, and ammunition destined for the Irish Republican Army (IRA). And in a Paris courtroom, the judge sentences four leaders of the Direct Action terrorist group to long terms in prison.
Terrorism, Europe's longtime scourge, is on the defensive.
''Western Europe delivered real hammer blows against the terrorists in 1987,'' says Paul Wilkinson, a leading specialist on terrorism at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. ''For all Europe's mistakes and errors, Americans should know that it is the area with the most regional cooperation, the most sharing of police information.''
The success, of course, is not complete. Professor Wilkinson and other experts warn that terrorism is increasing in Asia, in the Middle East, and in Latin America, and that ''Europe and North America still risk suffering from the fallout.'' Within Europe, the terrorism experts note that the IRA remains ''just as dangerous as before,'' and that a ''second generation'' of left-wing terrorists could emerge to replace their jailed older comrades.
Even worse, Europeans still show a tendency to strike deals with hostages. In recent months, the West Germans reportedly paid a $1 million ransom to free Alfred Schmidt from Lebanon. The French gave up even more for Jean-Louis Normandin and Roger Auque, releasing a $330 million payment on a long-outstanding loan to the Iranians, expelling Iranian refugees in France, and reportedly even selling weapons to the Iranians.
''The hostages are the Achilles' heel of counter-terrorism policy,'' a Western diplomat remarks. ''Everyone caves in.''
Overall, however, the Europeans have made significant progress in dealing with terrorism. According to Wilkinson, about 50 percent of all world terrorist incidents took take place in Europe a few years ago. Last year the figure fell to 20 percent, or a total of only 168 incidents.
Outside Ireland, nationalists such as the Basques and Corsicans failed to mobilize mass backing for their fight for independence. Instead of gaining widespread support, the radical ideology of Euroleft terrorists such as the German Red Army faction, the Italian Red Brigades and the French Direct Action provoked revulsion.
''Euroterrorism no longer is chic,'' says Gerard Chalind, a professor at France's Ecole Nationale d'Administration and author of several studies on terrorism. ''It is tired, worn out.''
Mideast-inspired terrorism is not worn out, but analysts say that the principal sponsoring states, Syria and Iran, have become more cautious in their use of terror. Some of this new caution, analysts believe, stems from the deployment of strong European and American naval forces in the Gulf.
''It was an important gesture,'' Wilkinson says. ''The Western navies put psychological and strategic pressure on the Iranians and Syrians.''
Greater security back inside Europe has also helped make the Continent a tougher target to hit. The French, for example, have stepped up border patrols and now demand visas from all Arab visitors.
''Terrorists don't like (putting themselves in) danger,'' notes Dominique Brigot, a terrorist specialist at the French Institute of Military Strategy. ''Relatively speaking, it's become harder to hit Western targets inside Europe, so the terrorists are staying away.''
European governments are beginning to deal harshly with captured terrorists. Despite threats of retaliatory bombings, a French judge sentenced Lebanese terrorist Georges Abdallah to life imprisonment. English courts meanwhile convicted Nezar Hindawi for his attempt to blow up up an El Al jetliner, and German courts convicted Abbas Ali Hamadei on kidnapping and other charges, even though they refused to extradite his younger brother Muhammad Ali to the United States for his part in the 1985 TWA hijacking.
''For a long time, Europeans underestimated terrorism,'' says analyst Chalind. ''They now have taken a prise de conscience and realized that they must be tough.''
Throughout the Continent, police have been deployed on streets as a deterrent. Special antiterrorist centers have been established to computerize and coordinate information.
Untrained local police no longer handle terrorist crime. Special antiterrorist task forces - Cobra in Britain, Uclat in France - concentrate full time on terrorist crime.
The results are striking. In Belgium, for example, the ''Fighting Communist Cells'' carried out about 30 bombing attacks in 1985. The next year, the Belgian anti-terrorist specialists infiltrated the cells and managed to arrest all its leaders.
''The Fighting Communist Cells now have been liquidated,'' notes Mr. Chalind. ''It was simple, good police work.''
A large part of this good police work results from intra-European cooperation. At a high level, European interior ministers meet regularly in the Trevi Group to coordinate antiterrorist policy. On a lower level, police forces exchange hunches, tips, and solid evidence.
Belgian information, for example, helped the French round up Direct Action leaders last year. An arrested Belgian terrorist gave away the Direct Action headquarters. French police surrounded the site and caught the terrorists when they came home.
Similarly, German information led the French to the Arab terrorist cell responsible for the violent bombings that terrorizedParis in September 1986. A German customs agent stopped a suspicious-looking Lebanese tourist at the Frankfurt airport; he turned out to be alleged TWA hijacker Muhammad Ali Hamadei
In his address book, the Germans found names and addresses of some Lebanese in Paris. French police took up the trail, and within a few days they had arrested seven terrorists.
Once they catch a suspected terrorist, the police have begun using longer interrogations to wring out information. In Germany, police can hold suspects in prisons without a lawyer for five days. In France, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac's conservative government has increased interrogation time from two to four days. Police keep suspects up all night, wearing them down with constant questions.
''It's easy for the terrorist to stay silent for two days,'' one antiterrorist expert explains.  ''They crack on the third day. It may sound hokey, but it's a fact: Most breakthroughs come in the third day of interrogation.''
Such interrogations, as well as other harsh antiterrorist measures, raise serious civil rights concerns. American law forbids any interrogations without a lawyer. The French League of Human Rights also criticizes the practice of holding terrorist suspects in solitary confinement and of trying terrorists before judges without a jury.
''Terrorism has become a pretext for repressive laws,'' complains Gilles Nived, a League of Human Rights activist. ''France signed the Convention of Human Rights and it should be respected.''
But most Europeans believe the extra security measures are a small cost to pay for reducing the terrorist menace. When Direct Action leaders went on hunger strike to protest their solitary confinement in prison, the League of Human Rights launched a petition drive to defend them. The move was widely criticized.
''We should respect the rights of the victims,'' concluded Francoise Rudetzki, president of SOS Attacks, an association of terrorist victims. ''Their rights come before the rights of the terrorists.''

Graphic

 
Chart, ''International terrorist incidents'' - number of incidents involving nationals of more than one country, 1980-1987; SOURCE: ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS DEP., LISA REMILLARD - STAFF


End of Document