European outrage over NSA is tempered by necessity U.S. often provides tips that help nations combat terrorism.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 12, 2013 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 345 words
Byline: By FRANK JORDANS Associated Press
Body


BERLIN • Indignation was sharp and predictable across Europe - a continent where privacy is revered. Yet anger over revelations of U.S. electronic surveillance was tempered by an indisputable fact: Europe wants the information that American intelligence provides.
That dilemma was clear Tuesday, only days after leaks about two National Security Agency programs that purportedly target foreign messages - including private emails, voice and other data transmissions - sent through U.S. Internet providers.
The European Union's top justice official, Viviane Reding, said she would demand that the U.S. afford EU citizens the same rights as Americans when it comes to data protection. Hannes Swoboda, a Socialist leader in the European Parliament, said the purported surveillance showed that America "is just doing what it wants."
At the same time, however, Germany's interior minister, Hans-Peter Friedrich, confirmed that his government regularly receives tips from the United States on Islamic extremists - and he doesn't expect the Americans to tell him where they got the information.
"We get very good and reliable information from our American friends and partners that has played an important role in the past in preventing attacks in Germany," Friedrich said in Berlin. "The Americans don't tell us, and we also don't tell our partners ... where this information comes from. That's the business of the respective agency."
The conflict in Europe between the right to privacy and a government's obligation to protect its citizenry is similar to the debate in the United States over the limits of intelligence activities in a free society.
President Barack Obama alluded to the conflict Friday when he told reporters in California: "It's important to recognize that you can't have 100 percent security and also then have 100 percent privacy and zero inconvenience."
The dilemma is even sharper in Europe, which hosted major NSA monitoring sites during the Cold War.
Much of the continent still has bitter and recent memories of massive surveillance by Communist authorities.

Graphic

 
 This Monday, June 10, 2013 photo shows the National Security Agency's Utah Data Center in Bluffdale, Utah. The Obama administration says it has no plans to end a broad U.S. spy program that it says is keeping America safe from terrorists. That comes as the White House faces fresh anger at home and from abroad over its secretive surveillance system that tracks phone and Internet messages around the world. (AP Photo/Rick Bowmer)  FILE - This Sept. 19, 2007, file photo, shows the National Security Agency building at Fort Meade, Md. When the federal government went looking for phone numbers tied to terrorists, it grabbed the records of just about everyone in America. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak, File) 

Load-Date: June 12, 2013


End of Document