Europe gains against terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 20, 1986, Tuesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 865 words
Byline: By William Echikson, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Highlight: Police cooperation, political will, and diplomacy bring results
Body


Greater police cooperation, greater political will, and greater diplomatic efforts. These factors are helping turn around the European battle against terrorism.
But terrorist violence will not easily be exterminated and may actually increase as terrorists are pressured, according to high-ranking French government officials and analysts interviewed in the past week.
Four countries joined in a preemptive operation this past weekend to foil predicted attacks on passenger ferries that cross the English Channel. A tip on the reported terrorist plot was received by British police Friday and then passed on to Belgium, France, and the Netherlands. Security forces are now checking passengers and searching automobiles for explosives and weapons.
In earlier weeks, police forces have made an impressive number of arrests: the British capture of a Jordanian who allegedly tried to blow up an Israeli passenger plane in London; the French nabbing of a suspect believed responsible for attacks against several Marks & Spencer stores; and the Spanish roundup of 10 suspected terrorist guerrillas. Several West European nations also expelled Libyan and Syrian diplomats in efforts to limit state-sponsored terrorism.
But terrorism is not disappearing. Just this weekend, Corsican nationalists blew up a bungalow, killing two people, and the radical Direct Action group exploded a bomb in the Paris headquarters of Interpol, the international police agency.
These attacks show the terrorists on the defensive, analysts say. In recent months, French police have scored notable successes against Corsican nationalists and Direct Action. One Direct Action leader was arrested last month and files on the group were recovered. In Corsica, many nationalists have ended their fight after implementation of greater regional autonomy. As a result, the weekend attacks are seen here as desperate actions by threatened groups.
But the greater police cooperation, political will, and diplomatic efforts are bearing fruit.
Last year, West European governments set up the so-called Trevi Group. It brought together Cabinet officials from the 12 European Community countries in an effort to combat terrorism.
Proof of European police cooperation came after British police foiled the April 17 attempt to bomb an El Al airplane. They arrested Jordanian Nezar Mansur Hindawi and passed information about him to their West German counterparts, who a few days later arrested Hindawi's brother, Ahmed Mansur Hasi. He was arrested in connection with the April 5 bombing of a Berlin discotheque in which two people were killed.
There are still problems to be ironed out in increasing such cooperation. For instance, the French fear that information will leak out if meetings of the Trevi Group become too large. To limit that possibility, they favor increasing police cooperation on a bilateral basis.
The United States' role also is unclear. US diplomats here say they would like the US to be included in the Trevi Group. The Europeans apparently are resisting. While the recent declaration against terrorism of the Western leaders at the Tokyo summit's may increase cooperation with the US, French officials warn that they will not let such cooperation turn into, ''a new trans-Atlantic political alliance.''
When the French arrested Habib Maammar and charged the Tunisian with bombing Marks & Spencer stores in London and Paris, they publicly trumpeted the arrest. Not very long ago, the French authorities might have kept the news quiet or even moved to free the alleged terrorist. In 1978, the mastermind of the Munich Olympic massacre, Abu Daoud, was arrested in Paris. He was quickly put on the next plane to Algeria.
''(Then) we were scared of the Arabs,'' says Philippe Moreau Defarges, of the French Institute of International Relations. ''Today, Abu Daoud could not be let go.''
Arab influence is lessening. With oil prices low and Arab export markets diminishing, Western Europe faces little economic blackmail.
Also, European citizens want a tougher line against terrorism. Denis Baudoin, spokesman for French Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, says ''security'' will be one of the big tests for the new French government. ''It has become as important to our public as unemployment.''
Stronger political will translates into stronger diplomatic action against nations suspected of backing terrorism. This is the rationale behind the recent expulsions of a number of Libyan and Syrian diplomats and increased surveillance on others.
''Since the beginning of the year, we have cut down the misuse of diplomatic missions,'' says one top French official. ''This is the easiest and most identifiable way of fighting terrorism.''
Still, Europeans consider diplomatic discussions essential to fighting terrorism. French envoys have visited Arab countries ''from Iraq to Morocco,'' says one official.
French officials reveal that Syria has proved helpful in trying to win release of eight French hostages kidnapped in Lebanon.
''Before they would start denouncing Western state terrorism and wouldn't even discuss the real problem,'' the top official says. ''Now they talk about it. We'll have to wait and see if that produces results.''

Graphic

 
Picture, British police inspect car waiting to board ferry Sunday, AP


End of Document