European Union had opposed Pakistans exit from FATF grey list ahead of plenary
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 24, 2020 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 625 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has commenced its plenary meeting from October 21 to take up a case related to exit of Pakistan from its grey list, ARY News reported on Wednesday.
"India's plans to push Pakistan into the black list of FATF will fail because of the steps the country has taken to meet the requirements of the global money laundering and terror financing watchdog", he said.
FATF President Dr Marcus Pleyer, addressing a webinar to announce the decisions taken by the plenary in its three-day meeting period from October 21 to 23, said that the forum has decided that Pakistan "needs to do more" when it comes to fulfilling the requirements set out by the task force. In August, Parliament's lower house passed four FATF-related bills as part of the efforts by Pakistan to move from the FATF's grey list to the white list.
Pakistan will remain on a terrorism financing watch list until it completely implements a set of preventive guidelines, a global watchdog said, urgingIslamabad to improve financial controls.
Pakistan also needs to work on four areas to "address its strategic deficiencies", it said.
Pleyer said Pakistan has been given a chance to fix their progress.
"Pakistan shall continue to make efforts to complete the remaining items in line with its strategy by February 2021". The FATF had placed Pakistan on the grey list in June 2018 and askedIslamabad to implement a plan of action to curb money laundering and terror financing by the end of 2019, but the deadline was extended later on due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Pakistan's continued political commitment had led to progress in a number of areas in its action plan.
Ministry of External Affairs Spokesperson Anurag Srivastava had said, "As is well known, Pakistan continues to provide safe havens to terrorist entities and individuals and has also not yet taken any action against several terrorist entities and individuals including those proscribed by the UNSC such as Masood Azhar, Dawood Ibrahim, Zakir-ur-Rahman Lakhvi etc".
19-Year-Old Plotted To Kill Joe Biden, Court Documents Indicate
Revelations about the plot were detailed in a filing to keep Alexander Hillel Treisman in custody on child pornography charges. In April, he is said to have posted a meme online with the caption "should I kill joe biden? ".
The FATF maintains two lists - a blacklist and a grey list.
"We are expecting a positive nod from the FATF's apex body", he said.
India on October 22 had reiterated thatIslamabad has not taken any action on terrorist it has been providing safe havens.
He explained that we need the support of nine other countries to get off the Grey List but if we don't get that support, the worst case scenario would be Pakistan staying on the Grey List for another few months.
The assessment includes implementation of cross-border currency and bearer negotiable instruments, controls at all ports of entry, including applying effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions. The remaining six points pertain to terrorism financing.
According to earlier reports, Pakistan has been unable to comply with six of the 27 points in the global watchdog's action plan.
Pakistan's position will be up for review in the next meeting of the FATF to be held in February next year. China, Turkey and Malaysia are its consistent supporters. It has also made progress on 40 other points apart from the 27 in the action plan. Currently, North Korea and Iran are in the FATF blacklist.
The FATF is an inter-governmental body established in 1989 to combat money laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats to the integrity of the worldwide financial system. It now has 39 members including two regional organisations - the European Commission and Gulf Cooperation Council.

Load-Date: October 24, 2020


End of Document