EUROPEAN TERRORISTS THREATEN UNIFICATION MEANS REPRESSION, SAYS W.  GERMAN; GROUP
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 5, 1990, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9D
Length: 343 words
Body


BONN, West Germany - The Red Army Faction, the West German terrorist group once known as the Baader-Meinhof gang, says that it intends to wage a guerrilla war against the rising power of a unified Germany.  Last month the terrorist group blew up the car of State Secretary Hans Neusel, West Germany's top anti-terrorism expert, slightly injuring him.  Last week the group accused the ''rising Greater German-West European world power'' of establishing a ''Fourth Reich'' that would spread repression through economic domination.  In a five-page letter to news organizations, the group said that Neusel represented ''the continuity of German fascism from the Third Reich to 'Greater Germany.' '' Terrorism experts said the letter appeared to be authentic. They said that although the Red Army Faction was believed to consist of a core group of fewer than 25 members, it had loose ties to other terrorist and anarchist groups around Western Europe.  One former West German anti-terrorism official said the Red Army Faction's letter showed ''that they are desperate, that time has just about run out for them and no one really cares about their message.'' The faction, the expert said, is made up mostly of middle-aged ideologues who failed to grow out of their anarchist subculture of the late 1960s.  Andreas Baader, who said he set fire to a Frankfurt department store in 1968 to liberate his countrymen from consumerism and sexual repression, joined Ulrike Meinhof, who helped him escape from prison, to form a gang that terrorized West Germany for most of a decade.
Their followers formed the Red Army Faction.  The letter said the group intended to step up its activity because ''only an armed action can get this stalled situation going again.'' Since the two German states agreed to reunite, East Germany has disclosed that its former Communist government sheltered eight Red Army Faction members, providing them with new names, housing, and protection from prosecution. In recent weeks, the eight have been arrested and sent to West Germany for prosecution.

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document