Europe Talks Focus on Terrorist Extradition
The New York Times
December 11, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 679 words
Byline: By PAUL ANASTASI, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, Dec. 9
Body


Interior and justice ministers of the European Community meeting in Athens agreed today that common European legislation on extradition was necessary to combat ''the continuing threat from international terrorism.''
Officials exchanged charges, however, in a dispute over the refusal of some nations to extradite terrorist suspects. Italian officials criticized Greece for releasing an Palestinian terrorist suspect this week, while the British representative called for harmonizing European legislation on extradition to prevent disputes such as one between Britain and Ireland and Belgium over an Irish Catholic priest suspected of helping the outlawed Irish Republican Army.
At the end of the meeting of the European Community's anti-terrorism working group, known as the Trevi group, the 12 member nations issued a statement saying they had agreed to cooperate more closely and to exchange more information, especially concerning the extradition of suspected terrorists.
The communique did not reflect what were otherwise contentious meetings between the ministers. The Italian Interior Minister, Antonio Gava, said in a statement at the end of the conference that Italy had asked Greece to explain its decision on Tuesday to allow a Palestinian terrorist suspect to fly to freedom in Libya, instead of extraditing him to Italy as the two Governments had previously agreed.
The Palestinian, 27-year old Abdel Osama el-Zomar, is wanted in connection with the 1982 bombing of a Rome synagogue, in which a 2-year old boy was killed and 34 people were wounded. Greece said it had released him because his activity was part of an effort to liberate his homeland, and because matters had changed since the Palestine Liberation Organization recently declared an independent state and criticized the use of terrorism.
Mr. Gava said the Greek decision was a ''surprise and a disappointment, the opposite of our original agreement and a breach of the European commitment to combat terrorism.'' the United States had also criticized the decision.
The British Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said in a news briefing that ''several countries strongly supported the Italian position.''
The Athens Government dismissed the criticism. Sifis Valyrakis, Greece's Under Secretary of Public Order, said at a news conference after the meeting that an explanation for the move ''will be provided to the Italian Government later, through diplomatic channels.''
''This is not the first time that the problem of extradition has arisen,'' Mr. Valyrakis said. ''Each country has the right to make its decisions according to its national interests.''
Mr. Hurd, as well as the Ministers of Justice of Belgium and Ireland, said they had not discussed details of the dispute that has arisen over Britain's demand for the extradition of the Rev. Patrick Ryan, who is suspected of supporting I.R.A. activities.
''This was not the place to say more about the case of Patrick Ryan, since we are waiting for the Irish reply to our extradition request,'' Mr. Hurd said. ''But I reminded my colleagues of the crucial importance of extradition as a vital weapon in the fight against terrorism.''
The ministers agreed that common European legislation on extradition should be pursued as a means of avoiding similar disputes. Britain suggested that all members should sign the European convention on extradition, and that each nation's legislation should be adapted accordingly.
The Trevi group meeting was attended by senior American officials, including Attorney General Dick Thornburgh; William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Paul L. Bremer, head of the State Department's anti-terrorism section.
Mr. Valyrakis said the Americans had met informally with Greek officials, but he denied that any pressure had been exerted for the extradition of three other Palestinian terrorist suspects now held in Greek jails. One American extradition request is pending before the Greek Supreme Court, and its outcome has been described by Washington as a test of Athens's sincerity in combating terrorism.


End of Document