European Union going ahead with Boeing tariffs against U.S.
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 11, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MARKETS; Pg. 1
Length: 597 words
Byline: Jean Garcia
Body


The European Union pressed ahead Monday with plans to impose tariffs and other penalties on up to $4 billion worth of US goods and services over illegal American support for plane maker Boeing, but expressed hope that trade ties would improve once President Donald Trump leaves office. USA aircraft-related products as well as other goods ranging from spirits and nuts to handbags and chemicals were included on the bloc's planned target list last month.
"There are great expectations and the hope that the American presidential elections will lead to a return to multilateral engagement in worldwide trade and that it will be possible to overcome past conflicts", German Economy Minister Peter Altmaier told a news conference before the ministers met.
Mr Dombrovskis, Latvia's former prime minister, made his comments before the EU trade ministers discussed how Europeans can face up to challenges from both the USA and China.
Eager to move on from Mr Trump's critical view of Germany, Dr Merkel said Berlin, as part of the European Union, and the United States must work "side by side" to tackle Covid-19, global warming and terrorism, and to champion free trade.
"The hope is that the USA will return to multilateral approaches, also in trade", added the minister, whose export powerhouse Germany was the most exposed to Mr Trump's protectionist onslaught against Europe. "We are ready to withdraw or suspend our tariffs at any time when the U.S.is ready to do so on their side, whether it is the current or future USA administration".
Boeing and Airbus have taken steps to remove subsidies and fiscal support that had been deemed illegal by the WTO, opening the door to both sides entering into a negotiated settlement quickly, said the official, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the matter.
The response to climate change also needed EU-U.S. leadership, said von der Leyen, hailing Biden's commitment for the U.S.to reenter the Paris climate agreement.
"We are not escalating anything".
NBA, union agree to amend CBA, free agency to start November 20
The two sides agreed to begin the 2020-21 season on December 22, with each team playing a 72-game schedule. Additionally, free agent negotiations can begin on November 20, with signings beginning on November 22.
The EU said it still hoped to settle the fight, which saw the USA impose tariffs on European products a year ago.
"Additional tariffs will be a major blow to the US spirits industry, especially craft distillers who are struggling to regain their footing following the closings of distillery tasting rooms, restaurants and bars due to COVID-19", he said in a statement.
"We are just mirroring the USA approach", he said. In 2004, the USA took the EU to the WTO over subsidies to European plane maker Airbus, and the EU retaliated with a case against the U.S. over support for American manufacturer Boeing.
While a presidency under Biden, who was given as victor of the U.S. election on Saturday, will certainly differ in style from Donald Trump, experts warn that European manufacturers shouldn't get too ahead of themselves.
The decline in manufacturing jobs, a major USA concern, was the reason Trump cited in hiking tariffs on goods entering the United States to stand at more than 20 percent on average today.
The US says European aircraft maker Airbus received illegal subsidies. "We now have an opportunity to reboot our trans-Atlantic cooperation".
A coalition of 20 trade associations representing the US, EU and United Kingdom wine and distilled spirits sectors has called for the immediate removal of tariffs.

Load-Date: November 13, 2020


End of Document