EUROPE'S UNEASE
The New York Times
April 14, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk; ANALYSIS
Length: 859 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, April 13
Body


The prospect of an American military strike against Libya has touched off deep apprehension in Western Europe and highlighted the differing European and American perspectives on terrorism and how best to combat it, European officials and defense experts said in interviews this weekend.
 
The current tour of
European capitals by the American special envoy Vernon A. Walters has heightened anxiety that the United States has already decided to stage air strikes against Libya in retaliation for what Washington sees as Libya's involvement in the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque frequented by American soldiers.
Reagan Administration officials portray European allies as ''soft'' on terrorism, unwilling to take bold political and economic measures, much less military moves, to isolate countries that sponsor terrorist attacks. The officials blame what some term ''Europe's greed'' for its reluctance to act.
Italy and West Germany are Libya's largest trading partners, and Libya remains their largest supplier of crude oil. Because of such trade relations, resistance to sanctions, in general, runs deep in Western Europe.
 
A Fear of Libyan Retaliation
European officials and news organizations expressed fear this weekend that the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, if faced with American military strikes that the European allies appear to support, might retaliate against the 15,000 Italians, 5,500 Britons, 1,500 West Germans and 1,000 French citizens living in Libya.
Libya exploited this fear by announcing today that it had evacuated camps considered targets for American attacks and had ordered that foreign companies house their workers there.
Beyond these concerns, Europe and the United States have strikingly different views on terrorism and the constraints inherent in fighting it.
Europe is simply more vulnerable to terrorist attacks than is the United States, European defense experts say. Because of the continent's proximity to the Middle East, it is far harder for Europe to prevent infiltration by Middle Eastern groups intent on terrorism.
The United States, moreover, in the European view, has only recently come face to face with terrorism. Europeans have lived with it for more than 15 years, since the advent of groups such as the Red Brigades and the Baader-Meinhof organization. So Europeans say they resent American lectures on combating terrorism, such as recent remarks by the Director of Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, who chastised Europe for being ''rather slow'' to mobilize.
Lingering doubt here about Washington's proof of Libyan involvement in the recent wave of attacks - another cause of European skepticism about military action - has diminished as Washington has offered allies evidence of what it says is Libyan complicity in the discotheque bombing. Yet European leaders and the public remain deeply concerned about the effectiveness of military action against Libya.
 
'A Rambo Response'
Italian officials have openly maintained that the recent American military strike in the Gulf of Sidra reinforced an unpopular, faltering Qaddafi regime and endangered Italy without preventing Libya from sponsoring further violent acts in Europe.
''It was a Rambo response,'' said Pierre Lellouche, a defense analyst at the Paris-based French Institute of International Relations. ''It made the Americans feel good but did nothing to curb Libyan-sponsored terrorism.''
Mr. Lellouche and other self-professed hard-liners say such attacks will continue until West Europeans are persuaded that they are engaged in a real war against terrorism, and until the allies are willing to act boldly and consistently against countries that sponsor it - not just Libya, but Syria and Iran as well.
But ''going to the source,'' as Americans call it, is a complex task, since many nations have harbored members and sympathizers of movements labeled terrorists by other countries.
 
Fear of Confrontation With Soviet
In general, there is little support for a military response to terrorism in Europe. Polls indicate that most Europeans strongly believe that American military action against international terrorism would aggravate the problem. They are also concerned that military action could ultimately provoke a confrontation with the Soviet Union, a possibility far more widely feared by Europeans than by Americans.
Some defense experts here said Western European leaders might well condone military strikes against Libya if they felt such action would cause Colonel Qaddafi's demise or the overthrow of his regime. But neither is deemed a likely result of military action. The experts said covert action was a preferable means of eliminating Colonel Qaddafi and the threat of terrorism in general.
''If you want to kill a fly, do it with a needle, not a 1,000-ton sledgehammer,'' said a senior Western official.
Still others drew a distinction between the public and private stands of European leaders. ''Some would love the Americans to strike; they would secretly jump for joy,'' a senior French official said recently. ''But because of Europe's vulnerability, no European leader wants to be seen as publicly sanctioning such a strike.''


End of Document