European raids hit at World Cup terrorism
USA TODAY
May 27, 1998, Wednesday,
INTERNATIONAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 364 words
Byline: Fred Coleman
Dateline: PARIS
Body


PARIS -- Police detained more than 80 suspected Islamic terrorists
in five European countries Tuesday in an attempt to quash the
threat of violence at the World Cup soccer tournament in France
opening in two weeks.
The operation capped several months of investigations by counter-terrorist
services into radical Algerian fundamentalists operating on French
soil. It also coincided with similar operations in Belgium, Germany,
Italy and Switzerland, the French Interior Ministry said in a
statement.
The coordinated dawn raids followed tapped phone calls, police
said, indicating that Islamic extremists were planning to move
men, funds and arms around Europe in a plot to disrupt the competition.
French police said they detained 53 suspects at 43 sites, mostly
in Paris, Lyon and Marseille.
The World Cup will take place in 10 French cities between June
10 and July 12.
Those detained for questioning in France held Algerian, Tunisian
and French nationalities. They are suspected of ties to the GIA
or Armed Islamic Group, Algeria's most radical Islamic guerrilla
organization.
The GIA, which blames France for supporting Algeria's military
government, claimed responsibility for a 1995 bombing campaign
in Paris that killed eight and injured 170.
Police also detained about 10 suspects each in Belgium, Switzerland,
Italy and five in Germany in the raids.
French raids confiscated documents, a computer and about $ 150,000
in cash.
German authorities said the Islamists there had been suspected
of providing arms and explosives, but none was immediately reported
found.
False documents and the equipment to make them were found, however,
in Italy.
Milan prosecutor Stefano Dambruoso, who directed the raids in
Italy, said, "as we gradually got closer to the World Cup, in
phone calls between various members of the (Islamic) groups, they
talked more and more about arms and false documents, passports
and identity cards."
He also said suspects detained had been constantly on the move
within the five countries involved.
An announcement from the French Interior ministry made clear that
the preventive action against World Cup terrorism was far from
over.
"Other developments are likely to happen in the hours ahead,"
it said.

Load-Date: May 28, 1998


End of Document