EUROPEANS LINK TERROR TO ARABS BUT DISAGREE ON SOVIETS
The New York Times
June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 2256 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 22
Body


Western European police, intelligence and political officials generally believe that Palestinian groups and radical Arab nations have given considerable direct assistance and encouragement to European terrorist organizations.
The officials, however, are more divided and equivocal on the much-argued question of the Soviet Union's possible role in terrorism. Some officials believe that the Soviet Union has given mostly indirect support to terrorism.
At the same time, these officials say they do not believe that Soviet or Palestinian officials create, lead or direct urban terrorist groups, which they describe as indigenous. The officials also say the evidence of Soviet involvement sometimes falls short of being ''proof.''
West European leaders generally believe radical Arab groups are linked to domestic terrorism, although they disagree on role of Soviet activism
These were among the conclusions suggested in interviews conducted by New York Times correspondents in Europe and in Israel and supplemented in the United States by the opinions of nongovernmental and governmental analysts of international terrorism.
The responses varied among officials and analysts from different countries, and there were differences in emphasis and in assumptions within individual countries.
A debate about international links between terrorist groups and about the degree of Soviet complicity has recently become more heated, especially in the United States, and has increasingly assumed ideological implications that involve the desirability of detente with Moscow and the international status of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
 
Palestinian Role Continues
This sometimes causes different individuals and groups to assign varying meaning and degrees of importance to direct and circumstantial evidence. But the interviews suggested several themes:
- Palestinian groups that in the past have openly cooperated with and supported European terrorists in spectacular operations continue to give sanctuary to hunted European terrorists and to render some assistance to both left- and right-wing terrorist groups.
- There is evidence that in the very recent past, as well as for more than a decade previously, diverse groups of terrorists have received training in camps in Southern Yemen, Libya, Lebanon and elsewhere in the Arab world. Some of these camps were created by radical Palestinian organizations such as Dr. George Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Technical and political instructors from East Germany and other Soviet-bloc nations reportedly were involved.
- The operations, associations and character of terrorism have not remained static and neither have the political implications and importance of terrorism. In Spain, for instance, officials suggested this spring that terrorism was being encouraged, apparently by the Soviet Union, in the hope of preventing Spain from joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Rightists have used the Government's inability to stamp out terrorism as an excuse to support demands for a return to authoritarian government. In West Germany and Italy, on the other hand, officials believed that the strength of terrorist organizations was waning.
Some journalists, policy analysts and conservative politicians in the United States and Britain have, in effect, accused government officials in Europe and in the Carter Admininstration of ignoring evidence of alleged Soviet complicity for diplomatic and political reasons.
To a considerable extent the debate is actually about how to interpret ''evidence.'' Although some West German terrorists have said they used ''safe houses'' in East Berlin and received help from East Germans, officials in West Germany seem to give less weight to such evidence than American analysts committed to the hypotheses of indirect Soviet responsibility.
Those who wish to blame the Soviet Union for Italian terrorism stress statements made by a Czechoslovak defector about Sovietdirected training camps in Czechoslovakia. An Italian police official said the Czechoslovak camps were for ideological training and had been ''important'' at one time, but he said he did not believe they continued to operate.
One important feature of recent terrorism was the extremely violent and ruthless character of two incidents attributed to neo-Fascist groups. A bomb attack at the railroad station in Bologna, Italy, in August killed more than 80 people and injured at least 200. In West Germany, a neo-Nazi group called the Defense Sport Group Hoffman was blamed for a bomb incident during the Munich Oktoberfest. A 21-year-old member of the group was killed along with 11 other people, and about 200 people were injured.
 
A Higher Casualty Rate
Western officials say right-wing terrorists seem to attempt fewer attacks but cause more casualties per incident.  The Central Intelligence Agency said the two right-wing attacks ''rank among the worst terrorist incidents ever recorded'' and ''produced more casualties than any previous terrorist attacks in Western Europe.''
The New York Times reported this spring that senior West German security officials suspected that Palestinian groups associated with the Palestine Liberation Organization had given paramilitary and other training to neo-Nazi groups. The P.L.O. representatives in West Germany denied this.
The same German officials said they possessed ''clear indications'' that fugitive members of extreme left-wing terrorist groups were hiding in regions of Lebanon controlled by the P.L.O.
 
Israeli Reports Cited
Israeli intelligence files are overflowing with allegations of both old and fairly recent contacts between Palestinian groups and neo-Fascist terrorists as well as even more numerous associations with left-wing terrorist groups.
But this evidence does not necessarily mean that ''active'' support of international terrorism by the P.L.O. or by so-called ''rejectionist'' groups has actually increased.
For instance, the Central Intelligence Agency's annual report on terrorism published June 15, covering the year 1980 and reviewing events since 1968, said that ''Palestinian terrorist actions in 1980 did not reach the level experienced during the 1970's.''
It added that Al Fatah, the largest group in the P.L.O. and the one directly led by Yasir Arafat, ''while presumably waiting for the results of Arafat's diplomatic initiatives'' in seeking an interim Palestinian state, ''restricted its international terrorist attacks to Middle East countries.''
 
Habash Group Less Active
Other, ''rejectionist'' Palestinian groups ''met with mixed success,'' the C.I.A. report said, adding that their operations were mostly confined to Lebanon. The once highly active Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine has been ''relatively inactive'' since Dr. Habash underwent surgery in September.
The opinions of the European security officials about Soviet complicity in international terrorism were noticeably milder than those of some journalists, authors and American politicians who have stressed Soviet guilt in recent months.
A West German official, for instance, said in May: ''From our point of view, there are no facts in hand that would allow us to say that the Soviet Union is behind West German terrorists in any direct sense. This goes for the entire Eastern European bloc.''
Spanish officials, on the other hand, have been more willing to suggest that the Soviet Union has, to some extent, assisted the Basque group known by the initials E.T.A.
 
'No Great Brain Abroad'
A somewhat similar tone emerged in interviews with Italian officials. Gen. Umberto Capuzzo, the commander of the Carabinieri, Italy's paramilitary national police corps, said in an interview in February that ''Italian terrorism is sui generis; there is no great brain abroad.''
Since then, senior Italian security officials have seemed to take a position somewhere between that of officials in West Germany and those in Spain. A security official said it seemed safe to assume that the Soviet Union would find it ''interesting'' to have some connection with terrorist elements attempting to destroy the Italian system of government, but they expressed a belief that neither the Russians nor the Americans would maintain what he called a ''standing relationship'' with terrorists on the ground that it would be too risky.
Spanish officials have reported privately that Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union suggested to them two years ago that if Spain went forward toward becoming a member of NATO it would face a worsening terrorist problem.
 
'Don't Have Proof,' Spain Says
Last month, Manuel Ballesteros, head of Spain's antiterrorist squad, said in an interview with a Madrid newspaper: ''I suppose that you are asking me who is behind, what country is behind, E.T.A.  Well, we policemen do not suppose; we know, but we don't have proof.''
He went on to say that ''we are talking about countries in Moscow's orbit'' that had offered the Basque terrorists training and support.  Although the prevailing view of Italian officials was that Italian terror was basically homegrown, there was also a prevailing view that members of the terrorist underground were crossing borders easily and finding shelter, arms and other support in complex arrangements with non-Italian groups.
Some of the same security officials in Italy who seemed reluctant to indict the Soviet Union for complicity in Italian terrorism expressed the opinion that terrorism could not be separated from attempts to ''destablize'' Western societies. Some politicians have also argued recently that Italian terrorists have been given ''sanctuary'' abroad, presumably by authorities friendly to Moscow.
In his interview in February, General Capuzzo said that ''operationally speaking, the worst is over'' and that the police had crippled the Red Brigades and Front Line, two major terrorist groups, as much as was militarily possible. He suggested that political action was needed to create social and political conditions unfavorable to terrorism, to terrorist recruitment and to popular support. That view continues to be held by Italian officials.
 
Red Brigades Less Threatening
Although the Red Brigades achieved considerable publicity, which is a vital form of nourishment for terrorists, from the kidnapping late last year of a high-ranking magistrate in the Justice Ministry, the present abilities and the future of the left-wing terrorists seem somewhat less ominous to many officials.
The C.I.A. report said the Irish Republican Army ''was not as active in 1980 as in previous years.'' But the I.R.A. has achieved publicity and international attention this year through hunger strikes by members serving sentences in Northern Ireland prisons.  They are seeking ''political status'' from the British Government, and several of the protesters have died.
The I.R.A. this year has successfully attacked British Army patrols with land mines detonated by remote control.  British security officials spoke of training that some I.R.A.  members are believed to have received in Palestinian camps in Lebanon and elsewhere in the Middle East in the 1970's, but they said this relationship did not appear to have been longstanding.
 
Support Among Irish-Americans
The foreign group that is most important to the I.R.A. appears to be Irish-Americans in the United States. Sean O'Bradaigh, the spokesman for Sinn Fein, the political party in Dublin that is the legal arm of the I.R.A., said, ''Irish-Americans are our backbone.''
British officials said they believed that the I.R.A. bought most of its weapons somewhere in the Middle East, but they said there were no reliable clues as to who was selling used weapons.
The fact that financial donations from American citizens are apparently used to buy Soviet-designed weapons to shoot at British soldiers in Ulster is only one element in an increasingly complex and controversial argument about the roots of international terrorism.
Early this year, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said the Soviet Union was following policies that helped support, foster and expand terrorism. The C.I.A.'s analysts reportedly had difficulty marshaling strong evidence that would indict Moscow for responsibility for most terrorism, and they were ordered to rewrite a National Intelligence Estimate.
 
A Compromise Formula for Report
But the Reagan Administration has now apparently evolved a relatively bland compromise formulation, which may be relatively noncontroversial.
''The Soviets are deeply engaged,'' the C.I.A. annual report said, ''in support of revolutionary violence, which is a fundamental element of Leninist ideology. Such violence frequently entails acts of international terrorism.''
The report continued: ''The ostensible position of the Soviets that they oppose terrorism while supporting so-called national liberation movements is further compromised by Moscow's close relationship with and aid to a number of governments and organizations which are direct supporters of purely terrorist groups. In the Middle East, for example, the Soviets sell large quantities of arms to Libya -knowing that Libya is a major supporter of terrorist groups - and they back a number of Palestinian groups that have conducted terrorist operations.''
Few students of terrorism would quarrel with any part of that generalized statement. But Libya's main source of funds with which to buy arms for any purpose comes from Western nations purchasing Libyan oil. The Soviet Union has supplied arms directly to the P.L.O. since 1974.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Yasir Arafat (Page A13)


End of Document