EVEN MUSLIM LEADER KNEW 'SOMETHING WRONG' WITH HIM
Daily News (New York)
November 8, 2009 Sunday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 386 words
Byline: BY DAN McGRAW in Temple, Tex., and SAMUEL GOLDSMITH DAILY NEWS WRITERS With News Wire Services
Body


THE FORT HOOD gunman was rejected for a position as a Muslim lay leader at the Army base because "something just didn't seem right," a mosque official revealed yesterday.
Osman Danquah, co-founder of the Islamic Community of Greater Killeen, said he was deeply troubled by two conversations with Maj. Nidal Hasan over the summer.
Hasan, a psychiatrist, seemed incoherent and obsessed with the question of what to tell soldiers about fighting fellow Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan.
"But what if a person gets in and feels that it's just not right?" Danquah remembers Hasan asking.
"I told him, 'There's something wrong with you,' " Danquah said.
The conversation took place months before Hasan, 39, stormed into a predeployment center and shot dead 13 people and wounded dozens more.
One of the injured, Pfc. Najee Hull, 21, told his brother the shooter came at him, shouting, "God is great!" in Arabic before firing, the brother said.
He was hit in the right leg and fell.
"He was crawling when Hasan shot him twice in the back," Nate Hull said. "He muscled up all the strength he had and got out.
"He could have been killed if he got shot a couple inches higher," he said. "Thank God, he didn't."
Investigators are sifting through contradictory witness accounts about whether Hasan shouted "Allahu Akbar" before he opened fire.
They're also trying to pinpoint a motive amid reports Hasan was upset about being shipped to Afghanistan and had complained he was persecuted because of his faith.
Officials have said they have no evidence the shooting was terrorism, but at least one lawmaker disagrees.
"I consider this an act of terrorism," said state legislator Sid Miller, who represents Fort Hood. "He didn't just snap. He deserves to be punished to the fullest extent of the law."
Hasan was born in America to Palestinian parents who emigrated from Jordan. His extended family in the West Bank said the accusations against him were unfathomable.
"He is a doctor and loves the U.S." his grandfather, Ismail Mustafa Hamad, said from his home in the Palestinian town of al-Bireh. "America made him what he is.
"Whether he became angry or something else, I don't know. What I do know is that it is impossible that he would do something like that," said Hamad, 88.
President Obama is set to attend a memorial service Tuesday at Fort Hood.

Load-Date: November 9, 2009


End of Document