Evidence mounts of Iranian terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 24, 1996, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 831 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It has become fashionable in certain European quarters these days to scoff at  U.S. suspicions about dark terrorist plots being hatched in faraway places,  especially Iran.
According to the Europeans, notably the French, the Germans and British,  most of this talk about Iranian terrorism is your typical American  exaggeration, paranoia and simplistic naivete. The fact that all three of  these countries just happen to be doing big business with Iran and want to  keep it that way isn't a factor - at least that's what they say.
Which is why it's helpful, not to mention highly satisfying, when others  come forward to corroborate what the U.S. government has been saying all along  - that the regime in Tehran is the chief state sponsor of international  terrorism.
IRAN-1
It's one thing when the State Department or the Pentagon puts the finger on  Iran for the latest terrorist outrage. It's quite another when state  prosecutors in Germany get into the act.
And when an outfit like the Palestine Liberation Organization chimes in,  it's time for everybody to start taking this Iranian connection more  seriously. Because the PLO, as even its ardent defenders must acknowledge,  does know a thing or two about terrorism.
But let's start with those German prosecutors. They're trying an Iranian  operative and four Lebanese accomplices on charges of bursting into a Berlin  restaurant and gunning down a Kurdish opponent of the Iranian regime and three  of his assistants - on the direct orders of Iran's two top leaders.
A star witness in the trial, it's worth noting, is exiled former Iranian  President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr. Among other things, Bani-Sadr has testified  that the Iranian regime has set up an elaborate bureaucracy just to plan and  carry out the assassination of government opponents abroad.
The Berlin trial isn't over yet, but it's already having repercussions.  Prosecutors in Karlsruhe have issued a warrant for the arrest of Iran's  intelligence chief on charges of ordering the Berlin hits. They're also  putting together a case against the Iranian president, Hashemi Rafsanjani.
If these cases go forward, Germany's government - which has often played  down the Iranian link to terrorism - may finally have to get on board.
But even if developments in Germany haven't drawn a lot of attention, the  charge that Iran is backing plans to assassinate Yasser Arafat and other  high-ranking PLO leaders should. That accusation comes from Mahmoud Abbas, a  member of the PLO executive committee who helped put together the 1993 interim  peace accord with Israel.
According to Abbas, Iranian intelligence is working with militant  Palestinian groups to sabotage the peace process with Israel. The  assassination plans, he said, were part of the campaign.
The accusation came shortly after PLO security police rounded up at least  17 senior Palestinian military officers on charges of trying to kill Arafat  and overthrow his self-rule government. Arafat was so rattled by the apparent  coup attempt, PLO sources say, that he even asked for and got a team of  plainclothes Israeli commandos to beef up his personal security detail.
Yet another accusation against Iran comes from Bahrain in the Persian Gulf  where the ruling Khalifa family charges Tehran with stirring up the tiny  country's Shiite Muslim majority to revolt against it. Washington is  especially concerned about this because Bahrain is headquarters for the U.S.  5th Fleet, guardian of the Persian Gulf and its oil.
And while we're talking about the Persian Gulf, it's worth remembering that  U.S. officials are convinced that Iran was implicated in the truck bombing  that killed 19 Americans in June at Dhahran, only 20 miles across the gulf  from Bahrain. The theory is that the Saudi militants who actually carried out  the bombing honed their skills at one of the 11 terrorist training camps known  to be operating in Iran.
U.S. intelligence reports estimate that as many as 5,000 would-be  terrorists are undergoing training at the Iranian camps, learning, among other  things, how to build massive truck bombs and make clean getaways after  assassinations.
There is little doubt the Europeans are aware of all these developments,  possibly in even more detail than we are. That's why U.S. officials are more  than slightly annoyed that the Europeans aren't putting all the pieces  together to form a clear picture of how widely, and how menacingly, the  Iranian intelligence services are ranging these days. 
 
+++ 
 
   I see that the NBC television network has apologized for offending China  with its coverage of the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games in Atlanta last  month. The supposed offense came from NBC's Olympics anchor, Bob Costas, who  noted at the time that China had "problems with human rights, property rights  disputes, the threat posed to Taiwan."
I'm still scratching my head over this. Since when do we have to apologize  for telling the truth, even if somebody in China doesn't like it?

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Bani-Sadr

Load-Date: August 26, 1996


End of Document