EVIDENCE OF BOMB IN CRASH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 28, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1018 words
Body


BANGKOK, Thailand - Western security officials surveyed the wreckage Monday ofan Austrian airliner that crashed in northern Thailand and said they were nearly certain that the plane had been downed by a bomb explosion.  ''All the available evidence points to a bomb,'' one Western official said.  ''The pieces of the plane wreckage were literally tiny and spread out over a wide area.'' A Western airline official familiar with the investigation into the crash of a Pan American Boeing 747 that exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, said the Thai crash ''was far, far worse than Lockerbie.'' The Pan Am plane, which carried 259 passengers and crew members, was found to have been downed by a bomb placed aboard in Frankfurt, Germany, apparently by Middle East terrorists.  The Boeing 767-300 that crashed Sunday night appeared to have been destroyed by an explosion and subsequent fireball on board, Franz Karner, Hong Kong sales manager for Lauda Air, the airline that owned the jet, said in a news conference Monday. Asked whether he thought the blast had come from a bomb, he replied: ''It looks like it.'' All 223 people aboard the plane were killed when it exploded in the air and crashed into remote hilly jungles near the provincial town of Suphanburi, about 100 miles northwest of Bangkok.  The crash was the 12th-worst commercial aviation disaster in history.  Another factor pointing to a bomb explosion was the speed with which the airliner was destroyed.
The jet had taken off just 16 minutes earlier from Bangkok's Don Muang airport - an intermediate stop on its flight to Vienna, Austria, from Hong Kong.  The Bangkok tower gave the pilot permission to climb to 20,000 feet - and then the airliner simply vanished, said control tower officials at Bangkok airport.  And in London, David Learmount, an editor at Flight International magazine, said initial indicati ons suggested that a bomb had brought down the craft.  ''Early evidence is very similar to early evidence for Lockerbie and the Air India crash into the Atlantic,'' he told the British Broadcasting Corp.  Rescue workers recovered 140 bodies from the wreckage Monday in the 1,500-foot heights in northwestern Thailand. Three Americans were among those aboard, Lauda Air said.  Lauda Air in Vienna said 74 passengers and nine crew members were Austrian.  The pilot was Thomas Welsh, said to be from the Seattle area.  The airline said the other victims were 52 Hong Kong Chinese, 39 Thais, 10 Italians, seven Swiss, six Chinese, four Germans, three each from Yugoslavia, Portugal and Taiwan, two each from the United States, Britain, Hungary, the Philippines, and one each from Poland, Turkey, Brazil and Australia.  Officials recovered the plane's ''black box'' flight recorder, but the investigation was hampered by hundreds of Thais who rushed to the crash site to scavenge for valuables.  Thai authorities said the plane's pilot had made no report of any trouble before the crash. The plane's manufacturer, Boeing, said the craft had no history of flight problems.  Among the possible sources of a bomb attack are a disgruntled former employee of Lauda Air who Western airline officials say repeatedly threatened to bomb the airline's offices and aircraft. The employee, whose name was not made public, was being sought by police.  ''For an ex-airline official, it wouldn't be that hard to get a bomb on board,'' one official said. ''It was the first thing that occurred to everyone.'' Security officers noted that Lauda Air had conducted no baggage screening in Bangkok, apparently secure in the belief that Middle East terrorism would not touch the airline.  Baggage for all airlines is thoroughly X-rayed as a matter of course before loading in Hong Kong.  During the Persian Gulf War, Western intelligence pinpointed Bangkok as a possible staging site for terrorism; airport security subsequently was tightened.  At Hong Kong's Kai Tak International Airport, security has also been tight.  Austria maintains strict neutrality. If anything, it is considered among the most friendly of European countries to Arab regimes, including a number of radical governments in the Middle East that have been accused of supporting terrorism.  Vienna police discounted another theory: that a bomb might have been intended for a United Airlines flight and was placed on the Austrian plane by mistake.  Lt Col. Alfred Rupf, of the Austrian Police at Vienna International Airport, said that idea had been based on misinterpretation of a call that Vienna police received. The call came from an anonymous man speaking German with a German, rather than an Austrian, accent.  Security was stepped up in Bangkok, and officials there expressed confusion about the call, noting that the only United flight left more than eight hours later. All American airlines using Bangkok airport conduct their own security searches of luggage.  Airline officials noted that Lauda Air could be ruined financially by the explosion. The airline was founded in 1982 by Niki Lauda, a former world motor-racing champion.  Even with insurance coverage on the $60 million aircraft, Lauda Air flies just a handful of scheduled flights from Vienna to the Far East.  Lauda said Monday that he was leaving for Thailand immediately to speak with investigators about the cause of the crash.  Questioned about the possible economic consequences for his airline, he replied: ''The human tragedy is in the forefront now and must be dealt with.  When that has been done and the cause of the disaster discovered, we can look at other consequences.'' Seattle-based Boeing is sending a team of investigators to Thailand to examine the crash site. Boeing officials said the crash was the first involving the two-engine airliner, which was introduced in 1982.  A team from the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board was en route to Thailand to help in the investigation if needed, said Alan Pollock, a board spokesmanm in Washington.  The board has offered to bring the flight data and cockpit voice recorders to laboratories in the United States to be analyzed, Pollock said.

Graphic

 
Photo; Photo by AP … A Thai police officer looking Monday through the wreckage of an Austrian jetliner that exploded over a remote jungle area on Sunday. More than 200 people on board were killed.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document