EX-CHECHEN OFFICIAL GRANTED ASYLUM TO LIVE IN U.S.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 7, 2004 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 296 words
Byline: TIM MCCAHILL THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MONTPELIER, Vt.
Body


A former Chechen official whom Russian authorities have accused of having terrorist ties has been granted asylum in the United States over Moscow's protests.
 Ilyas Akhmadov was appointed foreign minister by separatist leader Aslan Maskhadov, now denounced by Russian authorities as a terrorist.
"We cannot consider the decision to grant Ilyas Akhmadov political asylum in the United States as anything other than a clear manifestation of double standards in issues relating to the fight against terrorism," the Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement yesterday.
 In an interview yesterday, Akhmadov, 43, said he came to the United States in 2002 and was granted asylum this spring. The Department of Homeland Security appealed the decision in June on the grounds that Russia accuses Akhmadov of involvement in terrorism.
 An investigation determined that Akhamadov had no connection to terrorism, and Homeland Security withdrew its appeal, said Russ Knocke, a spokesman for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
 Akhmadov's asylum request was officially granted Monday. He is temporarily living in Vermont.
 Russian forces pulled out of Chechnya in 1996 after a devastating 20-month war, leaving the region in separatist control. A year later, Maskhadov was elected president of Chechnya.
 Russian forces returned in 1999 following rebel attacks in a neighboring province, beginning an ongoing conflict in the region. Soon after the war began, Maskhadov sent abroad Akhmadov, along with other members of the presidential Cabinet, to work with foreign leaders promoting the Chechen cause.
 Daniel Pellathy, program director for the Washington-based American Committee for Peace in Chechnya, said granting Akhmadov refuge in the U.S. would "dispel the myth" that he is a terrorist.

Load-Date: August 9, 2004


End of Document