Ex-Agent Cut a Dashing Figure in the Spy World
The New York Times
November 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk; Column 3;
Length: 859 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON,

By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26
Body


One of the last of the legendary covert warriors at the Central Intelligence Agency, Duane R. Clarridge was a flamboyant spy who seemed to step boldly into the Iran-contra affair from the pages of an Ian Fleming novel.
Aggressive, imaginative and always willing to stick his neck out for the C.I.A., Mr. Clarridge was a star who sparkled under William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence in the Reagan years. Some former colleagues say Mr. Clarridge virtually created the contras' war in Nicaragua for Mr. Casey in the early 1980's.
Later, Mr. Clarridge became a role model for a Security Council aide, Oliver L. North. He also helped Mr. North arrange a missile shipment from Israel to Iran in November 1985, which led to the seven criminal charges against him in a Federal grand jury indictment returned today.
After an internal review of the intelligence agency's role in the Iran-contra affair conducted by William H. Webster, who succeeded Mr. Casey as Director, he was reprimanded and removed from his job as head of the C.I.A.'s counter-terrorism unit. Mr. Clarridge, 59 years old, left the agency in 1988 and is now employed at the General Dynamics Corporation in San Diego.
 
A Dashing Figure
 Former agency employees and published accounts describe Mr. Clarridge's career as one in which the Brown University graduate rose quickly in the ranks, awed his subordinates and alternately charmed and alarmed his superiors. In his three decades at the agency, Mr. Clarridge, known by his nickname "Dewey," was posted in India, Turkey, the Middle East, Europe and Central America. He became one of the agency's experts on terrorism, and some admirers said he may have saved many lives by conducting operations against terrorist groups in the Middle East.
Adopting cover names like Daks Lebaron or Dewey Maroni, he cut a dashing swath through the twilight world of espionage. He dined at the best restaurants in Europe, smoked hand-rolled cigars and favored white Italian suits, silk pocket handkerchiefs and expensive shoes. A former colleague recalled that Mr. Clarridge once grew enraged over a news report that quoted a lawmaker as saying that he had worn polyester suits to testify on Capitol Hill. "He wouldn't let polyester touch his skin," the former official said. "He was extraordinarily offended."
Junior operations officers looked up to him with awe. Superiors regarded him with mixed feelings. "If you have a tough, dangerous job, critical to national security, Dewey's your man," Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, is quoted as saying in the book "Casey" by Joseph E. Persico, which was published last year by Viking. "Just make sure you have a good lawyer at his elbow -- Dewey's not easy to control."
 
Appealed to Casey
 Shortly after Mr. Casey was confirmed as Director, he met Mr. Clarridge, then head of the C.I.A.'s office in Rome, at a gathering with his European station chiefs. "He was the kind of person who appealed to Casey," said Vincent M. Cannistraro, a former colleague, who was identified in the indictment as having taken part in a meeting that preceded the November 1985 missile shipment to Iran. "He was forward-leaning, can-do, positive, determined."
Mr. Casey put Mr. Clarridge in charge of the agency's emerging hot spot, the Latin American Division that supervised clandestine operations against the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua, even though Mr. Clarridge had never served in the region and spoke little Spanish. In that position, Mr. Clarridge organized covert military aid after President Ronald Reagan authorized the assistance in 1981.
Mr. Clarridge had direct access to Mr. Casey, bypassing and unsettling superiors in the chain of command who appreciated Mr. Clarridge's ability to get results but feared that they might be held accountable for whatever schemes he and Mr. Casey concocted.
Mr. Clarridge's boldest plan was the mining of Nicaragua's harbors in 1983, an operation that infuriated members of Congress when they learned of it. By most accounts, the operation cost Mr. Clarridge his Central America job.
But the mining was just one of a number of aggressive steps taken by the C.I.A. that prompted Congress to bar military aid to the contras and prohibit the agency from any involvement with the rebels in 1984. It was then that Mr. Reagan ordered his aides to keep the contras alive until Congress could be persuaded to reinstate aid.
Mr. Clarridge marked his departure with a military-style farewell address to the contras at a secret Honduran sanctuary. In his crisp safari jacket and smartly shined boots, he told the rag-tag troops that they would not be abandoned and that the operation was being turned over to Mr. North, the Marine Corps lieutenant colonel, who stood nearby in battle fatigues.
Back at the intelligence agency, Mr. Casey named Mr. Clarridge to head covert operations in Europe and to establish the C.I.A's counter-terrorism center. "He was the consummate operational officer," said Michael A. Ledeen, a consultant to the National Security Council, who is now employed at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. "He had ways of getting things done."

Load-Date: November 27, 1991


End of Document