Ex-CIA official: Al-Qaida weaker, but still a threat; Expert says Iraq war is a recruiting tool for Islamic extremism
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 19, 2007 Thursday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-3
Length: 511 words
Byline: PETER BACQUÉ

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


 U.S. efforts have hurt al-Qaida, but Islamic fundamentalism continues to be dangerously widespread, a former top CIA official says.
 "Al-Qaida is significantly weaker today," Paul R. Pillar told the World Affairs Council of Greater Richmond last night. "It's not just [Bush] administration hype."
 Islamic radicalism may be losing some of its appeal, he said, because the movement has failed to improve the lives of ordinary Muslims.
 But the war in Iraq has revived Islamic extremism, said Pillar, a former CIA national intelligence officer for the Near East and South Asia who now teaches at Georgetown University.
 "We need to worry at least as much about the 'children' and 'cousins' of al-Qaida," he said.
 The Iraq conflict has become a recruiting and funding tool for terrorists. "The current biggest jihad [holy war] is Iraq," he said.
 With the Taliban "kicking up their heels" again, Pillar said, "the short-term trend in Afghanistan... is unfortunate."
 Meanwhile, attacking Iran to eliminate its nascent nuclear weaponry would be a huge mistake, he warned.
 Though battered, al-Qaida itself - the Islamic fundamentalist group headed by Osama bin Laden that carried out the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States - is still quite capable of doing significant harm, Pillar said.
 The counterterrorism expert rejects using the term "war on terrorism." That phrase "assumes a single foe," he said. "It assumes a beginning and an end, and it emphasizes the military."
 In fact, Pillar said, "it's not a single enemy or a single state" that the U.S. can focus on to remove the danger to American interests. Instead, overcoming terrorism will require U.S. exertions on political, economic, security and intelligence fronts.
 Intelligence can never be perfect, he warned. It can only help policymakers deal with inevitable uncertainty.
 "We've had an escalation of expectations about the capabilities of intelligence" experts, Pillar said. "We expect them to do a whole lot more than they'll ever be able to do."
 He absolved the national intelligence establishment of responsibility for the war in Iraq.
 Despite the mistaken assessment that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction, "we just sort of slid into" the war, Pillar said, without the intelligence community's input.
 The post-Sept. 11 reorganization of the American intelligence community was a futile exercise, he said. "We're no better off than before... and may very well be worse off" for having created yet another intelligence bureaucracy.
 The absence of terrorism incidents in the United States is a poor measure of the threat, he said: "I will not be surprised when we do have an attack, given the vulnerabilities that exist all through our society."
 But difficult as getting information to foil the plans of small, mistrustful, ruthless terrorist cells can be, "we still have to try our darnedest," Pillar said.
 He spoke to more than 100 people attending the World Affairs Council program at the Sheraton Richmond West.
* Contact staff writer Peter Bacqué at pbacque@timesdispatch.com or (804) 649-6813.

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document