EX-CIA CHEIF SENT TO U.S. AFTER PANAMA DETENTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
July 20, 2013 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 428 words
Byline: Javier Cordoba and Deb Riechmann, Associated Press
Body


SAN JOSE, Costa Rica -- A fugitive former CIA base chief detained in Panama this week is being sent to the United States instead of Italy, which wanted him to serve prison time in the 2003 abduction of a terror suspect, the Obama administration said Friday.
Robert Seldon Lady was held Thursday in Panama after Italy and Interpol requested his arrest for his role in the anti-terrorism program known as extraordinary rendition. After barely a day in detention, he was put on a plane to the United States by the Panamanian government, a close U.S. ally that offered no explanation for its decision.
"It's my understanding that he is, in fact, either en route or back in the United States," State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf told reporters. She declined to disclose other details about his case.
Italy's deputy foreign minister, Lap Pistelli, said in a statement that Italy "acknowledges" Panama's decision, adding nothing more about the case. Italy and Panama have no extradition treaty, Italian diplomats said, but Panama would have been free to send Mr. Seldon Lady to Italy if it wanted.
"It's just pretty astonishing that this hopeful moment for some accountability turned so quickly on its head," said Katherine Gallagher, a senior attorney at the New York-based Center for Constitutional Rights, which has fought against U.S. practices such as extraordinary rendition and detention of terrorism suspects at the U.S. military detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Cleric Osama Moustafa Hassan Nasr, also known as Abu Omar, was hustled into a car in February 2003 on a street in Milan, where he preached, and transferred to U.S. military bases in Italy and Germany before being flown to Egypt. He alleged that he was tortured in Egypt before being released.
Italy conducted an aggressive investigation and charged 26 CIA and other U.S. government employees, despite objections from Washington. All left Italy before charges were filed in the first trial in the world involving the CIA's extraordinary rendition program, under which terror suspects were abducted and transferred to third countries where many were tortured. All of the U.S. suspects were eventually convicted, but only Mr. Seldon Lady received a sentence -- nine years in prison -- that merited an extradition request under Italian legal guidelines.
Mr. Seldon Lady, who was born in Honduras, left Italy early into the Italian investigation of the abduction. He also retired from the CIA. Interpol had issued a request for Mr. Seldon Lady's arrest, reflecting Italy's determination to get him back.

Load-Date: July 23, 2013


End of Document