EX-GREEN BERET IS CONVICTED OF ASSAULT ON LIBYAN STUDENT
The New York Times
December 5, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 791 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: FORT COLLINS, Colo., Dec. 4
Body


A former Green Beret who said he was on a C.I.A. assignment when he shot a Libyan student here last year was convicted today of two misdemeanor charges of assault but acquitted of three charges of attempted murder.
The case against the defendant, Eugene Aloys Tafoya, assumed international dimensions when the police and prosecutors theorized he had been paid by Libya to assassinate the student, Faisal Zagallai.  Mr. Zagallai, a student at Colorado State University, had been a persistent critic of the Libyan Government.
One juror, Gene Webb, 31 years old, said the county court jury believed Mr. Tafoya was working for the Libyans. They dismissed testimony from Mr. Tafoya that he was working for the Central Intelligence Agency at the time he shot Mr. Zagallai, or that he had acted in self-defense.
Fort Collins (Colo) jury convicts former Green Beret Eugene Tafoya of assault on Libyan student
Immediately after the verdict, Judge J. Robert Miller of the Larimer County Distict Court set Jan. 5 for sentencing and reduced Mr. Tafoya's bond from to $5,000 from $500,000.
Two hours later, a stony-faced Mr. Tafoya was freed from the Larimer County jail, where he had been held the last seven months.  The usually garrulous Mr. Tafoya said little to reporters, but when asked if he were happy with the verdict, he replied, ''It could have been worse.''
At most, the 48-year-old Mr. Tafoya faces 24 months in jail on the assault charges. If he had been convicted of the three more serious charges, attempted first-degree murder, conspiracy to commit firstdegree murder and attempted second-degree murder, he could have faced up to 24 years in prison.
Mr. Zagallai, 36, was shot twice in the head by a .22-caliber pistol wielded by Mr. Tafoya. He survived the wounds but lost the sight of his right eye.
The verdict brought praise from defense attorneys and an angry reaction from Mr. Zagallai, who was in the courtroom when Judge Miller read the jury's decision. ''I'm terribly shocked,'' he said.  ''This is supposed to be a system that fights terrorism. This encourages terrorism.''
The jurors, who deliberated almost 17 hours before reaching a decision near noon today, said afterward that they believed Mr.  Tafoya had wanted to ''rough up'' Mr. Zagallai, but had not intended to kill him.
 
Jury Dismissed C.I.A. Defense
In their decision, they convicted Mr. Tafoya of both third-degree assault and conspiracy to commit third-degree assault, indicating they believed that when Mr. Tafoya, posing as a job interviewer, visited Mr. Zagallai at his apartment here last year, he was acting on someone else's behalf.
''Obviously we felt there was another party,'' said Gary Thornberg, 37, the foreman of the jury. ''But it didn't matter for our purposes who that was.''
Defense lawyers said Mr. Tafoya had mixed feelings about the jury's decisions. ''He still feels he was sold out by his own government,'' said Chris Miranda, a defense aide, referring to Mr. Tafoya's assertion that he thought he was working for the C.I.A. when he went to see Mr. Zagallai.
Walter Gerash, the Denver lawyer defending Mr. Tafoya, described him during closing arguments earlier this week as a ''forgotten patriot, a soldier left out in the cold'' who believed he was acting on C.I.A. orders.
 
Warned He Might Be Target
Prosecutors said Mr. Tafoya was a professional hit man who bungled an attempt to kill Mr. Zagallai.  Federal officials warned Mr. Zagallai before tha attack that he might be the target of an assassination attempt because of his outspoken criticism of Muammar el-Qaddafi, the leader of Libya.
Testifying on his own behalf, Mr. Tafoya said he had shot Mr.  Zagallai in self-defense in a struggle over a gun he said the student pulled on him.
Mr. Tafoya said that when he visited Mr. Zagallai in October 1980, posing as a job interviewer, he believed he was on a secret C.I.A.  assignment. He said an agency contact identified only as John told him to ''rough up'' the Libyan student to get him to stop making what were described as ''broadcasts'' injurious to Israeli-Egyptian detente.
No evidence was introduced at the trial as to who might have hired Mr. Tafoya to kill Mr. Zagallai.
 
Reported Tie to Edwin Wilson
But prosecutors said Mr. Tafoya was hired by a former C.I.A. agent named Edwin P. Wilson, who was acting on behalf of the Libyan government. Mr. Wilson is believed to be living in Libya as a fugitive from a Federal grand jury indictment that accuses him of smuggling explosives to Libya as part of a plot to train terrorists.
Prosecutors said Mr. Tafoya fled the United States after the shooting of Mr. Zagallai and visited both London and Libya.  In England, Mr. Tafoya was identified by neighbors as a visitor at a country estate owned by Mr. Wilson.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Eugene Tafoya (page 8)


End of Document