Ex-general: It's time to protect our own shores; He says terrorists are everywhere
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 21, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. a1
Length: 402 words
Byline: MARY RAE BRAGG
Body


Richard Wilmot, a retired U.S. Army general turned security consultant, doesn't mince words when it comes to terrorists.
They are everywhere, he said, beginning with the man next door who beats his wife.
"It's my view that terrorism is a consciousness," Wilmot said Thursday.
Terrorism starts in the home as a way of leveraging control and getting something from someone else, he said.
"Osama (bin Laden) is not coming here," he said, "but there is all kinds of potential for terrorism because we have all kinds of people who fall into that consciousness."
Wilmot's remarks came prior to his appearance before the Dubuque Area Committee on Foreign Relations, which met Thursday night at the DeSoto Hotel in Galena, Ill.
After he retired from the Army, where he specialized in intelligence and special operations, Wilmot became a specialist in how to make civilians safer, working with companies to design public and private buildings that avoid natural and man-made disasters.
America's infrastructure is its most powerful element, but also its weakest link because it has not been built with security foremost in mind, Wilmot said.
In a perfect world, one in which the United States was not tied up with the war in Iraq, America could concentrate on the terrorist threat at home, Wilmot said.
He would start by increasing the size of the U.S. Coast Guard and reducing the size of the other service branches. Then, he would strengthen security at the nation's borders and entrance points.
Before the United States went into Iraq, leaders should have listed six to eight points of what that they wanted to accomplish, Wilmot said. Once those were attained, the United States would withdraw.
"The way it's going now, we're never going home," he said. "Come on, taxpayers, wake up. ... It's time to protect our own shores."
A blunt-spoken veteran of Vietnam, Wilmot didn't "get" the strategy the United States employed in that war, fighting in the south rather than going after the enemy that was in the north of Vietnam.
Rather than fighting to win, he said, it was, "a way to kill a bunch of people."
With the Iraq war, Wilmot wants a national referendum to decide if U.S. troops should stay there or come home. Voters would know that if they approved staying, it would mean reinstating the draft in order to get the troops necessary to squash the terrorists.
"Maybe it needs to be that gripping," Wilmot said. "Cut the rhetoric."

Graphic

 
Richard Wilmot

Load-Date: July 21, 2006


End of Document