EX-HOSTAGE, VICTIM'S DAD CRITICIZE TIES
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 18, 2000, Saturday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 294 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) The prospect of warmer relations with Iran drew a chilly reaction Friday from a former hostage and the father of a bombing victim, both of whom have gone to court to try to make Iran pay for terrorist acts.
Terry Anderson, former chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press, holds Iran accountable for his seven years in captivity in Beirut.
He said the Iranian government should "take responsibility for its acts and offer compensation to American victims" as a prerequisite for improved relations.
Stephen Flatow of New Jersey, who blames Iran for a 1995 suicide bombing in Gaza that killed his daughter Alisa, said the Clinton administration is putting "caviar, carpets and pistachio nuts" before confronting terrorism.
"What troubles me," Flatow said, "is nobody is saying to the Iranian government: 'Look, you've been the prime sponsor of terrorism. Send us a clear signal you're out of the business.'"
Flatow, Anderson and three other hostages held with Anderson in Beirut David Jacobsen, Joseph Cicippio and Frank Reed all sued Iran in American courts under a 1996 law allowing Americans to seek damages from nations that sponsor terrorism.
Iran declined to send any representative to court to respond to the lawsuits.
Flatow won a judgment for $ 247.5 million. Jacobsen, Cicippio and Reed won judgments totaling $ 65 million. Anderson, whose nearly seven years in captivity in Lebanon made him the longest-held American hostage, is awaiting a federal judge's ruling on his request for $ 100 million.
Nobody has collected a penny. The Clinton administration has opposed efforts to collect the judgments from frozen Iranian assets, arguing that unfreezing the assets could result in retaliation against U.S. diplomatic properties abroad.

Load-Date: March 19, 2000


End of Document