Ex-Official Faults Politics for Rendition of Canadian to Syria
The New York Times
September 4, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 361 words
Byline: By IAN AUSTEN
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


The former leader of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police blamed political interference in the United States, not mistakes by his force, for the rendition from New York to Syria and subsequent torture of Maher Arar, a Canadian engineer.
  The former police commissioner, Giuliano Zaccardelli, spoke in an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation broadcast Wednesday night. It was his first interview since he resigned in late 2006 after giving conflicting testimony to a parliamentary committee about the Arar case.
  Mr. Zaccardelli's analysis is somewhat at odds with a two-year Canadian commission of inquiry that found Mr. Arar innocent of wrongdoing and blamed false allegations by the Mounted Police linking Mr. Arar to terrorism for his detention while he was changing planes. Mr. Arar, who was born in Syria, was returning home to Ottawa from a family vacation in Switzerland when border officials held him at Kennedy Airport in 2002. He was interrogated without proper access to a lawyer or Canadian diplomats, then flown to Syria. In Syria, the Canadian inquiry found, he was tortured and held for about a year. Syria concluded that he had no ties to terrorism and ultimately freed him. 
  Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has said that the case was mishandled. The Canadian inquiry found that the Mounted Police  set off events in the United States by feeding false claims about Mr. Arar to the United States government. Among the most serious was a police request to put him and his wife in a database used by American border officials because the police said they were ''Islamic extremists suspected of being linked to the Al Qaeda movement.''
  In the interview  Mr. Zaccardelli said: ''I feel very comfortable in stating what we did was, we made some mistakes. But what we did in no way influenced the American decision to send him to Syria.'' Nor, he said, were his American counterparts to blame.
  ''It's clear to me that that decision went beyond the law enforcement agencies,'' he said, adding,  ''a decision at a higher level, at a political level of some sort, had to have been taken.''
  Mr. Arar did not respond to requests for comment.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 4, 2008


End of Document