Ex-PLO operative blasts terrorism 'Walid Shoebat' draws parallels between Muslim extremism and Germany's Nazi regime.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 31, 2006 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. B5
Length: 477 words
Byline: By Greg Jonsson ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Dateline: FRONTENAC 
Body


Racism taught from childhood is at the root of terrorism perpetrated by Muslim extremists, a man who says he is a reformed terrorist told a Frontenac audience Wednesday night.
"The problem, the crux of the matter, is racism on a pandemic scale -- racism worse than that of Nazi Germany," said Walid Shoebat, who said he joined the Palestinian Liberation Organization as a youth and committed violence against Israelis.
Shoebat spoke following the screening of "Obsession: Radical Islam's War Against the West," which about 1,000 people watched at a Frontenac hotel after passing through tight security.
The film shows what it calls an insider's view of Arab indoctrination to hate non-Muslims, permeating through Arab culture from schools, mosques and the media. The movie draws parallels between Muslim extremism and the Nazi regime in Germany. "History is repeating itself," Shoebat says in the movie.
Backers of the movie say it is a documentary that reveals the truth about dangers to Israel and the West. Critics call it pro-Israel propaganda.
Shoebat's visit to St. Louis was sponsored by the local branch of Aish HaTorah, a Jewish group based in Jerusalem with links to the organization that produced the movie. In addition to appearing in the movie, Shoebat has written several books, including his latest, "Why I Left Jihad."
"Walid Shoebat" is not his real name. He says he lives under the alias to protect himself from Islamic radicals who would want to harm him because of his message. He declined to give his age and other details for the same reason.
The son of an American mother and Jordanian father, Shoebat says he threw rocks at Israeli soldiers and tried to lynch one of them, participated in a riot and was jailed for a time in Jerusalem for incitement and violence.
He says he bombed a bank in 1976, throwing the bomb on the roof instead of at the bank's door in order to save nearby children. "I felt bad about the kids, because I thought I might have killed Arabs," he said. "If they had been Jews, I would have felt nothing."
He moved to the United States in 1978 and says he continued his extremist activities in Chicago, recruiting others and organizing support for anti-Jewish groups.
He declined to say whether he has been questioned or has had other contacts with law enforcement here.
A change came over Shoebat when he married a Christian woman and tried to get her to convert to Islam, he said. Reading through a Bible to convince her it contained falsehoods, he was the one convinced.
"Finally, my heart started to work with my mind," he said of his transformation.
He says he converted to Christianity and realized that a Jewish state belongs in the Middle East.
Shoebat has since spoken around the world at churches, colleges and synagogues, telling his story and, he says, trying to warn Americans about the danger posed by Islamic extremists.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Shoebat 

Load-Date: August 31, 2006


End of Document