Ex-sailor facing terrorism charges
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 26, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 5
Length: 534 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


NEW HAVEN, Conn. (AP) - The trial of a former Navy sailor on terrorism charges opened Monday with British investigators describing how they found details about the vulnerability of the sailor's Navy battle group in the London home of an alleged terrorism supporter.
American prosecutors allege that the sailor, Hassan Abu-Jihaad, sent those details to suspected terrorism supporters in London.
Abu-Jihaad, 32, of Phoenix, has pleaded not guilty to charges he provided material support to terrorists with intent to kill U.S. citizens and disclosed classified information relating to the national defense. If convicted, he faces up to 25 years in prison. Abu-Jihaad's attorneys say the government's case is weak.
The investigation that resulted in charges against Abu-Jihaad also led to the 2004 arrest of Babar Ahmad, a British computer specialist accused of running Web sites to raise money, appeal for fighters and provide equipment for terrorists.
Three British investigators testified Monday that agents who searched Ahmad's parents' house, where he had a room, in 2003 found a computer floppy disk.
Computer expert Samantha Miller testified that the disk contained information on U.S. Navy ships.
The information on the disk included statements such as "They have nothing to stop a small craft with RPG (rocket-propelled grenade), etc., except their SEALS' stinger missiles."
The ship details included the makeup of the Navy battle group, its planned movements and a drawing of the group's formation when it was to pass through the Straits of Hormuz on April 29, 2001. It also included the number and type of personnel on each ship and the ships' capabilities and ended with instructions to destroy the message.
Abu-Jihaad, an American-born Muslim convert formerly known as Paul R. Hall, was a signalman before he received an honorable discharge in 2002.
Prosecutors acknowledge they don't have direct proof that Abu-Jihaad leaked details of ship movements.
But Abu-Jihaad exchanged e-mails with Ahmad in 2000 and 2001 while on active duty on the USS Benfold, a guided-missile destroyer that was part of the battle group formation, according to an FBI affidavit. In those e-mails, Abu-Jihaad discussed naval briefings and praised Osama bin Laden and those who attacked the USS Cole in 2000, investigators say.
Abu-Jihaad also purchased videos promoting violent jihad from the group. Prosecutors plan to play portions of the graphic videos.
Prosecutors say the videos and Web pages that prosecutors displayed in court help prove not only that Abu-Jihaad leaked the ship details but intended to kill Americans by sending the information to those who promoted terrorism. They say the videos depict martyrdom, explaining why Abu-Jihaad would allow his own ship to be targeted.
Prosecutors also hope to bolster the case by playing intercepted phone calls to show what they say is Abu-Jihaad's coded speech and obsession with security. Authorities said Abu-Jihaad spoke of "hot meals" and "cold meals" in conversations with associates to refer to intelligence that would be useful to strike American military targets.
Abu-Jihaad's attorneys say the statements are irrelevant. The trial is expected to last one to two weeks.

Load-Date: February 26, 2008


End of Document