Ex-terrorists, walking the streets
Be our guest
Daily News (New York)
December 17, 2018 Monday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; CS; Pg. 25
Length: 711 words
Byline: Jesse Morton and Mitchell D. Silber
Body


One joined Al Qaeda in Pakistan and plotted to attack the Long Island Rail Road. Another was arrested before he could depart to join Al Shabab, Al Qaeda's offshoot in Somalia. A third was the most influential American jihadist propagandist in the United States. Today, all three are back on America's streets.
Amazingly, each of these men, Bryant Neal Viñas, Shaker Masri and co-author Jesse Morton, after being arrested, cooperating with law enforcement and serving their time, deradicalized on his own in prison.
And despite being left by the federal government at a three-quarters house, hotel or gas station outside of town, some with ankle monitors, others lucky to be on food stamps and/or Medicaid, they've turned their lives around.
The United States has prosecuted more than 400 jihadists since 9/11. The overwhelming majority of them will one day, re-enter society. According to the National Counterterrorism Center, over the next five years, nearly a quarter of America's terror convicts will complete their terms of imprisonment. However, unlike other countries, the United States has neither developed a formal national rehabilitation and re-entry program for convicted terrorists, nor infrastructure to support these individuals upon their release.
Rather, the Federal Bureau of Prisons has been content to apply whatever programs it has in place for the general criminal population to those convicted of terrorism-related offenses. Not only is this bad public policy, it is flat-out dangerous. Recidivism back to terrorism is not like other crime.
Terrorism-related offenders, who by the very nature of their criminality were at violent odds with American society, face the complex process of reintegrating against the strong headwinds of extraordinarily high recidivism rates. While garden-variety federal prisoners have a 44.7% re-arrest rate after five years, among Guantanamo Bay detainees (our best proxy) approximately 20% were suspected of re-engaging in terrorist or insurgent activities post-release.
We were encouraged to see the Trump administration counterterrorism strategy emphasize the importance of rehabilitation and reintegration. Yet while the inclusion was noteworthy, the strategy was light on details of the "how?" It is the how that we identified in a report we released with the Counter Extremism Project earlier this month.
With regard to in-prison programming, the U.S. might emulate the Bureau of Prisons' approach to gang "dropouts." At the Federal Correctional Institution in Otisville, N.Y., there is a special housing unit for individuals who wanted to withdraw from gang membership. After clearing an intense debriefing process to gauge their sincerity, "dropouts" participate in programs that include the testimony of former gang members, cognitive-behavioral therapy and classes preparing them to live a different lifestyle.
Utilizing pre-existing infrastructure, policies and practice to develop similar in-prison initiatives tailored to serve the unique needs of violent extremist offenders could make this cost-efficient.
Then, upon release, terrorism-related offenders should be mandated to participate in a tailored community-led program, like those for substance abusers and sex offenders. Community organizations providing tailored post-release services - vocational training, housing assistance and more - can complement the government's role.
As the former director of intelligence analysis at the NYPD and the former leader of America's pro-Al Qaeda organization, Revolution Muslim, we've established a nonprofit and have already started providing these post-prison services.
However, it is lonely out here. The U.S. needs to create policy and programs, and devote resources, to this looming public policy issue.
Rehabilitation and re-entry efforts are not a call to "hug a terrorist." Rather, they are sober and necessary elements of a robust counterterrorism strategy that seeks to reduce the chance of terrorist recidivism. We should not wait for something to go horribly wrong before we ask what to do when convicted terrorists come home and return to America's streets.
Morton, a former jihadi extremist, is a co-founder of the nonprofit Parallel Networks. Silber is the NYPD's former director of intelligence analysis.

Load-Date: December 17, 2018


End of Document