Ex-terrorists to explain ex-mindset at U. Nevada-Reno
University Wire
October 28, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Sagebrush via U-Wire
Length: 286 words
Byline: By Clint Demeritt, Sagebrush; SOURCE: U. Nevada-Reno
Dateline: RENO, Nev. 
Body


Â 
Students hear the word "terrorist" almost daily, but few get the opportunity to hear the terrorists' views. Thursday, students will have the chance to listen to two terrorists-turned-peace-activists give their lecture titled "Why We Want to Kill You."
Walid Shoebat and Kamel Saleem will share their experiences from when they were terrorists as part of the Palestinian Liberation Organization Oct. 30 at 7:30 p.m. on the fourth floor of the Joe Crowley Student Union.
"I'm not academic or professorial with my speeches," Shoebat said. "(They're) just like down-to-earth, straight talk about some of the misconceptions that we have."
He said he hopes to shed some light on the West's fundamentally flawed idea of the Islamic religion.
Shoebat, who has appeared on CNN and The O'Reilly Factor, often criticizes Islam in his lectures but is called a bigot for doing so. But other people criticize Christianity without being chastised, Shoebat said. He wants to bring that double standard to the student body's attention.
He said when he visits college campuses many students try to make excuses for terrorism with reasons like Western aggression or poverty. Shoebat said he wants to convince students there is no excuse.
"It has always been that in the United States itself the youth have always been suckers for revolutionary agendas," Shoebat said.
International Conservatives for Reno, a University of Nevada-Reno club, brought the speakers to campus. Club president Zack Abdalla said the lecture is meant to show students the real reason behind terrorism.
"It will wake them (the audience) up to exactly what is going on over the fence," said Abdalla, a 21-year-old international affairs major.
(C) 2008 Sagebrush via UWIRE

Load-Date: October 28, 2008


End of Document