EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S REPLIES BEFORE HOUSE PANEL
The New York Times
March 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk; text
Length: 884 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 18
Body


Following are excerpts from responses by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to questions during today's hearing in the House Foreign Affairs Committee, first from Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, and then from Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Democrat of New York:nm
 
Special to the New York Times
WASHINGTON, March 18 - Following are excerpts from responses by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to questions during today's hearing in the House Foreign Affairs Committee, first from Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, and then from Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Democrat of New York:nm
FASCELL: Given the need for a strong military establishment, for the security of the country to accomplish the foreign policy objectives of the United States, nevertheless there is some concern there might be an overemphasis or an overreliance on the military.  And because it has been said many times since World War II that the United States has reacted to Soviet thrusts, either political, economic or military, what kind of nonmilitary concept do you see as the best United States offensive?
HAIG: First, such a concept must be multifaceted. And I think it would be a sterile policy which suggested total preoccupation with the so-called Russians-are-coming syndrome. On the other hand, I think in the past we have been somewhat guilty of being rather complacent about that basic problem, and we've seen the consequences over the last five years as Soviet interventionism has developed in almost every corner of the globe.
Excerpts from Haig's replies before House panel
FASCELL: How do you assess Soviet objectives in the world today?  HAIG: I've always said that it is a relatively irrelevant question, whether or not one adopts devil theories with respect to Soviet imperialism or something more benign. The simple facts are that there remain profound differences between ourselves and the Soviet Union in a number of fundamental areas, political, economic, humanitarian and security-related.
As long as these differences remain, they will inevitably bring about confrontation as they have and continue today. And we must be able to handle these confrontations in the context of American policy and above all American security assets, which provide the cutting edge of our diplomacy. My greatest concern is not that we, as Americans, not recognize that but that we harbor some confusion with respect to our priorities and the nature of this historic spread of differences between ourselves and the Soviet Union.
ROSENTHAL: I've been trying to clarify in my own mind what the fundamental objectives and priorities of our foreign policy are. The tenor and tempo of your statement and testimony in a sense is that the foreign policy of the United States today is essentially based on a reaction to the Soviets, reaction to international terrorism, reaction to international unrest and violent change. There doesn't seem to be, and I say this respectfully, a positive tone to the statement.
I can't figure out from your statement and testimony what the positive fundamental program of United States foreign policy is. What are the things we stand for? Are we only reacting to Soviet adventurism, terrorism, unrest, things of that nature. I also cannot determine in my own mind what our priorities are. Whether they're for one minute El Salvador, Nicaragua or Poland, the arms race in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, relations with NATO countries, relations with the Soviets, detente, Salt II, international terrorism, relations with China? Every day since the Administration has been in office, there seems to be an up-and-down rollercoaster, a zigging and zagging of responses.
HAIG: I think I recognize very clearly from where you come. I would agree with you. A great deal of what we're saying and doing today is focused on the Soviet problem. I want to suggest that that emphasis is a direct consequence of the dangerous trends which have resulted in the recent past from Soviet activity. It does no good to pretend in our policies or our prclamations that that is not the most serious threat to world peace that we're facing today.
We've lived with that approach and we've seen Soviet illegal interventionism increasing at a proclivity that is increasingly placing world peace in jeopardy. And so I would suggest that that emphasis should be translated from your question to suggest that we are vitally interested in maintaining world peace and stability. And under the umbrella of world peace and stability the basic fundamental value of the United States can best be realized by due process, by self-determination in developing nations, freed from outside intimidation or intervention.
We seek, of course, reduction of armaments, especially in the nuclear area. We seek to prevent the proliferation of nuclear capability among developing states, especially those that are unstable or whose past historic record has been something less than consistent.
But we believe that those objectives can best be achieved in an environment of security, peace and peaceful change, and above all by rule of law, and not use of bloodshed, terrorism and so-called wars of national liberation. And I hope I shed some light on why the emphasis today is on the Soviet problem.


End of Document