EXCERPTS FROM ATTORNEY GENERAL'S NEW GUIDELINES FOR F.B.I. INVESTIGATIONS
The New York Times
March 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk; Text
Length: 1450 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 7
Body


Following are excerpts from ''Criminal Intelligence Investigations,'' a section of ''Guidelines on General Crimes, Racketeering Enterprise and Domestic Security/Terrorism Investigations,'' issued today by Attorney General William French Smith:
Domestic Security/Terrorism Investigations
 
1. General Authority
a. A domestic security/terrorism investigation may be initiated when the facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that two or more persons are engaged in an enterprise for the purpose of furthering political or social goals wholly or in part through activities that involve force or violence and a violation of the criminal laws of the United States. In determining whether an investigation should be conducted, the F.B.I. shall consider all of the circumstances including: (1) the magnitude of the threatened harm; (2) the likelihood it will occur; (3) the immediacy of the threat; and (4) the danger to privacy and free expression posed by an investigation.  b. Authority to conduct domestic security/terrorism investigations is separate from and in addition to general crimes investigative authority, racketeering enterprise investigations and international terrorism investigations. c. In the absence of any information indicating planned violence by a group or enterprise, mere speculation that force or violence might occur during the course of an otherwise peaceable demonstration is not sufficient grounds for initiation of an investigation under this section. This does not preclude the collection of information about public demonstrations by enterprises that are under active investigation.
WASHINGTON, March 7 - Following are excerpts from ''Criminal Intelligence Investigations,'' a section of ''Guidelines on General Crimes, Racketeering Enterprise and Domestic Security/Terrorism Investigations,'' issued today by Attorney General William French Smith:2. Purpose
The immediate purpose of a domestic security/terrorism investigation is to obtain information concerning the nature and structure of the enterprise as specifically delineated in paragraph (3) below, with a view to the longer-range objectives of detection, prevention, and prosecution of the criminal activities of the enterprise.
 
3. Scope
a. A domestic security/terrorism investigation initiated under these guidelines may collect such information as:
(i) the members of the enterprise and other persons likely to be knowingly acting in furtherance of its criminal objectives, provided that the information concerns such persons' activities on behalf or in furtherance of the enterprise;
(ii) the finances of the enterprise; (iii) the geographical dimensions of the enterprise; and (iv) past and future activities and goals of the enterprise.
 
Authorization and Renewal
a. A domestic security/terrorism investigation may be authorized by the Director or designated Assistant Director upon a written recommendation setting forth the facts or circumstances reasonably indicating the existence of an enterprise as described in this subsection. In such cases, the F.B.I. shall notify the Office of Intelligence Policy and Review of the opening of the investigation.  In all investigations the Attorney General may, as he deems necessary, request the F.B.I. to provide a report on the status of the investigation. b. A domestic security/terrorism investigation may be initially authorized for a period of up to 180 days. An investigation may be continued upon renewed authorization for additional periods each not to exceed 180 days. Renewal authorization shall be obtained from the Director or designated Assistant Director. c. Investigations shall be reviewed by the Director or designated Senior Headquarters officials on or before the expiration period for which the investigation and each renewal thereof is authorized. d. Each investigation should be reviewed at least annually to insure that the threshold standard is satisfied and that continued allocation of investigative resources is warranted. In some cases, the enterprise may meet the threshold standard but be temporarily inactive in the sense that it has not engaged in recent acts of violence, nor is there any immediate threat of harm - yet the composition, goals and prior history of the group suggests the need for continuing Federal interest. Under those circumstances, the investigation may be continued but reasonable efforts should be made to limit the coverage to information which might indicate a change in the status or criminal objectives of the enterprise. e. An investigation which has been terminated may be reopened upon a showing of the same standard as required for initiation of an investigation. f. The F.B.I. shall report the progress of a domestic security/terrorism investigation to the Office of Intelligence Policy and Review not later than 180 days after the initiation thereof, and the results at the end of each year the investigation continues. The Office of Intelligence Policy and Review shall review the results of each investigation at least annually.
 
Investigative Techniques
A. When conducting investigations under these guidelines the F.B.I. may use any lawful investigative technique. Before employing a technique, the F.B.I. should consider whether the information could be obtained in a timely and effective way by less intrusive means.  Some of the factors to be considered in judging intrusiveness are adverse consequences to an individual's privacy interests and avoidable damage to his reputation. Whether a highly intrusive technique should be used depends on the seriousness of the crime and the strength of the information indicating the existence of the crime. It is recognized that choice of technique is a matter of judgment.
B. All requirements for use of a technique set by statute, Department regulations and policies, and Attorney General Guidelines must be complied with. The investigative techniques listed below are subject to the noted restrictions:
1. Informants and confidential sources must be used in compliance with the Attorney General's Guidelines on the Use of Informants and Confidential Sources;
2. Undercover operations must be conducted in compliance with the Attorney General's Guidelines on F.B.I. Undercover Operations; 3. Undisclosed participation in the activities of an organization by an undercover employee or cooperating private individual in a manner that may influence the exercise of rights protected by the First Amendment must be approved by F.B.I. HQ, with notification to Department of Justice;
4. Nonconsensual electronic surveillance must be conducted pursuant to the warrant procedures and requirement of Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
5. Pen registers must be authorized pursuant to Department policy.  This requires an order from a Federal district court and an extension every 30 days.
6. Consensual electronic monitoring must be authorized pursuant to department policy. For consensual monitoring of conversations other than telephone conversations, advance authorization must be obtained in accordance with established guidelines. This applies both to devices carried by the cooperating participant and to devices installed on premises under the control of the participant.
7. Searches and seizures must be conducted under the authority of a valid warrant unless the search or seizure comes within a judicially recognized exception to the warrant requirement.
8. Whenever an individual is known to be represented by counsel in a particular matter, the F.B.I. shall follow applicable law and Department procedure concerning contact with represented individuals in the absence of prior notice to their counsel.
 
Reservation
A. Nothing in these guidelines shall limit the general reviews or audits of papers, files, contracts, or other records in the Government's possession, or the performance of similar services at the specific request of a Department or agency of the United States.  Such reviews, audits or similar services must be for the purpose of detecting or preventing violations of Federal law which are within the investigative responsibility of the F.B.I.
B. Nothing in these guidelines is intended to limit the F.B.I.'s responsibilities to investigate certain applicants and employees under the Federal personnel security program.
C. These guidelines are set forth solely for the purpose of internal Department of Justice guidance. They are not intended to, do not, and may not be relied upon to create any rights, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party in any manner, civil or criminal, nor do they place any limitation on otherwise lawful investigative and litigative prerogatives of the Department of Justice.


End of Document