EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S REMARKS AT FIRST NEWS CONFERENCE AS SECRETARY OF
The New York Times
January 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk; Text
Length: 2366 words
Body


STATE
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 (AP) - Following are excerpts from Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig's news conference here today:
 
OPENING STATEMENT
There's been some controversy this week about the so-called agreement which brought our hostages back to our shores at long last.  I think it's important that those who analyze and assess the pros and cons of these agreements, which were arrived at under the most unprecedented and unusual conditions in our history, be recogonized to be perhaps the most complex series of international agreements that I have been exposed to. Four agreements, nine executive orders, all requiring a host and array of regulations to implement.
I would anticipate, and I reiterate, that the United States Government will fulfill its obligations in accordance with both international law and the accepted norms of domestic legal practice.
The process is under way and has been under way, within the executive branch, by those departments who are particular expert in reviewing all of these obligations.
Excerpts from Secreatary of State Alexander Haig's news conferenceon January 28 in which he made statement about agreement for hostages' release
And ultimately, of course, there will be assessments made with respect to how the other side also adheres to the obligations it has incurred in these accords.
There's been speculation as to whether or not these accords provide for the resumption of the provision of military equipment to the Government of Iran, either that equipment previously purchased and contracted for or perhaps additional equipment.
Let me state categorically today, there will be no military equipment provided to the Government of Iran, either under earlier obligations and contractual arrangements or as yet unstated requests.
Secondly, as you know, one of the executive orders signed by President Carter relieved the obligation for the sanctions in trade.  We have in that regard issued a warning, or an advisory, if you will, about the undesirability of travel by American citizens to Iran and, until further deliberations are made with respect to future commercial arrangements, it is my view that the most careful caution should be applied by American firms, both large and small.
 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Possible Retaliation
Q. Can you tell us whether the Reagan Administration is considering taking retaliation against Iran for its taking of the hostages and its treatment of them. And if so, what measures are being considered, such as a reimposition of the trade embargo?
A. Well, first, let me just early on in our dialogue suggest that experience has taught me that speculation about future actions of that kind, contingency plans, in a public forum, is frequently selfdefeating, because it ends up creating the kind of controversies that deprive one of the ability to do anything in the second place.  So, I'm going to avoid it.
I would emphasize again that the period ahead is going to clearly demonstrate the nature and character of the Iranian regime's posthostage-return attitude.
There are additional American hostages in Iran, one with a clear citizenship connotation, and a host of other incurred obligations which make that question a little premature in the context of my answer.
 
Future Hostage Cases
Q. Along that same line, however, but on a more general scale, yesterday the President in welcoming the hostages talked of swift and effective retribution in case of future incidents involving terrorism. Can you supply us with any idea of the guidelines on that retribution? For example, will there be retribution in cases which does not involve another government, in other words, a freelance terrorist, if you would?
A. Well, I said, I think, to somebody last night, that was consciously ambiguous, that statement, consciously ambiguous in the sense that any terrorist government or terrorist movement that is contemplating such actions I think knows clearly what we are speaking of.
Now, as you parcel it out in the context of individuals or separatist movements or independent movements, of course the problem is substantially different and the restraints and the ability to apply retaliatory action is sometimes not only constrained but uncertain. And so I caveat it that way.
 
Arms Control Talks
Q. Can you give us your criteria for resuming arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union?  A. Well, this is a question about which there has been a great deal of speculation and some questions to me in my confirmation hearing.  I think President Reagan has stated repeatedly that the United States cannot contemplate negotiations or ratifications of arms control agreements exclusive of consideration of the conduct and the activities of the Soviet Union outside the sphere of arms control.
That's the shorthand for linkage. And I don't think it would be appropriate for me today, in the context of future strategic arms limitations talks, to clarify further precisely how that principle will be applied. But clearly that principle will be applied.
 
Situation in Poland
Q. In relation to that, could you give your judgment of developments within the past week or so in Poland, where the Soviet forces remain in the state of readiness that were described a month ago by the Carter Administration, and what your sense is at this point of the immediate future and Soviet action, perhaps.
A. I think following those early days in December, when the state of readiness was somewhat heightened, there has been somewhat of a decline.
And that is not to suggest that Soviet forces and other Eastern European forces are not postured in such a way that they could react very, very quickly in Poland.
Now, as you know, in early December, the council of the NATO alliance suggested in very clear language that any Soviet intervention in Poland would have the gravest consequence in the context of ongoing East-West relations and that those consequences would be longstanding in time.
I know of nothing today that would cause this Administration or this State Department to depart from a strong affirmation of that view.
 
Internal Conflicts
Q. Could you give us your concept or what the agreed concept is between yourself and the President on how the National Security Council will operate vis-a-vis the State Department, over what it is you are asserting?
A. Of course. I noticed there have been a number of dope stories along the airways on this subject. Let me assure you that most of those I've read, including the most recent, are totally without basis of fact.
Early on, I brought some drafts which I had discussed and coordinated with Richard Allen to Mr. Meese with Mr. Allen with the view towards starting out with a straw man. This is not an experience I haven't been through before.
And we have been in the process of coordinating this draft with the Secretary of Defense, who has a very keen interest, of course.  And I would anticipate very shortly those drafts will be published in the form of Presidential directives, which will implement a framework, if you will, in general for the conduct of national security policy making plus day-to-day operational matters.
In that context, when I accepted this position I was assured by President Reagan personally that I would be his chief administrator, if you will, for the formulation, the conduct and the articulation of American foreign policy.
I intend that the President's mandate to me be carried out, and I'm confident it will be.
 
Restraint on Arms
Q. The Carter Adminitration had a policy of abiding by the conditions and the terms of SALT II even though it was not ratified and said it hoped and expected that the Soviet Union would do the same. Is that the policy of the Reagan Administration?
A. Well, we are in process of reviewing this obligation, which President Carter assumed in the context of our new responsibilities and ongoing Soviet activities around the globe.
We would certainly hope that in the period between now and the time the decision is made, or a policy is adopted - and this involves not only Soviet conduct worldwide, it involves the national security interests of the American people as we look at SALT II and SALT I and the potential future defense needs of this country.
But I would hope that in the meantime the Soviets would do nothing to exacerbate the kind of mutual restraint that both sides should pursue.
 
Middle East Policy
Q. As you know, there's been talk this week about the Middle East policy review. How much can you tell us about that, how do you reconcile the State Department's definition of the P.L.O. with President Reagan's definition? Do you expect to see the time the Reagan Administration might talk to the P.L.O., and do you expect the Reagan Administration to ever recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel?
A. First, President Reagan has stated, every American President since 1975 has stated, we will neither recognize nor negotiate with the P.L.O. so long as they refuse to recognize the right of the state of Israel to exist, for so long as they refuse to accept provisions of 242 and the other United Nations resolutions.
And having said that, I think that is a sufficient answer for a large portion of it.  With respect to Palestine, as an entity for 30 years, I think, the United States has felt that this is a matter that has international implications and should be a city that is not divided by barbed wire or imposed unilateral restraints.
We don't welcome unilateral action that makes this kind of an international consensus impossible.  Q. You meant Jerusalem, didn't you?  A. Jerusalem, I'm sorry.
 
Policy on Korea
Q. Will you please give us your comment on the meeting between President Reagan and the President of South Korea, and also give us your general policy toward North Korea. I understand the U.S.  Government proposed three-way talks in North Korea in 1979.
A. Well, I have not proposed any talks.  I do not anticipate any until there has been a thorough review of the desirability of such talks, and they will be conducted against the backdrop of North Korean performance, conduct and demeanor with respect to the desirability and the hope for progress.
As you know, the Korean President will be visiting Washington next week. He's already arrived on the West Coast.  Somebody suggested was this a deal for Mr. Kim. There were no deals. No deals.  Q. The significance of the meeting?  A. The significance. I think it is vitally important.  For the period since the end of World War II, with an enhanced rejuvenation in the early 50's, Korea has been a friend, partner and intimate participant in Western security relationships.
And because of some static in recent period, it's important that we clarify the air. I would not want anyone to suggest, as some have, that this is politically motivated because of upcoming elections in South Korea. The American tie, if you will, is not an issue in these elections.
 
On Soviet Foreign Policy
Q. It must be conceded that North America and the Soviet Union keep their own areas of influence all over the world. How can this be understood now that the Soviet Union has extended its presence to Latin America and Afghanistan. Now, what element would North America consider to maintain the strategic interest of your country in Latin America?
A. I don't think my own past expressions on this subject need too much clarification before this group. I think it's clear we have been witnessing an unprecedented, at least in character and scope, risktaking mode on the part of the Soviet Union, not just in this hemisphere but in Africa as well.
We have seen in that process the exploitation of the Cuban proxy.  And I can assure you this is a subject of utmost concern for this Administration.
It is a subject which will be high on the priority of our national security and foreign policy agenda, and I would suggest also an additional subject related intimately to this in the conduct of Soviet activity in terms of training, funding and equipping is international terrorism.
International terrorism will take the place of human rights in our concern because it is the ultimate of abuse of human rights. And it's time that it be addressed with better clarity and greater effectiveness by Western nations and the United States as well.
 
Rights and Terrorism
Q. Did you mean to say that you are not interested in human rights per se in non-Communist areas? I'm not sure what you meant by terrorism by Communist countries should replace concerns about human rights.
A. No. No. I'm talking about in functional priority areas.  It's been my view human rights is an essential and fundamental aspect of American foreign policy and domestic policy.  And as such when you move it from the mainstream of fundamental policy making and give it an extraordinary role in organizational terms, you frequently result in distortions that probably put in jeopardy the well-meaning objective you seek to achieve. So I would like to see some organizational change in the period ahead - no deemphasis; a change in priorities.
Now the greatest problem to me in the human rights area today is the area of rampant international terrorism on both sides of the Iron Curtain. And as one looks at the menu of those who have been most disturbed by it, its suprising that the Soviet Union itself has been victimized by it.
But be that as it may, they today are involved in conscious policy, in programs, if you will, which foster, support and expand this activity which is hemorrhaging in many respects throughout the world today.
 
Talks on Mideast
Q. Do you intend to invite to the United States President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin, and when?  A. Well, I don't think I would want to inject any sense of urgency in our view of this matter. We have and continue to support the Camp David accords and the peace process that was launched under those accords, and we will continue to abide by that in consultation with the parties, not only the signatories but those with a direct interest in the outcome.
I think that's enough for now. We are in the process of reviewing the situation and in that process we perhaps will come up with a timetable that makes some sense. But I need to have some discussions with the parties concerned first.


End of Document