Exclusions for terrorism grow;
Even with Pool Re, U.K. businesses unable to afford coverage
Business Insurance
November 1, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 83
Length: 669 words
Byline: By CAROLYN ALDRED
Dateline: BERLIN
Body


Insurers and the British government are struggling to provide adequate protection for U.K. businesses faced with a growing threat of terrorist attack.
As the Irish Republican Army continues to plant bombs in an attempt to disrupt commercial activity in the United Kingdom, particularly in London, commercial insurance coverage for terrorist sabotage is vanishing rapidly, according to Anthony P. Benson, head of group risk management for Guinness P.L.C. in London.
Mr. Benson spoke at last month's 23rd International Insurance and Risk Management Conference in Berlin, sponsored by Management Centre Europe.
Mr. Benson and John Arpel, mamaging director of SCOR (U.K.) Reinsurance Co. Ltd. in London, presented a workshop on U.K. terrorism insurance.
Following a massive 800 million pound ($ 1.18 billion) property loss caused by an IRA bomb planted in the heart of London's financial center (BI, May 3), U.K. insurers introduced an exclusion into commercial property policies for damage caused by terrorist activities.
Now the insurance industry also is considering excluding acts of terrorism from liability policies as well as property coverage, Mr. Arpel warned.
Despite the establishment of Pool Re--a government-backed reinsurance pool for property losses caused by terrorism--rates are increasing to such an extent that many businesses are refusing to buy the coverage, the speakers said.
''Two-thirds of industrial companies are walking away from the situation,'' one conference delegate said.
Pool Re was set up by the British government and insurance industry, in response to a massive contraction in reinsurance capacity following the IRA attack on the Commercial Union P.L.C. head office in London (BI, April 20, 1992).
''Toward the end of last year, reinsurers made it clear that reinsurance (for terrorist damage) would cost a lot of money,'' said Mr. Arpel.
Under the new system, insurers provide a limited amount of property coverage against terrorism. Pool Re provides coverage above this limit by collecting premiums based on a tariff set by the insurer. If Pool Re has inadequate funds for a loss, it can collect an additional 10% in funds by imposing a levy on insurers. Any loss above this will then be paid by the government, Mr. Arpel explained during the session.
However, continuing IRA bomb attacks on Britain quickly prompted an actuarial report to government suggesting that Pool Re dramatically increase rates, Mr. Arpel said.
But ''new tariff increases of up to 300% have produced too heavy a burden on companies obliged to buy the cover,'' he added.
As a result, many companies will refuse to buy the additional cover, thus leaving those businesses most at risk to pay huge--and probably unaffordable--premiums, attendees agreed.
The insurance industry, businesses and the government have to ''ask how the potential cost of terrorism should be spread. The problem is that 80% of the risk is confined to an area of the U.K. probably only two miles-by-two miles large,'' said Mr. Arpel, referring to the City of London, as the city's financial district is known. ''Should 80% of the premium be levied to those businesses in the City of London?''
Pool Re is proving to be an inadequate rescue raft strung up in haste and resulting from inadequate communication between the insurance industry and the government, according to Mr. Benson.
Before Pool Re was established, the government realized that it was economically essential for businesses operating in central London to be protected against terrorist acts, but the insurance and reinsurance industry were no longer prepared to assume the risk without government backing, Mr.  Benson noted.
''I find something very unhealthy and ambiguous about the insurance industry asking for help from government in providing insurance cover. The insurance industry never wants any government involvement in profitable business,'' he said.
Meanwhile, the industry is in danger of alienating its customers by removing coverage every time it becomes unprofitable, he said.


End of Document