Executives outline terror cover plan at NAIC forum
Business Insurance
April 3, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 461 words
Byline: GLORIA GONZALEZ
Body


NEW YORK-The insurance industry may be inching closer to developing a long-term proposal for handling terrorism exposures that would reduce, but not eliminate, the federal government's role in insuring the risks.
While the industry realizes that Congress is unlikely to renew the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act in its current form, a proposal being developed by a committee of chief executive officers of large property/casualty insurers still envisions the federal government providing a backstop to any catastrophic terrorism insurance losses.
Edmund Kelly, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Liberty Mutual Group, laid out the basic proposal at a public hearing of the National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners' terrorism insurance implementation working group last week in New York.
Mr. Kelly is chair of the 15 person Property and Casualty CEO Roundtable, which is developing a proposal for insuring terrorism risks that aims to provide sufficient protection to policyholders while creating a stable market for the risks and easing concerns about federal involvement in such a program.
One of the key points that the committee seeks to reinforce is the industry's position that there exists insufficient capital to absorb catastrophic terrorism risks.
The industry failed to convince Congress of the permanent lack of capital during last year's TRIA renewal debate, said Mr. Kelly, who emphasized that his comments reflect the views of his company rather than those of the committee.
In addition, the committee's proposal contends that the insurance market in general is regulated and not a truly free market, which speaks to one of the key criticisms by members of Congress during the renewal debate-that the handling of terrorism risk is a free-market issue and the industry should develop a free-market solution.
``While many of us certainly agree with that philosophy in concept, we have to recognize there are some instances where the free-market response will be to withdraw from the market,'' said New York Superintendent of Insurance Howard Mills, who also spoke at the hearing.
The structure envisioned by the industry executives would have three tiers: individual company retentions; continued private financing of the risks through some form of reinsurance, catastrophe bonds or other private-market mechanisms; and a federal backstop.
The first two layers would increase over time, causing the federal backstop to recede, Mr. Kelly said.
``However, there will never be a time when a federal backstop is not needed,'' he said.
The executives plan to have a formal proposal finalized by late June or early July, Mr. Kelly said. ``Success is not assured, but I am confident that our industry can come together on a sensible long-term proposal,'' he said.

Load-Date: April 7, 2006


End of Document