EXECUTIVES' CRIME FEARS STUDIED
The New York Times
February 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 16, Column 3; Financial Desk
Length: 371 words
Byline: By SELWYN RAAB
Body


About 40 percent of America's major business executives fear that they, a relative or a business associate will be kidnapped, according to a crime study published yesterday by a private research organization.
The study of the attitudes of 1,000 corporate officials toward crime and prevention also found that nearly 40 percent were concerned about the threat of arson to their companies.
Because of their concern over the rising rate of national crime and international terrorism, 53 percent of the executives said they had installed burglar alarms, fire alarms and other safety devices in their homes. More than one in four reported having an unlisted telephone number and trying to keep home addresses confidential.
Findings of study on executives' attitude toward crime and prevention are discussed
The survey, ''The Figgie Report, The Corporate Response to the Fear of Crime,'' found that as another security measure one of every three executives varied his route to work every day.
 
Harsher Penalties Supported
Executives, the report said, generally supported longer and harsher judicial penalities for criminals than the general public.  Among the other findings: 92 percent of senior executives favor the death penalty for persons convicted of murder, compared with 66 percent of the general public; 96 percent favor mandatory prison terms for violent crimes, compared with 86 percent of the general public, and 46 percent endorsed sterilization of habitual criminals and the hopelessly insane, compared with 45 percent of the general public.
The study on the fear of crime in the United States was the second issued since last September by A-T-O Inc., a multiple products company, and was named for Harry E. Figgie Jr., the chairman of A-TO. The studies were inspired by David Finn, the chairman of the board of Ruder & Finn, whose brother was murdered in New York City in 1979. Mr. Finn's company provided the research staff for the analysis.
Last September, in its first study, the group asserted that fear of crime in the country had become so ''alarmingly pervasive'' in the nation that it has altered the way people live and that a majority of American families had acquired guns legally or illegally for self-protection.


End of Document