EXHIBIT DRAWS LINK BETWEEN ILLEGAL DRUGS AND TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 4, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 248 words
Byline: CHRISTOPHER NEWTON, Associated Press writer
Body


ARLINGTON, Va. -- Attorney General John Ashcroft and former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani helped open a museum exhibit Tuesday intended to show Americans that buying illegal drugs can support terrorist attacks.
The exhibit, titled "Target America," includes Sept. 11 rubble from the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. It is housed at a museum in the Drug Enforcement Administration's headquarters.
DEA Administrator Asa Hutchinson said the exhibit aims to educate Americans about the role drug money has in terrorism.
"Before terrorism hit home on Sept. 11, few Americans realized the connection, and fewer still understood that drug money has been used to fund terrorism," Hutchinson said.
Attorney General John Ashcroft said, "Terrorism and drugs go together like rats and the plague. … They thrive in the same conditions, and they feed off of each other."
The exhibit, supported by $ 650,000 from the DEA budget plus private financing from donors, will go on nationwide tour next year.
It includes photographs from Afghanistan that outline connections the al-Qaida terror network and the Taliban militia, Afghanistan's former rulers, have had to drug trafficking. An interactive map illustrates that some reputed opium sellers and distributors support the Taliban.
The rubble from the World Trade Center sits as part of a replica of the ruins left after the towers fell. Another section of the exhibit is devoted to exploring the history of drug runners who support groups like al-Qaida.

Graphic

 
* Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani helps launch a new exhibit at the Drug Enforcement Administration headquarters in Arlington, Va., as DEA Director Asa Hutchinson listens Tuesday.

Load-Date: September 9, 2002


End of Document