Exit poll: Wisconsin GOP voters excited, scared about Trump
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 6, 2016 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 297 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


WASHINGTON • Wisconsin GOP primary voters say a potential Donald Trump presidency inspires both more excitement- and more fear- than his remaining Republican rivals.
That's according to exit polls conducted Tuesday for The Associated Press and television networks by Edison Research.
On the Democratic side, voters are more excited about Vermont's Sen. Bernie Sanders but view Hillary Clinton as the better candidate to beat Trump.
Other exit poll highlights:
GOP: MIXED FEELINGS
About a quarter of Wisconsin GOP primary voters said they're excited about Trump, while less than 15 percent said that of either Ohio Gov. John Kasich or Texas' Sen. Ted Cruz, exit polls show.
At the same time, nearly 4 in 10 said they're scared about what Trump would do as president, while only about 1 in 10 said that about either Cruz or Kasich.
DEMOCRATS: OPTIMISTIC
At least 7 in 10 Democratic primary voters in Wisconsin said they were excited or optimistic about what either candidate would do in office, but they were more likely to be excited about Sanders. About a third said they were excited about what he would do, while about half as many said that about Clinton.
ECONOMIC WORRIES
Both Republican and Democratic voters in Wisconsin said the economy was weighing heavily on their minds. Three quarters of Democratic voters said they were worried about the direction of the U.S. economy. Republicans who came out to vote were even more troubled by the direction of the economy.
TERRORISM
While 3 in 10 voters in the Republican primary said terrorism was the most important issue, only about 10 percent of voters in the Democratic primary selected terrorism. However, 70 percent of Democrats were very or somewhat worried about the prospect of a major attack. (Republicans were not asked that question.)

Graphic

 
 Abi Nesbitt, a UW-Eau Claire freshman from Mosinee, Wis., votes in her first primary election at UW-Eau Claire's Davies Center on Tuesday morning, April 5, 2016. (Dan Reiland/The Eau Claire Leader-Telegram via AP)  Wisconsin voters cast their ballots in the state's primary at the South Shore Park Pavilion on Tuesday, April 5, 2016, in Milwaukee. (AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast)  Wisconsin voters cast their ballots in the state's primary at the South Shore Park Pavilion on Tuesday, April 5, 2016, in Milwaukee. (AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast) 

Load-Date: April 7, 2016


End of Document