EXONERATION ASKED FOR IRANIAN FUND
The New York Times
May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11NJ; Page 17, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk
Length: 538 words
Byline: By LEO H. CARNEY
Dateline: NEWARK
Body


THE New Jersey chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union last week asked the state's Attorney General, W. Cary Edwards, to clear the name of the Iranian Relief Fund, a fund-raising group that Mr. Edwards's predecessor, Irwin I. Kimmelman, had labeled a ''terrorist organization.''
Jeffrey Fogel, executive director of the chapter, said that an investigation by it had ''exonerated'' the group, which, far from being a terrorist front collecting money in New Jersey, comprises refugees who fled Iran when the Ayatollah Khomeini came to power.
''There's no evidence to support the wild accusations that have been made,'' Mr. Fogel said.
Nevertheless, Thomas Cannon, a spokesman for the Attorney General, said that Mr. Edwards was not prepared to issue a retraction because the fund was ''still under investigation by the F.B.I. and State Police, and we've requested more information from the State Department, too.''
Last year, Mr. Cannon said, Mr. Kimmelman's office issued a statement saying ''what a dangerous organization the Iranian Relief Fund was.'' That information was provided to Mr. Kimmelman's office by the State Department in Washington.
In essence, the State Department said that the fund was an ''Iranian terrorist organization that employs terrorism and violence as instruments of its policies,'' and went on to cite murders and acts of terrorism committed by the Iranian-based arm of the fund.
Mr. Kimmelman's office had requested the background information from the State Department because the fund had registered as a charitable organization with the Charities Registration Section of the state's Division of Consumer Affairs, part of the Attorney General's office.
George Danco Jr., a spokesman for the division, said that the fund's 1984 registration had been canceled last year because of its failure to submit a financial statement.
The fund's secretary and treasurer, Muhammed Scharifi, lives in Bergenfield. Its headquarters are in New York City and its president and director, said to be Morad Saheli, lives in Jackson Heights, Queens.
Neither man has a listed telephone number or has been available for comment since the allegations were first made.
Mr. Danco declined to comment on whether the division had ever intended to cancel the fund's registration because of the terrorism accusation.
Edward Martone, assistant executive director of the A.C.L.U. chapter, said in a telephone interview that Mr. Kimmelman's only proof that the Iranian Relief Fund was a terrorist organization had been that Mr. Kimmelman ''saw the word Iranian and thought it was synonymous with terrorism.''
Members of the fund, Mr. Martone said, are ''people who are anti-Khomeini and had pretty much fled Iran after he took over.''
''They've been trying to help refugees here in the United States ever since,'' he said.
Mr. Martone said that a hearing on the allegations had been scheduled by the Division of Consumer Affairs for last Jan. 10, but was canceled and never rescheduled even after repeated attempts by officials of the fund to have this done.
Mr. Danco said that these delays had resulted from the fund's not having supplied required financial information to the division and that a new hearing was now scheduled for May 31.


End of Document