EXPANSION OF TERRORISM LAW URGED;
ASHCROFT WANTS TO EXTEND DEATH PENALTY
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
June 6, 2003 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 605 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft urged Congress yesterday to expand the new anti-terror law to permit the government to hold more suspects indefinitely and to extend the death penalty.
Though critics say the current anti-terror law cramps citizens' legitimate rights, Ashcroft said it needs to be expanded to let prosecutors bring charges against anyone who helps or works with suspected terrorist groups as "material supporters."
Ashcroft held aloft copies of al-Qaida declarations of war against America and read aloud the names of people killed in the Sept. 11 attacks as he defended the Justice Department's use so far of anti-terrorism powers granted after the 2001 hijack attacks.
The Patriot Act has led to more than 3,000 "foot soldiers of terror" being stopped, Ashcroft said. But he also told the House Judiciary Committee the law "has several weaknesses which terrorists could exploit, undermining our defenses."
He did not immediately give details on his three proposals. And Justice officials indicated it was unclear whether the Bush administration would request any legislative proposals before the end of the congressional session.
House Democrats, meanwhile, complained about the way the Justice Department has used its current anti-terrorism powers, especially considering a department inspector general report Tuesday that criticized the government's treatment of illegal immigrants held after the attacks.
The inspector general found "significant problems" in the Bush administration's actions toward 762 foreigners held on immigration violations after the attacks. Only one, Zacarias Moussaoui, has been charged in the United States with a terrorism-related crime; 505 have been deported. Some were held for up to eight months, and others complained of abuse.
Ashcroft said department policy, "for which we do not apologize," is to detain people who are in the country illegally for as long as it takes to clear them before they are deported.
But Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee, D-Texas, said, "My fear is that we may go to the point of changing the culture of America, the First Amendment protections and the Fourth Amendment protections."
Added Rep. Howard L. Berman, D-Calif.: "Some of us find that the collateral damage is greater than it needs to be in the conduct of this war."
Ashcroft said he would investigate all abuse allegations, though 14 of 18 cases referred so far already have been cleared without any charges being filed. "We do not stand for abuse," Ashcroft said.
Ashcroft said that without the anti-terrorism law, there might have been another major attack.
"Our ability to prevent another catastrophic attack on American soil would be more difficult, if not impossible, without the Patriot Act," Ashcroft said. "It has been the key weapon used across America in successful counter-terrorist operations."
The tougher penalties have persuaded some suspected terrorists to help the federal government root out other terrorists in exchange for lighter sentences, he suggested.
"One individual has given us intelligence on weapons stored here in the United States," Ashcroft said. "Another cooperator has identified locations in the U.S. being scouted or cased for potential attacks by al-Qaida."
The law expires in October 2005, and while House Judiciary Chairman James Sensenbrenner Jr., R-Wis., praised Ashcroft's work so far, he added, "My support for this legislation is neither perpetual or unconditional."
"I believe the department and Congress must be vigilant toward short-term gains which ultimately may cause long-term harm to the spirit of liberty and equality which animate the American character," he said.

Load-Date: June 8, 2003


End of Document