Expanded wiretaps dropped;
Anti-terrorism bill advances for vote
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 2, 1995, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 524 words
Byline: Marcy Gordon, The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a bid to salvage a stalled anti-terrorism bill, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee has agreed to conservative fellow Republicans' demands to remove proposals expanding the government's wiretapping authority.
President Clinton pushed the legislation as a response to the Oklahoma City bombing last April. An anti-terrorism bill passed the Senate in June by an overwhelming 91-8 vote. But in the House, liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans have joined to delay the measure, saying they're concerned it could erode civil liberties.
The leader of the GOP opponents, freshman Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., said yesterday the proposed changes in the House bill ''have significantly improved the chances for passage.''
The changes include removal of the wiretap provisions, which Clinton had described as essential tools for federal law enforcement's fight against terrorism. Also struck from the House bill would be a provision allowing use of the military in emergencies involving chemical or biological weapons.
Also excluded would be the House bill's new definition of terrorism that includes use of firearms, which particularly raised the ire of Republican gun-control opponents.
''They've taken a strong bill and weakened it because of pressure from some extremists,'' said Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., a leading supporter of the measure.
He said the revisions were made to placate groups such as armed private militias and ''radicals in the pro-gun lobby.'' Schumer, the senior Democrat on the House Judiciary subcommittee on crime, recently accused the House GOP opponents of conducting ''secret, backroom negotiations'' on the bill.
At the White House, spokeswoman Ginny Terzano declined to comment on the Republican changes because Clinton had not yet received notice of them. ''We're anxious to get legislation to the White House that he can sign,'' she said.
The changes were listed in a letter signed by Barr and Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the Judiciary Committee chairman, and sent to committee members on Thursday.
While the compromise breaks the logjam for the House bill, it could make it more difficult for House-Senate negotiators to reconcile the two measures. The Senate version contains the provisions to expand wiretapping authority and allow use of the military in chemical or biological emergencies.
''To the extent the Senate insists on those, it will be a very serious problem,'' Barr said in a telephone interview. ''We have a lot of work down the road.''
The head of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, a Jewish organization that supports the legislation, said he ''can live with'' the changes to the House bill as a way of assuring its passage.
''We will have made a major stride in combatting terrorism,'' said Abraham Foxman, the group's national director.
House Judiciary Committee aides said the revised bill could reach the House floor for a vote as early as next week.
The proposal would add to the House bill provisions that would stringently limit appeals by death row prisoners. Similar limits are contained in the Senate measure and in a package of anti-crime bills that passed the House earlier this year.

Load-Date: December 4, 1995


End of Document