Expect germ terrorism, experts warn
USA TODAY
August 6, 1997, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; HEALTH AND BEHAVIOR
Length: 837 words
Byline: Anita Manning
Body


There is good reason for Americans to be concerned about an attack
by terrorists using biological agents, say scientists and policymakers
writing in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.
"Small groups of people with modest finances and basic training
in biology and engineering can develop an effective biological
weapons capability," say Richard Danzig and Pamela B. Berkowsky
in an editorial that accompanies several articles on biological
warfare. Danzig is a Washington, D.C., lawyer, and Berkowsky is
a special assistant in the office of the Secretary of Defense.
"Recipes for making biological weapons are even available on
the Internet," they warn.
Government agencies are preparing to cope with a potential attack,
says Bob Knouss, director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness.
His office would work with 12 federal and private agencies to
coordinate medical response.
All the preparation in the world cannot guarantee safety, he says.
"The problem is that there are so many opportunities to create
a threat. Is someone going to be able to outguess the system?
Hopefully, we'll never have to face that question," he says.
There is nothing new about biological warfare, says a report by
researchers at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases (USAMRIID) at Fort Detrick, Md. In the 14th century,
attacking hordes of Tatars hurled the corpses of plague victims
into the city of Kaffa, in what is now the Ukraine, to cause an
epidemic. British soldiers in the French and Indian War gave smallpox-infected
blankets to Native Americans.
Since World War II, they report, there have been several incidents
involving biological weapons, including a 1979 anthrax epidemic
that killed at least 66 people downwind from a Soviet microbiology
plant in Sverdlovsk. The incident was caused by an accidental
release of anthrax spores into the air, the researchers say. More
recently, in March 1995, members of the Aum Shinrikyo cult attacked
the Tokyo subway system with the nerve agent sarin. Police investigators
later found the cult had an arsenal that allegedly included aircraft
equipped with spray tanks and a supply of botulinum toxin, the
deadliest toxin known.
Outbreaks of botulism in Europe and the Middle East and "reports
that national governments and terrorist groups have stockpiled
botulism toxin have increased levels of concern regarding global
preparedness for an intentional episode of botulism poisoning,"
write scientists with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in a separate article. They argue for a system of international
surveillance along with a program to supply antitoxin as needed
worldwide.
If an enemy government or domestic terrorists launch a biological
attack in the USA, Knouss says, it will be local health officials
who will know about it first. "They are going to be the first
on the scene," he says. "They'll have to recognize an incident
is occurring . . . and are going to have to respond quickly. It's
different from when you see a (mushroom) cloud appearing and you
take appropriate steps. This time, the first thing we'll know
is when unusual symptoms occur."
Thousands of people coming down with physical symptoms could overwhelm
the medical system and create widespread panic, even among those
not affected, writes psychiatrist Harry C. Holloway of the Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Md. Any
strategies for handling a biological attack should include "consideration
of the psychological and social impact" on people, he says. "Inattention
to the phenomenon of terror and its consequences for individuals,
institutions and society" could jeopardize the effectiveness
of disaster plans.
"The idea of infection caused by invisible agents is frightening,"
Holloway writes. "It touches a deep human concern about the risk
of being destroyed by a powerful, evil, imperceptible force."
Any response to such a threat will require cooperation between
military and civilian institutions, Danzig and Berkowsky write.
"(I)t is time to throw away the anachronistic notion that the
military's only role is to defend the United States against threats
on foreign soil. In the event of a domestic incident of biological
weapons use, no matter who the perpetrator, it is unlikely that
the response would be left to local law enforcement and health
officials," they say.
Cooperative efforts are under way, they say, including a Defense
Department training program in 100 U.S. cities for fire, health
and rescue personnel. Meanwhile, a network of epidemiologists
across the country is on the lookout for outbreaks of any illnesses
that might be the result of biological attack, Knouss says.
"Everyone's level of suspicion is heightened," he says. "You
need that. It needs to be on your radar screen. Basically, we're
trying to improve the sensitivity of our antennae."
Such sensitivity is crucial, he says, because a biological attack
could occur anywhere, anytime. "Who can second-guess humans'
creativity in doing these things?" he asks. "I just hope our
creativity in trying to thwart them is equal."

Load-Date: August 6, 1997


End of Document