Experts are either applauding or calling the U.S. irresponsible
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 23, 1998, Metro Edition


Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
Section: Pg. 20A
Length: 1384 words
Byline: Eric Black; Staff Writer
Body


In the aftermath of Thursday's cruise missile strikes, terrorism experts from the political left and right differed radically on the Clinton administration's decision to bomb targets in Sudan and Afghanistan.
 The raids were typical of "the United States' tendency to lash out violently and precipitously on the basis of information that's limited and often turns out to be untrue," according to Edward Herman, a professor and author of books on terrorism.
 On the contrary, the raids were a refreshing change from the usual pattern of the United States allowing terrorists to operate with impunity, according to Daniel Pipes, a terrorism expert and editor of the Middle East Quarterly.
 "The striking thing is how politician after politician tells the terrorists: 'You can run, but you can't hide.' But usually they do run and they do hide and they get away with it," said Pipes.
Ideology influences most experts' analysis of current events. Herman and Pipes fit last week's action into pre-existing beliefs about how the world works and the United States' role in it. And those belief systems differ radically.
 A view from the left
 Herman, a professor emeritus at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Finance, has coauthored several books with Noam Chomsky, a leading intellectual of the American left. In "The 'Terrorism' Industry," Herman argued that institutions and experts who dominate the discussion of terrorism are mostly supporters of what he called "the received view that our enemies are the terrorists and we are the counterterrorists." But he challenged that in another book, arguing that the United States is at the center of "The Real Terror Network," which was the book's title.
 Of Thursday's attack, he said, it's "absolutely standard procedure" for Washington to announce that it has compelling evidence of responsibility for a terrorist act, then refuse to release the evidence. In many instances, the evidence is never released or turns out to be less persuasive than advertised.
 A classic case, he said, was the 1986 bombing raid on Libya, which President Ronald Reagan said was based on "precise and detailed" information that Libya was responsible for a bombing at a German disco that had killed U.S. soldiers.
 "So we bombed Libya and killed quite a few civilians in the process," Herman said. The only evidence ever released to back up Reagan's statement were intercepted cables implying that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi knew about the disco bombing in advance, not that he was responsible for it.
 In the famous Gulf of Tonkin incident, the Johnson administration claimed that the North Vietnamese navy had launched unprovoked attacks on U.S. ships, and used the incident to justify U.S. expansion of the Vietnam War. In fact, the U.S. ships were in the area because they were helping the South Vietnamese navy attack North Vietnam's coast, Herman said.
 So when Washington says, as it did last week, that it had solid evidence to justify a retaliatory attack, "we should be skeptical because they've lied so often in the past," Herman said.
 Herman also said the U.S. attack violated international law. The U.N. charter prohibits an attack on a foreign country except under extreme emergencies, he said.
 The United States "takes upon itself the right to attack anyone for any reason it deems satisfactory and has for decades," Herman said.
 To illustrate his point, he talked about a Cuban-American based in Florida who recently confessed publicly that he had operated against Cuba for years with the support of the Miami-based Cuban-American National Foundation, Herman said.
 If the Cuban government decides to bomb the foundation's Miami headquarters on the grounds that it was fomenting terrorism against Cuba, it would be the equivalent of what the United States did Thursday, except that "the world would be aghast, the United States would call it unbelievably unacceptable behavior and would bomb Cuba in retaliation," he said.
 A view from the right
 Pipes, a State Department official with the Reagan administration whose terrorism expertise comes from decades of following the Middle East, begs to differ.
 Thursday's bombings were not typical of U.S. counterterrorism actions, but he wishes they were.
 The United States may or may not have had solid proof that Osama bin Laden was responsible for the Aug. 7 attacks on the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, but Pipes isn't that concerned with the possibility that the missiles might have targeted the wrong anti-American terrorist.
 The 1986 attack on Libya, which Herman called typical of the United States' quick trigger finger, was the only real antiterrorism strike Pipes could recall. And it seemed to have "a strikingly large impact on the policies of the Libyan government," Pipes said. Before 1986, Gadhafi seemed to be openly denouncing the United States around the world, but "he's been far more subdued ever since."
 "I would never have guessed at the time that it would be so effective," Pipes said. "And it did not lead to a cycle of retaliatory violence" as some analysts worried might occur after Thursday's attack.
 Pipes' only complaint about the 1986 raid was that it was an isolated example. He would like to see the United States respond forcefully every time it is attacked by terrorists.
 "For the most part, it's been virtual impunity for the killers of Americans," he said. "The worst that can happen to you is you get caught, brought to America, given a lawyer, tried and imprisoned and maybe you spend the rest of your life in jail."
 This policy has emboldened terrorists, Pipes said. "Basically, I think the standard of proof that the U.S. seeks before acting in such cases is too high. . . . My inclination is that if somebody attacks Americans, there's hell to pay for it. And if the wrong terrorist gets hit, I'm not terribly concerned. Maybe Osama bin Laden wasn't behind the embassy bombings. Maybe all the intelligence is wrong. I don't care.
 "We've known about Bin Laden for five years, and he's openly declared war on America. Why did we have to wait so long and have such high levels of proof before we did anything warlike back to him?"
 If the pattern of inaction is so entrenched, why does Pipes think President Clinton broke the pattern in this case?
 "You know what I'm going to say - Monica. But my feeling is that if the wrong reason gets the right policy, that's OK with me."
 International terrorism
 A look at acts of terrorism against Amercians abroad, 1979 to 1998.
 Nov. 4, 1979
 Islamic students storm U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran; 52 Americans held hostage for 444 days.
 April 18, 1983
 Suicide car bomber blows up U.S. Embassy in Beirut; 17 Americans killed.
 Oct. 23, 1983
 Suicide bomber blows up U.S. Marine base; 241 Americans killed.
 Dec. 12, 1983
 Car bombs explode in front of U.S. and French embassies in Kuwait City; five people killed.
 Sept. 20, 1984
 U.S. Embassy annex in east Beirut is car-bombed; 16 killed.
 June 14, 1985
 Gunmen seize TWA airliner and force it to Beirut; U.S. Navy diver killed; 39 Americans held hostage 17 days.
 Oct. 7, 1985
 Palestinian terrorists hijack the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro off the coast of Egypt, with 438 passengers aboard. A wheelchair-bound American, Leon Klinghoffer, is shot and his body dumped overboard.
 April 2, 1986
 Four Americans killed when bomb explodes on TWA airliner flying from Rome to Athens.
 Sept. 5, 1986
 Pan Am jumbo jet carrying 358 people is hijacked in Pakistan; 20 people killed.
 Dec. 21, 1988
 Pan Am Boeing 747 explodes over Scotland en route to New York; 270 killed.
 Sept. 13, 1995
 Rocket-propelled grenade fired at U.S. Embassy in Moscow pierces wall; no injuries.
 Nov. 13, 1995
 Car bomb attack on U.S. military headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; five Americans killed.
 June 25, 1996
 Truck bomb explodes outside a U.S. military housing complex near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia; 19 Americans killed.
 1996
 296 acts of international terrorism, one-fourth of them against U.S. targets; 24 Americans died.
 1997
 304 acts of international terrorism, one-third of them against U.S. targets; seven Americans killed.
 Aug. 7, 1998
 Bombs explode at U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania; 247 people in Kenya and 10 people in Tanzania killed; more than 5,500 injured.
 Source: AP research; U.S. State Department

Graphic

 
Chart; Chart; Chart; Chart; Cartoon

Load-Date: August 26, 1998


End of Document