EXPERTS SAY DRAFT UNLIKELY;
WAR ON TERRORISM HAS OTHER REQUIREMENTS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 1, 2001 Thursday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 285 words
Byline: Kirsten B. Mitchell, Media General News Service,
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, about 245,000 young men have marked one of the milestones of American life by celebrating their 18th birthdays and registering for the Selective Service.
It's unlikely any of them or the other 13.3 million registered with the Selective Service will be called to fight in the nation's war on terrorism, experts say, despite President Bush's repeated warning that the war could last indefinitely.
Eight weeks into the war on terrorism, less than 3 percent of the country's active duty and reserve forces are deployed in Operation Enduring Freedom, according to the Pentagon. That leaves 1.37 million soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen on active duty and 1.26 million on reserve.
"A draft? Forget it. Absolutely not," said Bill Taylor, a retired Army colonel at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
The war on terrorism, Taylor and other experts say, is a different kind of war requiring special forces, not divisions of ground troops with heavy mechanized equipment that require base camps.
"You put in a base camp and you become a target," Taylor said. "The Taliban could move in with three-person teams launching surface-to-air missiles. We learned this lesson from Vietnam. We learned this lesson from the Soviet experience in Afghanistan."
While reinstating the draft is unlikely, Harlan Ullman, a senior associate from the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said changes to the nation's all-volunteer force could be in order.
Instead of recruiting enlistments by offering training in computers, science, technology or intelligence as the military currently does, it could solicit civilians who already have expertise in those areas to join, he said.

Load-Date: November 3, 2001


End of Document