Expert: Public role key in alerts; New system aims to raise awareness of suspicious activity.Feds add 'Bulletin' to two prior levels.; NATIONAL SECURITY
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 19, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. B1
Length: 410 words
Byline: By Barrie Barber
Body


An updated national terrorism alert system may help Americans make better informed decisions when they travel and may make them more likely to report suspicious activity, a former FBI special agent said.
This week, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security unveiled an updated National Terrorism Advisory System that adds "Bulletin" to two prior levels, "Elevated Alert" and "Imminent Alert."
The change will heighten public awareness about security risks, said Timothy A. Shaw, a former FBI special agent who specialized in counterterrorism.
It also would allow people to make more informed decisions and to take security precautions when going somewhere, he added.
"You've got to keep it simple so everybody understands it," he said.
An elevated risk was defined as a specific "credible, terrorist threat." An imminent risk is a warning of a "credible, specific, impending terrorist threat against the United States," according to DHS.
The two-level system was never used, according to Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson, which caused authorities to add "Bulletin" to describe general developments or trends on the threat of terrorism.
In the aftermath of deadly terrorist attacks in Paris, France, and San Bernardino, Calif., the U.S. issued a six-month bulletin Wednesday, which noted authorities were particularly concerned with "'self-radicalized' actor(s) who could strike with little or no warning notice."
Authorities' mantra to the public of "if you see something, say something" could make reports of suspicious activity more likely, Shaw said.
"It's important in this day and age because there's only so many FBI agents ... and it takes the community to provide the intelligence," said Shaw, a senior vice president and director of operations at the Advanced Technical Intelligence Center in Beavercreek.
Among other things, Johnson told reporters this week the public can expect to see more security and law enforcement this holiday season at public events and public places around the country, and more security in federal buildings.
The federal agency also shares "what it is we see" with businesses and sports leagues such as the NCAA, NBA and the NFL, Johnson said.
Donna Shlagheck, a retired Wright State University political science professor who wrote a college textbook on terrorism, said the missing piece is communicating a terrorism risk to the public and the media. She said she did not expect the updated advisory system to have much impact.

Load-Date: December 19, 2015


End of Document