Experts mull terror cover options in BI webinar on TRIA alternatives ITASCA, Ill --
Business Insurance
September 4, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 414 words
Body


The clock is ticking on developing a long-term solution to insuring terrorism risks, but consensus is growing around insurance industry proposals that would utilize a combination of private capital and federal government reinsurance to protect against attacks, according to a panel of experts during a recent Business Insurance Online Executive Forum(tm).
The Aug. 29 webinar, ``A Permanent Solution to TRIA,'' reviewed the current market for insuring terrorism risks in the United States, as well as proposals for a more lasting mechanism to reinsure the risk. The panelists were:
* J. Eric Brosius, senior vp and manager, reinsurance for Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. in Boston.
* Aaron Davis, director, National Terrorism and Property Resources for Aon Risk Services in New York.
* Al Gorski, manager of risk management for the Orange County Transportation Authority in Orange, Calif.
* Greg Heidrich, senior vp of policy development and research for the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America in Des Plaines, Ill.
Business Insurance Editor Regis Coccia moderated the webinar.
The webinar is now archived online for on-demand viewing. Free registration is required to access the webinar.
As the panelists noted, U.S. insurance industry leaders are pushing for a new and lasting solution before the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act expires at the end of December 2007. Uncertainty about TRIA's reauthorization and dislocation of the property insurance market following last year's windstorms slowed the take-up rates for terrorism coverage, they said, but once TRIA was renewed, purchasing of the coverage surged. An audience poll during the webinar indicated that about 63% of respondents currently purchase some form of terrorism insurance.
While a stand-alone market exists for terrorism coverage, the maximum total capacity in 2006 was about $1.5 billion, with capital providers writing average lines of $550 million.
Congressional support for further extension of the federal program is broad, but key leadership in the Senate remains skeptical and wants to see strong insurance market-based participation in funding terrorism losses.
The webinar panelists noted that for any reform to succeed, risk managers must inform and educate their colleagues as well as lawmakers on the importance of a federal terrorism insurance program.
To view ``A Permanent Solution to TRIA,'' or learn about other Business Insurance Online Executive Forums(tm), please visit www.BusinessInsurance.com/webinars.

Load-Date: September 8, 2006


End of Document