EXPERTS ASSESS IMPACT OF TERRORISM SURGE
The New York Times
September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 568 words
Byline: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16
Body


The State Department's new chief of counterterrorism held out only moderate hope today that the surge of terrorist attacks around the world in recent weeks would generate more international cooperation.
The official, L. Paul Bremer 3d, told his confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that because terrorism is an international problem, ''the struggle against terrorism likewise must be an international one.''
But he added that getting international cooperation was not easy. ''Each country faces different terrorist threats, defines terrorism differently, and gives terrorism a different priority among its foreign policy considerations,'' he said.
Mr. Bremer asserted that ''we must be persistent and we must keep pushing other countries to show the same resolve.''
 
Anti-Terrorism Coordinator
Mr. Bremer, Ambassador to the Netherlands before President Reagan nominated him to head the State Department's counterterrorism office, is scheduled to be the Government's senior coordinator of anti-terrorist action and to negotiate with other governments on anti-terrorist policy.
Asked by Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, whether foreign governments would continue to refuse joint action against terrorists until their people ''reach a point of frustration where they become indignant,'' Mr. Bremer replied that ''terrorism is an important subject of conversation'' in other capitals but added: ''It is true that this is a frustrating and long-term problem.''
State Department figures show that the number of terrorist incidents worldwide during the first three months of this year ran about the same as last year, about 60 a month, but jumped to 116 in April.
The April incidents included a bomb explosion in a West Berlin nightclub, which led President Reagan to order air raids on Libya; a bomb explosion on an airliner over Greece; the discovery of a bomb in London in luggage intended for a flight to Israel, and a bomb explosion in the parking lot of a hotel in Bangkok, Thailand, where Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger was attending a state dinner.
 
Lull Ended in September
After that, the number of worldwide terrorist incidents dropped to the previous level. Then came the surge this month, including the hijacking of a Pan American World Airways plane in Karachi, Pakistan; an attack on a synagogue in Istanbul, Turkey; a series of bombings in Paris and a bombing at the airport in Seoul, South Korea.
The September surge appears to have been the result of a bandwagon effect, according to Robert Kupperman of the Georgetown University Center for Strategic and International Studies.
News of one terrorist attack, he said, has led other groups to execute terrorist actions they had planned. ''They've joined in the momentum of terror,'' Mr. Kupperman said. ''The only thing left was to make the decision about when the operation was going down.''
William R. Farrell Jr., an analyst at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., said terrorist acts sponsored by Libya had dropped after the American air raids in April but that terrorism in the rest of the world had continued without a lull.
''Those raids didn't deter terror,'' Mr. Farrell said. ''They only pre-empted the Libyans, which was the Administration's intention.'' Officials in Washington have asserted that intelligence reports showed the raids on Libya averted about 30 terrorist attacks planned by Libya.


End of Document