Experts don't see larger plot in bombings; One suspects more Timothy McVeigh than Osama bin Laden.; CONTINUING COVERAGE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 21, 2013 Sunday


Copyright 2013 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION & WORLD; Pg. A11
Length: 664 words
Byline: By Barrie Barber and Terry Morris
Body


DAYTON - The two Chechen suspects identified in connection to the Boston Marathon are more akin to Timothy McVeigh than Osama bin Laden, according to a local terrorism expert.
"I don't see this as a terrorist attack coordinated or controlled by an outside organization," said the University of Dayton's Mark Ensalaco, director of Human Rights Research at UD, who teaches a course called "Political Violence."
Ensalaco believes the Bos-ton bombings represent a "variation on the lone-wolf" scenario and compared the suspects' mindset to that of McVeigh, who detonated a truck bomb in front of the Oklahoma City federal building in 1995, killing 168 people.
"I see this as a case of two terribly disaffected individuals who could not assimilate in the U.S. seeking a psychological thrill and taking on a jihadist mindset," Ensalaco said.
Jaro Bilocerkowycz, a University of Dayton political science and international studies associate professor, said he views the reported suspects as troubled individuals and does not see a terrorism threat emanating from Russia's Chechnya region. "If they were going to target someone, they weren't going to target the U.S.," he said. "Russia and their policies are the ones they are frustrated with. The U.S. is sort of a third party that is almost irrelevant."
Russia and Chechnya have had centuries of conflict, he said. Since the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991, the two sides have had two wars. Russia has battled Chechen terrorist attacks over the years as Islamic separatists fought for independence from Russian control.
Liam Anderson, a Wright State University political science professor with expertise on the former Soviet Union, said he doesn't expect the attacks will have an impact on U.S. and Russia relations.
"I think the U.S. and Russia relations are driven by other things that are more significant," he said. "I think (the Boston terrorist attack) probably marginally improves relations because I think it's a shared perception of threats."
But Donna Schlagheck, chairwoman of the WSU Political Science Department and a specialist on terrorism and foreign policy, said the U.S. may have been a convenient target for the suspects, particularly since they were already here.
Russia "used an iron fist and some very brutal tactics" to crush the Muslim province of Chechnya during two wars there, particularly the one lasting from 1999-2009, she said. "The U.S. was pretty much silent about what Russia was doing there, particularly following 9/11, when our foreign policy put us shoulder to shoulder with Russia and China. In this case, it might be that for these young men, a target in the U.S. was easily and readily available, compared with going to Russia."
She believes the Russian-Chechnyan war triggered a "domino effect" that may now have extended to the U.S.
"A lot of young men who fled Chechnya during the war encountered Islamists from other countries and learned from them," she said.
WSU history professor Sean Pollock, who has spent time in the Caucusus, written on the region and studied Russia's relations with the ethnically diverse population, said Chechen forces during the war included "many radical Islamic figures from many other countries."
He said they "chose their brand of Islam as the ideology that justified their participation in a separatist movement that has included terrorizing non-Islamist countries. Any government perceived as oppressing Muslims is perceived as a target."
Pollock said some scholars have established connections between those fighting to establish an independent Islamist state there and al-Qaida.
Based on the psychology of the Boston suspects and gunmen in recent mass shootings, Ensalaco said there's reason to fear that the seeds for another have now been planted.
"Whenever one of these happens," he said, "I immediately begin to worry about the next."
Contact this reporter at 937-225-2363 or email Barrie.Barber@coxinc.com; Contact this reporter at 937-225-2377 or email Terry.Morris@coxinc.com

Load-Date: April 21, 2013


End of Document