Experts Say Bush's Goal in Terrorism Bill Is Latitude for Interrogators' Methods
The New York Times
September 19, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 1016 words
Byline: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Kate Zernike contributed reporting.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18 
Body


In his showdown with rebellious Senate Republicans over bills to bring terrorism suspects to trial, President Bush has repeatedly called for clarity in the rules for what he calls ''alternative interrogation techniques'' used by the Central Intelligence Agency.
  What Mr. Bush really wants, legal experts on both sides of the debate say, is latitude so the interrogators can use methods that the military is barred from using under a recently issued Army field manual.
Despite his call for clarity, the president has been vague in talking about the alternatives, which have in the past included sleep deprivation, playing ear-splittingly loud music and waterboarding, which induces a feeling of drowning.
  ''They can't come out and say we want more leeway to rough these people up,'' said John Radsan, who was assistant general counsel for the intelligence agency from 2002 to 2004 and now teaches at the William Mitchell College of Law in St. Paul. ''That doesn't sell. So he says we need clarity. It doesn't play well to say we need to deprive them of sleep and play loud music.''
  On Monday, the Bush administration appeared to make the first stab at compromise, telling senators, including John W. Warner, the Virginia Republican who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and who is leading the opposition to the president's plan, to expect a counterproposal. 
  White House officials would not release details of the administration's new proposal, except to say late Monday night that it involved the part of the Geneva Conventions known as Common Article 3.
  At the same time, the House decided to postpone its vote on Mr. Bush's proposal until at least next week. That was a setback for the White House, which had been counting on the House to pass the measure this week, a step that it hoped would prod the Senate into action before lawmakers break at the end of the month for the midterm elections.
  The Supreme Court ruled in June that Common Article 3, which legal experts agree would prohibit the intelligence agency's techniques, applies to the treatment of terrorism suspects. 
  So the White House wants Congress to pass measures redefining Article 3 to say it bars ''cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,'' language that the administration borrowed from a bill written by Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who was tortured while a prisoner in the Vietnam War. 
  ''The president is advocating a standard that prohibits cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment, a standard based on years of U.S. Court decisions interpreting the constitutional prohibitions on cruel and unusual punishment that protect U.S. citizens in custody,'' Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales said Monday in a speech at a conference on citizenship. ''Seeking this clarity is important to our efforts to continue gathering information about our enemies.''
  Some Senate Republicans, including Mr. Warner and Mr. McCain, are pushing back. They say redefining Article 3 would send a message that the United States was not serious about living up to the Geneva Conventions, a view shared by former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, and are pressing an alternative bill.
  Part of the dispute revolves around protection for military and intelligence agency interrogators. The White House says Article 3 is too vague and leaves interrogators open to being sued.
  The senators do not disagree. But they propose to clarify Article 3 by amending the War Crimes Act to specify exactly what abuses of the article constitute war crimes. 
  Jeffrey H. Smith, a general counsel for the intelligence agency under President Bill Clinton, said that the language in the Senate bill would not bar the controversial techniques, but that the White House bill appeared to give the agency greater latitude.
  ''The senators seem to be prepared to allow some techniques, but not nearly as many as the administration wants,'' Mr. Smith said.
  Since his speech nearly two weeks ago announcing that he was transferring 14 prominent terrorism suspects, including the reported mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, to the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, Mr. Bush has said the previously secret program under which they were interrogated was invaluable in thwarting terrorism plots. 
  The president has said he will have no choice but to stop the program if Congress does not pass his bill.
  The legislation does not explicitly state what the permissible techniques are, and the president and White House officials, including Gen. Michael V. Hayden, director of the intelligence agency, have steadfastly refused to discuss them. 
  Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, has been repeatedly asked about waterboarding, for example, and whether Mr. Bush has ruled it out.
  ''I'm not going to go into what's ruled in and ruled out,'' Mr. Snow told reporters last week, saying to do so would tip the interrogators' hand with suspects. 
  In a setback for the White House, the top uniformed lawyer for the Army has now told Mr. Warner that he prefers the Senate approach. The lawyer, Maj. Gen. Scott C. Black, joined military lawyers last week in a letter saying he did not object to the administration bill.
  But on Friday, General Black sent a second letter to Mr. Warner in which he said that the Senate bill was preferable and that ''further redefinition of Common Article 3 is unnecessary and could be seen as a weakening of our treaty obligations.''
  Whether the two sides can reach an agreement is unclear. Mr. Warner and another rebelling Republican senator, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, spoke to reporters late Monday, saying the two sides were exchanging, in Mr. Warner's words, ''ideas and words here and there.''
  Mr. Graham said the real work toward compromise started on Sunday, after appearances on Sunday by senators and administration officials on televised news and interview programs.
  Mr. Graham said, ''Everybody felt like what we were telling each other is: 'We share the same goals. We have a different way of achieving them. Let's see if we can write the legislation to meet our goals.' '' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 19, 2006


End of Document