EXPERTS BLAME JUSTICE FOR TERROR-CASE COLLAPSE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 2, 2004 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 942 words
Byline: DAVID ASHENFELTER, DETROIT FREE PRESS
Dateline: DETROIT
Body


Attorney General John Ashcroft and the Justice Department deserve much of the blame for the collapse of a Detroit terrorism case, legal experts said yesterday, after the government asked a judge to dismiss terrorism charges against two defendants and retry them for document fraud.
 "Senior officials at Justice didn't vet the case, didn't ask tough questions of the line prosecutors or adequately supervise them," said Peter Margulies, professor at Roger Williams Law School in Rhode Island. "The case should never have gotten this far."
 "Although the line prosecutors bear some responsibility, the Justice Department needs to stand up and be much more critical about its handling of the case," added Margulies, who has written extensively about terrorism and prosecutorial ethics.
Margulies and Bruce Green, a professor at the Fordham University School of Law in New York, said it appeared that the Justice Department was trying to make former lead prosecutor Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard Convertino a scapegoat. They say the department is faulting him for withholding crucial documents from defense lawyers, allowing witnesses to give misleading testimony and engaging in other questionable conduct.
 The Justice Department folded its hand in the nation's first post-Sept.  11 terrorism trial late Tuesday, saying last year's trial was so riddled with prosecutorial errors there was no choice but to toss out the terrorism convictions.
 "The government believes that it should not prolong the resolution of this matter pursuing hearings it has no reasonable prospect of winning," acting U.S. Attorney Craig Morford said in a 60-page request to U.S.  District Judge Gerald Rosen, who is considering the defendants' request for a new trial.
 Rosen is expected to dismiss the terrorism charges as early as today. Morford said in Tuesday's request that he wouldn't object to releasing one of the defendants on bond with an electronic tether pending retrial. Rosen is expected to decide the bond issue later.
 Morford and the Justice Department declined to say yesterday whether Convertino faces disciplinary action or possible criminal charges for his handling of the case. An investigation of his conduct continues. They wouldn't indicate whether Ashcroft approved the decision to seek dismissal of the terrorism charges.
 Convertino's lawyer yesterday defended his client's conduct. "Rick Convertino fairly and responsibly prosecuted this case with the safety and protection of his community uppermost in his mind in the wake of 9/11," said attorney William Sullivan of Washington, D.C. Sullivan said the material that Convertino failed to turn over to defense lawyers was "insubstantial, cumulative and would not have encouraged the reasonable probability that a different verdict would have resulted after trial."
 Moroccan immigrants Karim Koubriti, 26, and Abdel-Ilah Elmardoudi, 38, were convicted in June 2003 of conspiring to provide material support to terrorism and document fraud. Ahmed Hannan, 36, also of Morocco, was convicted of document fraud. A fourth defendant was acquitted.
 Throughout the trial, defense lawyers accused Convertino and his boss, Assistant U.S. Attorney Keith Corbett, of withholding documents, witnesses and other evidence crucial to the defense. After discovering in December that prosecutors had withheld evidence that lawyers could have used to challenge the government's star witness, Rosen ordered prosecutors to conduct a thorough review to find out whether other documents were held back.
 Tuesday's report said prosecutors, among other things, failed to:
 * Disclose that U.S. and foreign officials had expressed doubts that a day planner found in the defendants' apartment contained targeting sketches of a U.S. Air Force base in Turkey and a military hospital in Jordan.
 * Disclose photos that would have raised doubts that the hospital was depicted in one sketch.
 * Provide information that Air Force officials also had misgivings about whether the other sketch depicted the air base in Turkey.
 Instead, Tuesday's request said, Convertino allowed an Air Force colonel to mislead the jury by indicating that officials were uniform in their belief that the sketch depicted the air base.
 Prosecutors argued at trial that the defendants had a mentally ill Yemeni immigrant make the sketches to conceal their purpose and ownership. Although CIA officials said terrorists would want someone more dependable to handle such information, Convertino remained steadfast that the sketches were targeting diagrams, Morford said in the request to Rosen.
 Although CIA official William McNair expressed reservations to Convertino in five to 10 phone calls, he said Convertino "didn't much care what I was saying" because he had made up his mind that the sketches depicted terrorist targets. McNair told investigators that Convertino seemed to be shopping for an opinion that agreed with his own.
 Morford also faulted Convertino for directing FBI agents to keep no notes of his interviews with star witness Youssef Hmimssa and allowing lead FBI Agent Michael Thomas to testify that there was nothing unusual about the procedure. Morford said another FBI agent, James Brennan, adamantly disagreed with Convertino's decision, and that Corbett and Justice Department officials also had objected, but that information wasn't shared with defense lawyers.
 Defense lawyers were elated. "We're fortunate to be in the position we're in. But we hope to be in a better position before this thing is over. This has been incredible," said defense attorney William Swor. "The outrageous nature of what's gone on is almost too much to believe."

Load-Date: September 3, 2004


End of Document