Experts question terrorism fight
USA TODAY
March 23, 1999, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 841 words
Byline: John Omicinski; Gannett News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- U.S. anti-terrorism spending will exceed $ 10 billion
next year, and critics contend that amount represents political
paranoia more than good policy.
Anti-terrorism spending's explosive growth, a 44% overall jump
in a year and a leap of 800% in outlays by the Justice Department
alone, comes with no clear plan or strategy, critics say.
"A critical piece of the (anti-terrorism) budget and spending
picture is missing -- threat and risk assessments that would suggest
priorities and appropriate countermeasures," Assistant Comptroller
General Henry Hinton Jr. told a House subcommittee earlier this
month.
Agencies are tripping over each other competing for taxpayer dollars
to do many of the same jobs, such as training of local police
and fire forces' "first responders."
Health agencies are stockpiling smallpox and anthrax vaccines
while other offices emphasize preparedness or covert operations,
with little overall direction.
"The United States," Hinton cautioned, "cannot fund all possibilities
that have dire consequences. By focusing investments on worst-case
possibilities, the government may be missing the more likely threats
the country will face."
Leading terrorism experts agree that money is simply being thrown
at a complex, though shadowy, threat that doesn't yield to easy
solutions.
"No one's been asking how much is enough," said Bruce Hoffman,
director of the RAND Corp.'s Washington office and author of the
definitive study, Inside Terrorism. "It's getting lost
in a lot of fear and concern, and the trouble is that we may be
putting our eggs in the least likely basket. It's a threat we
have to defend against, but what's the line between prudence and
paranoia?"
In a new poll of 1,507 Americans by the Chicago Council on Foreign
Relations, 84% called terrorism the leading foreign threat.
Not interested in inviting reprisals at the polls, especially
after the bombings of two U.S. embassies last year in Africa,
few in Congress raise questions about anti-terrorism spending
that is increasing across a dozen or more agencies.
Virtually all anti-terror outlays, at this point, appear likely
to slip through the congressional vetting process as easily as
buttered rattlesnakes. No one's going to risk touching them and
getting bitten, particularly when the federal budget is running
a surplus.
The $ 10 billion figure for year 2000 anti-terror spending is just
the amount on the public books.
The government's hush-hush agencies -- Central Intelligence Agency,
National Security Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency -- don't
disclose spending, but their efforts surely will add billions
of dollars to the anti-terrorism bottom line.
Hinton cautioned that while government officials get carried away
with scenarios about chemical and germ attacks, law enforcement
experts say a conventional explosive attack is still the most
likely terrorist event.
Terrorists, he said, "need a relatively high degree of sophistication
to disseminate biological agents to cause mass casualties." Terrorists
"are less likely to use biological and chemical weapons than
conventional explosives partly because they are difficult to weaponize
and the results are unpredictable," he added.
Even terminology is confused and misunderstood. Professionals
ridicule the common talk about developing cadres of "chem-bio"
experts.
Chemical and biological threats are too different to be handled
by dual-purpose experts, said D.A. Henderson, director of the
Center for Civilian Biodefense Studies at Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore.
In testimony to Congress, Henderson called the dual-use notion
"as patently ridiculous as to assume that the athletes playing
on the Washington Redskins football team would be interchangeable
with the Baltimore Orioles baseball club."
A big problem, Hoffman said, is government's adoption of buzzwords
such as "weapons of mass destruction" for chemical and biological
weapons that don't compare in killing power with a nuclear warhead,
the real weapon of mass destruction.
"We're very mistaken to look at these acts (chem-bio attacks)
as ineluctably involving (deaths of) large numbers of citizens,
entire populations, entire cities," he said.
The Japanese group Aum Shinrikyo tried and failed three times
in 1990 to dispense botulinum and anthrax toxins in aerosols,
Hoffman said. Its 1995 use of sarin gas in the Tokyo subway killed
12 and sickened 5,000, he added, but that hardly qualified as
mass destruction.
The Aum group had millions at its disposal, hired high-class scientists
and provided them with first-rate labs. Still, he said, in the
sarin attack, "they were reduced to putting the sarin in plastic
bags and poking holes in them with sharpened umbrellas" to release
the gas.
Aum's failures, he said, speak volumes about the difficulties
of chem-bio warfare.
Hinton told Congress that law enforcement agencies regard conventional
explosives as the most likely terror weapon to be used against
U.S. targets.
With that in mind, he raised questions about whether agencies
should be amassing huge supplies of vaccines instead of hardening
U.S. installations and agencies against bombs.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, GNS (Chart); PHOTO, B/W, AP; Hinton: U.S. might miss threats

Load-Date: March 23, 1999


End of Document