Experts warn of terrorism to agriculture

Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 5, 1999, Sunday


Copyright 1999, Telegraph-Herald
Section: Business; Pg. d 4
Length: 440 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


'Agroterrorism': Livestock and crops are easy targets
ALBUQUERQUE (AP) - Terrorists who want to create economic chaos in the United States could try to sneak hoof and mouth disease into the nation's livestock yards or bomb corn fields with blight instead of using car bombs to inflict human carnage, according to members of Congress who've talked with agriculture experts.
That's the picture being painted in recent weeks for people such as U.S. Sen. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M., and New Mexico Land Commissioner Ray Powell. Agricultural experts are telling them it's only a matter of time before terrorists try to wreck the country's food and fiber business.
Despite expert testimony, Bingaman said he's not unduly alarmed.
"The testimony raised a lot of questions in my mind about how real the threat is," Bingaman said in a telephone interview. "It was interesting, but I don't think the answers we got were conclusive."
Nonetheless, there's a newly coined word for the threat: agroterrorism.
"When we heard about this, it just scared the bejabbers out of us," said Powell, recently returned from the Foreign Animal and Poultry Disease Advisory Committee's annual meeting. "I was unaware of the severity of the threat, or of the potential for this happening."
Terrorists lugging lunch coolers into the darkness near a giant Midwestern feedlot could easily swab the muzzles of a dozen steers with the contagious foot and mouth disease, the experts are saying.
Cattle feedlots, hog and chicken farms are easily accessible and often contain large numbers of animals, said agroterrorism expert and veterinary pathologist Corrie Brown of the University of Georgia, who testified at a subcommittee hearing attended by Bingaman.
"We are sitting ducks for agricultural terrorism," she said.
For starters, Brown said, an outbreak of foot and mouth disease or other diseases not frequently found in the United States could cost an estimated $ 27 billion in lost exports. Even if the prognosis for halting the disease were good, foreign countries would quickly slam the door on imports.
Another scenario the experts talk about could threaten crops.
An airliner with pods of corn seed blight could fly over the nation's corn belt, spraying spores across wide swaths of countryside. The blight would be present in the soil when spring planting occurs.
If the resulting harvest is 30 percent below expected levels, the United States would be forced to import corn for the first time. Food prices would rise sharply, causing inflation. The U.S. agricultural reputation would be seriously damaged, and consumers would see price hikes for all kinds of corn-enhanced products.

Load-Date: December 6, 1999


End of Document