Expert criticizes U.S. stand on anti-Semitic crimes at Boston U. talk
University Wire
November 18, 1999


Copyright 1999 The Daily Free Press via U-Wire
Length: 612 words
Byline: By Rosanna Roizin, The Daily Free Press
Dateline: Boston
Body


Radical groups in the United States who use violent language against people because of their religion, creed or political affiliation are time-bombs ready to explode, an expert on terrorism said Wednesday.
Because the American media and government permit radical Islamic fundamentalist groups and ultra right-wing organizations to use demonic language, they, in turn, legitimize these organizations and proliferate violence, said Steven Emerson, an expert on Middle Eastern terrorism in the Unites States.
"The United States allows and legitimizes the dissemination of anti-Semitic rhetoric, which propagates violence," Emerson said.
Boston U.
Emerson, who has written four books about Middle Eastern terrorism and lectures throughout the nation about anti-Semitic violence, spoke to about 15 Boston University students and faculty about the threat Jews face from radical anti-Semitic organizations in the Unites States.
The lecture was part of a series of events sponsored by the Boston University Hillel House to raise awareness of hate crimes.
According to a report released by the FBI, 80 percent of the 14,883 hate crimes reported in 1997 were against Jews, Emerson said, adding that Jewish people have been a target of a disproportionate number of hate crimes throughout history.
Emerson said there have been an unprecedented eruption of anti-Semitic crimes in the Unites States this year.
Incidents such as the August shooting in a Jewish Community Center in California have caused temples and Jewish Community Centers nationwide to increase security.
EgyptAir Flight 990, which crashed last week killing all aboard, may prove to be another example of a hate-crime conducted on U.S. soil, Emerson said.
Even though the FBI has not concluded whether the words the co-pilot uttered before the plane plunged into the ocean were an Islamic religious death prayer, Emerson said the media has already jumped to cover up any implications of a radical religious trace in the incident.
Emerson said the United States successfully manipulates these incidents in an effort to be politically correct and not offend Islamic religious groups.
"It's an etiological blindness and a gullibility on behalf of the West," he said.
But fundamental Islamic religious groups are a disproportionately strong minority among a large population of non-violent Islamic people, Emerson said, adding that radical Muslims use Islam as a veil to justify violent rhetoric and actions.
One reason Emerson cited for this year's increase in anti-Semitic language and violence is because of the large influx of radical websites that promote anti-Semitic and racist beliefs on the Internet.
"There is no concrete reason for the increase in violence this year, but one strong reason is the proliferation of anti-Semitic websites," he said. Emerson said the only way to fight threats of anti-Semitic terrorism in the United States is to delegitimize radical groups.
Their beliefs and organizations should publicly be denounced by the government and the media. He doesn't believe restricting violent anti-Semitic rhetoric is a violation of the First Amendment since it is the responsibility of the government and the media to choose where to focus their attention.
Just as an editor in a newspaper decides which editorial he will print, President Clinton should not be meeting and giving voice to radical Islamic groups.
Emerson said the government has been more successful in denouncing and muffling ultra right-wing groups such as Neo-Nazis and now has to apply the same tactics for radical Muslim groups in the United States.
(C) 1999 The Daily Free Press via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 18, 1999


End of Document