EXPERT ON TERRORISM ESCAPES BOMB ATTACK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 28, 1990, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 498 words
Body


BONN, West Germany - The government's top terrorism expert survived an assassination attempt Friday, when suspected guerrillas of the Red Army Faction detonated a remote-controlled bomb as he drove by.  ''They tried to kill me,'' said Hans Neusel, who escaped with minor cuts to his hand.  ''It's a risk in my job, but even if they had killed me, someone else would take my place,'' he told reporters at the scene of the attack, a highway exit ramp by the Rhine River.  Neusel, state secretary in the Interior Ministry and anti-terrorism adviser to Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble, said he recently gave up the use of a personal bodyguard and was driving alone when the blast hit.  A note claiming responsibility for the attack was found near the scene. It bore the symbol of the Red Army Faction but was signed by the ''Jose Manuel Sevillano commando.'' Sevillano, who was suspected of being a member of the Spanish leftist guerrilla group Grapo, died on hunger strike recently in a Spanish jail.  Police said they had not yet made any arrests in the attack.  The Red Army Faction, a leftist organization formerly known as the Baader-Meinhof gang, carried out a series of killings and kidnappings of West German politicians and industrialists in the 1970s and early 1980s.  Neusel said the bomb, triggered by an electric eye, was probably activated by someone watching for his car from a nearby bridge.  HEADLINE: E. German Accord East Germany's government averted collapse Friday after its second-biggest faction agreed to remain in the coalition.
The Social Democrats had threatened to resign from the government of Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere unless a dispute over united German elections was reached.  They agreed to remain in the government after de Maiziere appeared to back away from a demand that East Germany remain a separate country until after German elections are held on Dec. 2.  Under that plan, the German states would hold separate elections for the same Parliament and then formally unify.  The Social Democrats had demanded that East Germany dissolve itself Dec. 1 and merge with West Germany so a single all-German election could be held the following day.  The date is important because it could help determine which political factions get seats in Parliament. Under West German law, parties need 5 percent of the total German vote to be represented in Parliament. No minimum is required in East Germany.  The Social Democrats want to keep the 5 percent limit, which is called for in the West German constitution that will be the law of a united German land.  HEADLINE: Disco Arrest A West German man of Arab origin has been arrested on charges of organizing the 1986 discotheque bombing that killed two American servicemen and a Turkish woman.  The attack led then President Ronald Reagan to bomb Libya in retaliation.  West Berlin Justice department spokesman Cornel Christoffel said the man, who denied involvement in the bombing, was arrested Wednesday.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO by AP … Hans Neusel, West Germany's top anti-terrorism adviser, inspecting his bomb-damaged car after he survived an assassination attempt Friday in Bonn, West Germany.

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document