EXPERTS WARN OF ONGOING THREAT OF CYBER TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 12, 2001 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B-6
Length: 385 words
Byline: McGregor McCance, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact McGregor McCance at (804) 649-6348 or mmccance@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


Yesterday's shocking attacks provide visceral and visual evidence of the nation's vulnerabilities to conventional terrorist assaults.
But experts say the ongoing threat of cyber terrorism presents as much risk to communications, financial markets, utilities and the government.
"A well-directed, cyber-terrorist attack could, in a different way, have the same consequences," said Allan Berg, executive director of the Commonwealth Information Security Center, a newly formed information-security research center at James Madison University.
"A cyber attack can do the same thing," he said. "We just don't feel it the same way."
The recent Code Red worm threat, which initially targeted the systems supporting the White House Web site, was one example of the country's high-tech vulnerabilities, says Yacov Haimes, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Risk Management of Engineering Systems.
But Haimes said much more is at stake.
"Through cyberspace, individual and group terrorists can disrupt our lives simply by denying us access to our critical infrastructures - the systems that provide our food, drinking water, electrical power, telephones, air travel and medical care," he said.
Berg and Haimes each called for more emphasis on combating terrorist acts that can cripple the Internet infrastructure or damage information systems.
"There needs to be the recognition that this country is incredibly vulnerable," Berg said. "We're the most technologically advanced society in the world. I don't personally believe our countermeasures are of significant magnitude to thwart a major effort."
A panel headed by Gov. Jim Gilmore last December also urged Congress to establish a national strategy to deal with all forms of domestic threats, including cyber attacks.
"Cyber attacks inside the United States could have 'mass disruptive,' if not 'mass destructive' or 'mass casualty' consequences," the report said.
It warned that cyber attacks that cripple key communications systems could be used to help carry out more conventional attacks.
Berg said electronic attacks can be used to "give new instructions to equipment, divert things, shut things down."
"Information would get lost. Information would get destroyed. We're an information-based society, and with it comes a vulnerability on how to protect it."

Load-Date: September 15, 2001


End of Document