Experts wonder if IS has new plan; They say if terror group crashed plane, the threat of global terrorism is elevated
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 6, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 4
Length: 323 words
Byline: ZEINA KARAM

The Associated Press
Dateline: BEIRUT 
Body


 - At this stage, there is no hard evidence. But reports from the U.S. and Britain suggesting an Islamic State group bomb may have caused the Russian plane crash in Egypt are raising the alarm among experts, who say such an act would be a frightening change in tactics by the extremist group. It would also underscore the failure so far of the U.S.-led coalition to deter the jihadis - despite the recent addition of Russia to the forces arrayed against them.British Prime Minister David Cameron said Thursday it was more likely than not that an explosive device brought the jetliner down. If that proves to be true, and if the Islamic State group was responsible, it would be the Sunni extremists' largest act of transnational terrorism by far.
The Sinai attack would be a first, and would signal that the Islamic State has become both capable of - and interested in - joining the dreadful ranks of global terrorism, concluded an analysis by the Soufan Group, a private geopolitical risk assessment company.Given the Islamic State militants' success in creating mayhem through its brutal tactics and ferocious fanaticism, such a metamorphosis would be a challenge for security services around the world.IS has claimed responsibility for bringing down the Russian plane. It said the attack was retaliation for Russia's air campaign against IS - and other groups - in Syria, where Moscow wants to preserve the rule of President Bashar Assad. The group warned Putin that they would also target him at home.
But IS has not offered details to back its claim. Aymenn al-Tamimi, an expert on rebel and Islamic extremist groups and a fellow at the Middle East Forum think tank, said bombing a jetliner becomes a significant one-up in the rivalry with al-Qaida.
If the Islamic State is capable of conducting attacks like this - particularly against a target now widely reviled (Russia) - this could bolster their appeal in the jihadi world, he said.

Load-Date: November 6, 2015


End of Document