Expiring surveillance powers in danger
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 13, 2020 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 465 words
Byline: Mary Clare Jalonick and Eric Tucker Associated Press
Body


Nation
 WASHINGTON  - Three surveillance powers available to the U.S. government are set to temporarily expire Sunday after a trio of senators opposed a bipartisan House bill that would renew the authorities and impose new restrictions.
 The Senate will consider the House bill next week, after a delay, but it is unclear if President Donald Trump, a skeptic of the nation's intelligence community, would sign it. Trump told Republican Sen. Mike Lee, who opposes the House measure, on Thursday that he doesn't support it, according to a spokesman for the senator.
 Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell supports the legislation and had hoped to pass it Thursday, but he was forced to delay consideration past the expiration date after Lee and two other senators - Republican Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky and Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon - said they would object.
 The three senators, longtime critics of government surveillance, said the House bill would still give the government too much power to surveil Americans. The House legislation, negotiated by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Republican leader Kevin McCarthy, would renew several provisions the FBI sees as vital to fighting terrorism but also aim to ensure stricter oversight of how the bureau conducts surveillance.
 Lee proposed a deal on the Senate floor Thursday - extension of the current authorities if the Senate would consider several amendments to the House bill that would further limit them. Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Richard Burr, speaking on the floor for McConnell, objected to that deal, saying the Senate should instead pass the House bill.
 "We're not a rubber stamp for the House of Representatives," Lee said. "We're certainly not a rubber stamp for the Deep State."
 The House legislation updates the three expiring surveillance provisions, including one that permits the FBI to obtain court orders to collect business records on subjects in national security investigations. Another, known as the "roving wiretap" provision, permits surveillance on subjects even after they've changed phones. The third allows agents to monitor subjects who don't have ties to international terrorism organizations.
 The House legislation, passed Wednesday, is a compromise that reflects angst in both parties about the way the surveillance powers have been used, but also a reluctance to strip those powers from the government's arsenal. Republicans and Democrats in the House broadly agreed that they did not want civil liberties sacrificed in efforts to thwart terrorism and other crimes.
 In addition, Republicans had been aggressively seeking changes to the law since the Justice Department's investigation into Trump's campaign and Russia, while many Democrats already had concerns about government surveillance.

Load-Date: March 13, 2020


End of Document