EXPLOSION ABOARD T.W.A. FLIGHT 800: TERRORISM;
New Questions About Security For Airports
The New York Times
July 19, 1996, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk  
Section: Section A;  ; Section A;   Page 1;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk  ; Column 5;  
Length: 905 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER  

By JOHN KIFNER  
Body


After a terrorist bomb disintegrated Pan American Flight 103 on Dec. 21, 1988, scattering the bodies of 259 passengers and crew members across the bleak, snowy landscape of Lockerbie, Scotland, the Government drew up strict new regulations to protect air travelers.
Yet as rescue workers continued yesterday to search the waters off Long Island for the 230 people aboard T.W.A. Flight 800, which blew apart Wednesday night, Federal investigators were increasingly convinced that this plane, too, was destroyed by an explosive device.
And it was far from clear whether the new rules to prevent bombs from being smuggled on airplanes were being effectively enforced, or if terrorists had found a new way -- perhaps even a surface-to-air missile -- to bring an airliner down.
A new, million-dollar baggage scanner capable of detecting even thin rolls of plastic explosives, for example, is not in use at Kennedy airport, although it was certified in 1994 by the Federal Aviation Administration. Indeed, only three of the machines are in use in the United States: one at the San Francisco airport and two in Atlanta, where they were recently installed for the Olympic games.
A barrier to widespread adoption of these detection devices is the expense. The F.A.A. estimates that buying and installing them at the 75 busiest domestic airports would cost at least $400 million and perhaps as much as $2.2 billion, depending on the mix of technologies and procedures, according to a report on air security earlier this year by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.
The Lockerbie explosion, which also killed 11 people on the ground, was caused by a bomb hidden inside a Toshiba radio-cassette player and packed in a brown Samsonite suitcase. It was checked onto a connecting Air Malta flight and transferred onto the Pan Am flight in London.
The suitcase was sent on from London unaccompanied; the passenger on the flight from Malta never boarded for the second leg. The bomb, said Lee S. Kriendler, the lawyer who helped win a $500 million settlement for the families of the 225 Lockerbie victims, was set off by a sophisticated Swiss timing device.
It was apparently intended to explode over the Atlantic, thus preventing the recovery of bodies and evidence, but it went off over Scotland because the plane had been delayed on the ground in London.
Noting that the T.W.A. flight, too, was delayed at takeoff, Mr. Kriendler raised the possibility that a bomb might have been meant to explode over the ocean.
A Presidential task force and later Congressional legislation in 1990 called for stricter security to prevent bombs from being smuggled aboard in baggage, especially in unaccompanied luggage.
A would-be bomber might have tried, for example, to get a bomb aboard the T.W.A. flight by checking luggage through from another flight in the United States.
There have also been cases where a terrorist hid a bomb aboard a plane -- under a seat cushion, for example -- set to go off later after the bomber had debarked.
The G.A.O. report on air security noted that on all international flights the Federal Aviation Administration "requires U.S. carriers to implement the International Civil Aviation Organization standards as a minimum, including the inspection of carry-on passenger baggage and passenger bag match."
T.W.A. officials did not respond yesterday to repeated inquiries about whether they had actually carried out the match requirement: that is, making sure there was a passenger for each piece of luggage.
At Kennedy airport, all bags are passed through a metal detector as soon as a passenger enters a terminal. But the level of security is the responsibility of each airline.
The most advanced screening device, the Invision CTX-5000, is not in use at Kennedy Airport, although the Israeli airline, El Al, known for its security consciousness, has a model on order.
The Invision scanner, which uses a variant of medical CAT-scan technology, is capable of detecting military explosives or even a plastic explosive like Semtex rolled out into a thin sheet, the most difficult form of explosive to spot, said the California company's president, Sergio Magistri.
Normal X-rays show the outlines of metal objects but cannot detect plastic explosives.
"It is the stepchild of Pan Am 103." Mr. Magistri said of his company's machine, adding that it had been developed with the help of $8 million in research money from the F.A.A.
An earlier technology, Thermo-neutron scanning, has been largely abandoned because it frequently set off false alarms, delaying flights.
But the possibility that a surface-to-air missile had been used against the T.W.A. flight could raise the terrorist threat to an entirely new level.
One possibility could be that attackers used the American-made Stinger missile, widely distributed to Afghan rebels by the Central Intelligence Agency. The light, shoulder-fired missile, with a sophisticated heat-seeking guidance system, proved highly effective against Soviet helicopters, effectively turning the tide of battle.
There are believed to be hundreds of the missiles unaccounted for since the war in Afghanistan.
Writing on the changing nature of terrorism in a publication of the United States Army War College last year, one expert, Stephen Sloan, warned: "A Stinger missile aimed at a jumbo jet as it takes off or as it approaches a large metropolitan airport could cause tremendous casualties."

Graphic

 
Chart: "Safety Measures Taken at U.S. Airports"
Here is an explanation of some security measures used at airports like Kennedy International Airport. Major American airports are operating a relatively high level of security because of concerns about the Olympic Games and current trials involving terrorism charges.
 
1. At Kennedy, passengers can drive to the curb outside the terminal to unload. Some airports, like Hartsfield in Atlanta, have installed barriers of concrete planters there to deter car bombs.
 
 2. At check-in, passengers are likely to be asked for a picture ID and asked who packed their bags and sometimes interrogated in more detail.
 
3. Baggage handling area
 
Baggage to be stowed in the plane's cargo hold may be examined by bomb-sniffing dogs, by sophisticated equipment or by hand.
 
4. Passengers and carry-on luggage pass through metal detectors and X-ray machines.
 
 5. To gain access to the area where the plane is waiting, personnel -- including mechanics, cleaning crews and other employees -- must pass background checks and carry appropriate identification.
 
Detecting Plastic Explosives
 
 At Congress's instruction, the F.A.A. and private companies have been developing equipment that can reliably detect explosives that do not show up on X-ray machines. The InVision Technologies CTX 5000, which meets the agency's specifications, is being tested in San Francisco and Atlanta as is planned for installation at the El Al terminal in JFK by late September.
 
Mail
 
Experts say mail is a vulnerable area for security. The postal service will not x-ray, so mail is only subject to visual inspection at airport. (pg. B9)
 
      

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document