Explanation required
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 6, 2005, Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; IN OUR VIEW
Length: 473 words
Body


Sandy Berger owes the American people an explanation.
Berger, President Clinton's national security adviser, last week pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor after acknowledging that he intentionally removed and destroyed three copies of classified documents from the National Archives about that administration's record on terrorism.
Under the terms of the plea agreement, Berger agreed to pay a fine of $10,000 and accept a three-year suspension of his national security clearance.
#BERGER.LIB#
The case unfolded in 2003 when Berger twice left the National Archives with documents. He was researching information about the Clinton administration's options for dealing with international terrorism to provide to the Sept. 11 Commission.
Berger took copies of National Security Council terrorism expert Richard Clarke's "after-action review'' that was prepared in 2000. The document detailed how the Clinton administration planned to deal with terrorist threats during the millennium celebration and, more importantly, what the administration knew about terrorist threats on U.S. soil.
Berger's actions were disclosed by the White House last July - only days before the September 11 Commission released its report - prompting Democrats to argue that the White House was attempting to deflect attention from a report expected to paint the White House in a bad light.
After news of the investigation into Berger's actions was announced, he acknowledged having mistakenly taken documents. When examining them, he said he realized they were similar and snipped apart the copies to compare them.
But in his guilty plea Friday - tucked between news of the death of Terri Schiavo and the impending death of Pope John Paul II - Berger said he intentionally took the documents and knowingly destroyed three of the five copies in his possession. He returned the other two copies. The originals were never in danger.
Why Berger took and destroyed copies then lied about it has raised countless questions about his motives.
Some Clinton administration critics have suggested the copies that Berger took contained handwritten notes from others within the administration, thus leading to Berger's destruction of the copies. Those claims remain unproven.
The accusations last July cost Berger his position as senior foreign policy adviser to Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry. Whether his plea will serve to disqualify him from future administrations remains to be seen. After all, Iran-Contra figures Elliott Abrams and John Poindexter have served in various government capacities since their convictions. Those appointments reflect badly on the current administration.
If Berger has any hopes of returning to public service, he will need to do more than offer a mea culpa. He needs to explain why he took and destroyed the documents. Anything less is unacceptable.

Load-Date: April 7, 2005


End of Document