Extremist attacks rose in '04;
Bush officials, facing heat to give figures, reported
651 "significant" global strikes, up from 208 in 2003.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 28, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A05
Length: 507 words
Byline: Frank Davies INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Under pressure from Congress, the Bush administration yesterday released a report showing an upsurge in extremist attacks worldwide in 2004.
The number of "significant attacks" grew to about 651 last year, from 208 in 2003, according to statistics released by the National Counterterrorism Center. The 2004 total includes 201 attacks in Iraq.
The annual report on global terrorism, compiled by the State Department, warned that while al-Qaeda leaders had been hurt by military operations, local groups inspired by the terror network were able to launch deadly attacks in Spain, Indonesia and elsewhere.
The State Department had said last week that it was ending the practice of including the statistics in its annual report about attack trends. Congress requires the State Department to produce the report.
Critics on Capitol Hill accused the department of holding back embarrassing numbers that showed an increase in attacks in Iraq, Afghanistan and Europe.
"This is very disturbing," said Sen. Carl Levin (D., Mich.) at a hearing yesterday of the Senate intelligence committee. "Suddenly we read the State Department has decided they're no longer going to tell the American people what the numbers were."
The totals include only attacks on noncombatants, so the 201 attacks in Iraq do not include roadside bombs that killed U.S. and coalition soldiers. A year earlier, there were 22 attacks in Iraq, following the U.S. invasion.
John Brennan, the interim director of the counterterrorism center, said at a briefing that the increase in 2004 "reflects the increasing number of civilians and contractors and others who are in Iraq."
Attacks by remnants of the Taliban also increased from 14 to 27 in Afghanistan, and the report recorded about 300 attacks related to the Pakistan-backed Muslim insurgency against India in Kashmir. Pakistan is a U.S. ally in the war on terrorism.
Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D., Calif.), who had pressed for release of the data, said in a letter to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice that the increase "may undermine administration claims of success in the war on terror."
But counterterrorism officials said more rigorous reporting methods and analysis may account for much of the increase from 2003 to 2004.
"The data you see today represent a break from previous years," Brennan said, "and the numbers can't be compared to previous years in any meaningful way."
The report stated: "Because terrorism is a tactic, used on many fronts, by diverse perpetrators in different circumstances and with the different aims, the Counterterrorism Center cautions against using incident data alone to gauge success in the war on terrorism."
The State Department report touted better international cooperation for foiling some attack plans and said that two nations that had supported attacks, Libya and Sudan, had improved their cooperation.
The attacks last year claimed about 9,000 casualties, including 1,907 people killed. In 2003, there were 625 people killed.
Contact reporter Frank Davies at 202-383-6054 or fdavies@krwashington.com.  

Load-Date: September 12, 2005


End of Document