Extremists hijack religion
USA TODAY
September 25, 2013 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 13A
Length: 390 words
Body


Islamic extremists killed more than 70 people at a mall in Nairobi, Kenya, over the weekend. Somali al-Shabab extremists were behind the attacks.
The "religion" of Islam didn't kill these people, but fanatics did, just as in any religion where radicals exist. I wonder how may peace-loving Christians, filled with religious fervor, owned slaves and beat those who wouldn't comply? How much hate today is tied to religious beliefs, especially beliefs that don't coincide with those of others?
Thomas Laurie Felts
If the attackers in Kenya did this as "retribution," then I say we  blow up all the Islamic radicals as "retribution" for 9/11. I'm sure many of our politicians will expect us to do something about this attack at the Nairobi mall. They seem to want to take care of everything and everyone as long as it is not the people here in the USA who need help and protection.
Darlene Bowers Blankenship
Islamic terrorism is our business. Extremists will  kill you at your neighborhood mall if they figure out a way to do it.
Do the Sept. 11 and the Boston marathon attacks sound familiar?
David Swain
Americans are tired of Muslim fanatics? Maybe they should stop funding and arming them and calling them freedom fighters as they do in Syria.
Americans think Muslims aren't doing enough to denounce and sideline the more radical and violent in their midst? Maybe Americans should stop going out of their way trying to overthrow secular Arab leaders such as Saddam Hussein, Moammar Gadhafi and Bashar Assad, who keep al-Qaeda in check and protect Christians.
All American foreign policy has done is destabilize Middle Eastern countries, thereby removing any possibilities they have to combat terrorism and then whine about the consequences.
Jugurtha Syphax
People thinking the deeds of radical fools in the name of Islam represent true Muslims  would be the same as claiming the Klu Klux Klan and its hateful deeds define Christianity.
Kalah Terry
---
WHAT IS AL-SHABAB?
Al-Shabab is an extremist Islamic terrorist force that grew out of the anarchy that crippled Somalia after warlords ousted a longtime dictator in 1991.
WHY ATTACK KENYA?
Al-Shabab has warned for two years that it will attack Kenya in retaliation for the country's leading role in sending troops to Somalia in 2011 and effectively reducing the extremist group's power in Somalia.
Source AP 

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document