EXTRADITION SHOULD BE LEFT IN JUDICIOUS HANDS
The New York Times
December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 536 words
Body


To the Editor:
You argue editorially (''The Extradition Thicket,'' Dec. 19) that the refusal of a Federal judge in New York to extradite an escaped ''terrorist'' to Northern Ireland shows the inadequacy of our extradition arrangements with Britain, and you seem to support Administration proposals to replace judicial discretion in this area with executive discretion.
But the Joseph Doherty case is entirely consistent with two prior decisions by Federal judges in New York and California, and with deep American legal traditions. In all three cases, Doherty, Mackin and McMullin, the extradition was refused under the treaty because an objective classification of the facts would show the offenders to have acted under a regime of armed conflict in which the laws of war apply, and the acts for which extradition was sought, far from being acts of ''terrorism,'' were consistent with the laws and customs of war.
For the United States to accept British legal classifications of political events in Northern Ireland is for us to mingle in the internal affairs of Britain on the side of the current Government, whose policies are subject to change without any consultation with us. Surely, applying the law as determined by objective judges is wiser policy than accepting the classifications of a foreign party to a foreign struggle.  The tradition of judges, and not administrators, interpreting extradition treaties is based firmly on constitutional law; the same provisions that make judges and not administrators the interpreters of statutes. The leading case is U.S. v. Laurence, 3 Dallas 42 (1795). Its logic has seemed irrefutable for almost 200 years.  Two alternatives exist. One is for the Irish refugees to be expelled as undesirable aliens; I should have thought the threshold for such an expulsion considerably lower than the threshold for extradition, and the hospitable traditions of the United States as a refuge for defeated foreign revolutionaries would be best evaluated within that wide context, instead of the technical extradition context.  The other is simply to apply strictly the neutrality laws of the United States and, if any of the accused has been guilty of attacking the civilian population as such, or killing surrendered prisoners, extraditing him as a war criminal under the laws of war.
Since it is not legally the business of the United States to sit in judgment on the classifications of law used by Britain in enforcing the laws of war against war criminals of either party to a conflict in which it is engaged and we are not, extradition as part of the enforcement procedures applicable to war crimes would seem easy, even if Britain insisted that the particular British statute involved considered the accused to be common criminals.
It remains a mystery to me why we insist on fabricating oversize legal sledgehammers that destroy more than they help for problems that can easily be solved by using the neat tools placed in our hands by the insights of our ancestors.
 
ALFRED P. RUBIN Medford, Mass., Dec. 20, 1984
The writer is professor of international law at Tufts University and chairman of the International Law Association's Committee on Extradition as Applied to Terrorism.


End of Document