Extremists convicted in Dutch terror cases; Prosecutors said rules on evidence led to mixed results. The nine got light sentences; five others were acquitted.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 11, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 518 words
Byline: Sebastian Rotella, Los Angeles Times
Body


A Dutch court yesterday convicted nine members of an Islamic extremist cell on terrorism charges, but the relatively light sentences and acquittals of five other suspects revealed continuing legal obstacles to fighting terrorism in the Netherlands.
The verdicts, announced in a heavily guarded courtroom in Amsterdam, were a partial victory for prosecutors in the case against the Hofstad Group, which stunned the Netherlands when its leader assassinated filmmaker Theo van Gogh in November 2004.
The predominantly Dutch-born extremists stood out because of their youth, ferocity, and the prominent role of female members in the network. The threat it posed forced a number of political figures in the usually tranquil country to go into hiding, temporarily flee the country, and protect themselves with 24-hour security details.
The three-judge panel convicted van Gogh's assassin, Mohammed Bouyeri, who is already serving a life sentence for the ritualistic shooting and stabbing of the outspoken filmmaker.
The judges imposed 15-year and 13-year sentences, respectively, on Jason Walters, 21, and Ismail Aknikh, 23, for attempted murder and membership in a terrorist group. Walters and Aknikh, both of whom had traveled to Pakistan to train with Islamic extremists, wounded three police officers with grenades during a standoff in the Hague soon after the van Gogh killing.
Police arrested Walters and Aknikh because wiretaps indicated they planned follow-up assassinations of legislators, among them Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a feminist who worked with van Gogh on a short film critical of Islamic extremism. But the court did not accept that evidence because it was gathered by the intelligence service, not the police - a recurring problem in Dutch antiterror prosecutions.
The judges imposed a five-year sentence on another central figure: Nourredine Fatmi, a Moroccan-born 23-year-old who was captured at an Amsterdam subway station in July with a loaded and cocked machine pistol. Prosecutors had asked for a 10-year sentence.
There was evidence that Fatmi and his girlfriend plotted to kill Ali, and a witness said that Fatmi admitted afterward to the plot. Judges convicted him only of weapons possession and terrorist activity. His girlfriend is serving time for weapons possession.
Prosecutors said the mixed results were caused by the court's complex assessment of the evidence.
"We are satisfied that the court agreed with the prosecutors that there is a terrorist organization," spokesman Wim de Bruin said in a telephone interview. "The court had its own opinion on the intentions of the terror group."
The case highlights a concern of European and U.S. law-enforcement officials: disparities among judicial systems that remain an impediment to a unified campaign against terrorism. Despite terrorism legislation introduced in 2004, the Dutch system still has shorter sentences and more stringent standards of proof in terrorism cases than in countries such as Spain or France.
The five men acquitted yesterday had already been released because they had served more time than the sentences they might have faced.

Load-Date: March 11, 2006


End of Document