EXTREMISTS GUILTY IN N.Y. BLAST
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 5, 1994 SATURDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 916 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


To a shout of "Injustice!" four Muslim extremists were convicted Friday in the World Trade Center bombing, a verdict the government hailed as an unmistakable message that terrorists can't get away with it in America.
"Islam is coming back!" cried defendant Nidal Ayyad, glaring at the jury as it pronounced the four men guilty on all charges. "Injustice!" shouted defendant Mohammad Salameh, pounding on the defense table.
The defendants face life in prison without parole when sentenced by U.S. District Judge Kevin Duffy on May 4.
"They should be executed," said Walter Stokes, 47, who was among those injured in the blast. "There wasn't enough penalties for them."
The anonymous federal jury returned the verdicts on the sixth day of deliberations, and a year and six days after the blast that killed six people, injured more than 1,000 and shattered Americans' confidence that terrorism was a foreign problem.
"The signal should go out across the world that anyone who seeks to come into this county to practice terrorism will have the full weight of law enforcement brought against them," President Clinton said.
The verdict "should send a clear and unmistakable message that we will not tolerate terrorism in this country," said U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White, whose office prosecuted the case.
After the verdicts, the State Department warned Americans overseas of possible attacks by Islamic extremists.
The verdicts - on conspiracy, assault and various explosives charges - came on the Muslim Sabbath and during Ramadan, the holy month of daytime fasting.
As the jury forewoman repeatedly said "guilty," Salameh shook his head dejectedly. Defendant Ahmad Ajaj appeared to smile in wonderment, then joined a chant of "Allahu Akbar!"- Arabic for "God is great!"
Salameh, a 26-year-old Palestinian, was accused of helping bankroll the attack, building the bomb and renting the van that carried it into the trade center's underground parking garage.
Prosecutors said Ayyad, 26, a chemist, ordered chemicals for the bomb and later told news organizations the motive: to protest U.S. aid to Israel.
Witnesses said Mahmud Abouhalima, 34, frequented the apartment where the bomb was built, while Ajaj, 28, provided bombmaking expertise. Ajaj was in jail on a false-passport conviction when the blast occurred.
Ajaj lived in Houston, the others in New Jersey suburbs of New York City.
Defense attorneys contended that the government twisted the evidence to trap the defendants in a web of conspiracy.
Salameh's lawyer, Robert Precht, said he will appeal. He called it a "shameful day" because of pretrial leaks designed to "demonize" his client.
"No one in the government should be patting themselves on the back and pretending this was a fair outcome," Precht said.
Hassen Abdellah, attorney for Abouhalima, said the verdict came too quickly after a five-month trial that included 207 prosecution witnesses, four defense witnesses and more than 1,000 exhibits.
But Abdellah added, "I'm not going to second-guess the jury. We hope they did the best they could under the circumstances." He said he didn't know whether he would appeal.
Precht acknowledged in closing arguments that there was a conspiracy but insisted his client was an unwitting dupe of the alleged ringleader, Ramzi Yousef, a fugitive, and therefore was innocent.
Salameh later complained to the judge about his attorney's comment.
The noontime blast Feb. 26, 1993, blew a five-story-deep crater in a garage beneath the trade center.
The 1,200 pounds of explosives inside a yellow Ryder van wrecked the skyscrapers' power and emergency systems. Tens of thousands of people fled down smoky, dark stairwells in a six-hour evacuation, emerging with soot on their faces and terror in their eyes.
A pregnant woman was plucked off a rooftop by a police helicopter. Seventeen kindergartners spent five hours trapped in an elevator.
Among the six people killed were a pregnant clerical worker and a trade center worker whose body wasn't found for two weeks.
Two days after the blast, investigators found van parts in the rubble, one with a vehicle identification number. That led them to Salameh, who was arrested March 4 as he tried to recover a $ 400 deposit on the rental van.
Also charged with conspiracy in the bombing were Bilal Alkaisi, 28, who awaits trial, and fugitives Yousef, 26, and Abdul Yasin, 33.
White said the government is investing "considearble efforts" to find the fugitives. She didn't elaborate.
BOX:
DEFENDANTS
Following are profiles of the men who have been convicted, who have fugitive status and who are awaiting trial in the World Trade Center bombing.
*Convicted:
*Mohammad A. Salameh, 26, Jordanian citizen of Palestinian descent, of Jersey City, N.J. Rented van that carried bomb.
*Nidal A. Ayyad, 26, chemical engineer, naturalized American citizen, born in Kuwait to Palestinian parents, of Maplewood, N.J. Wrote motive letter to The New York Times.
*Mahmud Abouhalima, 34, born in Egypt, former New York City cab driver, of Woodbridge, N.J. Paid for gas for Salameh's van before bombing.
*Ahmad Ajaj, 28, Palestinian, of Houston. Went to Pakistan for military training in April 1992; his bombmaking books had bomb's recipe.
*Fugitives:
*Ramzi Yousef, 26, of Jersey City. Ordered chemicals, built bomb; fled to Iraq hours after bombing.
*Abdul Rahman Yasin, 33, of Jersey City. Taught Salameh to drive the van; believed to have fled to Iraq.
*Charged, awaiting trial:
*Bilal Alkaisi, 28, of New York City. Shared Jersey City bank account with Salameh.

Load-Date: August 30, 1994


End of Document