Extradited Terrorism Suspects Appear in Court
The New York Times
October 7, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 27
Length: 582 words
Byline: By EMILY S. RUEB; Stacey Stowe contributed reporting.
Body


After a protracted battle in the British and European courts, Abu Hamza al-Masri, an incendiary Muslim preacher with links to Al Qaeda, and four other terrorism suspects implicated in an array of terrorist plots were extradited to the United States on Saturday to face federal charges in Manhattan and New Haven.
Appearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Masri, 54, who lost both hands and an eye in an explosion, looked considerably thinner and diminished in appearance than in recent photographs. As Magistrate Judge Frank Maas read the 11-count indictment, he remained seated and looked down at court papers a lawyer turned for him.
Two other defendants in Manhattan, Adel Abdul Bary, 52, and Khaled al-Fawwaz, 50, were arraigned on charges including murder and conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction in connection with the 1998 bombings of the American Embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and in Nairobi, Kenya, in which more than 200 people died. They pleaded not guilty.
In New Haven on Saturday, the final two defendants, Seyla Talha Ahsan, 33, and Babar Ahmad, 38, pleaded not guilty to charges that included conspiring to recruit fighters, raise money and gather equipment for terrorists on Web sites hosted out of Connecticut.
Federal authorities in the United States had long been seeking the extradition of Mr. Masri, an Egyptian-born cleric, for his involvement in a 1998 kidnapping of American citizens in Yemen, supporting the establishment of a terrorist training camp in Bly, Ore., and ''facilitating violent jihad in Afghanistan,'' according to a statement by the United States attorney in Manhattan. If convicted, Mr. Masri could face life in prison.
Last week, lawyers for Mr. Masri said he was physically unfit and should stay in Britain, where he has been incarcerated since 2006. On Saturday, a court-appointed lawyer, Sabrina Shroff, asked that the judge order ''a full evaluation'' of his medical condition, which had yet to be conducted at the time of his appearance.
She also requested he be fitted for special walking shoes to provide stability and given medicine for diabetes and high blood pressure. She also asked that the court return the prosthetic devices for his arms that had been confiscated and that he be given access to a dictation device.
''If he doesn't receive his prosthetic devices immediately, he'll need someone to take care of his daily needs or he will not be able to function in a civilized manner,'' Ms. Shroff said.
The two other defendants in Manhattan also requested treatment for their ailments -- an inhaler for Mr. Bary's asthma and medication for Mr. al-Fawwaz's high blood pressure. British and American officials orchestrated the handover of the suspects shortly after a high court rejected a final appeal by the men to stay in the United Kingdom. Escorted by United States marshals and F.B.I. agents on planes, the men touched down early Saturday in New York, where they will remain in custody pending further court appearances. Mr. Masri is to be arraigned on Tuesday.
The United States attorney in Manhattan, Preet Bharara, said, ''It makes good on a promise to the American people to use every available diplomatic, legal and administrative tool to pursue and prosecute charged terrorists no matter how long it takes.''
Mr. Masri's case and those of the other defendants have been at the center of British and European courts for nearly a decade as they tested the boundaries between civil liberties and national security.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/07/nyregion/men-extradited-from-britain-appear-in-court-on-terrorism-charges.html

Load-Date: October 7, 2012


End of Document