Eye for an eye rule applies in war against terrorism
University Wire
November 8, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1492 words
Byline: By Brendan Loy, Daily Trojan
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


In its Nov. 3 issue, The Economist magazine declared the conflict in Afghanistan "a heart-rending but necessary war." This is a perfect description.
Since the United States began bombing Afghanistan a month ago, there have been a number of accidental civilian deaths. The term "collateral damage" is surely insufficient to describe the gravity of such sad incidents. These tragedies are indeed "heart-rending." But we must not forget why we are fighting this war: to eradicate the terrorist network that deliberately murdered thousands of civilians on Sept. 11, and to send a message to governments that would support such terrorists.
U. Southern California
This is a fight that simply must be fought, and won hence the term "necessary." Next week, this necessary war will enter an even more heart-rending phase as the bombing and ground fighting continue into the holy month of Ramadan. As if the civilian deaths thus far weren't tragic enough, now there will undoubtedly be civilian deaths during a holy month. This will be awful on a human level, and potentially very damaging on a public-relations level. America has two choices in the Ramadan dilemma: stop bombing for a month, thus allowing the Taliban invaluable time to regroup and don't think for a moment that our enemies will refrain from reorganizing their forces just because it's Ramadan or continue bombing through the holy month for the sake of our crucial military objectives, but risk the ire of Muslim governments abroad and left-wingers at home.
There is no moral imperative to stop fighting during a holiday this is a war, not some sort of friendly war game. There is also no historical precedent suggesting that wars are usually halted for religious holidays; the 1973 war between Egypt's Muslims and Israel's Jews was fought during both Ramadan and Yom Kippur. So the overriding question is whether stopping for the holiday is militarily feasible. If the holiday lasted a day or two, maybe it would be. But we cannot stop for a whole month. Not surprisingly, the liberals on campus who have always opposed military action profess to oppose it even more during Ramadan, as shown in Tuesday's Daily Trojan ("Questioning bombs over holy month of Ramadan," Nov. 6). But their view hardly represents a general consensus.
Among the silent majority that has favored military action from the beginning, there is an understanding that a month-long pause in the war is simply untenable. The Bush administration clearly agrees with this silent majority. So do I. Yet I feel it is truly unfortunate that we find ourselves in the position of attacking a Muslim country during a Muslim holy month. I wish it did not have to be so.
Ah, if only Afghanistan was not ruled by a corrupt, evil government that gives refuge and support to a group of barbaric terrorists. If only that government had handed over the murderous criminals who helped organize the deadliest terrorist attack in world history. Should we halt our war on terror for Ramadan? The terrorists of Sept. 11 didn't stop to ask the people on those planes and in those buildings whether they were celebrating any holidays, birthdays, or anniversaries. They had no qualms about breaking up marriages, destroying families, orphaning children and shattering lives. But then again, the civilians of Afghanistan are not the terrorists of Sept. 11, and that's what makes this dilemma so heart-rending. As subjects of Taliban tyranny, the Afghan people are the victims of terror, not its perpetrators. And some of them hopefully not many, but certainly some will inevitably die during their holy month if the bombing continues. If only there was another way. If only the Taliban regime had not brought this upon itself and its people.
Opponents of U.S. military action love to use the plight of Afghanistan's people as their trump card. They say the civilian deaths are reason enough to not only suspend the fighting during Ramadan, but to call off the war altogether. On this campus, a recent slew of anti-war flyers denounced "collateral damage" and declared that "war is also terrorism." This is, on its face, an appealing argument. But it ignores the basic reality that the blood of the dead Afghan civilians is not on America's hands. It is on the Taliban's.
The Taliban's al Qaeda friends started this war. The Taliban then allowed the war to spread to Afghanistan by refusing to hand over Al-Qaida's leaders. To this day, Taliban leaders, even in spite of the inherent wickedness of their regime, could end the war by cooperating fully with the United States' anti-terrorism, anti-al Qaeda efforts. Instead, they are crying "jihad." This is not a war of American aggression. America is defending itself and the world from the evils of terrorism, and the Taliban is standing squarely in the way of that effort. If unavoidable tragedies occur during America's prosecution of its self-defense, the fault is not America's. It is the Taliban's.
Simple as that. I recently made this argument to a prominent campus liberal, only to be promptly shot down as a purveyor of "imperialist rationalizations." But mine is not an imperialist argument; it is a straightforward recognition of the undeniable fact that everything now happening in Afghanistan could have been avoided if the Taliban was not standing toe-to-toe with the world's most wanted criminals.
What's more, the Taliban is deliberately putting civilians in the line of fire. Troops are being stationed near villages, and ammunition stored in mosques. The Taliban is making it extraordinarily difficult for America to carry out its military campaign without hitting civilians and then we are the ones called "terrorists" by our own liberals when civilians do, in fact, die. Think about that for a second. This is not to say that America couldn't be doing better. Although the number of civilian strikes has been fairly low given the intensity of our campaign, it could be lower. We should restrict the use of cluster bombs odious weapons that are known for killing innocent people to areas like isolated Taliban troop lines, far from villages, or else not use them at all.
And we should further hone our technology and intelligence resources to continually minimize the number of accidental hits in civilian areas. Furthermore, U.S. bombs simply should not be falling anywhere near mosques, even if there is ammunition or weapons nearby or inside. If necessary, we should encourage the Northern Alliance to send people in to achieve our objectives. But the specter of "infidel" Americans destroying a mosque would simply be too much.
When I heard that bombs had fallen near a mosque in Herat where, apparently, the Taliban had placed a military helicopter and may have killed people emerging from prayers, I cringed. In these and other ways, we could and we should do better. But America cannot be expected to get down on its knees and beg our enemies for forgiveness every time we accidentally kill civilians. We should mourn the tragic deaths, yes. But the ones begging forgiveness should be the Taliban rulers. While we are trying our hardest to avert civilian deaths, the Taliban is trying its hardest to bring about the exact opposite result. The Taliban's fondest hope is that many, many of its own people die, because the higher the number of innocents killed, the more Islamic fundamentalists will likely rally to the Taliban's and al Qaeda's misguided cause. It is as if the Afghan government is putting its people on a firing line as sacrificial lambs, then throwing up its hands and praying for a calamity. America should keep doing everything in its power to prevent or minimize that calamity.
But at the same time, liberals at home should remember that we are not the aggressors in this battle. America is fighting a war it did not ask to fight, striving not for conquest and glory but for a necessary victory over inhuman terror. That is why civilians are dying in Afghanistan: because the Taliban and al Qaeda created this awful war. Calling the accidental killing of innocent Afghans a "genocide," as some on this campus have done, is absurd. Ignoring the fact that the Taliban bears more blame than America does is irresponsible. Decrying every accidental civilian death as an outrageous act of American "terrorism" is playing right into the Taliban's hands. If I am an "imperialist," then those who blame America for the Taliban's misdeeds are surely apologists. We can legitimately argue about the proper scope and nature of this campaign against terrorism, but let us all remember who started the war.
Let us not forget the events of Sept. 11, the global outrage, the consensus that something had to be done. We must not lose sight of our objectives, or of our rightness, amid the inevitable tragedies of this heart-rending but necessary war. That is what the Taliban hope we will do. Let us not give them that victory.
(C) 2001 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 8, 2001


End of Document