F.B.I. Investigating Threats to Rushdie Publisher and Stores
The New York Times
February 23, 1989, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 853 words
Byline: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22
Body


Federal agents are analyzing scores of threats against both the American publisher and some retailers of the novel ''The Satanic Verses,'' but nothing so far suggests the threats are organized or directed by Iran, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today.
The majority of the threats, which usually have been telephoned to local bookstore managers in the New York City area, appear to be crank calls. ''But we have had some that we view as serious that we have responded to,'' said Bob A. Ricks, a deputy assistant director for criminal investigations.
Mr. Ricks, who supervises the bureau's terrorism section, declined to say whether suspects have been identified in the cases. He said, however, that the F.B.I. has long been concerned about a small group of ''hard-core'' supporters of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini among Iranian students in the United States.
Threats to Booksellers
Nationally, several major booksellers said they have shrugged off threats telephoned to them in recent days.
''In general, what we're getting from our members is very few threats, and enormous amounts of customer curiosity,'' Ginger Curwen, director of publications for the American Booksellers Association, said in an interview.
Bookstores in Los Angeles, Portland and Chicago today reported receiving thousands of requests or back orders for ''The Satanic Verses,'' many from people who said they were buying the book as a personal statement about freedom of expression.
In Washington, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, and Senator Claiborne Pell, a Rhode Island Democrat who heads the Foreign Relations Committee, denounced Iran's threats against the novel's author, Salman Rushdie, and others who published or sold the work.
 
'Act of International Terrorism'
Senator Leahy called the death threats against Mr. Rushdie ''an act of international terrorism'' and urged President Bush to protest the action to the United Nations.
Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican who specializes in terrorism issues on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said that any Iranian-directed action against the novel in the United States ''could well fall into the category of an act of war.''
Mr. Specter called the threats against Mr. Rushdie and others ''open, brazen aggrandizement'' which he said can not be tolerated.
Nevertheless, booksellers and law-enforcement officials said today that they knew of no actual acts of violence in the United States against anyone involved with selling or promoting Mr. Rushdie's book.
Two major bookstore chains, B. Dalton and Waldenbooks, removed the novel from their shelves this week after an unknown number of individual store managers reported receiving threats. B. Dalton, which also owns the Barnes & Noble chain, reversed itself today and said it would restock the novel. Officials of both chains declined in interviews to describe the number of type of threats, but they appear to have been referred to local authorities rather than to Federal investigators.
 
Threats Against Publisher
The most serious threats of violence in the United States appear to be directed against Viking Penguin, Mr. Rushdie's publisher. Those warnings began in December and remain under investigation by the New York City police and the F.B.I.'s New York office.
Both declined to state today whether those inquiries are making progress.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Ricks said that the F.B.I. regards all the threats investigated so far as criminal matters and not incidents of international terrorism.
The bureau has authority over all terrorism matters, as well as many extortion incidents and all threats of violence delivered through the mails or across state lines.
''We do not see as of yet any organized activity by groups'' in connection with the threats, Mr. Ricks said. ''That's not to say that if it is learned subsequently that organized groups are involved and have direct links to Iranian groups or other terrorists, that we would not change the focus of the investigation.''
Besides Waldenbooks and B. Dalton, Ms. Curwen said today, only two retailers have reported receiving threats or protests about the Rushdie book to the booksellers' association.
 
Portland Bomb Threats
One, Powell's Books in Portland, Ore., received five telephoned bomb threats in the week that ended on Friday and reported the indicdents to local police, the store's owner, Michael Powell, said in a telephone interview today. Most of the threats were delivered by women, he said.
An F.B.I. spokesman in Portland, David Miller, said that the bureau is not investigating the matter.
Mr. Powell said he has been assured by police that the likelihood of violence was minute, but that he remained concerned. ''I've never been threatened by the Ayatollah,'' he said.
In Chicago, the 17-store Kroch's & Brentano's chain has received both polite objections from delegations of local Muslim leaders and anonymous ''crank calls with curse words and threats,'' said Bill Rickman, the chain's president.
''We have asked our security force to stay in touch with the local police, but we dont feel particularly under siege,'' Mr. Rickman said.


End of Document