F.B.I. DIRECTOR SEES NO EVIDENCE SOVIET FOSTERS TERRORISM IN U.S.
The New York Times
April 27, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 582 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 26
Body


William H. Webster, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said today that there was ''no real evidence'' to suggest that the Soviet Union was sponsoring or instigating terrorist activity in the United States.
''I cannot speak about activities abroad,'' Mr. Webster said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.'' ''But I can say that there is no real evidence of Soviet-sponsored terrorism within the United States.''
FBI director sees no evidence Soviet fosters terrorism in US
Mr. Webster said that some terrorist groups in this country, such as the Croatian nationalists seeking independence for their homeland in Yugoslavia, emanated from Communist countries in Eastern Europe.  ''But within the United States,'' he added, ''we seem at this point to be free of direct, deliberate Soviet domination or control or instigation of terrorist activity.''
Administration officials have repeatedly said the Russians encouraged terrorist activities abroad, and the perceived threat of politically inspired violence in this country has sometimes been cited as a reason for relaxing Justice Department restraints on the use of surveillance and infiltration for investigation.
 
Not Protesting Guidelines
Mr. Webster said the Justice Department guidelines were not hamstringing the bureau. Indeed, he said, there would be ''a storm of protest within the bureau'' if the President did away with them.
Without being specific, he said that ''pieces'' of the guidelines could be improved and that the bureau was making suggestions in that respect.
Mr. Webster also said that bureau members almost uniformly felt ''relief and appreciation'' when President Reagan pardoned two former top-level officials of the agency, W. Mark Felt and Edward S.  Miller, who had been convicted of conspiring to violate constitutional rights of citizens. Mr. Webster said there was no reason to believe the pardons would encourage agents to think they were above the law.
Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller authorized agents to break into homes in search of antiwar radicals suspected of setting off bombs in the early 1970's. Mr. Webster said that ''we're operating in a different milieu today'' and that agents understood ''today's values, today's requirements with respect to privacy.''
He said the number of bombings recorded in the United States had declined from 100 in 1977 to 52 in 1978, 42 in 1979 and 20 in 1980.  But he said that more of the bombings seemed to be ''directed against human beings,'' indicating ''less regard for human life.''
 
Bureau Clarifies Remark
In the interview, Mr. Webster said there were indications of Soviet participation in terrorist activity in terms of supplying weapons and ''even several years ago some indication of training.''
But a bureau spokesman said later that the Director was referring to activities outside the United States.  Mr. Webster declined to take a position for or against strict gun control legislation, saying existing laws should be more vigorously enforced. He cited laws against carrying a concealed weapon and forbidding the possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.
The question of gun control, he said, ''needs to be addressed coolly, with sensible data, and not in the atmosphere of a Presidential assassination attempt.''
The Director was unable to report any progress in the search for the person or persons who killed 25 young blacks in Atlanta. He said he had not authorized the remarks by an agent who said four of the victims had been killed by their parents.


End of Document