F.B.I. CHIEF BACKS INFORMATION CURB
The New York Times
November 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 775 words
Byline: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12
Body


William H. Webster, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said today that details of the bureau's investigations into foreign counterintelligence, organized crime and terrorism should be released only to members of Congress and not to the public.
Testifying before a Senate Judiciary subcommittee on the sixth day of hearings on revision of the Freedom of Information Act, Mr.  Webster said the F.B.I.'s information in the three areas should be placed beyond the reach of the act, which permits the public to request documents detailing Government activities.
The Reagan Administration submitted a proposal to Congress last month that would permit the Attorney General to keep secret selected information on those areas. His decision, however, would be subject to court appeal.
Director of FBI, William H Webster, believes that details of investigations into certain international issues should be released to Congress, not public'They Are Vulnerable'
''Most of our foreign counterintelligence, organized crime and terrorism investigations are detailed and extensive,'' said Mr.  Webster. ''As a result, they are more vulnerable to analysis by those who have something to gain from trying to identify sources and to ascertain the scope and limitations of our efforts. Groups of individuals are free to pool our releases and subject them to detailed analysis.''
Mr. Webster said that information released under the act might be put to use by criminals or foreign agents. He said, however, that the bureau did not know whether 60,000 pages of its documents provided to a West Coast lawyer representing clients connected with the Weather Underground group assisted those involved in the recent deaths of two police officers and a Brink's guard in a robbery in Nyack, N.Y.
''We do know two of those apprehended had received documents and were suing us under F.O.I.A. for more information,'' he said.
 
Documents to Miss Chesimard
Mr. Webster said that the act, as written, permitted foreign agents and criminals to obtain a blueprint of the bureau's investigative techniques. He added that 1,700 pages of documents obtained by Joanne Chesimard, who was convicted in 1977 of the murder of a New Jersey State Trooper, Werner Foerster, may have helped her elude the authorities since she escaped Nov. 2, 1979 from the Clinton Correctional Institute for Women in New Jersey.
The act permits the F.B.I. and other law enforcement agencies to withhold reportrs of informers, but other information must be released unless it would identify a source. ''It is our task to review thousands of pages line by line, word by word, to determine what information, if released, would identify a source,'' said Mr.  Webster. ''There is no litmus paper test. We have to make the decision, and in making that judgment we do not know, cannot know and have no way of knowing what the recipients of our releases already know.''
In an appearance before the subcommittee nearly two months ago, William J. Casey, the director Central Intelligence, urged that intelligence agencies be granted ''total exclusion'' from the act.  No such proposal has reached Capitol Hill yet, but the Administration expects to submit one.
 
Press Representatives Object
Representatives of several press groups contested the contentions of bureau officials that the act discourages potential sources from sharing information with the F.B.I. or that it endangers the lives of informants.
''The longer we listen to the F.B.I. about the need for changes in the law enforcement exemption, the more we are persuaded that the bureau is simply crying 'wolf,' '' said Jean Otto, editor of the oped page of The Milwaukee Journal and a representative of the Society of Professional Journalists, Sigma Delta Chi. ''Every time the bureau tries to prove that law enforcement has been damaged by the F.O.I.A., the claim collapses.''
She said the group plans to file a request under the act tomorrow to determine the nature and extent of promotional materials the F.B.I. has distributed to persuade Capitol Hill that the act makes it easier to identify informants.
Edward Cony, vice president for news for the Dow-Jones Publishing Company and a representative of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, said the act ''over-protects the F.B.I. and other Federal law enforcement agencies.''
Ernie Ford, managing editor of KSL-TV News in Salt Lake City added: ''Journalists, at least in our state, live and die in most cases by the public record. And by extension, so does the public. The public record is our tool to tell the public what is going on in Government - whether the Government wants anyone to know it or not.''


End of Document