F.B.I. Sought 'Terrorism' in the Wrong Place
The New York Times
February 22, 1988, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 391 words
Body


To the Editor:
I find it ironic that according to Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, the investigation involving 237 United States organizations that were working for peace in Central America was justified because the Federal Bureau of Investigation had ''reason to believe that Cispes'' - the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador - ''was engaged in international terrorism or supported known terrorist elements'' (news story, Feb. 4).
Most Americans had probably never before heard of Cispes or many of the other peace groups that were investigated by the F.B.I. for their links to terrorism. Although I am not familiar with the entire list, I am the director of one of the organizations investigated by F.B.I. agents in three regional offices and am familiar with most of the other organizations on the list obtained by the Center for Constitutional Rights through a Freedom of Information Act suit.
I find the official rationale for this investigation highly inconsistent with the character of these organizations as I know them. The Fellowship of Reconciliation, for which I work, is a 74-year-old interreligious pacifist organization that has worked since World War I against war, terrorism and all other acts of violence.
Our work in Central America has consisted mainly of taking two delegations from the North American religious community every year to visit several of the countries of Central America to meet with local church officials, foreign relief or development workers, government officials and human rights activists. Our only link with terrorists has been when we have come to the aid of their victims, as when we assisted the Rev. Amancio Sanchez, a Nicaraguan Pentecostal pastor, and Elda, his 7-year-old daughter, to come to an Atlanta hospital, where they were treated and fitted with artificial legs. Mr. Sanchez and his daughter had lost their legs when the civilian truck in which they were traveling struck an American mine placed in the road by the United States-supported contras.
If the Federal Bureau of Investigation was seriously looking for people who were supporting ''known terrorist elements,'' it would not have had to go far from its Washington headquarters to find what it was looking for.
 
C. DOUGLAS HOSTETTER
Executive Secretary
Fellowship of Reconciliation
  Nyack, N.Y., Feb. 7, 1988


End of Document