F.B.I. DIRECTOR SAYS INCIDENTS OF TERRORISM ARE ON INCREASE
The New York Times
December 30, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 376 words
Byline: UPI
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 29
Body


William H. Webster, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, voicing concern over terrorist activities in Puerto Rico, said today that the nationwide total of terrorist acts jumped almost 50 percent in 1981, to 42.
Mr. Webster said that after a four-year decline, there were 13 more incidents this year than in 1980, but that the total was still lower than the 111 cases listed for 1977.
The reason for the increase still is being analyzed by the bureau, he said.  ''Most of the terrorist activities, with the exception of Puerto Rico, have to do with people in the United States with causes that don't involve the United States,'' Mr. Webster said in a year-end news conference at the headquarters of the agency.
Federal Bureau of Investigation director William Webster reports that terrorist acts in Puerto Rico increased 50% in 1981
Mr. Webster noted the activity of groups opposing President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, of groups opposed to President Fidel Castro of Cuba and of Armenians. He expressed particular concern over the activities in Puerto Rico of groups seeking independence from the United States.
 
He Lists Recent Years' Totals
There were 69 acts of terrorism in 1978, he said, 52 in 1979 and 29 in 1980, including 11 in Puerto Rico. He said the subtotal for Puerto Rico in 1981 was not available.
The director said there had been ''extensive activities'' among Puerto Rican independence groups in San Juan. ''I expect to see that continuing,'' he said.
When asked whether Cubans had infiltrated Puerto Rican independence groups, Mr. Webster replied that a number of incidents in Puerto Rico ''suggest various types of support.''
The island is ''economically vulnerable'' and provides an opportunity for recruitment ''specifically by hostile intelligence agents,'' he said.
Mr. Webster said that the $1.6 million Brink's robbery in Rockland County, N.Y., that led to the arrest of Katherine Boudin, a fugitive, was being investigated as a bank robbery and not as an act of terrorism at this time.
Mr. Webster declined to comment on the kidnapping of Brig. Gen.  James L. Dozier in Italy last week, saying the case was too sensitive to talk about. He also declined to say whether his agency was involved in any aspect of the case.


End of Document