F.B.I. SHELVES PLAN TO EXPAND ITS COMPUTER FILES
The New York Times
April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 603 words
Byline: By DAVID BURNHAM
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 28
Body


The Federal Bureau of Investigation has shelved a proposal that would have expanded its national computerized files to include information about people who are considered suspicious but not wanted for crimes.
 Instead, the possible expansion of the bureau's National Crime Information Center will be delayed pending the conclusions of a broad new study of one of the Government's largest communication systems. That survey will recommend which services the system should be offering to Federal, state and local criminal justice systems in the year 2000.
The information center links about 64,000 Federal, state and local justice agencies.
The apparent effect of the F.B.I. decision was to sidetrack a computer proposal that had gathered considerable support among some law-enforcement officials at all levels of government.
 
Study May Take Two Years
Kier T. Boyd, a senior official in the F.B.I.'s technical services division, said in a recent interview that the bureau hoped to sign a contract by the end of September to carry out the study and that he expected it would require 18 months to two years to complete.  ''We want to take a look at the social and privacy impacts of the N.C.I.C,'' Mr. Boyd said.
The study will also examine the adequacy of the system's security arrangements and the complex question of how it can guarantee the accuracy of the information it transmits.
A major role of the current system is to tell police officers on an almost instantaneous basis whether a particular car has been reported stolen anyhere in the United States and whether an individual held by the police in one state has been named in an arrest warrant in any other state.
Under the proposal put forward for consideration last October by the information center's Advisory Board, the system would have been expanded to include information on whether a police agency believed an individual was involved in organized crime, terrorism or narcotics, or was a ''known associate'' of a drug trafficker.
 
Director's Serious Reservations
When asked about this unannounced proposal last December, the executive asssistant director of the bureau, Lee Colwell, declined to indicate how thebureau's top leadership viewed the suggested expansion. While William H. Webster, Director of the bureau, has not said publicly whether he wants the project to go forward, he has indicated that he has serious reservations about it.
In testimony before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism on March 14, for example, Mr. Webster said he did not believe ''that the mere capability is a justification in itself for putting names and facts into a massive computer file.''
''It is better, I think, if it is public source material that is merely made more readily available to law enforcement authorities,'' he said.
Mr. Webster, a former Federal judge, added: ''I think we have to look very closely at information where somebody says, 'Well, he pals around with the wrong kinds of people.' That kind of file will cause us a lot of mischief and undercut the enormous, I say that again, the enormous service that the N.C.I.C. system is providing to state and local law enforcement throughout the country.''
Mr. Boyd said that once the study of local, state and Federal needs had been completed, ''We will then move to the second phase of actually designing a new computerized information network.''
He noted that the current N.C.I.C. system had been designed in 1967, long before Congress passed the Privacy Act of 1974. ''We have plugged in a lot of retroactice changes but you can go on modifying a big system like the N.C.I.C for only so long.''


End of Document