Face-to-face; Pakistani leader facing uphill battle on drone strikes
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 27, 2013, Sunday


Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1C
Length: 916 words
Byline: Yaqoob Malik
Body


Yaqoob Malik is in Charleston as part of a U.S.-Pakistan partnership program arranged by the International Center for Journalists, in Washington, D.C.
During their recent meeting in Washington, Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and U.S. President Obama wore nearly matching dark suits and blue ties, but on the issue of drone strikes inside Pakistan, there was a definite difference of opinion.
Sharif has emphasized the need to end U.S. drone strikes in Pakistan's tribal areas, but the media and political analysts acknowledge that Sharif faces an uphill battle.
Pakistani people and mainstream political parties have serious reservations about the strikes and believe they violate the country's sovereignty.
Last month, Sharif spoke out against the strikes in his address to the United Nations General Assembly, arguing that the civilian casualties from the strikes undercuts Pakistan's "resolve and efforts to eliminate extremism and terrorism from Pakistan."
U.S. officials have said they are reducing the drone strikes, but are not ending their use.
"We want to find ways for our two countries to cooperate even as we have differences on some issues," White House Press Secretary Jay Carney told the press.
So, the drone attacks are not likely to stop on account of any reservation of Sharif, especially considering the report that appeared in The Washington Post while the delegation was in town, and which stated there is strong evidence that the drone activity had the Pakistan government's previous approval.
Besides the controversial drone issue, the first face-to-face meeting of the two leaders in the Oval Office last week was said to be overall positive. Both sides discussed the U.S. troop withdrawal in 2014 from Afghanistan and stressed cooperation.
"We believe that if Pakistan is secure and peaceful and prosperous, that is not only good for Pakistan, it is good for the region and it is good for the world," Obama said.
Obama acknowledged that it was a challenge for both the nations to strengthen cooperation on counterterrorism and also agreed to cooperate in maintaining Pakistan's sovereignty.
Obama's administration also welcomed Sharif by releasing $1.6 billion in aid - mostly for the military - that had been frozen because of past disputes - especially the high tensions over the 2011 raid that killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad.
Such statements and steps on the part of the U.S. is very supportive for Pakistan in the time when it is also worried about the serious crises and security threats due to the prevailing war against terrorism. Especially in the face of an abrupt U.S. troop withdrawal in 2014 from Afghanistan, as it could create further security threats and unseen problems for Pakistan's government - besides fear of a further influx of Afghan refugees.
According to the UN refugee agency, Pakistan hosts more than 1.6 million registered Afghans since the aggression of the USSR in 1990, the largest and most protracted refugee population in the world.
After the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan after their defeat, Pakistan was left behind, isolated and alone, like collateral damage. It's the reason the troop withdrawal issue was high on the agenda of the Sharif/Obama meeting.
Sharif was elected prime minister in June in a historic election that marked Pakistan's first civilian transfer of power after the completion of a full term by a democratically elected government. The U.S. government hailed the peaceful transition of one democratically elected government to another as an enormous milestone for Pakistan.
Now pro-democratic wings believe that democracy is finally taking root in Pakistan, and Sharif is the most experienced politician who has held high office of state in Pakistan, and as such he can recall the mistakes of the past, including relations with its neighboring countries Afghanistan and India.
The main hurdle in maintaining good-neighbor relations is the longstanding dispute with India over Kashmir. There was some inside talk that Sharif advisers had advised him to ask Obama for help in solving the Kashmir dispute. But before the meeting, U.S. officials made it clear that India and Pakistan should settle this matter, lowering the hopes that Sharif would be able to gain any extraordinary support from the U.S. on this matter.
The others issues and challenges that were discussed in the meeting included Pakistani priorities of boosting the economy, developing energy resources, promoting education, and combating extremist and terrorism activities.
The fragile economic situation in Pakistan is illustrated by the rapid decline of the Pak-rupee against the dollar. The rupee exchange is now about 106 to 107 to a U.S. dollar, causing inflation and price hikes besides bearing extra financial burden in the return of foreign loans.
The U.S. government is in a position to play an important and effective role in the future of Pakistan. Because, naturally, clapping needs two hands.
Pakistan is deserving of such support, as it has been targeted after extending its cooperation to the U.S. in the war against terrorism. As a result, hundreds of its innocent citizens, and defense and law enforcement personnel were either killed or injured in subsequent terrorism attacks, which also caused serious setbacks to law and order and the country's economic situation.
AP photo
President Obama talks with Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif during their meeting in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington on Wednesday.

Load-Date: October 28, 2013


End of Document