FACING A HORNET'S NEST OF TERRORISM / THE UNITED STATES CONFRONTS A DIFFERENT / KIND OF ENEMY. IS IT READY FOR THE LONG HAUL?
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 23, 1998 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. E03
Length: 983 words
Byline: Richard Parker, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


By unleashing cruise missiles at Osama bin Laden, the United States has crossed a threshold: committing itself to a long struggle against a shadowy new enemy.
The United States has long waged a struggle against state-sponsored terrorism, but it has little experience with the stateless terrorism that authorities say bin Laden finances. That movement is characterized by antagonists who move independently of any single government, are intensely ideological, and are very willing to create mass casualties.
Waging a protracted campaign against such an organization - as the Clinton administration has vowed - will require a concerted political, intelligence and military campaign, say military and intelligence officials and experts.
It means finding and identifying members of bin Laden's organization and arresting them or attacking them militarily, all the while strangling the organization financially and dividing it politically.
Though U.S. military leaders are experienced in fighting terrorism, they are caught in an awkward moment: They are short of old-fashioned spies and not yet tested in a wide-ranging offensive against this brand of terrorism.
Bin Laden's Al Qai'da, the largest Sunni Muslim terrorist organization in the world, is vast and complex. Its leaders head other terrorist groups and support Muslim fighters in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Chechnya and Kosovo.
In confronting it, U.S. intelligence and military forces are only partly prepared. The nation's 13 spy agencies are believed to rely heavily on satellites, which work well intercepting phone conversations or spotting troop movements but are ill-suited for penetrating opaque organizations such as bin Laden's.
"We are in the middle of a debate on how best to allocate resources; how to shift from militaries to civil breakdown; how much to spend on technology, and how much to spend on time-honored efforts," said Rep. Porter J. Goss (R., Fla.), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. "There is a lot of enigma in human intelligence. But it's not something for which you just push a button and get overnight."
In 1995, the CIA began to put more officers in the field and recruit foreign agents. But intelligence officials privately said that even those efforts might be lacking. Only a couple of dozen officers speak Arabic well, and fewer speak Pashtu or Dari, the main languages in Afghanistan, these officials said.
Indeed, the United States may be years from effectively penetrating terrorist organizations with human spies, said Frank Cilluffo, a former aide to the Senate Intelligence Committee and a terrorism expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
"But we need more than just one approach. We need in this situation a synergistic approach," said Cilluffo. He thinks the administration must plan a combination of overt military attacks; a campaign to seize bin Laden's personal finances, believed close to $300 million; and a covert effort to divide his organization against itself.
"It's not a strike for a strike, like an eye for an eye. It's got to be multitiered, and it's got to be ambiguous," Cilluffo said.
So far, the military campaign against bin Laden has been extraordinarily secretive. In the last military reprisal for a terrorist attack, the 1986 bombing of a Berlin disco that killed nine American soldiers, the Reagan administration responded with an air raid on Libya. But in Thursday's attacks, military officials withheld nearly all details.
Secrecy is the hallmark of the military leaders who were most closely involved in planning the operation. Only a few senior officers and Defense Secretary William S. Cohen knew of the missile strike in advance, according to military officials.
"We are trying to preserve a certain edge here, to keep them in the dark as long as we can," said a military official. "It may give us an edge, at least for a little while."
Two officers figured most in Thursday's attacks. One is Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who most recently commanded the 40,000 troops of the U.S. Special Forces command. Before that, he served as the commander of joint special operations, including elite counter-terror units such as the Army's Delta Force and the Navy's Seal Team Six.
His impact on the country's most elite troops was to make them more secretive and invisible to the public than his predecessors had, according to military officials familiar with his tenure.
The second is Marine Gen. Anthony Zinni, commander of the 20,000 U.S. personnel in the Middle East, a leading strategist in unconventional warfare.
In the past, even elite units are believed to have been used mainly to prevent attacks. A recent Defense Department study of the military's ability to combat terrorists operating among several countries found that even with the creation of new units, the military was still stretched thin and "especially vulnerable" in certain areas, such as biological attacks.
The study's authors, who are outside advisers to Cohen, recommended a clearer definition of the military's role in combating such terrorists and urged that President Clinton strengthen international support for countering them.
Yet any offensive campaign carries the risk of casualties. On Friday, for the first time since the 1991 Persian Gulf war, black-clad security police appeared on Pentagon steps in bulletproof vests, openly displaying automatic weapons. Other agencies urged law enforcement to be on the alert for possible attacks.
The hallmark of terrorists is an emphasis on greater numbers of casualties: The World Trade Center bombers in 1993 planned to kill 250,000 people, according to the Pentagon study.
"We have stirred the hornet's nest, and the hornet's going to want to sting us," said Goss, the House intelligence chairman. "We have no choice now but to go after them in both the short and the long term. We've got to grind this one out."

Graphic

 
CHART

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document