FACING FEAR; THE PROPER RESPONSE TO TERRORISM IS TO CARRY ON
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 24, 2016 Saturday
WEB EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. WEB ONLY
Length: 376 words
Body


With the car attack in Berlin fresh in mind and Australia's announcement that it had thwarted a Christmas terrorist plot, it makes sense to ask:How should Americans respond to terror? We live in an age of it, and it seems unlikely that it will abate any time soon.
In truth, terror - a surprise attack on, and execution of, innocents in order to destabilize a great power - has been with us as a political force since the beginning of recorded history.
How should America cope?
Only a fool would presume to know the full answer.But it is possible to say what the nation should not do:
* The U.S. government should not engage in impulsive or knee-jerk reaction.
That is, America should not do as the Ohio Legislature did earlier this month by passing a law that essentially endorses the idea of arming college kids. The law -following the Nov. 28 attack on the Ohio State University campus by Abdul Razak Ali Artan, who rammed his car into a group of bystanders and then got out and began swinging a knife at passers-by -gives public colleges and universities the option of allowing people to carry concealed guns on campus.
Leaders in Washington should not rush to war, as they did after 9/11 - seeking to punish someone because they could.Nor should they abridge civil liberties on the premise that an enhanced national security state will deter all threats.
* But neither should the United States act like a helpless giant.
America has the CIA, the Navy SEALs and other military and intelligence elites. We can track bad guys who hurt our families and countrymen and catch them and punish them. We need to be patient and stay with it, as Barack Obama and his team did in pursuing Osama bin Laden.
Patience pays.
* The nation should not become desensitized.
Assassination and terrorist deaths cannot become the new normal. Americans never should cease to be outraged or to cry out for justice.
* But the United States cannot be rattled.
Americans must be stoic and carry on. We must live our lives, travel and continue to engage with the world and, as a nation, take our stand, based on our founding principles and national interests.
But, chiefly, we cannot let terror terrorize us. As Franklin Delano Roosevelt said, the true enemy is fear itself. Therefore, we face it.

Load-Date: December 27, 2016


End of Document