Facts Leave No Doubt Al-Arian Abetted Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 25, 2002, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 839 words
Body


University of South Florida President Judy Genshaft has said repeatedly that she is intent on dismissing computer science Professor Sami Al-Arian, and buoyed by a clever team of lawyers, she approved a legal strategy that took both her critics and admirers by surprise.
Instead of firing Al-Arian outright, USF filed a lawsuit in Hillsborough Circuit Court asking a judge to decide whether the university can discharge the tenured professor without violating his constitutional rights. With the matter in court, the burden of the decision passes to Hillsborough Circuit Judge Vivian Maye and takes Genshaft off the hook - for now.
Within the next three weeks, Al-Arian must respond, and he will most likely move to dismiss the lawsuit or remove it to federal court. If the strategy was designed to placate the academic groups, it has failed. Duke University law Professor William W. Van Alstyne, who led an investigation into the Al-Arian matter for the American Association of University Professors, called the expanded allegations in the lawsuit "uniquely inappropriate and totally gratuitous."
But filing the complaint serves the purpose of taking the heat off Genshaft for the moment and extending indefinitely Al-Arian's time off campus.
Genshaft has been under considerable pressure since last September, when Al-Arian's appearance on a national talk show gave new life to the longstanding controversies that have plagued the university and him. USF's trustees recommended Genshaft fire the professor, while faculty unions fought the dismissal.
Ultimately, she sided with the trustees. She maintains that Al-Arian's actions outside the university have disrupted and continue to disrupt USF's educational and research missions in violation of the school's collective bargaining agreement with the faculty union.
Al-Arian, meanwhile, has inspired the supportive ire of fellow academics throughout the country with his contention that his job is threatened because of his politics and religion. The American Association of University Professors served notice that USF has not made the case for Al-Arian's discharge and threatened to censure the university if he is fired. A censure would damage the university's reputation and impact faculty hiring and retention.
The university makes the more compelling case. Al-Arian's outside activities have continually disrupted the campus, compromised its security and caused him to neglect his academic duties. He has been on paid leave more than 15 percent of the time he has been at USF because of turmoil caused by his political campaigns.
Al-Arian says he abhors terrorism, but his ties to people and organizations that sponsor terrorist activities are unmistakable. Tribune reporter Michael Fechter has documented that the professor oversaw nonprofit groups that raised money in the name of the Islamic Jihad and Hamas.
Al-Arian was introduced at a 1991 Cleveland rally as head of "the active arm of the Islamic Jihad Movement in Palestine." At the same rally, the speaker said, "Donate to the Islamic Jihad. Nidal Zalooum from the Islamic Jihad held a dagger and stabbed four of the Jews in the courtyard of Al-Haram Al Qudsi. … For the Intifadah, for the Islamic Jihad, I say it frankly for the Islamic Jihad. … If you write a check, write for the Islamic Committee for Palestine, I.C.P."
The Islamic Committee for Palestine was a "charitable" organization run by Al-Arian that sponsored conferences around the country at which a number of Middle East radicals appeared, including Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, who was convicted in the first World Trade Center bombing.
Also in 1991, Al-Arian recruited Ramadan Abdullah Shallah to run the World and Islam Studies Enterprises, a think tank he founded that worked with faculty at USF. After Shallah left WISE, he became head of the Islamic Jihad.
Fundraising For Suicide Bombers
In 1995, 10 days after a double suicide bombing by the Islamic Jihad in Israel that killed 18 people, Al-Arian wrote a fundraising letter that referred to "two mujahidin martyred for the sake of God" and requested donations "so that operations such as these can continue."
Current and former senior Israeli intelligence officials have described Al-Arian as having been a founding member of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad's governing council. And a few weeks ago Vincent Cannistraro, once the CIA's chief of counterterrorism and analysis and one of Al-Arian's most prominent advocates, described the professor as one of Jihad's "intellectual organizers."
Tampa's former U.S. attorney said earlier this year that Al-Arian remains under investigation, and last month The New York Times reported the case is focused on at least $650,000 sent overseas by Al-Arian and his associates in the late 1980s and 1990s.
Al-Arian is quick to point out that he has never been charged with a crime, but his insistence that he has been "cleared" is disingenuous. Enough is known about his activities to lend credence to the university's view that he has aided and abetted international terrorism.

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: August 27, 2002


End of Document