Fading populism
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
June 13, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 524 words
Byline: Peter Beinart
Body


These are tough times to be a Republican. An unpopular president, an unpopular war and a trio of ideologically impure 2008 front-runners have left the party in a funk. And running through it all is one debilitating weakness: The GOP no longer has a unifying populist cause. 
But the right's very success -- the beachheads it established inside the Beltway in the 1980s and 1990s -- undermined its insurgent credentials. As the judiciary and bureaucracy moved right, taking harder lines on welfare and crime, they became less attractive targets for right-wing rage. 
And in 1992 and 1996, Pat Buchanan took right-wing populism in a subversive new direction, replacing hostility toward the government elite with hostility toward the corporate elite.  
In 2000, John McCain launched a crusade against K Street, the financial bedrock of the GOP, and came within inches of claiming the Republican nomination. All of a sudden populism was no longer conservatism's weapon against the American left but a dagger facing inward, threatening the GOP itself. 
For a time after Sept. 11, 2001, George W. Bush solved the problem. Regardless of their views on corporate power, conservatives rallied to his war on terrorism. And in framing America's new foreign policy debate, the president skillfully employed populist themes.  
Republican presidential hopefuls would love to revive Bush's formula. But it has collapsed. After America invaded Iraq, the absence of weapons of mass destruction forced Bush to shift his rationale for the war. The entire subject of terrorism has receded in the absence of another attack on U.S. soil. And with public fear declining, Americans are less willing to sacrifice civil liberties in national security's name.  
Thus, another key element of post-Sept. 11 conservative populism has withered. But conservative populism is not dead. The right-wing base is turning -- as it did in the 1990s -- against corporations.  
The first sign came in February 2006 when the Bush administration provoked a populist hailstorm by supporting a Dubai company's plans to manage six U.S. ports. The political backlash -- stoked not merely by Democrats but also by conservative commentators such as Sean Hannity -- combined distrust of foreigners and corporate elites. And in this way, it presaged the current, much bigger, conservative revolt on immigration. 
In the past two years, with Iraq going south, immigration has become the hottest issue among conservative activists. But unlike terrorism, it is a doubled-edged sword, wielded against pro-immigration Democrats but also against the pro-immigration corporate right, which largely funds the GOP. 
Already, polls show a distinct passion gap in 2008, with Republicans far less excited than Democrats about their candidates. The GOP badly needs a cause that can mobilize its base. At key moments over the past 60 years, hostility toward cultural and political elites has done that. But today, with the culture war at a low ebb and the Iraq war a national disaster, the elites with whom Republicans seem most enraged are their own. 
Peter Beinart is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. 

Load-Date: June 13, 2007


End of Document