Fair or Foul?
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 7, 2013 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 372 words
Byline: Tony Messenger Kevin Horrigan
Body


FOUL: For more than 15 years as attorney general, Jay Nixon paid lip service to the idea of enforcing the Sunshine Law, giving the state's most important public accountability law attention mostly when it served his political purposes. So it's interesting that as he begins his second term as governor, he wants lawmakers to reinstate an expiring exemption to the law rather than close its numerous loopholes.
Mr. Nixon came to St. Louis on Friday to bring attention to a provision first enacted after the terrorism attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, which allows schools, courthouses, hospitals and other government agencies to withhold from the public certain documents, videos, or other records which might disclose to terrorists key security information. It's not a bad idea, but perhaps the governor could acknowledge the "terrorist exemption" has been abused. To his benefit.
In 2009, then Springfield News-Leader reporter Chad Livengood filed a Sunshine Law request to see the video from the cameras trained outside the governor's office. He wanted to see if there had been any meetings between the governor and the then-embattled deputy director of the Department of Natural Resources. The DNR had failed to close a beach at Lake of the Ozarks despite elevated levels of E. coli bacteria. The bacteria-in-the-lake incident embarrassed the governor and his staff.
The Capitol police, citing the terrorism section of Sunshine Law, denied the request.
That gets us thinking. Now that the exemption expired, maybe it's a good time to ask for the video from the camera trained on Rush Limbaugh's bust in the Capitol rotunda. - Tony Messenger
FAIR: Congratulations to the St. Louis Symphony and its music director, David Robertson, for reaching agreement on a contract extension that will keep Mr. Robertson on the Powell Hall podium through the 2015-2016 season. In his field, Mr. Robertson is a star of the same magnitude as Albert Pujols and Jeff Fisher are in theirs. The orchestra has reached new artistic heights under his baton, as well as new audiences and widespread critical acclaim. With the orchestra's musicians having reached a new labor agreement, there is assurance of great music in St. Louis for years to come. - Kevin Horrigan

Load-Date: January 7, 2013


End of Document