Faith and fear in the war on terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 12, 2006 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B9
Length: 1197 words
Byline: ERIC MINK
Body


The U.S. Supreme Court's most recent slap-down of Bush administration policies turned on issues of legal structure and procedure, accountability and authority. But the true heart of the Hamdan v. Rumsfeld decision beats in rhythm with things much more human: faith and fear.
According to the controlling 5-3 decision, the system of military commissions concocted by the Bush administration after 9/11 to handle alleged terrorists like Salim Ahmed Hamdan is, in a word, illegal. It violates provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, which was passed by Congress in 1950 and signed into law on May 31, 1951. It also violates the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, which were ratified by the United States on August 2, 1955, and are thus "binding law," as Justice John Paul Stevens wrote.
But even this willful lawlessness -- the UCMJ provides for exceptions to its rules, but the court noted that the administration did not bother offering reasons why its plan should qualify for the exceptions -- betrays even more ominous defects: The Bush administration lacks fundamental faith in the American system of government and justice, and it fears that our system is too weak to combat the threat of international terrorism.
So in the weeks after 9/11, administration lawyers avoided seeking new laws from Congress and, instead, cobbled together an illegal system that was approved by President George W. Bush. The latest Supreme Court decision (along with two earlier landmark decisions in 2004) tells the administration it is not allowed to do that in America -- war or no war, fear or no fear.
The authority asserted by Bush, Cheney and others since 9/11 has been breathtaking in its sweep. They have claimed the power to imprison people, citizens and non-citizens alike, for unlimited periods of time and hold them beyond the reach of courts. They have denied people the right to a lawyer, the right to be charged with a crime, the right to a trial, the right to confront their accusers and the right to know and challenge the evidence against them.
In one case, they snatched an American civilian from American soil, threw him in a military prison and kept him in solitary confinement for three years without filing charges against him. Once he finally got legal representation and his case made its way to the Supreme Court, the administration shifted gears and filed vague criminal charges that bore no resemblance to the accusations made when he first was grabbed. Weeks later, it transferred him to a civilian prison.
Another American was seized by a warlord faction in Afghanistan in 2001 and turned over to American military forces in return for a reported $50,000 bounty. He was kept in military prisons for three years with no charges filed against him. In June 2004, the Supreme Court ordered the administration to allow him to challenge his imprisonment. Less than four months later, with that challenge about to be considered in federal court, the administration suddenly released and deported to Saudi Arabia a man it had described as too dangerous even to bring to trial.
In an even broader sense, the administration has proclaimed that a president's power in time of war is unlimited, that the nation is at war and therefore the laws of war apply and that Congress endorsed all this in its Sept. 14, 2001, Authorization for Use of Military Force. In deciding the Hamdan case on June 29, the Supreme Court ruled that Congress did not authorize creation of an illegal system of military commissions and that, in any case, the system Bush came up with violates the very laws of war he cites as justification for it.
None of this was necessary. After 9/11, the experienced corps of lawyers for the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines repeatedly warned the administration's zealous legal team not to chuck the respected system of military justice that is codified in the UCMJ and that honors the requirements of the Geneva Conventions. In the end, the
administration ignored the system, declared the Geneva provisions optional and disregarded the military lawyers.
The fallout from the Hamdan decision is becoming apparent. On Tuesday, the Financial Times (London) reported that the Pentagon last week reversed past Bush orders and issued a directive that Common Article 3 of the Geneva accords, a provision covering humane treatment and legal procedures specifically cited by the Supreme Court, now applies to all prisoners in U.S. military custody.
In preparing its now-discredited system of military commissions, the administration kept plans and details from Condoleezza Rice, then national security adviser, now secretary of state; from Michael Chertoff, then head of the Justice Department's criminal division, now head of the Department of Homeland Security; and from Colin Powell, secretary of state at the time, a combat veteran and a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Had these people and their perspectives been included in the process -- or had congressional approval been sought through legislation -- Bush might have come up with a system that was effective, fair and legal. He got none of those.
More evidence of administration arrogance surfaced over the weekend with the disclosure of a May 18 letter to the president from Michigan Republican Peter Hoekstra, chairman of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and one of the administration's most steadfast supporters. Hoekstra complained that the administration had failed to tell him and his committee about certain ongoing intelligence operations and that that failure could be both "a breach of responsibility" and "a violation of law." Such conduct also strains the credibility of past assurances that the administration has kept Congress properly informed about other dubious intelligence operations.
As if that weren't enough, there's Bush's use of signing statements to disavow his obligation to obey laws and parts of laws passed by Congress. Bush has filed more than 750 such statements in five years, compared with 232 in four years by President H.W. Bush and 140 by President Bill Clinton in eight years, according to an investigation by the Boston Globe. That should make Congress doubly vigilant in any negotiations with the administration about new legislation to address the Supreme Court's rulings.
More than anything else, though, it is essential to recognize the Bush administration's implicit rejection of the bedrock institutions of America -- fair and impartial military and civilian justice systems and three equal branches of government -- as capable of successfully dealing with international terrorism.
Justice Stephen Breyer addressed the matter directly in a concurring opinion in the Hamdan case:
". . . judicial insistence upon that consultation [between the administration and Congress] does not weaken our Nation's ability to deal with danger. To the contrary, that insistence strengthens the Nation's ability to determine -- through democratic means -- how best to do so. The Constitution places its faith in those democratic means. Our Court today simply does the same."
It's long past time for the Bush administration to start having faith in America as well.

Notes

 ERIC MINK OTHER VIEWS 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO -  Attorney Neal Katyal and U.S. Naval Commander Charles Swift, who represent Guantanamo Bay detainee Salim Ahmed Hamdan, after the Supreme Court ruled in their favor on June 29. Joshua Roberts | Getty Images  PHOTO - Salim ahmed Hamdan in an undated file photo AP photo courtesy of prof. Neal Katyal 

Load-Date: July 12, 2006


End of Document