False Choices on Terrorism
The New York Times
April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section 4; ; Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 707 words
Body


As investigation of the Oklahoma City bombing continues, President Clinton and Congress have started a necessary but hazardous debate about revising Federal law and enforcement to combat domestic terrorism. Already, the fine balance between preservation of domestic tranquillity and protection of civil liberties is in jeopardy. Mr. Clinton and many lawmakers appear far too ready to give up liberty to insure safety.
America's history shows how easy it is to suspend liberties in times of trouble. The paranoid streak in American politics is not solely owned by fringe paramilitary organizations and demagogues. The Government itself has turned its powers against innocent citizens again and again in the name of protecting public safety. Not that many years ago agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation harassed Americans opposed to racial segregation and specialized in "black-bag jobs," burglarizing the homes and offices of Americans who opposed the Vietnam War.
 Some liberals like Representative Charles Schumer have unwisely forsaken their traditional allegiance to civil liberties to ride the wave of public revulsion over the bombing. Mr. Schumer and Mr. Clinton support the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995 that, among other things, would permit the Government to deport aliens suspected of terrorist activity on the basis of secret information that could be withheld from defendants.
 Some Congressional conservatives have wisely cautioned against careless and hasty legislating. Louis Freeh, the Director of the F.B.I., courageously told the Senate last week that his agency does not need the relaxation of investigative guidelines that the White House and many in Congress were quick to propose.
 Proposals to give more money and resources to the F.B.I. deserve approval, including Mr. Clinton's plan to add 1,000 new agents, prosecutors and support staff to deal with terrorist threats and acts. Congress should make it illegal to possess stolen explosives and increase the penalty for transferring firearms or explosives used to commit violent crimes. It should criminalize the use of chemical weapons in solid and liquid form (only the gas form is currently covered). Congress should also require manufacturers of fertilizers and other raw materials used in bombs to make their products less combustible and easier to trace.
 Beyond these steps, the Administration's shopping list is filled with unnecessary and unwise provisions dictated more by political expediency than by law-enforcement need. One of the most dangerous is a plan to revise the 1878 Posse Comitatus Act, which prohibits involvement of military forces in domestic law enforcement. The Administration is seeking an exception in terrorist cases involving chemical or biological weapons, arguing that military specialists may be needed to assist in such cases.
 The separation of civil and military police responsibilities is essential to maintaining civil governance in the United States. There is already one exception, allowing military assistance in domestic threats involving nuclear weapons. There need not be others. The military is already free under the 1878 act to provide advice, and the F.B.I. can use some of the $1.5 billion in added spending Mr. Clinton has requested to train its own units to deal with chemical and biological weapons. It is better to instruct law enforcement agents to handle these threats than to open the door to use of military forces unfamiliar with the constitutional rights that govern domestic police work.
 There is also loose talk of expanding electronic surveillance, easing access to credit and travel records, tapping telephone and computer lines, and making it illegal to distribute bomb-making information on computer networks like the Internet. These steps would threaten privacy and free speech. The Government already has the tools it needs to investigate domestic terrorist threats. The way to prevent the making of bombs is to control explosive materials, not computer networks.
 Jamie Gorelick, the Deputy Attorney General, told the Senate, "The choice between civil liberties and a safe society is a false choice." She is right. But so far the Administration and Congress seem perilously close to choosing.

Load-Date: April 30, 1995


End of Document