Families file lawsuit over attacks $100 trillion suit claims groups funded terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 16, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 435 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - Relatives of Sept. 11 victims filed a $ 100 trillion lawsuit against the Sudanese government and Saudi officials, banks and charities, claiming they helped finance Osama bin Laden's network and the terror attacks. 
"It's not the money. We want to do something to get at these people," said Irene Spina, whose daughter, Lisa Trerotola, 38, died in the World Trade Center in New York City. "There's nothing else we can do."
"This is the right thing to do," said Matt Sellito, father of Matthew Carmen Sellito, 23, who also died at the World Trade Center. "If the odds are stacked against us, we will beat them."
The 15-count federal lawsuit seeks to cripple banks, charities and some members of the Saudi royal family as a deterrent to terrorist financing schemes.
The suit was filed Thursday in U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Va., on behalf of some 600 families. It seeks "an amount in excess of $ 100 trillion" and charges the defendants with racketeering, wrongful death, negligence and conspiracy.
Lead attorney Ron Motley said the money likely would come largely from assets held by the defendants in the United States. He said the plaintiffs were after more institutions than those whose assets already have been frozen by the U.S. and other governments.
Another attorney in the case, Allan Gerson, said Friday that one aim of the lawsuit was to choke off the financial support for terrorist networks.
"Until now, sponsoring terrorism has been a cost-free operation," Gerson said on CBS'"The Early Show." He said "we intend to stop that."
The complaint also ignores the Bush administration's delicate diplomatic balancing act with Saudi Arabia by bluntly blaming the kingdom's officials and institutions for the attacks.
"That kingdom sponsors terrorism," Motley told reporters. "This is an insidious group of people."
The complaint names more than seven dozen defendants, including the government of Sudan, seven banks, eight Islamic foundations and three Saudi princes.
Those listed include Prince Mohammed al-Faisal, former intelligence chief Prince Turki al-Faisal, Saudi Defense Minister Prince Sultan, Khalid bin Salim bin Mahfouz of the National Commercial Bank and the Faisal Islamic Bank.
Officials from the Saudi Embassy did not return a call for comment.
President Bush's administration has been careful not to blame the Saudi government for the attacks in its drive build a coalition for its war against terrorism.
Prince Saud al-Faisal, the Saudi foreign minister, said last week that the 70-year-old U.S.-Saudi alliance was as solid now as before the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.

Load-Date: August 17, 2002


End of Document