Family suing U.S. Islamic groups over son's death
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 15, 2000, Monday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 662 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- The parents of an American teenager slain on the West Bank have filed suit in a federal court in Chicago against Islamic groups and charities, claiming they raised money in the United States for Hamas, a radical Islamic group that has carried out dozens of suicide bombings against Israelis.
In an apparently unprecedented move, Stanley and Joyce Boim, former New Yorkers who now live in Jerusalem, invoked the federal anti-terrorism law of 1990 against what their lawsuit describes as Hamas-front organizations and individuals who collected funds in the United States for relief and development on the West Bank and in Gaza.
The Boims seek $600 million in damages in what could be the first effort by individuals to use federal terrorism laws against what the suit calls "a network of front organizations" in the United States that raise money for Islamic causes.
The suit contends the money was channeled to terrorists and some of it was used to pay for the vehicle, machine guns and ammunition used to kill the Boims' son David, a 17-year-old yeshiva student who was gunned down in 1996 waiting with other students at a bus stop in Beit El, on the West Bank.
The Palestinian Authority apprehended Amjad Hinawi and Khalif Tawfiq Al-Sharif in 1997.
Hinawi confessed and was tried and convicted by a Palestinian court in 1997 and sentenced in 1998 to 10 years in prison.
According to the suit, Al-Sharif was released by Palestinian authorities and participated in a suicide bombing in Jerusalem in 1997 in which five civilians were killed and 192 injured.
Among the groups named as defendants were Quranic Literacy Institute, with offices in Oak Lawn, Ill.; Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development, a California corporation with a branch office in Illinois; and Islamic Association for Palestine.
The Quranic institute is said to translate and publish sacred Islamic texts. The Holy Land foundation claims to conduct a variety of humanitarian relief and development efforts. The Islamic association disseminates information on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Also among the defendants is Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, a native of Gaza who was deported to Jordan in 1997 and then deported from the kingdom last year when King Abdullah closed the Hamas political bureau in Amman, and Mohammed Abdul Hamid Khalil Salah, described as the leader of Hamas" military branch and a resident of Illinois.
A telephone number is listed for a Mohammed Salah in Bridgeview, Ill., but efforts to reach him were unsuccessful because the number is not published.
"In general, the allegations that have been brought against us in this case and the preceding case that's still in court are utterly false," said Ahmer Haleem, secretary of the Quranic Literacy Institute in Oak Lawn, Ill., a suburb just sought of Chicago. "In my judgment, they are persecutorial in nature.
"I think that it's important for people in the media to begin to take a deeper look at what's happening to Muslims in America," Halem said, adding that he believes Muslims are being unfairly targeted by government authorities, such as the FBI as part of an aggressive anti-terrorism effort.
"Rather than protecting American citizens, they are targeting Muslims," he said. "There's an assumption in the media that Muslims are somehow associated with terrorism. It's as dangerous as the Oklahoma bombing situation pointed out."
Haleem's reference to the "preceding case" was to a civil forfeiture action brought by the Justice Department under the same law relied on by the suits filed Friday by individual platintiffs. The Justice Department civil case has been put on hold by a federal judge as the request of the defendants, who said they also were subjects of a criminal investigation.
A message left Sunday with the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development branch in Palos Hills, Ill., was not immediately returned.
No listing could be found in Illinois for a branch of the Islamic Association for Palestine.

Load-Date: May 15, 2000


End of Document