Families honor Virginians killed in war on terrorism; Tears and pride link those paying tribute to 141 who have fallen
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 25, 2007 Friday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-3
Length: 455 words
Byline: MICHAEL HARDY

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


Families of some of the 141 Virginians killed in U.S. military actions since 2000 pleaded yesterday for remembrance of their sacrifice and the democratic values they died for.
 "Please stop and remember what Memorial Day is all about," said Larry Sticklen of Virginia Beach. "These are people willing to fight for what we have."
 "It's part of our history as a nation and state," said Sticklen, who lost his son Joshua, 24, a corporal in the 3rd Marine Division, in Iraq on Dec. 3.
 Gloria and John Clodfelter of Mechanicsville lost their son Kenneth, 21, a petty officer 2nd class, in the bombing of the USS Cole on Oct. 12, 2000. He was the first Virginian to die in what has been called the war against terrorism.
 They said they appreciated the new Wall of Honor established in the lobby of the Pocahontas Building in downtown Richmond, that displays pictures and facts about the fallen heroes. The 38.5-foot wall has a dozen glass frames, each containing room for 12 individual profiles. It can be expanded.
 "A very wonderful honor," said his mother, but her husband said sadly, "I would much rather have Kenneth back."
 Joining a handful of family members of five other victims, they paused and glanced at their loved ones' pictures inside glass panels. Some sobbed; others bowed their heads.
 Later, they went outside for a moving ceremony in front of the nearby South Portico of the State Capitol to dedicate the memorial inside the Pocahontas Building at 900 E. Main St. It is open 9 a.m. until 5 p.m. on weekdays.
 About 400 people gathered below the gleaming white columned portico to honor the dead and their sacrifices.
 Darrell Bowling of Martinsville, a master trooper with the Virginia State Police, said his son, Jonathan, a Marine corporal, died in an ambush in Iraq on Jan. 26, 2005.
 "The saddest part of today is that more Virginians will be on that wall," Bowling told the crowd.
 "Our task is to remember those who gave so much," he said, adding "there is no better way" to celebrate Memorial Day.
 Bowling helped inspire the creation of the wall, which was then envisioned and brought to fruition by Attorney General Bob McDonnell, whose daughter, Jeanine, a first lieutenant in the U.S. Army, has completed one tour of duty in Iraq.
 Gov. Timothy M. Kaine reminded the crowd that such ceremonies and memorial unify a community.
 "We're here today to bind up wounds . . . to express the value of community," Kaine said.
 The somber ceremony included reading of the names of the Virginians killed in Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries in the past seven years. A 21-gun salute, the playing of taps and an F-18 flyover capped the ceremony.
Contact staff writer Michael Hardy at mhardy@timesdispatch.com or (804) 649-6810.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document