Far-Right Police Officers Suspended in Germany After Sharing Hitler Pictures
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 18, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 458 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The group of officers, which included men and women, are also accused of using far-right chat rooms where swastikas and other Nazi symbols were posted. Others are accused of failing to report their colleagues.
The Interior Minister of the western state, Herbert Reul, said the 126 images shared across five WhatsApp chat groups on private phones between 2013 and 2015 were "the worst" and "obnoxious". The most recent message was sent on August 27.
The Interior Minister said he assumes there are more participants in such right-wing extremist communications groups who are also police officers.
"We have to ask unpleasant questions of ourselves", Reul said. 'Who knew about this?
"It is hard to find words", he added.
The material was exchanged in at least five WhatsApp groups used entirely or largely by police officers who worked at the same police precinct in Muelheim an der Ruhr.
Reul, the interior minister, said he had long hoped that such episodes were isolated exceptions. All have been dismissed from service and disciplinary proceedings have begun against them.
"These people have thrown away the right to wear the uniform". On Monday, authorities raided the home of a 40-year-old soldier in an investigation of a suspected far-right terrorism plot. One sergeant major suspected of having extremist links was found to have a cache of weapons in a bunker at his home.
Google removes PayTM App from play store, citing gambling rules
Paytm which is claimed to have over 50 million monthly active users promotes fantasy sports within its main app. In a blog , the financial services giant said , it will continue to work with Google to restore the app .
The gang, which dedicated 10 racist murders in between 2000 and 2007."NSU 2.0" scandal has actually now seen the "National Socialist Underground" state police chief Nazi Münch resign after it emerged that police computer systems were utilized to learn information of a left-wing political leader who later on got among the threatening e-mails.
"This news has hit the police at its core".
A similar group was also discovered in the southern state of Bavaria past year, in which hate speech targeting Muslims was shared.
Germany's top security official at the federal level, Horst Seehofer, had rejected calls two months ago for an investigation into the extent of racial profiling by the police, insisting that there was "no structural problem".
On Wednesday, Mr Seehofer's spokesperson cautioned against making "sweeping allegations" against the whole German police, which has 300,000 officers.
"But of course it's clear, as the current case shows, that we're not talking about individuals", said the spokesman, Steve Alter.
In a statement, they said: "Fighting the far-right is part of the police's DNA".

Load-Date: September 19, 2020


End of Document