Farm bill debates are set to begin
The Bismarck Tribune
May 28, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: WIRE
Length: 303 words
Body


n Washington
U.S. immigration agencies say anti-terrorism is their primary mission, but they tried to deport only 12 people on terrorism-related charges from 2004 through 2006, according to a private research study released Sunday.
That group of 12 represents a tiny fraction of the 814,073 people the government tried to remove from the country during those three years. The study's authors acknowledge the figure understates the anti-terrorism effort by the Homeland Security Department's immigration agencies.
In addition, because no one knows how many terrorists are in the United States or tried to get in, there is no way to say whether the figure of 12 is too low, too high or about right.
"The right number is unknowable," co-author David Burnham said in an interview. "But the budget and powers of this agency are influenced by all their talk and rhetoric about terrorism and criminals and if that isn't what they are doing, it should be considered by Congress and the public."
Homeland Security spokesman Russ Knocke said the study failed to appreciate record-setting enforcement totals.
See story on Page 2A
* Washington
Farm-state members of Congress are facing a tough reality as they begin to consider the next six-year farm bill - a tight budget environment, and the lack of money to significantly add or expand popular programs.
Two House Agriculture subcommittees approved parts of the legislation last week, but several amendments were deferred as committee leaders worried about spending too much money.
To start, Congress will have less money to work with this time around. This is because the last bill, written in 2002, saved the government billions of dollars.
That law pays farmers more when prices are low, and commodity prices have been high. So Congress must start with a lower baseline.
See story on Page 3B

Load-Date: May 29, 2007


End of Document