Fashion designer thinks outside the box to combat terrorism
Post-Bulletin (Rochester, Minnesota)
September 26, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Post-Bulletin
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 947 words
Byline: Brett Boese, Post-Bulletin, Rochester, Minn.
Body


Sept. 26--CANNON FALLS -- Five years ago, Missy Klapperich recalls frantically hitting refresh on Dina Fesler's blog in hopes of confirming that she was still alive. Periodic snippets came from Fesler as expected, but the Cannon Falls social studies teacher had no idea that her friend's fact-finding trip would be the start of a movement that could change the world.
Fesler, a longtime humanitarian, can only shake her head at the memory.
The 49-year-old former New York City fashion designer spent years running small fundraisers to help the needy without ever seeing how that money was being used. In 2009, she decided to take that plunge. Somehow, that meant visiting one of the most dangerous places in the world.
Fesler, who now lives in rural Goodhue County, went to Kabul, Afghanistan, to visit a refugee camp. It's considered prime Taliban recruiting grounds and routinely makes the news for deadly suicide bombings.
"There's no one else in the world who could go over there seven times and come out unscathed like she has," Klapperich said. "That first time she went, I was so scared."
Fesler admits she was "in over her head," but contends that the risk opened doors while laying the groundwork for her organization, Children's Culture Connections, to be nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize earlier this year. The winner will be announced Oct. 10 in Norway.
Not bad for someone who couldn't even define social studies five short years ago.
"The ability to visualize things that don't yet exist transcends many industries," quipped Fesler.
Hungry to learn
At the heart of the program are three curious Afghan boys who bombarded Fesler with questions on her initial visit to Afghanistan. She says they were illiterate, still believed the Earth was flat and had been indoctrinated in violent Taliban ideology -- but they hungered for details about the world outside of their muddy village.
Fesler responded with her organization by enlisting the help of children around the globe, including about 20 students from Cannon Falls. The children created video-based curriculum that introduced the Afghan boys to basic concepts, such as electricity, running water, sanitation and many other things that most of the world takes for granted.
From the Children's Cultural Connection came Bridges Academy, which uses an application pre-loaded onto smartphones donated from the Cannon Falls community. It gives isolated Afghan children access to authentic visuals of the outside world presented by their peers in other countries. In turn, the Afghan boys have created their own videos that are disseminated to programs in 35 U.S. states and 15 countries.
"It's so unique because it's the kids who were really doing it," said Vanessa Peer, a Cannon Falls seventh-grader who teamed up with eighth-grader Olivia Anderson to create Cannon Falls' first video.
Added Klapperich: "These are some of the most privileged kids in the world connecting with the most underprivileged kids in the world. They're starting to realize they aren't all that different."
Fesler said the growing program has given the Afghan boys a chance to transition from victims to heroes by sharing their stories with the world. At the same time, the boys are embracing the opportunity to spread a message of education and hope in a grassroots movement that could eventually turn the local tide against terrorist groups such al Quaida and the Islamic State.
"These boys are like a Hollywood story," said Fesler, who repeatedly refuses to take credit for the success of the program. "They're taking back their generation and their country."
Hearts and minds
Njajibullah Sedeqe, a Afghanistan-based spokesman for Bridges Academy, said the program has begun a slow process of combating the anti-American indoctrination instilled by local terrorist groups.
"Their mind is getting changed about Americans," Sedeqe said in a video message sent to the Post-Bulletin. "If you asked them before what do you think about an American, they would say if I see an American I would like to kill an American.
"After your program and you, Dina, sitting with the kids, even if they were a suicide attacker, they change. They are human like us. Why not be your friend? This is very, very important."
In another shocking development, Bridges Academy has even managed to break down some barriers between people on opposite sides of religious conflict. Fesler said a local Shiite man she befriended on her initial visit has served as her translator when speaking with the three Sunni boys on six subsequent visits and for the videos.
"They would never come together under any other circumstances," Fesler said.
Possibilities abound for the program's future. If Bridges Academy wins the Nobel Peace Prize cash award of about $1.4 million, Fesler said it would raise the program's profile immensely and allow her to hire more Afghan youths to expand the educational campaign.
A school in Italy has recently proposed hosting a Bridges Academy conference seeking to bring all of the participants together -- including the three Afghan boys. The likelihood of that happening is unknown, but Fesler admits to dreaming about flying to Norway to accept the Nobel Peace Prize and stopping in Italy for the conference on her way home.
"There's a goal and it's not a group hug," Fesler said of the proposal.
"These kids are watching all of these world leaders be completely dumbfounded about how to respond. I think this is a great opportunity to fight fire with fire. The new, hipper generation uses social media to recruit. We can use this program to combat that."
___ (c)2014 the Post-Bulletin Visit the Post-Bulletin at www.postbulletin.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: September 26, 2014


End of Document