Fatal NATO airstrike is subject of dispute Afghan officials say jets fired on campaign workers; Gates says target was group linked to terrorism.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 3, 2010 Friday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A21
Length: 501 words
Byline: New York Times The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Dateline: 0 
Body


KABUL, Afghanistan - Airstrikes by NATO forces that killed 12 people Thursday in northern Afghanistan have produced sharply conflicting accounts as to whether the attacks hit a team of election campaign workers, including the parliamentary candidate himself, or a group connected with an Uzbek terrorist network.
Afghan officials in Kabul and in Takhar Province, where the deaths occurred, said two NATO jets fired twice on a convoy of campaign workers. The candidate, Abdul Wahid Khurasani, was among three wounded.
"What reaction can I have?" said Khurasani by telephone from his hospital bed in Kabul, where he was being treated for minor injuries. "NATO came in, killed my supporters and my campaigners. They are powerful, what can I do? I cannot do anything."
But in a contrasting assessment of the airstrike, international forces said it singled out a group connected to the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, including a senior leader who is believed to be the deputy shadow governor in Takhar.
Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who was in Kabul to meet with Afghan President Hamid Karzai, said at a news conference with Karzai that "I can confirm that a very senior official of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan was the target and was killed." Gates said the official was responsible "for organizing and orchestrating a number of attacks here in Kabul and in northern Afghanistan."
The defense secretary said it was the first he had heard that there might have been civilian casualties, but Karzai said he had reports from local government officials that 10 civilians had been killed in the election convoy and three were wounded. Karzai said the nature of the operation and the presence of the Islamic movement had to be determined.
Chaplain is killed - A chaplain killed in Afghanistan this week was the first Army clergyman killed in action since the Vietnam War, the military said Thursday. Capt. Dale Goetz of the 4th Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colo., was among five soldiers killed by an improvised bomb on Monday.
Before Goetz, the last Army chaplain to die in action was Phillip Nichols, who was killed by a concealed enemy explosive in Vietnam in October of 1970, said Chaplain Carleton Birch, a spokesman for the Army chief of chaplains.
Rush on bank - Afghans on Thursday rushed to withdraw their savings from troubled Kabul Bank despite attempts by officials to reassure nervous depositors that their money was safe. But the scramble, which followed U.S. news reports that Afghanistan's largest private bank faced liquidity problems, had not yet risen to the level of a bank run.
At the bank's main branch in Kabul, hundreds of frustrated customers crowded the counters, many shouting or elbowing for a number to get served, with a mass of people in front of the "$10,000 or more" withdrawal desk. "I waited for six hours, but they didn't let me withdraw the amount I wanted," said Rafi, 24, who uses only one name. "People are in panic. They want to retrieve their money because they lost trust."

Graphic

 
 ASSOCIATED PRESS  ASSOCIATED PRESS Army Capt. Dale Goetz, a chaplain with the 4th Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colo., was among five soldiers killed by an improvised bomb in Afghanistan on Monday. He was the first Army clergyman killed in action since the Vietnam War, according to the military. 

Load-Date: September 3, 2010


End of Document