FATAL SCHOOL BOMBING STOKES WORRIES OF VIOLENCE IN ITALY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 20, 2012 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 605 words
Byline: Gaia Pianigiani and Elisabetta Povoledo, The New York Times
Body


BRINDISI, Italy -- A bomb exploded Saturday in front of a school in this southern city, killing a 16-year-old student and wounding at least five others, local officials said, raising fears of a return to the kind of violence that shook Italy decades ago.
The explosion occurred near a vocational school named after Francesca Morvillo, a magistrate who was killed with her husband, Giovanni Falcone, an anti-Mafia prosecutor, by a Cosa Nostra bomb on May 23, 1992, an event Italy planned to commemorate on its 20th anniversary.
The bomb went off as students were preparing to enter the school Saturday morning before classes began. Italian news media reported that the explosive devices consisted of gas canisters set off by timers, placed by a low wall surrounding the school. The blast occurred just before 8 a.m., next to a group of girls. One, Melissa Bassi, 16, was killed by the blast, and another was seriously wounded. Four others also suffered injuries.
Witnesses described the panic that followed the explosion as "an inferno," while television stations broadcast the eerily silent aftermath, with knapsacks, textbooks and notebooks strewn across the asphalt in front of the school, pages flapping in the wind.
There were no immediate claims of responsibility, and the Italian authorities said Saturday afternoon that investigations would examine all possibilities, including links to the Sacra Corona Unita -- the organized crime syndicate rooted in the southern region of Puglia -- and domestic or foreign terrorism.
"It's difficult to form an idea because killing students is without precedence, and doesn't correspond to any of the models of Italian terrorism," said Salvatore Lupo, a professor of contemporary history at the University of Palermo. "There's no logic, but with terrorist attacks there is no logic."
Piero Grasso, the prosecutor who leads the anti-Mafia judicial agency, described the bombing as an act of "pure terrorism," because, he said, "Every parent will think when they send their child to school: Could they be in danger?" In recent months, Italy has experienced a level of economic turmoil that has unsettled people, with some linking the government's austerity measures to a rash of suicides.
There has also been a rise in violence against tax collection offices -- mostly carried out by indebted and frustrated taxpayers -- as well as against other institutions, like the military and the aerospace group Finmeccanica, which has been singled out by radical groups that pattern themselves after the domestic terrorists that kept Italy under siege in the 1970s and early 1980s.
A senior executive for a Finmeccanica-owned company was shot in the leg on May 7, and the group's chief executive was the target of a death threat recently.
On Thursday, the government announced that it would redeploy the nearly 25,000 police officers and soldiers that currently protect more than 14,000 potential targets and 550 people, after analyzing the recent spate of attacks throughout the country.
Some commentators on Saturday noted that the school bombing occurred as runoff elections were being held in several cities, a signal, perhaps, to the country's political elite.
Since November, Italy has been governed by a caretaker government of technocrats, led by Prime Minister Mario Monti, a respected economist called in to stave off financial disaster caused by the fallout from the eurozone crisis. Although Mr. Monti has broad bipartisan support in Parliament, that is more a function of the need to assure financial markets that Italy is getting its economy in order, rather than any real political conviction.

Load-Date: May 21, 2012


End of Document