FBI plans new unit to battle terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 15, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 806 words
Byline: AP, New York Times News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- FBI Director Robert Mueller is seeking to address some of the flaws exposed by the Sept. 11 attacks by creating a new terrorism-fighting team in Washington that will oversee all U.S. terrorism investigations worldwide, officials say.
Meanwhile, officials said Tuesday the classified FBI memorandum written last summer urging headquarters to investigate Middle Eastern men enrolled in U.S. flight schools also cited Osama bin Laden and suggested that his followers could use the schools for terrorism training.
The memorandum, from an FBI agent in Phoenix, said terrorist groups like bin Laden's might be sending students to the schools as the first step in what could be a concerted effort to place Islamic militants in the aviation industry around the world as pilots, security guards or aircraft-maintenance workers.
The existence of the memorandum has been known for months, but few details were available until recent weeks, when some lawmakers and congressional staff members were permitted to read it. Before Tuesday, however, government officials had not revealed that the memorandum included direct references to bin Laden.
Mueller is informing the FBI agents who supervise each field office across the country this week of his plan designed to centralize terrorism fighting and ensure all intelligence is evaluated thoroughly and urgently and compared against other information gathered by the government, officials said Tuesday.
The officials, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said the plan is part of a broader reorganization Mueller started last fall to reshape his agency in the aftermath of the new terrorism threat and the Robert Hanssen spy case.
The aim, they said, is to change a terrorism fighting structure inside the FBI that often stretched thin the expertise of the New York field office, which handled the high profile cases of the 1990s involving the bombings of the World Trade Center and U.S. embassies in Africa.
The new plan would create an expert team in Washington that would direct all terrorism investigations, centralize the evaluation of intelligence and threats and ensure that leads aren't lost inside the government bureaucracy, the officials said.
The bureau has been moving in that direction for months under the work of Assistant Director Dale Watson, who has led the bureau's counterterrorism and intelligence operations from Washington.
The reorganization comes as the FBI faces tough scrutiny from Congress about how much it knew prior to Sept. 11 about the threat of a terrorist strike.
The Associated Press reported earlier this month that FBI headquarters did not act on a memo last July from its Arizona office warning there were a large number of Arabs seeking pilot, security and airport operations training at at least one U.S. flight school and which urged a check of all flight schools to identify more possible Middle Eastern students.
Officials on Tuesday confirmed that a section of that classified memo shared with Congress in recent days also makes a passing reference to Osama bin Laden, speculating that al-Qaida and other such groups could organize such flight training. The officials said, however, that the memo offered no evidence bin Laden was behind the students that raised the concern.
The FBI also has faced tough questioning about whether it failed to act aggressively enough after arresting Zacarias Moussaoui, a Frenchman of Moroccan descent, in August after he raised concerns by seeking flight training at a Minnesota flight school.
Moussaoui has emerged as the lone defendant charged in the aftermath of Sept. 11. He is charged with conspiring with bin Laden and the 19 suicide hijackers to attack Americans.
Mueller repeatedly has said he wished the FBI had acted more aggressively in addressing the Arizona and Minnesota leads but said nothing the FBI possessed before Sept. 11 pointed to the multiple-airliner hijacking plot.
He also told senators in an appearance before Congress last week that the FBI was remaking itself to address the past flaws and to ensure all information about possible terrorist threats is addressed quickly and thoroughly. He asked senators for patience and support in the effort.
The bin Laden memorandum was written by an agent conducting terrorism investigations of several Middle Eastern men who were attending flight school in the area. According to people who have read the memo, it did not identify anyone by name as a follower of al-Qaida, did not specify which flight schools should be investigated or explicitly predict the Sept. 11 attacks.
But several lawmakers who have read it described the Phoenix memorandum as the most significant document to emerge in congressional inquiries into possible warnings to the government about hijackings. Several senators said the letter represented a warning that went unheeded.

Load-Date: May 15, 2002


End of Document