FBI MEMO QUESTIONS ATF ROLE ON TERRORISM;
 DOCUMENT ADVISES AGAINST GIVING AGENCY MORE POWER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 13, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A14
Length: 300 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


An FBI memo questioning whether the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms can handle major bombing and terrorism investigations is circulating as Congress considers whether to merge the ATF bureau into the Justice Department.
Congress is considering a proposal to transfer parts of the ATF bureau from the Treasury Department to the Justice Department, which oversees the FBI.
One administration official said the ATF bureau's law enforcement elements - whose duties include bombing, arson and weapons investigations - likely would become a separate unit in the Justice Department if the plan is approved.
The draft, unsigned FBI memo, obtained Tuesday from congressional sources, says the FBI should remain the nation's primary investigative agency, and any proposal to give the ATF bureau some of that power would be "unwarranted and counterproductive."
The memo - which an FBI spokesman said "is not the official policy" of the agency or Director Robert Mueller - says the ATF bureau is too small and has insufficient training facilities and forensic labs, and the wrong command structure to lead investigations of major violent crimes, civil rights cases or domestic terrorism.
The memo recommends that Congress transfer the bomb and weapons law enforcement functions from the ATF bureau to the FBI, not create a stand-alone ATF agency in the Justice Department. That would leave the Treasury Department with regulatory, licensing and tax collection responsibilities in the areas of firearms, explosives, alcohol and tobacco.
ATF officials did not immediately return telephone calls seeking comment.
The Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, which represents 19,000 federal officers, issued a statement Tuesday saying it was "appalled at the unwarranted criticism of ATF agents and ATF expertise."

Load-Date: November 13, 2002


End of Document