FBI BALKS AT NEW JOB OF FIGHTING TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 2, 2002 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 660 words
Byline: ERIC LICHTBLAU, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Just two weeks after imploring the FBI to make counter-terrorism its top priority, Director Robert S. Mueller III has warned his agents in even stronger terms that he will not tolerate "bureaucratic intransigence" as an obstacle to change.
 The FBI's ability to adapt to change "is now being tested in the extreme," Mueller wrote in an internal memorandum on Friday. "Change will be needed in many areas and needed quickly. Bureaucratic intransigence cannot be an impediment or excuse."
Mueller's message to employees, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, comes as the bureau is facing stepped-up pressure from leading members of Congress to shore up its counter-terrorism operations.
 Two senior members of the Senate Judiciary Committee -- Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., and Charles E. Grassley, R-Iowa -- wrote to the Justice Department last week, saying they had serious concerns about the FBI's ability to lead the fight against terrorism and about its treatment of some agents who have voiced criticisms internally. The senators questioned whether the FBI had been truthful about its progress in recasting its counterterrorism operation.
 And two members of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Sens. Richard C. Shelby, R-Ala., and Bob Graham, D-Fla., the outgoing chairman, expressed concern about the agency's ability to recast its mission from traditional law enforcement duties to intelligence functions.
 "I think the FBI is being challenged big time today," Shelby said. "They're moving from a police -- a federal police agency to an intelligence agency. It's a big cultural change."
 The complaints of Leahy and Grassley were spurred in part, they said, by a front-page article in The Times on Nov. 21 that detailed the frustrations of senior FBI officials in getting some field offices to focus squarely on counter-terrorism as their main priority.
 The senators demanded access to two memos that were quoted in the article, from Mueller and Deputy Director Bruce J. Gebhardt, which the FBI has refused to give them, as well as any other internal documents dealing with a "lack of focus" in counter-terrorism efforts.
 In those memos, Gebhardt told field office chiefs he was "amazed and astounded" by the failure to commit essential resources to the fight against terrorism and said they must instill a sense of urgency in their agents. Mueller's agency-wide memo stated unequivocally that counter-terrorism has to be the top priority and that local field offices can no longer establish their distinct agendas.
 In his most recent memo, Mueller characterized the effort to refocus the bureau's mission as "the Reengineering initiative." He said the bureau must work to identify areas in need of change, make them a priority, pull in senior executives to accomplish the task, and ensure accountability. Without such an over-arching plan, he wrote, worthwhile ambitions can "end up abandoned in frustration or done poorly."
 The new push comes seven months after Mueller announced a counter-terrorism reorganization that included a restructuring of the management hierarchy at FBI headquarters and a redeployment of some 400 personnel who had been working non-terrorism investigations such as narcotics and white-collar crime. Roughly a quarter of the FBI's 11,000 agents are now working counter-terrorism, officials say.
 But there have been nagging doubts about whether the plan is working.
 Members of Congress appeared willing to give Mueller a lengthy grace period to put the reorganization plan in place and, indeed, many Republicans as well as senior officials in the Bush administration say they remain confident Mueller can get the job done.
 A senior Justice Department official said yesterday that while there is clearly room for improvement in the FBI's counterterrorism work, "From our perspective, there's been a huge sea change in how the FBI is operating in the last year, with several suspected terror cells around the country disrupted."

Load-Date: December 2, 2002


End of Document