FBI AGENT QUESTIONS BUREAU'S READINESS TO COUNTER TERRORISM IF IRAQ IS ATTACKED;
 HOMELAND SECURITY HAS BEEN WEAKENED BECAUSE OF FOCUS ON WAR, SHE SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 7, 2003 Friday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A17
Length: 420 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ST. PAUL, MINN.
Body


The Minneapolis FBI agent who exposed intelligence failures related to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks has told her boss she doesn't think the agency will be able to handle terrorism that could follow a war with Iraq.
Agent Coleen Rowley outlined her concerns in a seven-page letter sent to FBI Director Robert Mueller last month.
The nation's "internal security posture," she writes, "has been weakened by the diversion of attention from al-Qaida to our government's plan to invade Iraq, a step that will, in all likelihood, bring an exponential increase in the terrorist threat to the U.S., both at home and abroad."
She adds: "The bottom line is this. We should be deluding neither ourselves nor the American people that there is any way the FBI, despite the various improvements you are implementing, will be able to stem the flood of terrorism that will likely head our way in the wake of an attack on Iraq."
The letter is wide-ranging, variously questioning what evidence there is to link al-Qaida to Iraq and the veracity of a statement that there are 5,000 terrorists in the country. It also questions why the FBI has not investigated links between Zacarias Moussaoui, the person arrested in Minnesota and accused of conspiring with the Sept. 11 hijackers, and Richard Reid, convicted of trying to blow up a plane by igniting explosives in his shoes.
An FBI spokesman refused to comment on the letter, which was sent to the New York Times and the Star Tribune of Minneapolis. The Times posted the text of the letter on its Web site.
Rowley was not at home Thursday and didn't immediately return a call to her office or respond to an e-mail.
Rowley is a 22-year agent who came to national prominence when she accused headquarters of removing important details from a search warrant application that was later rejected, a gaffe she said may have kept the government from learning more about Moussaoui before the attacks.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer discounted Rowley's latest letter, saying the administration heard the same warning about attacking Afghanistan and the Taliban.
In testimony Tuesday before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Mueller said the FBI had taken several steps to improve analysis since the Sept. 11 attacks, increasing the number of counterterrorism analysts by 61 percent and opening an analytical college to provide more training.
"We have made significant strides toward enhancing our operations," Mueller said. "While we have come a long way in the past 18 months, we have a long way yet to go."

Notes

NATION; A shorter version of this story appeared in the Five Star Lift and Five Star Late Lift editions.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Coleen) Rowley - Agent in Minneapolis

Load-Date: March 7, 2003


End of Document