FBI warns of possible Serb terrorism in U.S.
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 15, 1999, Thursday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 315 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- The FBI is investigating a Serb-language letter faxed to several Orthodox churches in the United States urging terrorist strikes on U.S. military installations.
Counterterrorism agents at the FBI sent out an electronic alert memo last week to military bases, nuclear weapons labs and other key installations after Serbian Orthodox churches in the Sacramento, Milwaukee, Chicago and Indianapolis areas received the letter via fax.
It urged Serbian-Americans to respond violently to U.S.-led NATO strikes on Yugoslavia.
Justice Department spokesman Myron Marlin said Thursday that the FBI has found "no specific or credible threat" to U.S. forces in this country since the threats were faxed to three Serbian Orthodox churches and a Serbian-American social club on March 20.
"The threat letter requested that all Serbian nationalists living in America take action against the NATO decision to intervene in the Serbian/Kosovo conflict by killing as many American soldiers in the United States as necessary to stop the NATO attacks in Serbia," according to the FBI memo.
The memo, which was obtained by The Associated Press, was distributed to military bases and other sensitive federal installations, such as nuclear weapons labs, through a special e-mail warning system, officials said.
Dale Watson, the FBI's deputy assistant director for counterterrorism, declined to discuss the memo but said the church letters weren't the only Serb-related terrorism threats being examined by FBI investigators.
"As the war continues, we receive a lot of threats in here. The FBI looks into them," Watson said Wednesday. "This (letter) is not just an isolated situation. We look at threats; we take them all seriously."
Military bases around the country had been on alert dating as far back as last summer's bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. But bases are stepping up security measures.

Load-Date: April 15, 1999


End of Document