FBI BRIEFED ON DISTRICT'S TERROR CURBS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 5, 1999, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 415 words
Byline: JUDY PACKER-TURSMAN, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


After a two-week period that saw 250 bomb scares in Pennsylvania - many apparently related to the Littleton, Colo., school shootings - officials from Pittsburgh, Allegheny County and the state were called here to brief FBI agents from around the nation on their anti-terrorism efforts.
The briefing was closed to the media, but Lt. Gov. Mark Schweiker said outside the J. Edgar Hoover FBI Building that terrorism is a significant threat in Pennsylvania. "We have to get ready," he said.
Schweiker said the FBI wanted to learn about Western Pennsylva nia's well-developed system of gathering regional resources if any one community is overwhelmed with a crisis.
The FBI has begun 125 criminal investigations so far this year involving the threatened use or possession of biological, chemical or nuclear weapons. That compares with 181 for all of 1998 and 74 cases in 1997. Nine in 10 of these cases have involved anthrax.
Robert Burnham, who heads the domestic terrorism section of the FBI, said the agency regards as small the risk of a terrorist attack using such horrendous weapons. "But the consequences if one does occur could be devastating." He said that is why the agency is doing concentrated planning with state and local officials.
"Preparedness really is a deterrent," added Tom Kuker, director of the new National Domestic Preparedness Office, which is working with local communities and states to prepare for terrorist incidents.
Kuker asked Schweiker to talk about Pennsylvania's plans because, he said, the state has set up a 13-county network in a matter of months.
With Schweiker were Rick Mosquera, special agent in charge of the FBI Pittsburgh office, and Raymond DeMichiei, operations supervisor for the city's emergency operations center.
DiMichiei said the focus of a re gional task force has been to make certain that law enforcement officials, hazardous materials experts and medical teams know each other and are prepared to work together.
"It's like a football team practices, and players know what the other person can do, and when they hit the field. . . they're off and running," DiMichiei said. "When the call comes in, because of what we've done, we're off and running. We're not having a huddle."
Allegheny County Manager Glenn Cannon heads the western Pennsylvania task force, which includes 12 counties and Pittsburgh. He said the task force, with FBI oversight, is prepared to share emergency personnel and equipment if the region must respond to a terrorist incident.

Load-Date: May 5, 1999


End of Document