FBI to focus 520 more agents on terrorism
USA TODAY
May 29, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 521 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The FBI, under fire from critics who say it ignored potential clues that the Sept. 11 attacks were coming, will reassign at least 520 more agents to anti-terrorism duties as part of an unprecedented restructuring effort, federal law enforcement officials said Tuesday.
Today, FBI Director Robert Mueller and Attorney General John Ashcroft will outline a plan to pull at least 400 agents off drug probes and put them on anti-terrorism duty, along with about 120 agents assigned to white-collar and violent crimes. The reassignments, part of Mueller's effort to make the FBI's primary mission preventing terrorism, mean that the bureau will have more than 2,500 of its 11,500 agents focused on anti-terrorism operations.
It was unclear late Tuesday how the FBI's anti-drug efforts will be affected. State and local officials have expressed concern that the FBI's new mission would skim resources from drug enforcement and from probes into other federal crimes, such as bank robberies. But federal officials said the plan could be carried out without significantly hurting drug enforcement.
The FBI's plan comes as bureau officials, along with those at the CIA, prepare for congressional hearings next week that will examine whether the U.S. government did enough to prevent the Sept. 11 attacks. The FBI came under criticism last week when a bureau lawyer in Minneapolis accused headquarters of not responding swiftly enough or ignoring information about potential terrorism suspects, including Zaccarias Moussaoui, the only person charged in the USA in the Sept. 11 plot.
The FBI lawyer, Coleen Rowley, also accused Mueller and other officials of playing down information collected by agents in Minnesota and Arizona before Sept. 11.
Two months before the attacks, the FBI did not act on a Phoenix agent's call for a nationwide probe into Middle Eastern men training at U.S. flight schools. A month later, according to Rowley, headquarters thwarted a more aggressive probe of Moussaoui by Minneapolis field agents, one of whom wrote in his notes that Moussaoui might want to fly a jet into the World Trade Center. Mueller has said that the FBI probably would not have seen the attacks coming even if it had been more aggressive in following the tips from Minnesota and Arizona.
Mueller's plan is aimed largely at improving the FBI's ability to develop and analyze intelligence. U.S. officials say that the FBI will create an Office of Intelligence headed by a CIA officer and that CIA analysts will help the bureau.
"For a long time, intelligence analysis has been like a foreign language to the FBI," said Rep. Porter Goss, R-Fla., chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. "There needs to be a structure in place for this type of analysis."
Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, underscored the importance of Mueller's efforts Tuesday. "The FBI's credibility is at risk until all these questions are answered in an open way. And Director Mueller has a lot of explaining to do.  . . .  He needs to take charge and make sure the FBI is telling the whole truth about what happened, not just spinning to cover up embarrassments."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP; Mueller: Plan shifts FBI's priorities.

Load-Date: May 29, 2002


End of Document