FBI TO WIDEN PRESENCE OVERSEAS IN BATTLE TO COMBAT TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 29, 2003 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 814 words
Byline: CURT ANDERSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The FBI plans to open offices in Kabul, Afghanistan; Jakarta, Indonesia; and eight other foreign capitals as part of a decade-long overseas expansion that officials say is crucial to meet the global threat of al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
 The blueprint also calls for adding 30 new FBI personnel, including 17 agents, to the nearly 200 stationed at 46 locations around the world, according to FBI documents and interviews with The Associated Press.
 Their importance was demonstrated during the afternoon of the Sept. 11 terror attacks, the FBI says, when agents in dozens of cities already were tracking down leads with the cooperation of local authorities in Germany, Canada, Great Britain and elsewhere.
 "Had we not had those relationships, it would have been a question not of days in covering leads but probably weeks and months," said Roderick Beverly, special agent in charge of the FBI's Office of International Operations.
Since the fall of 2001, about 500 agents and 200 support people have been working overseas on the terrorism investigation, along with the FBI agents known as permanent legal attaches, or "legats," who were already there. The agents are often directly involved with interrogation of terrorist suspects or criminals and sometimes submit questions to those doing the interviews, including CIA officers.
 Legats feed information gleaned from the interviews back to the United States for further investigation, sometimes resulting in more suspects being put under surveillance or homes being searched.
 While they work more closely than ever with the CIA, these FBI agents also differ in that they do not operate covertly and are involved more with investigations than with intelligence gathering.
 The ongoing worldwide FBI search for Saudi-born Adnan G. El Shukrijumah, a suspected al-Qaida operative with family in Florida, resulted in part from the overseas interrogation of captured al-Qaida senior planner Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, officials say.
 FBI Director Robert Mueller told Congress recently that the bureau's agents abroad have proved invaluable in several recent investigations, including the October bombing of a nightclub in Bali, Indonesia, that killed more than 200 people and the fatal shooting of Laurence Foley, a U.S. diplomat, in Amman, Jordan.
 Legat offices, which date to World War II, numbered only about two dozen as recently as the early 1990s. Louis Freeh, FBI director at the time, pushed the expansion, traveling to Moscow and other cities to open new offices to tackle organized crime, drug trafficking, kidnapping and other international crimes.
 The FBI's growing foreign presence is not always welcome. Earlier this year in Pakistan, rumors that dozens of agents were breaking down doors at Islamic schools and aggressively questioning students prompted a wave of public anger.
 The FBI insists its agents do nothing of the kind and, in fact, are highly deferential to local police and laws. In Pakistan, even as the United States scours the countryside for al-Qaida leaders including Osama bin Laden, the number of FBI agents has topped out at fewer than 50.
 "We don't go knocking on doors," said Mike DiPretoro, who was the legat in Moscow, Hong Kong and Manila, Philippines, before retiring in 1999. "You really are a diplomat."
 Tom Baker, who as legat in Paris also covered 26 West African nations including Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia, said FBI agents must observe local customs and learn foreign cultures to overcome suspicions and gain the trust of officials.
 "There are people who will be very resentful of us," Baker said. "The officials want to cooperate with us. They are very concerned about the fundamentalists in their countries who are causing terrorism."
 One problem with the rapid overseas expansion is a lack of foreign language skills, especially compared with the State Department's diplomats and the CIA. Mueller told Congress on Thursday that he is working to upgrade the program so agents have better language abilities before they arrive at their new post.
 Typical of the FBI's overseas work is last year's investigation of the Washington-area sniper killings, which led to the Caribbean island of Antigua, where suspects John Allen Muhammad and John Lee Malvo had once lived. The FBI went in with the permission of Antigua, doing about 30 interviews and helping handle the evidence.
 If the $47 million expansion is approved by Congress, Beverly said, new FBI offices would be established in Sarajevo, Bosnia; Jakarta; Tashkent, Uzbekistan; Kabul, and Belgrade, Serbia. Existing offices would be expanded in Ottawa; Seoul, South Korea; London, Berlin and Moscow.
 Earlier this year, Congress agreed to give the FBI money to open new legat offices in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Tunis, Tunisia; San'a, Yemen, and Tbilisi, Georgia. Those will be up and running in coming months.

Load-Date: April 1, 2003


End of Document