FBI has warning on terror in U.S. Homegrown extremists may be greatest risk, official says.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 28, 2008 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 355 words
Byline: By Paidley Dodds THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BIGHTON, England  
Body


The FBI said Wednesday the men accused of trying to blow up U.S.-bound airliners had no obvious links to support networks in the United States, but warned that the greatest terrorist threat for Americans still may lurk within their own borders.
Speaking at Britain's first national counterterrorism conference, Joseph Billy Jr., assistant director of the FBI's counterterrorism unit, said extremist groups pose three levels of threat.
The top tier, he said, is made up of traditional al-Qaida cells whose newfound sanctuaries in Pakistan and elsewhere have led to renewed capabilities. The other two tiers are al-Qaida allies and radicalized homegrown extremists inspired by al-Qaida but with no formal links to the network.
Unlike the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack on the U.S., in which the hijackers had lived and trained in the United States, the alleged 2006 plot to bomb jetliners flying over the Atlantic appears to have links to militants in Britain and Pakistan, Billy said.
The terrorism conference drew hundreds of British and international law enforcement officials, intelligence agents and lawyers. Two former British extremists - one who spent more than four years in an Egyptian jail - also spoke, warning that militants will change tactics once they think they've been profiled.
A host of challenges confronts counterterrorism agents today, including technology advances that make communication undetectable, Internet recruiting sites, gaps in international law that limit international cooperation and the mutation of al-Qaida.
The men accused of trying to blow up at least 10 U.S.-bound airliners in 2006 are scheduled to appear in a London court in April - just one of many terrorism cases with international implications.
Billy called the airline plot "worrying" and said U.S. officials would have been caught unaware without British investigators discovering the plan.
Billy said recent alleged plots aimed at military targets and a New York airport inside the United States - as well as intelligence showing that Hezbollah operatives might be working in the U.S. - underscored the threat lying within American borders.

Load-Date: February 28, 2008


End of Document