FBI creates 2 new divisions to handle terrorism, spying
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 12, 1999, Friday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 608 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- Criticized for missteps in investigations of alleged Chinese nuclear espionage and political contributions, the FBI is putting more managers to work catching and thwarting terrorists and spies.
Two new divisions were created Thursday by FBI Director Louis J. Freeh, with approval from Attorney General Janet Reno and Congress.
One, the Investigative Services Division, also is designed to ensure that top FBI officials and investigators are aware of all relevant information scattered in case files around bureau divisions.
Another of its goals is to improve the bureau's analyses so the FBI can prevent crimes as well as solve them after they occur.
The other new entity, a Counterterrorism Division, carved out of the old National Security Division, had been leaked by officials last summer.
Months in the making, the moves follow criticism from Congress, an executive branch commission and the Justice Department inspector general of the bureau's handling of two sensitive investigations involving China. The bureau was said to have focused too narrowly, failed to distribute relevant leads to all its divisions and failed to keep top officials aware of key evidence.
"Protecting America from terrorism and ensuring our national security are the FBI's highest priorities," Freeh said. "Given the complexity and difficulty of these threats, I have decided that counterterrorism and national security should be handled separately."
A bureau statement acknowledged that "increased attention to terrorism . . . had the effect of diluting senior management oversight given to the very real, systemic threat posed by espionage."
In recent years, the National Security Division established a National Infrastructure Protection Center to prepare for possible terrorist electronic attacks on U.S. computer systems and launched a National Domestic Preparedness Office to train local agencies to respond to terrorist attacks by computer, nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
"The buildup strained the capacity of the National Security Division to adequately oversee both counterterrorism and counterintelligence," the FBI said.
A Senate committee and an executive branch panel headed by former Sen. Warren Rudman criticized the FBI this year for focusing its investigation of possible theft of nuclear weapon secrets by China on one scientist of Chinese descent at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Wen Ho Lee.
Lee has been fired. Officials say he may face charges for mishandling secrets, though not of espionage. And the FBI has reopened the entire probe for a wider look.
Meantime, in July, Justice Department Inspector General Michael Bromwich criticized the National Security Division for long delays in turning over possible leads from its Chinese intelligence-gathering to the Justice Department's campaign finance task force, which was probing possible foreign contributions to the 1996 presidential campaign.
In addition, Reno and Freeh had been embarrassed at a congressional hearing in 1997 to learn several items of FBI Chinese intelligence from CIA testimony.
Bromwich found the National Security Division had sent the data to Reno and Freeh without any oral briefing to emphasize its importance and so haphazardly buried in other reports that "senior officials were unaware that they had ever received it."
The Investigative Services Division's analysis branch will have authority to extract information from case files in other divisions "to identify future trends and the means of preventing crime" and "to ensure that senior FBI officials are fully cognizant of information critical to fulfilling mission requirements," the FBI said.

Load-Date: November 12, 1999


End of Document