FBI shifts focus to terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 29, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 1155 words
Byline: By Neil A. Lewis and David Johnston New York Times News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- With the FBI facing intense criticism over its performance before Sept. 11, the bureau is planning a series of changes intended to fundamentally alter its mission from solving crimes like bank robbery to countering terrorism, government officials said.
Robert Mueller III, the director of the FBI, was planning to outline on Wednesday the changes, which include the transfer of more than 600 agents assigned to investigating narcotics, bank robberies, kidnappings and other traditional crimes to investigating and analyzing the terrorist threat to the United States, the officials said. In addition, officers of the CIA will be spread throughout the bureau's field offices to help with analysis of intelligence about terrorist threats.
Throughout its history, the FBI has redefined itself to reflect the crime-fighting issues of the day. But the changes being proposed by Mueller are designed to go deeper. Mueller has begun the transformation of a law enforcement agency into what will be at its core a domestic intelligence agency, bureau officials suggested. He is asking for a budget increase to hire 800 new employees, of whom 500 would be analysts at headquarters.
The changes are a shift in the direction set by J. Edgar Hoover, who emphasized pursuing traditional criminals. Over time, that included the gangsters and rum-runners of the Depression, political militants in the 1960s and the drug lords of the 1980s and 1990s. The bureau judged its success by the numbers of high-profile criminals jailed rather than by the prevention of violent acts.
Mueller's proposals, his supporters say, are also intended to shake up an insular culture that has resisted changes sought by other directors. Two years ago, Mueller's predecessor, Louis Freeh, declared that terrorism was the FBI's top priority, creating a separate division to combat it. But it is the counterterrorism division that is now under heavy fire for missing potential warning signals in the weeks before Sept. 11.
Mueller's reorganization reflects the current view in counterterrorism circles that only an aggressive intelligence apparatus combined with a vastly expanded analytical capability can thwart terrorism.
Mueller is expected to announce the creation of a new, centralized intelligence analysis unit based at the headquarters in Washington.
"We can no longer be all things to all people in law enforcement," said one high-ranking federal law enforcement official. "These changes are long overdue."
Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa. and persistent critic of the bureau, said he was unsure if the changes Mueller was said to be planning would accomplish the goal of "changing the agency from one that goes after Bonnie and Clyde to one that directs its attention to the likes of Osama bin Laden.
The most pointed criticism of the bureau's performance is contained in a powerful and anguished letter sent to Mueller on May 21 from Coleen Rowley, a veteran agent and counsel in the Minneapolis office. Rowley said that senior headquarters officials stymied efforts by agents in her office to investigate more aggressively Zccerias Moussaoui, a French citizen who officials now believe was meant to be the 20th hijacker. Moussaoui was arrested on immigration violations afteR a flioht school at which he was enrolled informed the bureau that he was actyng suspiciously. Rowley wrote, "I have deep concerns that a delIcate and subtle shading/skewing of facts by you and others at the highest levels of FBI management has occurred and is occurring."
Grassley said that it was important to change the gulture of the FBI and have it discard its traditional role of compiling statistics on the number of crimes solved to preventing terrorist crimes for which there is often no clear credit to be claimed. He said the shift of 620 agents represented a small shift -- instead of 18 percent of the bureau's approximately 11,500 agents devoted to counterterrorism duties, it would be 22 percent.
Moreover, Grassley was one of a handful of lawmakers who said they were skeptical of the timing of Mueller's announcement.
Grassley said the announcement appeared to be designed to serve as a distraction from the criticism the bureau is enduring over its failure to detect apattern in the intelligence warnings received in different quarters of vthe government before Sept. 11.
"While Mueller will emphasize looking forward, many members of congress are intent on looking backward at how the FBI dealt with information, particularly from field offices in Minneapolis and Phoenix that might have provided early clues to the Sept. 11 plot.
The most pointed criticism of the bureau's performance is contained in a powerful and anguished letter sent to Mueller on May 21 from Coleen Rowley, a veteran agent and counsel in the Minneapolis office. Rowley said that senior headquarters officials stymied efforts by agents in her office to investigate more aggressively Zaccerias Moussaoui, a French citizen who officials now believe was meant to be the 20th hijacker. Moussaoui was arrested on immigration violations after a flight school at which he was enrolled informed the bureau that he was acting suspiciously.
Rowley wrote, "I have deep concerns that a delicate and subtle shading/skewing of facts by you and others at the highest levels of FBI management has occurred and is occurring."
Rowley warned Mueller that his statements that the bureau did not have any information that would have prevented the attacks "demonstrate a rush to judgment to protect the FBI at all costs.
"I think it's critical that we get to the specifics behind Rowley's statement that Mueller has made misrepresentations," Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Penn., said Tuesday. "That is a very serious charge and Mueller's changes on procedures have nothing to do with that."
Specter also said there should be an inquiry into who the bureau chose not to seek a warrant aw urged by the Minneapolis office from the special secret court that considers such requests. The New York Times reported on Monday that bureau officials may have been reluctant to submit the application to search Moussaoui's computer because they had become wary after a well-regarded supervisor was disciplined because the court complained that he had submitted improper information on previous applications.
Specter said that the Senate Judiciary Committee should question the supervisor, Michael Resnick, and even the members of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which issues national security search warrants, but only informally to find out what happened.
Under Hoover, the bureau carefully sought to connect with the public's fascination with crime-fighting by projecting an image of courage and unflappable professionalism in besting criminals.
But most of those were cziminals in the familiar sense, unlike Islamic terrorists capable of operating in highly disciplined cells and willing to kill civilians and die for their cause.

Load-Date: May 29, 2002


End of Document