FBI launches terrorism awareness program
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 13, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 386 words
Byline: Chris Wetterich
Body


Task force contact
To get a pamphlet or report activities you suspect are related to terrorism, call the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force in Fairmont at (304) 625-9768.
chriswetterich@wvgazette.com  
The FBI has begun a program to combat terrorism by encouraging people to be more vigilant in watching for terrorist activities near key facilities in their communities, including government buildings, military facilities and places where a large number of people gather.
The nationwide public awareness program is part of a recent effort in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, to start special terrorism task forces outside the bureau's field offices, most of which are located in major cities.
One such office was opened in Fairmont in March after the Pittsburgh FBI, which is the point bureau for West Virginia, decided the state needed one, said Special Agent Dan Caldwell.
The FBI wants citizens to be especially alert for people running surveillance or asking strange questions about such facilities.
Also of concern to the bureau are people trying to acquire supplies like uniforms, badges or access cards; people doing dry runs or playing out scenarios for terrorist activities and testing security for such facilities.
The FBI is also handing out pamphlets titled, "Terrorism: What can I do to help?" to explain the program.
Caldwell asks that people use their gut instinct and common sense when deciding whether to report something. A person taking notes in a crowded park is not cause for alarm, he said, but a person videotaping the security entrance to a power plant would be of much more concern.
"Every time you see somebody with a notebook or a camera, you're not going to call that in," Caldwell said. "If it just doesn't make sense, then maybe they should call us."
Caldwell also cautioned that people who look like they're from a foreign country or a different ethnicity shouldn't be stereotyped as suspects.
The FBI also plans community forums starting at the beginning of 2004 where the bureau will explain how the public can help.
Caldwell said the Fairmont terrorism task force gets anywhere from a half dozen to a dozen calls a week, and he said that is expected to increase once news of the program becomes more well-known.
To contact staff writer Chris Wetterich, use e-mail or call 348-3023.

Load-Date: November 13, 2003


End of Document