FBI goes after fraud; Agents reassigned from anti-terrorism
USA TODAY
February 12, 2009 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 383 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


WASHINGTON -- Mortgage-fraud investigations are mounting as the economic crisis worsens, and FBI agents assigned to national security after the 9/11 attacks are "gradually moving back" to assist with financial-fraud inquiries, a top FBI official said Wednesday.
FBI Deputy Director John Pistole, in testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, said the massive fraud schemes have "shaken the world's confidence in the U.S. financial system."
The number of mortgage-fraud cases increased from 1,210 in fiscal year 2007 to 1,800 in fiscal 2008 and continues to climb. Pistole said there also are 530 pending corporate-fraud investigations, including 38 cases "directly related" to the current crisis. He did not identify the corporations or the allegations against them.
The 38 cases, Pistole said, involve large investigations on par with the 2001 meltdown of U.S. energy giant Enron. The number of larger inquiries could rise into the "hundreds," he said.
"The increasing mortgage-fraud and financial-institution-failure case inventory is straining the FBI's limited ... resources," Pistole said in a statement.
Rita Glavin, acting chief of the Justice Department's Criminal Division, said the pending fraud investigations and the inquiries expected to rise out of the government's enormous economic stimulus program likely will increase pressure on federal law enforcement.
Pistole said more than $1 trillion has been lost during the current financial crisis. During the savings and loan institution failures of the late 1980s and early 1990s, more than $150 billion was lost, a far smaller amount.
Yet Pistole said about 1,000 agents were assigned to the savings and loan crisis, far more than the 240 agents now working cases related to the financial collapse.
Pistole said that the bureau's first priority remains national security. After the 2001 terrorist attacks, about 2,000 agents were moved to national-security-related positions, including many who were transferred from white-collar crime duties. Given the growing caseload of financial investigations, Pistole said bureau officials are conducting a "scrub" of all available resources to assist with the new fraud inquiries.
"I want to see people prosecuted," said Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt. "I want to see them go to jail." 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images

Load-Date: February 12, 2009


End of Document