FBI warns of more terrorism   No specific method, target is mentioned
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
October 29, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. A1
Length: 955 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON _ The FBI issued its latest nationwide terrorist alert following "the convergence of information from credible sources," Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge said this morning, material deemed related to Osama bin Laden or his al-Qaida network.
At a White House news conference, Mr. Ridge said Americans should be on alert at the same time they continue to go about their normal lives.
"America has to continue to be America," he said.
The new warning was one of several homefront developments in the war on terrorism.
Vice President Dick Cheney was taken to an undisclosed secure location last night and remained there today in order to safeguard the continuity of government in the event of an attack on President Bush.
Officials are investigating how a New Jersey woman who does not work for the postal service developed skin anthrax.
In New York, doctors are monitoring a suspected case of the inhaled form of the disease in a hospital worker.
New traces of anthrax spores were found in the Capitol Police office of the Ford House building in Washington, which was already closed because of positive tests in its mail room. Anthrax also was confirmed late yesterday in a downtown Agriculture Department office mailroom and technicians were considering a plan to pump chlorine gas into the shuttered Hart Senate Office Building to kill any lingering anthrax spores there.
Officials closed the Friendship Heights post office in Washington today after anthrax spores were found. Postal workers there were advised to start antibiotic therapy.
In Maryland, state officials reported no new suspected cases of anthrax yesterday in Maryland and ruled out the illness in three earlier cases at a suburban Baltimore hospital.
Attorney General John Ashcroft said yesterday that the warning was issued following receipt of intelligence that terrorists may attack U.S. interests. Officials said members of bin Laden's network could be plotting attacks in retaliation for the U.S.-led bombing of Afghanistan.
At his news conference, Mr. Ridge provided little by way of elaboration.
The announcement was made because the "decibel level was louder" in routine intelligence information, suggesting an attack. "It was just the convergence of credible sources that occasioned the alert, more than usual, he said.
Asked about the quality of the information, he replied, "Credibility we leave to the experts but I think you can fairly assume that the experts view this tied in, this information somehow related to al-Qaida or bin Laden."
Like Mr. Ridge, White House spokesman Ari Fleischer sought to prepare the public for a new lifestyle in a terrorist age.
"This is what has been called the new normalcy," he said. "It's fair to say that until the war on terrorism is brought to a successful conclusion … this is going to be the case in our country."
The new warning came as jumpy Americans prepared to celebrate Halloween tomorrow. Stories circulating on the Internet warned about possible attacks on the children's holiday.
Justice Department spokeswoman Mindy Tucker said authorities had received no specific information about a Halloween attack.
As on Oct. 11, when the FBI issued a similar warning, Mr. Ashcroft tried to walk a fine line between giving the public prompt and necessary warnings and not causing panic.
The alert "gives people a basis for continuing to live their lives the way they would otherwise live them, with this elevated sense of alertness or vigilance," Mr. Ashcroft told a news conference. FBI Director Robert Mueller said the Oct. 11 warning may have helped avert an attack. Mr. Ashcroft said the absence of an attack should not lull people "into a false sense of indiffernce."
"It's important for the American people to understand that these (alerts) are to be taken seriously," said Ashcroft, who canceled plans to travel yesterday to Toronto to address a conference of police chiefs.
Ashcroft said 18,000 law enforcement agencies were advised to go on the highest alert. Federal agencies, meanwhile, were increasing security and immigration authorities were boosting their efforts to keep suspected terrorists from coming onto U.S. soil.
Authorities have arrested or detained over 1,000 people in connection with the terrorism investigation, including 180 detained for immigration violations.
The alert came as investigators continued to search for the source of the anthrax that has killed three people and infected dozens of others on the East Coast.
So far scientists have not matched the anthrax mailed from New Jersey with any samples of anthrax available in the United States, a source speaking on condition of anonymity said.
Investigators suspect that a single person, perhaps a deranged U.S. resident with a biochemistry background, could be behind the attacks.
New Jersey officials said a lesion on the forehead of a 51-year-old woman from Hamilton Township was diagnosed as anthrax, apparently the first case in the state not directly linked to a post office. She developed the sore on Oct. 17 and was treated at a hospital and released. Skin tests returned yesterday were positive for anthrax.
In New York City, preliminary tests showed a 61-year-old hospital stockroom employee has contracted inhalation anthrax. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said late yesterday that the woman had been hospitalized since Sunday and was in "very, very serious" condition and on a respirator.
The new New York City case "does appear to be different from the previous cases," Mr. Ridge said on ABC's "Good Morning America." He said the FBI and health officials are investigating where the woman lived and worked.
As of yesterday, 67 Maryland residents had been treated for suspected anthrax exposure. Two, workers at the Brentwood facility, died.

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document