FBI Thanks Saudi Authorities for Cooperating in Florida Shooting Probe
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 9, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 618 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The U.S. has sought the assistance of Saudi officials as they try to piece together information about the gunman and his motive.
"There are a number of Saudi students who are close to the shooter and continue to cooperate in this investigation", Rojas said. Two other Saudi students watched from a auto, the official said.
Friends of shooterMohammed Alshamrani were detained after the killing of three US Navy sailors Friday.
Other Saudi students who are on the same course have been restricted to base at the naval air station in Pensacola on the instructions of their commanding officer and were co-operating with the investigation.
A Twitter user appearing to match Alshamrani's identity also made a series of anti-US posts before the shooting, an online monitoring group says.
"I thank the kingdom for their pledge of full and complete cooperation", she added.
"You have to take precautions" to protect the nation, DeSantis said.
Earlier in the week of the shooting, Alshamrani hosted a dinner party where he and three others watched videos of mass shootings, another USA official told The Associated Press on Saturday.
"The Second Amendment applies to we the American people to keep and bear and arms".
Several others were wounded, including two sheriff's deputies and a Navy police officer, Escambia County Chief Deputy Chip Simmons said at a prayer vigil inPensacola Saturday.
But several questions still swirl around Alshamarani's motivation and whether the gunman, who used a legally purchased handgun, was acting in concert with others.
Google Announces Impressive Set of Pixel "Feature Drops"
Adding a blurred background to any photo is one click away, even if the photo was taken years ago on a different device. Google tends to update its Pixel phones with the latest Android version on the day it first becomes available.
Rojas did not respond directly when asked if other students knew about the attack beforehand or if there was something "disastrous" about making the video. Tension has risen between the countries over the continued restriction to the base of up to a dozen Saudi nationals, a person familiar with the case said.
"Our main goal is to confirm whether he acted alone or was he part of a larger network", she said.
President Donald Trump said Saturday that he would review policies governing foreign military training in the U.S.
"My point is it looks, from what we're seeing in the public reports, that this looks like something that's terrorism or akin to terrorism", he said.
Gaetz said he told the ambassador the US does not want the Kingdom interfering in the case, but expects its full cooperation should investigators need it.
For a long time, USA UU.
Booker decried Trump's stance toward the Saudis as "transactional", calling for a broad review of U.S. -Saudi relations. Besides this, he even allowed the arms deal with the middle east country though several lawmakers made the point that Saudi Arabia is potentially unsafe with reference to Khashoggi's killing and other incidents of violence in the past.
Watson had been training to become a military jet pilot when he died Friday after the gunman opened fire at a classroom building inside the base, his family said.
Foreigners allowed in the US UU.
At a separate press conference on Sunday, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis said the gunman had "a major social media trail" and called for more stringent security measures.
"Knowing everything that I know - which include [sic] all of the intelligence apparatus and everything in the federal government without going into critical detail at this moment - the community is safe and there's not any sort of immediate direct threat of any terrorist acts at this time". "We'll start that right away".

Load-Date: December 9, 2019


End of Document