FBI anti-terrorism team asks for help from Princeton
University Wire
December 17, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The Daily Princetonian via U-Wire
Length: 347 words
Byline: By Zack Surak, The Daily Princetonian
Dateline: Princeton, N.J.
Body


An FBI-led anti-terrorism task force discovered blueprints of common areas of Princeton Borough, N.J., and Princeton University in an apartment in Philadelphia earlier this week, University Public Safety Crime Prevention Specialist Barry Weiser said.
The FBI would not release to the university the reason for its investigation of the individual in possession of the blueprints, Weiser said.
The FBI contacted Princeton officials to determine the locations featured in the blueprints and ask whether the university was familiar with the person under investigation.
Princeton U.
"[University officials] were not familiar with the individual's name in the engineering or physical planning offices," Weiser said.
Princeton was helpful in identifying the locations shown in the blueprints, he said.
"[The university's Department of] State and Community Affairs said similar blueprints were used in the project to redesign downtown Princeton Borough," Weiser said. "An architect in Philly was used in that project."
Weiser added that the individual who owned the apartment could have been working for the architectural firm in Philadelphia.
Though Weiser did not know the status of the FBI's investigation, he said he didn't think the incident posed a major threat to the campus.
"The FBI obviously didn't deem it too important if they didn't continue discussing it with us," Weiser added.
Borough Police Lt. Dennis McManimon said the FBI did not inform Borough officials of the incident.
In an unrelated incident, McManimon said Borough police have a lead on suspects in the recent string of thefts at Prospect Avenue's eating clubs.
"It's just general information," McManimon said. "Sometimes you hear info that people may have been involved in thefts."
McManimon said the investigation is ongoing and the names of the individuals will not be released at this time. However, he added, Public Safety has been notified of the suspects.
"If we observe them on campus or around clubs, we will let local police know," Weiser said.
(C) 2002 The Daily Princetonian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 17, 2003


End of Document