FBI veteran's testimony aids defense
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 22, 2006 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 525 words
Byline: By Michael J. Sniffen THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA, VA. 
Body


The headquarters supervisor of the FBI's international terrorism operations section testified Tuesday he had never read an Aug. 18, 2001, memo in which an agent proposed a full criminal investigation of Zacarias Moussaoui as a possible terrorist hijacker.
The now-retired supervisor, Michael Rolince, was questioned by defense attorney Edward MacMahon during Moussaoui's sentencing trial. He was asked whether he had ever heard that Harry Samit, the FBI agent who arrested Moussaoui while he was taking pilot lessons in Minnesota, concluded the 37-year-old Frenchman of Moroccan descent was a terrorist planning to hijack a commercial jetliner.
"No," Rolince snapped.
Had he heard other conclusions by Samit about Moussaoui? "No. What document are you reading?" he demanded.
Samit's Aug. 18 report "sent to your office," MacMahon said.
Called as a government witness, Rolince, a 31-year FBI veteran who retired last October, proved more valuable for attorneys defending the only man charged in this country in connection with al-Qaida's attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001.
Defense objections and rulings by U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema barred Rolince from giving what prosecutors wanted most: a long listing of investigative steps the FBI could have taken if Moussaoui had admitted when he was arrested on Aug. 16, 2001, all the facts he confessed to when pleading guilty last April.
Instead, defense attorney MacMahon was able to extract from Rolince more embarrassing revelations about FBI handling of terrorism intelligence before the Sept. 11 attacks.
To get the death penalty at this sentencing trial, the government must show that Moussaoui's lies upon arrest prevented the FBI from identifying hijackers and the Federal Aviation Administration from altering airport security enough to have saved at least one of the nearly 3,000 people who died Sept. 11.
The defense position
The defense contends the government knew more than Moussaoui about the Sept. 11 attacks beforehand and the FBI was so inept at fighting terrorism that nothing Moussaoui could have said would have mattered. Moussaoui has admitted conspiring with al-Qaida to fly planes into U.S. buildings. But he says he was not part of the Sept. 11 plot and was training to fly a 747 into the White House as part of a possible later attack.
When prosecutor David Raskin began reading Moussaoui's confession statement and asking Rolince how the FBI could have responded to it in August 2001, Rolince started to describe what the FBI "would have" done. MacMahon protested.
The defense argued the Fifth Amendment protected Moussaoui from being required to incriminate himself upon arrest.
Rolince was able to say only that Moussaoui's confession statements were more specific about al-Qaida's targets and methods than other terrorist threat reports and that the FBI could have used all 11,300 agents to track leads and Moussaoui's financing.
Rolince also said he never saw an April 2001 briefing sent to FBI Director Louis Freeh, with Rolince marked in, that said Osama bin Laden was plotting with a Chechen Islamic rebels leader to mount a 2001 terrorist attack.

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Moussaoui 

Load-Date: March 22, 2006


End of Document