FBI director tells Utah agents fighting terrorism is a priority
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 12, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL
Length: 332 words
Byline: By Nate Carlisle The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


The FBI's top official said Utah's agents will continue making terrorism a priority while still investigating conventional crime.
That includes mortgage fraud, said FBI Director Robert Mueller, who spoke Wednesday during a visit to his agency's field office in Salt Lake City. Mueller said there are a "number of investigations" into mortgage fraud in Utah, Idaho and Montana - the three states where the FBI agents are controlled by the Salt Lake City office. Mueller declined to discuss specific investigations.
A report released in March ranked Utah as having the fifth worse mortgage fraud problem in the country and the FBI's western region had the second-most pending FBI mortgage investigations.
A state and federal task force has been created in the state to investigate the crimes.
Before taking questions from reporters, Mueller discussed how preventing terrorism remains an FBI priority. Investigators in Utah have uncovered no major plots or terrorism financing since 2001, but Mueller pointed out how the the Sept. 11 hijackers lived in multiple states. Mueller said every FBI station needs to remain vigilant.
"Those who are contemplating attacks may move around the country," Mueller said.
Salt Lake County Sheriff Jim Winder said Wednesday he would like the FBI to focus on more conventional crime.
"Resources are very finite in the local municipalities and jurisdictions, and the services the FBI has provided traditionally, that void has not been filled," Winder said.
Winder said the FBI has traditionally been valuable in investigating such crimes as bank robberies and kidnappings, but he has seen fewer federal agents dedicated to those crimes.
The Seattle Post- Intelligencer in April reported the number of FBI investigations since Sept. 11 has declined while agents have been diverted to terrorism investigations and away from white-collar and violent crimes.
Mueller said he does not expect FBI priorities to change when a new president takes office next year.
ncarlisle@sltrib.com

Graphic

 
FBI Director Robert S. Mueller speaks Wednesday during a visit to his agency's field office in Salt Lake City.

Load-Date: June 13, 2008


End of Document