FBI chief discounts new agency's need;
Mueller says his group can handle terrorism probes
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 20, 2002 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 456 words
Byline: REBECCA CARR
Body


Washington --- FBI Director Robert Mueller argued Thursday that the bureau is aggressively collecting intelligence on suspected terrorists.
Mueller said the FBI has the manpower, the tools and nearly a century of experience to track terrorists within the United States.
"Establishing a new domestic intelligence agency would constitute a step backward in the war on terror, not a step forward," Mueller said in a speech to the Citizens Crime Commission of New York City.
Cox Washington Bureau
It was the first time Mueller has publicly addressed the controversial proposal to create a new intelligence gathering agency. It marks the beginning of an intense lobbying effort to convince Congress that the FBI has changed under his stewardship.
The concept for creating a domestic spy agency grew out of a series of hearings held by the House and Senate Intelligence committees during the fall.
A preliminary report from the bipartisan investigation recommended that Congress consider creating a new domestic spy agency similar to the MI-5 in Britain.
But some lawmakers say that a new intelligence unit designed to root out terrorists within the United Sates should be created right away.
"The FBI is clearly broken, and we can accept no further delay in the effort to fix it," said Sen. John Edwards (D-N.C.), who oversees the bureau as a member of both the Intelligence and Judiciary committees.
The FBI should do what it does best, which is law enforcement, Edwards said Wednesday at the Brookings Institution.
But Mueller said it would be better to improve what the FBI is doing now, rather than "create a new agency from whole cloth."
In the months after the al-Qaida attacks on New York and Washington, the FBI made its top priority the prevention of another terrorist strike. It set up a National Joint Terrorism Task Force at its headquarters in Washington that includes staffers from federal, state and local agencies.
Mueller has doubled the number of agents handling terrorism cases and quadrupled the number of strategic analysts at headquarters. Ultimately, he plans to have 700 analysts across the country working terrorism cases.
"There is no reason to separate the two functions of law enforcement and domestic intelligence," Mueller said. "On the contrary, combining law enforcement and intelligence grants us ready access to every weapon in the government's arsenal against terrorists."
Sen. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa), often a critic of the FBI, said he thinks the bureau deserves a chance to change before a domestic spy agency is created.
"The FBI deserves a chance to get its act together," Grassley said. "But their time to move from investigating Bonnie-and-Clyde-type crimes to preventing terrorist activities is getting shorter."

Graphic

 
Photo: Robert Mueller says the FBI has the tools to track terrorists in the U.S.

Load-Date: December 20, 2002


End of Document