FBI chief expects terrorism to grow and possibly involve weapons of mass destruction
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 3, 1998, Thursday


Copyright 1998 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 343 words
Byline: By Lee Davidson Deseret News Washington correspondent
Body


WASHINGTON -- Expect terrorism to continue long into the future, to wage larger attacks and possibly to use chemical, germ and even nuclear arms, FBI Director Louis Freeh warned Thursday.
That came in a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing to review threats and U.S. antiterrorism efforts in the wake of attacks on U.S. embassies last month in Kenya and Tanzania.
Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, urged all parties to stand arm-in-arm in the fight against terrorism and said such joint resolve might help discourage attacks.
For example, he urged united support for President Clinton's decision to send missiles in retaliation attacks in the Sudan and Afghanistan last month. Hatch said, "The president deserves our support in taking those actions.
"Friends and foes alike must know that the United States stands united in facing down the scourge of international terrorism, and I am committed to providing the resources and tools that are necessary to respond to the threat," he said.
In outlining threats for the committee, Freeh said terrorism "will continue for the foreseeable future." But he said its nature is changing.
"Today's terrorists play by a different set of rules than those of years past," he said, adding they seem to aim for a maximum of casualties -- without any concern about whom is hurt -- to seek maximum attention and fear.
"The trend toward more large-scale incidents designed for maximum destruction, terror and media impact actually places an increasing proportion of our population at risk," he said, even though the overall number of terrorist attacks has reduced.
He said such deadly work is also aided by a "more dizzying array of weapons and technologies available."
Among them are the possible use of chemical, germ and nuclear weapons. "These weapons of mass destruction represent perhaps the most serious potential threat facing the United States today," Freeh said.
In fact, he said the FBI investigated more than 100 cases of potential use or seeking of weapons of mass destruction in 1997 -- triple the cases it had in 1996.

Load-Date: September 3, 1998


End of Document