FBI law enforcement foils terrorism plot
The Prairie: West Texas A & M University
March 8, 2011 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 631 words
Body


FBI law enforcement foils terrorism plot
Krystina Martinez
March 8, 2011 · 1,936 views
Filed under News
Khalid Ali-M Aldawsari was charged with attempted use of weapons of mass destruction. Photo courtesy of businessinsider.com.
A 20-year-old Saudi Arabian from Lubbock was charged with attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction on Feb. 24.
FBI investigators were tipped off when the Carolina Biological Supply of Burlington, N.C. reported suspicious purchases by Khalid Ali-M Aldawsari on Feb. 1.
Aldawsari was allegedly trying to obtain TNP, a chemical explosive that has the same destructive power as TNT. Federal agents searched his off-campus apartment and found chemicals such as phenol, beakers, flasks, a Hazmat suit, and clocks.
Investigators also searched his computer, e-mail accounts and personal diary to find that Aldawsari had been plotting to attack the U.S. for years.
"After mastering the English language, learning how to build explosives and continuous planning to target the infidel Americans, it is time for jihad," said Aldawsari in a journal entry.
Potential targets included reservoir dams across Colorado and California, the Texas home of former President George W. Bush and the homes of three American citizens who had served in the U.S. military and had been stationed at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. An FBI affidavit said he considered using infant dolls to hide explosives and was possibly targeting a nightclub with a backpack filled with explosives.
Aldawsari studied chemical engineering at Texas Tech University before transferring to South Plains College earlier this year to study business. He entered the U.S. legally in Oct. 2008 from Riyadh, Saudi Arabia on a student visa. A Saudi industrial company, Saudi Basic Industries Corp., had awarded Aldawsari a scholarship to study in the U.S.
"SABIC is prepared to assist law enforcement authorities upon request in the investigation of Khalid Aldawsari, the Saudi student who was arrested in Lubbock, Tex., on weapons charges," SABIC said in a statement. "Aldawsari was studying in the United States on a student visa as part of SABIC's scholarship program.
So far, investigators have been able to conclude that Aldawsari acted alone and was not working under the influence of any foreign terrorist organization.
Congressman Randy Neugebauer, (R-Lubbock) issued a statement praising the arrest by FBI and Lubbock law enforcement.
"This should be a lesson to us that we must remain diligent in our fight against terrorism," he said. "Additionally, we must remain alert and everywhere, including Lubbock, Texas, because terrorism isn't just a New York City or Washington, D.C. threat."
Aldawsari's arrest illustrates how quickly law enforcement officials were able to act when tipped off about a potential terrorism threat. However, because Aldawsari was able to get into the U.S. legally under a student visa, some wonder if the country has been too lenient with immigration standards.
"Ever since 9/11, I feel like we have been trying to forget about it," said Erynn Robinson, a junior nursing major. "I think we let up our guard too quickly. And we need to be careful about who we let in, not to discriminate but to be careful."
However, some fear that the same xenophobia that happened after 9/11 may happen again.
"I grew up in a country where there was war," Shanal DeSilva, a graduate student of biology and a native of Sri Lanka, said. "I think it's wrong to destroy another life [and] it's stupid because one person can ruin [people's perception] for others.
Racial profiling may become an issue after Aldawsari's arrest, but DeSilva hopes that the American people will be more understanding.
"You will find that people from Sri Lanka, Saudi Arabia look alike but that does not mean they are a terrorists," he said.

Load-Date: October 28, 2015


End of Document