FBI watched Colorado protesters
University Wire
March 29, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Colorado Daily via U-Wire
Length: 521 words
Byline: By Casey Freeman, Colorado Daily; SOURCE: U. Colorado
Dateline: BOULDER, Colo. 
Body


The world watched and listened as anti-war demonstrators rallied in hopes of stopping the impending war in Iraq. The FBI was watching and listening, too.
The American Civil Liberties Union released documents Tuesday showing the FBI recorded license plate numbers and monitored about 40 people gathering at a Denver bookstore for a Feb. 15, 2003, anti-war rally in Colorado Springs, Colo.
"One of the things that concerns the ACLU is that the FBI is conducting surreptitious surveillance on a bookstore and putting that in a file called 'Domestic Terrorism,'" said Mark Silverstein, legal director of the ACLU of Colorado. "The government is intruding on privacy in the name of fighting terrorism, and collecting information about Americans who have no connection with terrorism or other criminal activities."
The FBI claims the surveillance was to watch for criminal activity.
"All of our investigations that we conduct must be predicated on a criminal act," said Special Agent Monique R. Kelso, a media representative for the Denver branch of the FBI, in an interview with the Colorado Daily on Tuesday.
The ACLU obtained the documents through the federal Freedom of Information Act, adding another chapter to Denver's "Spy Files" case which has seen Denver police and FBI agents conduct surveillance on peace activists and other demonstrators.
The FBI watched over the beginnings of the Colorado Springs rally that was carried out by activists that included members of Boulder's Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center.
"They're trying to discredit us. They're trying to turn us into criminals," said Betty Ball, the nonviolence education coordinator at the RMPJC.
Ball mentioned that civil rights, labor movement and anti-war protesters have been broken up for years.
"This has been a modus operandi of law enforcement in this country for years," Ball said. "This is nothing new."
The ACLU continues to monitor what it views as spying by the National Security Agency. It has been trying to obtain similar documents for about 18 months. The organization is still requesting more information under the Freedom of Information Act.
"We get responses dribbling through once in a while," said Silverstein. "It's a long process."
Watching protesters is a way to silence protests and rallies, according to Ball.
"They don't want the dissent to be heard because it affects the administration," said Ball. "Their sole purpose was to harass nonviolent protesters."
Kelso said she did not know the details of the surveillance at the bookstore, but said protecting the civil rights of American citizen is a "top priority" for the FBI.
The agency would not monitor a group only because it was protesting, according to Bill Carter, a FBI spokesman in Washington, D.C., in an interview with the Associated Press on Tuesday.
Silverstein and Ball expressed concerns that the monitoring could create a "chilling effect" and dissuade people from attending rallies, putting names on mailing lists or donating funds.
"We need to look for the real terrorists and I can assure you there are not any at the Peace Center," said Ball.
(C) 2006 Colorado Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 29, 2006


End of Document