FBI Agent Briefs Bakersfield, Calif., Pipeline Workers on Terrorism
The Bakersfield Californian
September 19, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
Copyright 2003 The Bakersfield Californian
Length: 687 words
Byline: By Erin Waldner
Body


Be aware -- that was the message an FBI agent recently gave to a group of local pipeline workers about the possibility of terrorist attacks on their workplace.
"You don't think terrorism affects you because it happened in New York or it happens overseas," Special Agent Michael Murphy said. "Terrorism does affect us all. Don't think, working out here on a pipeline, it can't happen to you."
Murphy addressed around 80 people who turned out for a contractor awareness program in Bakersfield presented by the Pipeline Group, headquartered in Midland, Texas.
Terrorists attempt to cripple the United States by targeting its economic infrastructure, said Murphy, an agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 1971.
Certain industries, such as fuel, electrical power, transportation, banking, chemical and agriculture, are part of that infrastructure, Murphy said.
"Run down that list," he said. "Does that fit Kern County, the San Joaquin Valley?"
Local workers in these industries, including pipeline professionals, need to be cognizant of their surroundings, he said.
California is home to a network of crude oil pipelines that connect oil-producing areas with refineries in the state. Several oil and natural gas pipelines run through Kern County.
Pacific Pipeline System LLC, a subsidiary of Long Beach-based Pacific Energy Partners LP, transports 170,000 barrels of oil per day from the San Joaquin Valley to refineries in Bakersfield and the Los Angeles Basin.
Company vice president Art Diefenbach said Pacific Energy increased security at its pipeline system following 9/11. He said the company increased its air patrol and ground surveillance and installed remote control security services.
He also said that because the company transports hazardous materials, security has always been a high priority.
Having around 200 miles of pipeline does make security a challenge, Diefanbach said.
"It's a lot of distance to cover," he said. "It takes a network of people and methods. What you have to do is combine your resources."
The company's pipelines are buried three to five feet underground.
Diefenbach said that while Pacific Energy would like to completely hide from terrorists, it's required to mark its pipelines indicating their locations. This is for safety reasons in case someone is digging near the pipelines.
Diefenbach said the company has not received any specific threats post-9/11.
The company frequently holds safety meetings with its personnel and security is a recurring topic, Diefenbach said.
Pacific Energy's pipelines are remotely controlled. When employees work on the pipelines independently, they carry radios, Diefenbach said. He also said the company keeps an eye on anyone who enters the company's facilities.
Despite the security measures it takes, Diefenbach said it would not be very difficult for a terrorist to damage company's assets. However, he added that Pacific Energy has a matrix of pipelines and if there is an interruption in flow, the company ran re-route the oil to another system.
Claudia Chandler, assistant executive director of the California Energy Commission, said in general, "we are vulnerable because we created a (pipeline) system that in large part was based on trust. We're having to change that."
The commission, based in Sacramento, has changed its public information procedures since 9/11, Chandler said.
It has removed maps of pipelines from its Web site. Also, Chandler said the commission's staff members, when they receive a request for a map, ask more questions than they used to. She said someone from a wind energy association recently asked for a map, and before releasing it to him, the commission confirmed that he did work for the association.
Murphy said there have been instances when terrorists tried to buy uniforms or trucks so they blend into an environment. He advised Tuesday night's group of pipeline professionals to be aware of anything or anyone out of the ordinary when they're on the job, and to pass that information on to the FBI.
-----
To see more of The Bakersfield Californian, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.bakersfield.com 

Load-Date: September 20, 2003


End of Document