FBI agent blasts bureau on terrorism Feds: Businessman hired illegals Husband accused of killing ex-wife Vulgarity gets man in hot water
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
January 13, 2008 Sunday


Copyright 2008 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.   All Rights Reserved  
Section: B; Pg. 5
Length: 456 words
Byline: Sunday News Staff
Series: AROUND PENNSYLVANIA
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Around Pennsylvania
Jealousy, discrimination and flawed directives hinder the FBI's attempts to fight terrorism, an agency whistle-blower charged Saturday at an American Library Association meeting in Philadelphia.
Bassem Youssef, a decorated FBI supervisor who was born in Egypt and speaks fluent Arabic, says counterterrorism agents lack the language skills and cultural understanding needed to succeed. Youssef, 49, the highest ranking Arab-American agent, has a discrimination suit pending against the FBI.
"The FBI has publicly stated that ... cultural understanding of the Middle East and the radical Islamic groups, as well as the language, are not necessary to run the counterterrorism division," said Youssef. "Why would any Arab-American who may be the target of [FBI] recruitment ... be interested?"
A Pittsburgh-area business owner, who himself is an illegal immigrant, was accused of hiring illegal immigrants for his food-supply business.
Federal prosecutors on Friday charged Bao Ping Zheng, 39, Ohio Township, with harboring illegal aliens.
Zheng has been in federal custody since September on immigration violations, according to his attorney, Martin Dietz.
Zheng is accused of knowingly hiring seven Chinese workers through a New York employment agency for his Stowe Township-based business, New Chinatown/NBT Trucking, which delivers food to Chinese restaurants throughout western Pennsylvania.
A 32-year-old Westmoreland County man is accused of shooting his former wife dead at her home in Mount Pleasant Township.
State police say troopers found Dean Zisek Jr. of Yukon outside the house of Debra Zisek when they arrived at her house Friday night. Authorities say Debra Zisek was found inside the house, dead from several gunshot wounds.
Zisek is charged with homicide and was held in the Westmoreland County Prison.
A man who wrote a vulgar message on the memo line of a check he used to pay a $5 parking ticket has apologized in writing, leading police to drop a disorderly conduct charge.
"He was contrite enough to offer an apology, and I think that satisfies the people who were insulted by it, which were the clerks," Doylestown Police Chief James Donnelly said. Donnelly said the disorderly conduct charge was filed because the comment was obscene.
But the lawyer for David Binner, 45, Doylestown, said his client would have prevailed if he went through a trial.
"The F-word isn't what it used to be," attorney Keith Williams said. But Williams said his client felt bad about what he did and will pay the parking fine and court costs.
"This is not my normal nature and admittedly was a temporary lapse of judgment on my part, vented in a moment of frustration," Binner wrote in his letter of apology.
From our wire services

Load-Date: January 14, 2008


End of Document