FBI PROBE HAS SLEEPY BACKWATER TOWN ABUZZ
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 29, 1993, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 551 words
Byline: TIM REEVES, POST-GAZETTE HARRISBURG CORRESPONDENT
Body


The murky world of Muslim fundamentalism and international terrorism seems light years away from this sleepy backwater town 35 miles northwest of Harrisburg, the seat of Perry County that has yet to install its first traffic light.
So it's no wonder folks were buzzing yesterday after learning the FBI had raided a 35-acre property three miles north of New Bloomfield Saturday, looking for evidence that Muslim terrorists had trained there in preparation for a series of planned bombings and assassinations in New York City.
''It just goes to show,'' drawled a customer at Copenhaver's hardware store, a mile or so down the road from the site of the raid. ''You never know who your neighbor is.''
The neighbor in question is Kelvin Smith, a 39-year-old Muslim who operates a rifle range and survival-training course on his wooded property, nestled along a two-lane road that winds between Perry County's rolling hills.
FBI agents raided Smith's home Saturday while Navy divers searched a nearby pond -- looking for what, they would not say.
FBI spokeswoman Linda Vizi said the search was in conjunction with the arrest last week of eight Muslim fundamentalists accused of plotting to bomb the United Nations, the Holland and Lincoln tunnels, and to assassinate several prominent figures, including Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and U.S. Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato, R- New York.
Smith told the Harrisburg Patriot-News that a group of New York City Muslims had used his rifle-range four months ago. He also said he was contacted by the FBI, prior to the World Trade Center bombing, about suspected terrorists who may have trained there.
Smith, who said he opposes terrorism, told The New York Times he never knowingly allowed his property to be used by terrorists. He said all sorts of people use his place, and the Muslims were just another group.
''Why would I be suspicious?'' he told the Patriot-News. ''They prayed like I prayed. They never said anything crazy to me.
''No Muslim in his right mind would be involved in that kind of craziness, to blow up people.''
Smith, who moved to Perry County from New York eight years ago, told the newspapers he advertises his facility in fliers distributed at gun shows and in Muslim community newsletters.
No arrest warrants have been issued in connection with the Perry County investigation, said Vizi, the FBI spokeswoman.
Smith told the Patriot-News that nothing was found in the search. He said agents confiscated but then returned the shotguns and rifles he keeps at his home.
Yesterday, all was quiet at Smith's home. A woman, speaking through a closed door, said Smith was not in. She declined to say where he was.
Neighbors, some of whom described Smith as a likable fellow, had noticed, somewhat unhappily, heavy weekend activity at his rifle range.
Smith told the Patriot-News he has worked for the U.S. Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife Division, and now works as a night watchman at a nearby school and as a local martial-arts instructor.
Meanwhile, at the Uni-Mart in New Bloomfield, patrons were buzzing with excitement.
''There goes Channel 27,'' remarked one woman, as yet another television- station crew drove by to capture film of Smith's property.
''It's not often Perry County makes the news,'' she explained.

Graphic

 
MAP (2), PHOTO, Post-Gazette: (for two maps), John S. Zeedick/Associated Press: Kelvin Smith cuts grass at his farm in rural New Bloomfield, Pa., while his property is searched.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document