FBI narrowing focus in Los Alamos probe
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 21, 2000, Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 8A
Length: 338 words
Byline: From our news services
Body

Washington --- FBI agents investigating the strange case of lost-then- found nuclear terrorism secrets at Los Alamos National Laboratory reportedly are focusing on three weapons scientists who appear to have worked in collusion.
The FBI also determined that two computer hard drives, each containing highly classified data about nuclear terrorism, may have vanished weeks or months earlier than previously believed, the Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post reported today.
Until now, officials have said the drives were inventoried in a Los Alamos vault on April 7.
CONSTITUTION
The hard drives were definitely examined in January as part of Y2K tests, the Times reported, citing unnamed Energy Department officials.
But officials said human error and arrogance, not espionage, appear to be the culprits in the deepening mystery, according to the Times.
The newspaper added that a third U.S. official said the three scientists helped write the highly sensitive weapons data on the hard drives and "were so confident that the material was secure in their hands that they got lax."
The officials said the three scientists under suspicion all gave conflicting answers in interviews and appeared deceptive during lie detector tests, the Times reported.
The Times also reported that:
Investigators believe --- but have not yet proved --- that one member of the group took or misplaced the hard drives and then, after the FBI investigation began early this month, asked his colleagues for help in a scheme to avoid being caught.
If federal prosecutors conclude an illegal conspiracy or cover-up took place, the scientists could be charged with mishandling classified information or other felonies.
The three scientists all work in the lab's X Division, where the nation's most advanced nuclear weapons are designed. All three are volunteer members of the lab's Nuclear Emergency Search Team, a kind of nuclear bomb squad that assists the FBI in cases of nuclear terrorism.

> ON THE WEB: Los Alamos National Laboratory: www.lanl.gov/worldview/ 

Load-Date: June 21, 2000


End of Document