FBI UNMASKS PLOT TO BLOW UP U.N.; SUSPECTS TIED TO PLANS FOR ASSASSINATIONS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 25, 1993, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1010 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Eight Muslim fundamentalists were charged Thursday with plotting to use an explosive "witch's brew" to blow up U.N. headquarters, a federal office building in lower Manhattan and two tunnels under the Hudson River used daily by millions of commuters.  James Fox, the FBI's regional director, said the arrests were made as five of the suspects were mixing their massive bombs in what he called a "witch's brew" in five 55-gallon drums. The information is from an inside informer, Fox said.  Officials said the group also planned to assassinate U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali; Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.; and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. But the complaints do not mention assassinations.  Dov Hikind, an outspoken Jewish assemblyman from New York, said investigators had told him that he also had been a target of the group.  FBI officials said they acted as the group came dangerously close to carrying out the bombings.  The terrorist spree was conceived about 2 1/2 months after the Trade Center bombing of Feb. 26. Two of the eight suspects told an informer that they had helped in a test blast for that attack, a federal complaint alleges.  The Trade Center bombing was meant to send a chilling message: "We can get you anytime," Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, who police allege is the ringleader of the group, was reported to have told an informer.  "Law enforcement's answer is: No, you cannot," U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White said at a news conference.
"The message that these arrests and prosecutions should send is that we will not be driven from our community, we will not live in fear and we will not permit the likes of these defendants to terrorize our city." She said the men had been charged with conspiracy to bomb and attempting to bomb and face up to 15 years in prison. Additional charges were expected, she added.  The attack on the Trade Center's twin towers killed six, injured more than 1,000 and shook the national psyche. Six Muslim fundamentalists are in custody in connection with that incident.  Reuters News Service quoted sources in the Islamic community as saying that Siddig, 32, is a close associate of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the Egyptian cleric suspected of seeking the violent overthrow of the Egyptian government.  Investigators said privately that those arrested were followers of Abdel-Rahman, as were those charged in the bombing of the Trade Center.  The suspects in the new plot - five of them Sudanese nationals with permanent U.S. resident status and the others with unclear backgrounds - also discussed bombing unspecified "other military and governmental targets," the complaint says. Sudan has been a refuge for Egyptian fundamentalists.  Investigators said they had yet to determine the motive.  A federal judge ordered all eight suspects held without bail.  Also Thursday, authorities searched the apartment in Jersey City, N.J., of Abdel-Rahman. Officials could be seen removing about a dozen cardboard boxes from the building.  Several hours before his apartment was searched, Abdel-Rahman refused to comment on the latest arrests; his whereabouts later were undetermined.  A government informer recorded many conversations with the suspects, and authorities arrested them when it appeared they were starting to make explosives and lay plans for fleeing the country, said Fox, the FBI's regional director.  Five suspects, including Siddig, were seized about 1 a.m. Thursday at a safe house in the New York borough of Queens. Other arrests were made in the borough of Brooklyn, Yonkers, N.Y., and Jersey City.  In the safe house were five drums of a homemade explosive made from diesel fuel and fertilizer - the combination used in the Trade Center bomb, authorities said. The unidentified informer had rented the apartment, authorities said.  "As we entered the bomb factory, the five subjects were actually mixing the witch's brew," Fox said. "We entered so fast, some of the subjects said they didn't realize strangers were in the bomb factory until they had the handcuffs being put on them." Agents who took part said that "the smell of fumes from the mixture was almost overpowering," Fox said.  The fuel arrived Wednesday just hours before the arrests, brought to Queens from the gas station in Yonkers of one defendant, the complaint says. The safe house, a garage in the rear of a Queens storefront, was under physical and electronic surveillance, the FBI said.  The FBI complaint said Siddig, of Jersey City, planned a single day of bombings - first at the United Nations, then at the Holland or Lincoln tunnels, and finally a federal office building in lower Manhattan where the FBI has offices.  Siddig, afraid of surveillance, referred to U.N. headquarters as the "Big House" and 26 Federal Plaza as the "Center," the complaint says.  The complaint says that Siddig took responsibility for getting the material and personnel to build the bomb and carry out the bombing and that he had conducted surveillance of the target buildings.  On May 27 and May 28, Siddig, along with a fellow defendant described only as Amir and another defendant, Fares Khallafalla, met the informer at the safe house, where they tested a timing device for detonating a bomb, the complaint says. The complaint says Siddig and Clement Rodney Hampton-El, a fellow suspect, told the informer that they had participated in a test of explosives used in the Trade Center bombing.  D'Amato said he believed he was targeted for his calls for Abdel-Rahman's deportation and for his stance on terrorism.  Hikind has called for prosecuting Abdel-Rahman on charges of inciting another follower to kill radical Rabbi Meir Kahane in November 1990. He asserted that those arrested Thursday also were involved in the trial of a suspect in the killing of Kahane.  Boutros-Ghali is an Egyptian and a member of the country's Coptic Christian minority, which has been a target of Muslim radicals. The radicals also have been waging a deadly campaign in Egypt to topple Mubarak's secular government, as Abdel-Rahman has advocated.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, MAP; (1) Color Photo headshot of U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali (2) Color Photo headshot of U.S. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (3) Color Photo headshot of N.Y. state assemblyman Dov Hikind (4) Color Photo headshot of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt (5) Color Map By Knight-Ridder Tribune/Post-Dispatch - Map showing the N.Y. Terrorism Plot: Alleged bombing and assassination targets of eight people arrested on terrorism charges.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document