FBI expands investigation into Amtrak derailment
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 11, 1995, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 395 words
Body


HYDER, Ariz. - FBI agents hunting the saboteur who derailed an Amtrak train worked Tuesday to determine whether the "Sons of Gestapo" is really an anti-government terrorist group or just someone with a grudge against the railroad.
The FBI expanded its painstaking search for evidence to a mile-square area surrounding the gulch where the Sunset Limited lurched off a damaged track, and asked the public for help finding the culprit.
An Associated Press Report
The train jumped the tracks at the damaged section early Monday, toppling 30 feet from a bridge, killing a crew member and injuring at least 78 people.
A letter found at the scene mentioned federal raids at Waco, Texas, and Ruby Ridge, Idaho. It was signed "Sons of Gestapo," raising fears the sabotage was the work of anti-government extremists.
FBI officials held a brief news conference six miles from the scene Tuesday but offered little insight into the investigation.
With about 90 agents on the scene, Larry McCormick, acting special agent in charge of the Phoenix office, said he believed it was the bureau's second-biggest crime scene investigation after the Oklahoma City bombing.
"We are going to pursue every bit of evidence and every lead very thoroughly … until we find the person or persons who committed this crime," said U.S. Attorney Janet Napolitano.
Acting on a tip to Phoenix police, FBI agents on Tuesday found a device capable of derailing a train on a set of railroad tracks near Union Station in Phoenix. Special Agent Al Davidson said the bureau knew nothing to connect the discovery with the derailment.
The Amtrak case was put under the supervision of Assistant FBI Director Robert Bryant, who runs the national security division, according to a senior Justice Department official. The division handles terrorism cases.
"Bryant's national security division has the case because it has the potential to become a terrorism case, but we have not reached any conclusions yet whether terrorism is the motive or not," the source said.
The White House stressed that it was too early to be sure terrorism was involved, but President Clinton expressed outrage.
"We will do everything we can within the federal government to catch whoever is responsible," he said. "I am determined that we will make sure in the United States that we will have the tools, the means we need to keep the American people safe."

Load-Date: October 13, 1995


End of Document