FBI reportedly tried to hide its mistakes; It also retaliated against an agent who pointed out the problems, investigators say
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 6, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. c5
Length: 314 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


FBI agents botched a terrorism investigation in Florida and tried to cover up mistakes, said Justice Department investigators, who also concluded that a high-ranking official retaliated against the veteran undercover agent who first pointed out the problems.
The findings were included in a draft report by the Justice Department's inspector general on a complaint made by former agent Michael German about an investigation in Orlando that he believed showed promising signs of a link between terrorism financing and the sale of illegal drugs.
The inspector general's office "substantiated German's allegations that the Orlando case was mishandled and mismanaged by the FBI's Tampa Division," the report said. German, who left the FBI in 2004 after 16 years, received the Nov. 15 draft and made it public.
But the inspector general did not back up his contention that the agent in Orlando and FBI supervisors missed the chance to unravel a terrorism financing operation, concluding there was no evidence to undermine earlier reviews that the suspect had no link to terrorists.
German said Monday that the inspector general gave too much credence to those reviews, especially after documenting other significant problems.
The agent who handled the terrorism investigation in 2002 also misdated reports to make it appear he completed them much sooner than he had.
German sought protection as a whistleblower in September 2002, by which time he believed his complaints were being ignored.
Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, a critic of the FBI and ardent defender of whistleblowers, said German is "in a long line of FBI whistleblowers who have had their careers derailed because the FBI couldn't tolerate criticism. I look forward to seeing a final report on Mr. German's case, but right now I believe it to be a sad day when someone at the FBI alters records in order to discredit a whistleblower."

Load-Date: December 6, 2005


End of Document