FBI CANNOT FIGHT TERRORISM WITHOUT RESOURCES, MONEY
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 29, 2007 Monday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A
Length: 394 words
Body


It has been three years since the 9/11 Commission documented our nation's intelligence failures. One section of the commission's report stressed the importance of beefing up the FBI's role in combating foreign terrorists inside our borders. It ended with this warning: "We have found that in the past the (FBI) has announced its willingness to reform and restructure itself to address transnational security threats, but has fallen short - failing to effect the necessary institutional and cultural changes organization-wide."
So how is that effort going? Not so well, according to reports out of recent hearings of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Intelligence agents are treated as "second-class citizens" within the FBI, Thomas Kean, chairman of the 9/11 Commission, told the committee recently. "If fighting terrorism is now the highest priority of the FBI, then the role of analysts at the FBI must change dramatically. Change is happening, but so far very slowly," Kean said.
The FBI could start by hiring adequate staff. Only two of 24 senior intelligence officer positions have been filled in three years, Congressional Quarterly reported. Just 60 percent of counterterrorism supervisory positions have been staffed, and nearly one in four of those positions assigned to al-Qaida-related cases is unfilled.
Agents in the field have neither clear guidance on their mission nor adequate technology to do their jobs properly. The agency is unable to electronically store and share images or audio files collected in intelligence investigations. And according to a USA Today report, most FBI employees don't even have a computer on their desk. Of those with a desk computer, only one in three is connected to the Internet.
How discouraging. Money shouldn't be an excuse. The overall war on terrorism is expected to cost $2.4-trillion over the next decade. It would take just a thin sliver of that amount to hire a few dozen counterintelligence agents and provide them with the best technology.
The FBI has thwarted some potential terrorist activity and made some arrests since the 9/11 report was released. But imagine if terrorists attack again and the FBI's excuse for not stopping the attack is that an agent was waiting for an available computer. Someone in high office needs to express a sense of urgency that the FBI get its antiterrorist act together - and soon.

Load-Date: October 29, 2007


End of Document