FBI CHIEF HAILS HELP OF ARAB, MUSLIM NATIONS/ HE REPORTS COOPERATION AGAINST TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 18, 2004 Wednesday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 360 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorist attacks in Arab and Muslim countries have led those governments to vastly improve their cooperation with U.S. authorities in the war on terrorism, particularly in cutting off financing, FBI Director Robert Mueller said Tuesday.
Bombings tied to al-Qaida or its sympathizers have proven to governments around the world that terrorism is not merely a U.S. problem, Mueller told foreign journalists.
"I think countries around the world recognize that numbers of women and children were killed in those senseless acts and don't want to see that happen anywhere in the world," Mueller said.
Although he declined to name specific countries, Mueller said Arab and Muslim countries had made significant strides in helping the United States identify and shut down sources of financing for al-Qaida, Hamas, Hezbollah and other groups.
"You take the money away from terrorists, they cannot operate," Mueller said during an appearance at the State Department's Foreign Press Center.
FBI officials have cited several examples of this cooperation in recent months, including:
* Setting up a joint U.S.-Saudi task force to investigate and eliminate sources of terrorism financing in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere.
* Joint investigations of terrorism financing networks with local officials in Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Indonesia.
* Action taken by both the United States and Saudi Arabia to block accounts in Bosnia and Somalia of the Al-Haramain Islamic Foundation and Wa'el Hamza Julaidan, described by the FBI as an associate of Osama bin Laden who provided financial support to al-Qaida.
* Four occasions in which the FBI got information from unnamed foreign governments about financing of a pending terrorist attack and could provide that government with tracking information leading to the arrests of suspects.
Mueller said that despite the international gains made against al-Qaida and removal of its base in Afghanistan, the group remains a dangerous network with affiliates or sympathizers in many parts of the world. "They are a fragmented operation around the world about which all of us must be concerned," he added.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Robert) Mueller, Doesn't name specific countries

Load-Date: February 18, 2004


End of Document