FBI REASSIGNING 500 AGENTS TO MEET RISING TERRORISM THREAT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 5, 1996, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 448 words
Byline: ROBERTO SURO, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The FBI will reassign at least 500 agents to contend with the heightened threat of domestic and international terrorism, senior federal law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The decision to shift the special agents to the counter-terrorism program from other duties followed several incidents this summer that have stretched the capacities of the existing program, the officials said. These include the June 25 bombing in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 U.S. airmen, the suspicious explosion of Trans World Airlines Flight 800 on July 17 and the July 27 bombing at Atlanta's Centennial Park.
Reflecting on these events, FBI Director Louis J. Freeh said in congressional testimony last month, ''I think the country and the American people have been experiencing an increasing war against them by terrorists and terrorist-supported activities.''
That assessment underlies the decision to shift agents from other activities to increase the bureau's capacity to deal with several large terrorism investigations simultaneously, a senior law-enforcement official said. The agents will be assigned to field offices around the country as well as to the headquarters here, the official said.
The Justice Department and the FBI are currently determining how large and how quick a shift to make. A senior official said preliminary plans call for at least 500 agents to be moved but that figure could grow before congressional approval is sought.
The number of agents assigned to the counter-terrorism program is classified. The FBI divides its investigative resources into seven programs including civil rights, organized crime and counter-terrorism.
The total number of FBI agents has increased by nearly 10 percent since 1994 and is expected to reach 10,662 when the federal fiscal year ends on Sept. 30. That figure is expected to increase even further next year because Congress is now considering a number of bills that would further boost FBI strength in several areas.
New funding initiatives under consideration would increase FBI capabilities to deal with terrorism allowing the agency to hire additional agents, acquire new equipment and staff to deal with the threat of chemical, biological and nuclear terrorism and expand the FBI's bomb-data center that collects information and trains local law-enforcement officials.
In addition to funding measures, Congress is considering proposals to expand the FBI's wiretapping authority, to allow the prosecution of terrorists under anti-racketeering laws and to assign FBI agents to high-risk airports such as those with international flights.
Since 1993, the FBI's total budget has risen nearly 17 percent, from $ 2 billion to $ 2.32 billion in fiscal 1996.

Load-Date: September 7, 1996


End of Document