FBI FOLLOWED BOMBERS FOR YEARS THE REVELATION CAME AT THE N.Y. TERRORISM TRIAL. THE FBI KNEW OF THE PLANNING OF THE TRADE CENTER BOMBING.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
FEBRUARY 8, 1995 Wednesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A11
Length: 594 words
Byline: Larry Neumeister, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The FBI was on the trail of three of the World Trade Center bombers nearly four years before the 1993 explosion that killed six people and injured 1,000, the government disclosed yesterday.
In evidence presented at the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and 10 others, the FBI also said it had bugged the sheik's phone a week before the blast.
The surprising testimony - a day after a key defendant switched sides - revealed that the government had more extensive knowledge of the planning for the Trade Center bombing than it had previously acknowledged. And it raised anew questions about why the FBI was unable to prevent the Feb. 26, 1993, bombing, one of the worst terrorist actions in the United States.
The evidence was presented after U.S. District Judge Michael Mukasey brushed aside a demand for a mistrial, warning jurors not to speculate about the seat left empty by Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali.
Siddig Ali's nameplate was snatched away from his seat by a court officer just minutes before Mukasey addressed the jurors about Siddig Ali's absence.
The judge did not tell them that Siddig Ali agreed Monday to cooperate with the prosecution and confessed to plotting to blow up the United Nations, FBI headquarters, two tunnels and a bridge - with the approval of the sheik.
Instead, he said the 34-year-old former bodyguard and translator for the sheik was "no longer on trial."
He told defense lawyers they could file papers for a mistrial, though he expressed doubts that they would succeed. Defense lawyers accused the judge and prosecutors of foul play for refusing to disclose before opening statements that Siddig Ali was talking with prosecutors.
One of the sheik's attorneys, former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, blasted the judge, saying that prosecutors hid the likelihood that Siddig Ali would switch sides from the defense and that the judge "participated in that coverup."
Emad Salem, an FBI informant and million-dollar witness in the current trial, had accused the agency in conversations he secretly recorded of failing to heed his warnings that such a bombing was imminent.
Yesterday's testimony revealed that the FBI by mid-1989 had already begun surveillance on the group of men it now says waged a war of urban terrorism to try to change the United States' Middle East policies.
Photographs entered into evidence included pictures of three of the four men convicted last year in the Trade Center bombing.
The prosecution has been trying to show that that bombing was part of the overall plot. If prosecutors can link the sheik's organization and current defendants to those convicted in the Trade Center bombing, they can show the jury a closer connection to an actual terrorist act.
FBI Agent James Fogle testified that he followed a group of men who carried boxes out of a Brooklyn mosque in the early morning of July 2, 1989, to Calverton Shooting Range in Calverton on Long Island.
There, he said, he saw Mohammad Salameh shoot an AK-47 rifle and Mahmud Abouhalima slap and grab a rifle from a man who carelessly fired the weapon in front of him. Both men were sentenced to life in prison last year in the Trade Center bombing.
Also seen at the firing range was El Sayyid Nosair, who a year later was arrested in the assassination of extremist Rabbi Meir Kahane. Nosair was acquitted of the murder but convicted of related weapons charges. He is a defendant in the current case.
In other testimony, FBI Agent Steven Craig Chapman testified that wiretaps were put on Abdel-Rahman's telephone on Feb. 16, 1993, 10 days before the Trade Center bombing.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document