FBI director: Campus violence equivalent to terrorism for schools
University Wire
April 15, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Length: 486 words
Byline: By Dusty Somers, Oklahoma Daily; SOURCE: U. Oklahoma
Dateline: NORMAN, Okla. 
Body


Campuses must perceive threats in much the same way the FBI approaches national security, a bureau official said Monday.
"No counterterrorism lead goes uncovered," said Stephen Tidwell, FBI executive assistant director. "You now find yourself in the same place. You now have to do that for your campuses."
Tidwell, campus safety officials and mental health experts gathered as part of the National Campus Security Summit, held Sunday and Monday at the University of Central Oklahoma in Edmond.
The summit was held nearly one year after the Virginia Tech massacre and two months after the Northern Illinois University shooting.
Glen Johnson, chancellor of the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education, reported the findings of a task force established to evaluate security practices on Oklahoma campuses.
Commissioned by Gov. Brad Henry last April, the task force was created to assess campus security, including vulnerability to terrorism, and make recommendations for all state colleges, Johnson said.
"We were doing a snapshot of where we stand," Johnson said.
Tidwell said various levels of preparation are necessary so campus officials can uncover potential threats before they become reality.
For college campuses, that means being vigilant in establishing safety measures and monitoring for possible threats, he said.
"You're building picket fences," Tidwell said. "You need enough picket fences that someone sees [a threat] sooner or later as they go over them."
In the event of preparing for or dealing with a campus emergency, Tidwell urged school officials to collaborate with the local FBI field office.
"We're prepared to be a partner with you at any level," Tidwell said.
Phil Berkenbile, Oklahoma Department of Career and Technology Education director, presented statistics regarding mental health.
Thirty percent of institutions do not have a mental health recovery program and 93 percent do not have an active peer support group system in place, Berkenbile said.
There is less than one mental health counselor per 1,500 students in the state, a figure Berkenbile said "doesn't come close to the recommended average."
Educational institutions must significantly increase the amount of counselors available, he said.
"[It is] a tremendous need across the state of Oklahoma and the nation," Berkenbile said.
Since the task force was commissioned, steps have been taken to improve the situation, Johnson said.
New notification systems have been implemented, emergency simulation exercises have taken place and a more active involvement with Oklahoma Homeland Security has been established, Johnson said.
"The implementation process has already started," Johnson said.
Tragedies like the Virginia Tech shooting have provided a wake-up call that school officials must heed, said UCO President Roger Webb.
"As that drama unfolded, every one of us realized we could be standing there," Webb said.
(C) 2008 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 15, 2008


End of Document