FBI SEES NO TERROR 'WAVE';
BUT EXPERTS SAY PROS PLACED BOMB
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 10, 1993, Wednesday,
ONE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 364 words
Byline: KAREN BALL, ASSOCIATED PRESS WRITER
Body


A ''well-known terrorist group'' is likely responsible for the bombing at New York's World Trade Center, an FBI official told Congress yesterday.
But law enforcement experts said there was no reason to fear a wave of such incidents.
''We're saying it's a group that knows what they're doing, and perhaps not an ad-hoc bunch of terrorists,'' said James Fox, head of the FBI's New York office.
Fox told a House Judiciary subcommittee that it was investigators' ''gut feeling'' that experienced terrorists were responsible for last month's blast that killed five, injured 1,000 and shut down the World Trade Center for several weeks.
''I don't have a specific group in mind,'' Fox told reporters later, adding that agents based the speculation on ''30 years of this stuff.''
FBI Director Williams Sessions cautioned against speculating who was behind the bombing, and noted that it had taken years to conclude the investigation into the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Also yesterday, CIA Director R. James Woolsey told the House Intelligence Committee his agency was increasing its counter-terrorism efforts in light of several recent attacks. He cited the World Trade Center bombing, the Jan. 25 shooting deaths of two CIA employees outside agency headquarters and four recent hijackings. He did not elaborate.
The Judiciary subcommittee meeting was the first congressional hearing into the New York bombing, as lawmakers began reviewing whether there was need to overhaul immigration laws or take other precautions against terrorism.
It was an all-star witness list, featuring Sessions and other high officials. But they offered few new details, saying they didn't want to jeopardize the case.
One lawmaker questioned Congress' motive behind the hearing. ''I hesitate to see people who are elected to public office sort of elbowing their way in front of the cameras, when this is a law enforcement investigation that ought to be allowed to go on,'' said Rep. Craig Washington, D-Texas.
''The American public should always be vigilant,'' Sessions testified, ''but this suspected act of terrorism should not be viewed as the opening act in a coming wave of terrorism.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document