FBI picks first woman to run its Phila. office
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 23, 2008 Wednesday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Nation-World; Pg. B01
Length: 275 words
Byline: By John Shiffman

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


WASHINGTON - The FBI's terrorism supervisor in Los Angeles has been named the first female special agent in charge of the FBI's Philadelphia division. 
FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III selected Janice K. Fedarcyk, a 20-year veteran, to become the top agent in Philadelphia. A formal announcement is expected today. 
"I've always been attracted to cities the size of Philadelphia and impressed by the work that the Philly office does," Fedarcyk said yesterday. 
"I'm thrilled, and I consider it a privilege and an honor to be selected as the first woman to head that office, but at the end of the day I hope I can provide the appropriate leadership regardless of whether I am male or female," she said. 
Fedarcyk, 49, replaces J.P. "Jody" Weis, who retired to become superintendent of the Chicago Police Department. 
The Philadelphia division, the FBI's ninth-largest, extends from central Pennsylvania to South Jersey. It includes satellite offices in Harrisburg, State College, Scranton, Allentown and Cherry Hill. 
Fedarcyk, a former police officer in Reno, Nev., has worked in a variety of positions since joining the FBI in 1987, but she has specialized in counterterrorism and emergency response. 
In 2005, she became the FBI's representative to the National Counterterrorism Center, and, according to her FBI biography, "was instrumental in leading the development of a classified national strategic operational plan in the war on terrorism." 
She became the second-ranking FBI agent in Los Angeles last year, and has testified before Congress on Islamic radicalization. 
Contact staff writer John Shiffman at 202-350-9314 or jshiffman@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Feed Loader

Load-Date: January 23, 2008


End of Document