FBI warns of possible Serb terrorism in U.S.  u.S.
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
April 15, 1999, Thursday thursday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A
Length: 330 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - The FBI has warned the U.S. military to be alert for
possible Serb-led terrorist attacks inside the United States after
several churches received "threats to kill" American soldiers,
according to a memo obtained by The Associated Press.
FBI counterterrorism agents sent out the memo last week after Serbian
Orthodox church-
es in the Sacramento, Milwaukee, Chicago and Indianapolis areas
received via fax a Serb-language letter urging Serbian Americans to
respond violently to NATO strikes on Yugoslavia.
Serbian Orthodox church officials in the cities mentioned in the FBI
memo either declined to comment or said they had no information about
the Serb-language letter.  letter.
"The threat letter requested that all Serbian nationalists living in
America take action against the NATO decision to intervene in the
Serbian/Kosovo conflict by killing as many American soldiers in the
United States as necessary to stop the NATO attacks in Serbia,"
according to the FBI memo.
The memo was distributed to military bases and other sensitive federal
installations, such as nuclear weapons labs, through a special
electronic mail warning system, officials said.
Dale Watson, the FBI's deputy assistant director for counterterrorism,
declined to discuss the memo but said the church letters aren't the
only Serb-related terrorism threats being examined by FBI
investigators.
"As the war continues, we receive a lot of threats in here. The FBI
looks into them," Watson said Wednesday in a telephone interview.
"This [letter] is not just an isolated situation. We look at threats;
we take them all seriously."
The FBI seldom issues the type of memo sent to defense installations.
The agency is investigating whether there is any link between the
Yugoslav government in Belgrade and the threats in the United States,
officials said.
The alert memo warned military commanders nationwide "that there is a
credible threat outstanding to take action within the United States
against U.S. military personne
l." l."

Load-Date: April 15, 1999


End of Document