FBI to share terrorism intelligence with local police
USA TODAY
December 3, 2001, Monday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 365 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The FBI has begun offering thousands of local police executives access to secret intelligence so they can help decide whether to alert the public to terrorism threats, top bureau officials say.
The unprecedented sharing of intelligence is aimed at improving a sometimes-tense relationship with local police, which complained about a lack of information from federal authorities during two nationwide terrorism alerts. Under the FBI's plan, police chiefs, sheriffs and other local officials will get the same type of intelligence that Attorney General John Ashcroft used to issue the alerts on Oct. 11 and Oct. 29.
The move is part of a realignment of the FBI, which is shifting much of its focus to preventing terrorism. Assistant FBI Director Kathleen McChesney says the realignment plan includes an office within the bureau to advise FBI Director Robert Mueller on matters of local law enforcement.
McChesney says the moves were designed to foster "greater confidence" among 18,000 local agencies that will share in the information.
Local law officials also say they fear that the FBI's new emphasis on terrorism will prompt the bureau to take agents out of cities where they have helped investigate gangs, drug trafficking, bank robberies and white-collar crimes.
The possibility of the FBI abandoning the fight against crimes other than terrorism comes as many police departments face recruiting problems, tight budgets and a need to form their own anti-terrorism units.
"If we can't count on the feds any more, it's going to put a drain on our resources to a point I don't want to think about," says Philadelphia Police Commissioner John Timoney. "The FBI brings resources to the table we simply don't have."
Assistant FBI Director Ruben Garcia says the FBI won't abandon local law enforcement.
However, the bureau plans to consolidate its 174 task forces that work with local officers. In some communities, Garcia says, that could leave police with more responsibility for bank robbery cases, carjackings and drug probes.
William Berger, president of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, says the FBI initiatives are good first steps in repairing strained relations.

Load-Date: December 3, 2001


End of Document