FBI CHIEF PLANS NEW TEAM IN WASHINGTON TO OVERSEE ALL TERRORISM INVESTIGATIONS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 16, 2002 Thursday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 386 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


FBI Director Robert Mueller is seeking to address some of the flaws exposed by the attacks of Sept. 11 by creating a new terrorism-fighting team in Washington that will oversee all terrorism investigations worldwide, officials say.
Mueller is informing the agents who supervise each field office across the country this week of the plan, which is designed to centralize terrorism fighting and ensure all intelligence is evaluated thoroughly and urgently and compared against other information gathered by the government, officials said Tuesday.
The officials, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, said the plan is part of a broader reorganization Mueller started last fall to reshape his agency in the aftermath of the new terrorism threat and the Ro bert Hanssen spy case.
The plan received quick endorsement from Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., who said after a congressional meeting with President George W. Bush on Wednesday: "The idea that you have this super unit in Washington … makes sense to me."
Alluding to reports that the FBI received warnings of suicide hijackings before Sept. 11, Lott said, "If you have information in Phoenix and information in Minneapolis - if there's no place where that is put together, it's not worth very much to you."
The program's aim, officials said, is to change a terrorism-fighting structure inside the FBI that often stretched thin the expertise of the New York field office. That office handled the high-profile cases of the 1990s involving the bombings of the World Trade Center and U.S. embassies in Africa.
The new plan would create an expert team in Washington that would direct all terrorism investigations, centralize the evaluation of intelligence and threats, and ensure that leads aren't lost inside the government bureaucracy, the officials said.
The reorganization comes as the FBI faces tough scrutiny from Congress about how much it knew before Sept. 11 about the threat of a terrorist strike.
The Associated Press reported this month that FBI headquarters did not act on a memo last July from its Arizona office warning that a large number of Arabs were seeking pilot, security and airport operations training at at least one U.S. flight school. The memo also urged a check of all flight schools to identify more possible Middle Eastern students.

Load-Date: May 16, 2002


End of Document