FBI battles terrorism in Northwest
USA TODAY
December 23, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 527 words
Byline: Patrick McMahon
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body


SEATTLE -- The FBI is launching a task force on domestic terrorism
in the Pacific Northwest, long considered a hotbed for white supremacist
and anti-federal government activities.
The action comes as anti-supremacist activists in the Northwest
fear an increase in terrorism coinciding with the year 2000. "We
anticipate that 1999 is going to be a pretty tough year," says
Bill Wassmuth, executive director of the Northwest Coalition Against
Malicious Harassment based here.
Already, there is talk about "Doomsday" and "Armageddon,"
among these groups, Wassmuth says, and paranoia about the possible
computer collapse at the beginning of 2000, commonly called the
Y2K problem.
He says these groups fear the federal government secretly favors
collapse of the financial system and other social institutions,
"so that it can abolish personal freedoms and establish world
government."
"That is the No. 1 topic at preparedness expos" organized by
the anti-government groups, Wassmuth says.
"There are people buying two years of food and supplies and heading
for the hills," Wassmuth says. His group is a coalition of organizations
in six Northwestern states countering white supremacist and extremist
groups.
The FBI task force is still being assembled. It will include agents
from federal, state and local law enforcement agencies in eastern
Washington, northern Idaho and western Montana, says Burdena Pasenelli,
special agent in charge of FBI division headquarters in Seattle.
"Our goal is to find out ahead of time what is planned and to
prevent incidents of domestic terrorism," she says. "Historically,
this area has had a number of domestic terrorism incidents."
The task force is a joint effort of the FBI division headquartered
in Seattle and Salt Lake City. It is an outgrowth of domestic
terrorism legislation and the addition of 500 FBI agents authorized
after the 1995 bombing of the federal office building in Oklahoma
City.
Formed at a meeting this fall in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, this is
the first FBI task force to cross state lines and FBI field offices,
Pasenelli says. "We call it the Inland Empire," she says, referring
to the three-state region being covered.
Richard Butler, 80, is leader of a group called Aryan Nations,
based in Hayden Lake, Idaho, since 1973. He says the task force
may be watching his organization but his members are not involved
in any terrorist activity.
"The FBI is just an arm of the money system," and is being directed
by President Clinton, "who has appointed nothing but non-Christians
and nonwhites," Butler says.
Mark Potok of the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Ala.,
and editor of its quarterly Intelligence Report, says, "The Pacific
Northwest has produced some of this nation's leading domestic
terrorists." The only comparable areas are certain parts of the
Ozarks and rural North Carolina, he says.
The center has compiled a list of 26 domestic terrorist incidents
between September 1995 and March 1998. Eight of those incidents
occurred in the Northwest or were linked to organizations based
there.
The report notes that at the time of the Oklahoma City bombing,
the FBI had about 100 domestic terrorism investigations under
way, compared with about 900 now.

Load-Date: December 23, 1998


End of Document