FBI WIDENING PROBE;
LOCAL ANTI-TERRORISM TASK FORCE EXPANDED
 Philadelphia Daily News
SEPTEMBER 20, 2001 Thursday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 04
Length: 304 words
Byline: JIM SMITH smithjm@phillynews.com  
Body


The FBI has formed "Anti-Terrorism Task Forces" in Philadelphia and across the country in hopes of preventing more mass murders and catching those responsible for last week's carnage.
A terrorist task force, headed by the FBI, has been in place in Philadelphia for about 15 years, but it will be greatly expanded to help investigate the attacks on New York and Washington.
Robert Conforti, agent in charge of the FBI's Philadelphia office, said "being one step ahead of the terrorists" is the FBI's goal.
Patrick L. Meehan, the rookie U.S. Attorney in his first week on the job as the region's top federal prosecutor, said the Philadelphia task force will work round the clock, seven days a week, and "reach into every neighborhood."
Anyone with information about suspected terrorists should call the FBI at 215-418-4000 or use a national terrorist hot line, 1-866-483-5137, or e-mail the FBI at www.ifccfbi.gov. 
U.S. Attorney General John D. Ashcroft ordered task forces formed this week in more than 90 regions of the country as part of "a concerted national assault against terrorism."
Asked by a reporter if there is any basis to fear that the terrorists are planning to strike again on Saturday, the FBI's Conforti said, "I am not in possession of any such information."
Meehan gave a similar response, saying he was "not aware of any reason why that day should be of more concern than any other" day.
"All of us need to be vigilant. Every person out there is a set of eyes and ears," Meehan added.
Neither Meehan nor Conforti would comment when asked if there were any known terrorist cells operating in the Philadelphia area, or if any suspects had been searched or detained here.
Local, state and county law enforcement agencies will take part in the task force, along with most of the federal law enforcement establishment. *

Notes

ATTACK ON AMERICA

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
DAVID MAIALETTI, Daily News
U.S. Attorney Patrick L. Meehan (left) listens to local FBI boss Robert Conforti (second from left) discuss expansion of the Philadelphia FBI office's anti-terrorism task force yesterday.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document