FBI terrorism assessment never finished
USA TODAY
October 2, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 579 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The FBI never completed a written assessment of the terrorist risk to the United States, despite promising Congress more than a year before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks that it would do so, a Justice Department review said Tuesday.
By September 2001, the FBI had a draft of its "Terrorist Threat Report," which described terrorist organizations and state sponsors of terror. But the draft did not address the risks of an attack on U.S. soil, the Justice Department's inspector general found.
The FBI's draft also did not account for possible methods of attack, potential targets, or the resources amassed by various terrorist organizations.
"Because the FBI has not completed a systematic written assessment of the most likely terrorism scenarios," Justice said, "it may not have fully identified the specific nature of the threat so that it could focus its attention and resources to prepare adequately and respond effectively."
The FBI acknowledged in the Justice review that it did not follow through on its promise to conduct a formal threat assessment. But Dale Watson, the FBI's executive assistant director for counterterrorism, said he was "fully aware of the threats, both before and after Sept. 11, 2001, based on the breadth of the FBI's counterterrorism cases and his frequent discussions with FBI employees," the review said.
Watson, who retired last week, "did not believe a formal, written threat assessment would have improved the FBI's ability to understand or address terrorist threats," the Justice review said.
The Justice Department review was initiated by Inspector General Glenn Fine last year after Attorney General John Ashcroft said counterterrorism -- specifically the prevention of future attacks -- would be the primary mission of the FBI and the department.
Fine released only a summary of the Justice Department findings Tuesday. The bulk of the 131-page review remains classified and was submitted to House and Senate oversight committees.
According to the public portion of the Justice review, the FBI indicated in a March 2000 letter to the House Appropriations Committee that the bureau would "develop scenarios for the highest threat hazards . . .  to determine deficiencies in response capabilities." In the letter, bureau officials also promised they would "rank a list of chemical and biological agents based on the likelihood" of their use.
Justice concluded that the FBI's draft assessment was "unresponsive." Further, "the FBI failed to follow through on its promise that it would render a formal, authoritative intelligence threat assessment."
Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, a harsh critic of bureau operations, blamed the failures on both the FBI and Congress. "(FBI) headquarters handled the issues of foreign terrorism by the seat of their pants, always looking backwards instead of seriously thinking about attacks on our soil," he said. "At the same time, Congress kept pouring more money into the FBI to use against terrorism and did little if anything to make sure it was used in an effective way."
Elsewhere on Capitol Hill, a joint House-Senate committee investigating intelligence lapses was told that information-sharing among federal, state and local agencies remains inadequate more than a year after the attacks.
There still is "no single agency or database or computer network that integrates all counterterrorism information nationwide," said Eleanor Hill, the committee's staff director.
***
Contributing: Toni Locy

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Pablo Martinez Monsivais, AP; Watson: FBI's former counterterrorism chief said he was fully aware" of threats.

Load-Date: October 2, 2002


End of Document