FBI agent says terror threats real Chicago office chief sayspriority became terrorism after Sept. 11, 2001, attacks
Chicago Daily Herald
March 24, 2004, Wednesday All


Copyright 2004 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 402 words
Byline: Tom O'Konowitz Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Chicago office's priority became terrorism only after the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001  
Al-Qaida remains the top threat against the United States and another terrorist attack at home is more than just a possibility, according to the head of the FBI's Chicago field office.  
"Al-Qaida would do anything in this nation against us that they could do. There is absolutely nothing out of bounds for this organization - nothing," Thomas Kneir, special agent in charge of the Chicago FBI office, said Tuesday during an address before the Elgin Kiwanis Club at the Prairie Rock Brewing Co. "When they see our guard down, they will be back."  
Kneir's comments came the same day a federal task force intensified its probe into the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, trying to determine to what extent government officials were aware of such a threat and whether they did enough to counter it.  
Kneir, appointed to take over Chicago's FBI office just a day before the attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people, said the FBI had known for some time of threats possibly involving commercial jets - but he said the FBI didn't make counterterrorism its highest priority until after the Sept. 11 attacks.  
Now, the FBI's Chicago office focuses most of its manpower and efforts on anti-terrorism, already shutting down three charities suspected of funneling money to terrorist supporters and also arresting suspected dirty bomber Jose Padilla of Chicago.  
"We do run down each and every one of these leads. ...We err on caution," Kneir said. "Since 9/11, we have taken a very aggressive, proactive approach to terrorism. When it comes right down to what is the (biggest) concern in America, right now it is al-Qaida. No question about it."  
Kneir said that while the FBI continues tracking down leads and arresting those believed to be involved with terrorism or people who offer it material support, residents of Chicago and the suburbs should continue to stay alert to try and prevent future attacks.  
Pointing to the recent train blasts in Madrid, Kneir said people should keep their eyes open for unusual behavior, like people getting on a train and leaving baggage behind.  
Kneir also said the FBI remains committed to its other law- enforcement duties, particularly focusing on drug and gang crimes in Chicago and in the suburbs, even occasionally assigning agents to work with local police in Elgin, Carpentersville and Aurora.

Graphic

 
Thomas Kneir

Load-Date: March 24, 2004


End of Document