FBI wants UI student to testify against peer Agency says he can shed light on Al-Hussayen's alleged terrorism ties;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 23, 2003 Thursday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Pg.B3
Length: 840 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE<
Body


Federal authorities are seeking to keep a second University of Idaho
 graduate student from leaving the country, so he can testify at the trial of a
 computer science student accused of links to terrorism.
 Saleh Abdulaziz Al-Kraida is not accused of any crime, but FBI agents argue
 in court documents that the graduate student is a material witness in the case
 against Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, who is charged with visa fraud and false
 statements.
 Federal authorities claim AlHussayen operated Internet sites for Islamic
 extremists indirectly linked to the al Qaeda terrorist network, and funneled
 money to suspect Islamic charities.
 Al-Hussayen, former president of the Muslim Students Association at the
 University of Idaho, has maintained his innocence, saying he is a peaceful
 student who abhorred the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and organized a blood
 drive for its victims.
In an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court in Boise, FBI agents say
 Al-Kraida, who, like AlHussayen is a Saudi national, is an acquaintance of
 Al-Hussayen's who saw him almost daily before he was jailed last February.
 Both were among a group of local Muslims who gathered at a Moscow apartment
 for dinners and social gatherings.
 The apartment, referred to in court papers as ''Almutaqa," an Arabic word
 for ''gathering place," had a computer and credit card sales machine, and the
 FBI said Al-Hussayen used them to sell books, tapes, magazines and other items
 that included Islamic extremist messages, including the use of violence
 against non-Muslims. Proceeds went to Islamic charities, including some that
 authorities suspect of ties to terrorism.
 The affidavit also alleged that prior to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,
 extremist ideas were discussed at gatherings at the apartment.
 Scott McKay, an attorney for Al-Hussayen, said he couldn't comment on the
 allegations, but said the apartment also has a pingpong table, a foosball
 table and a kitchen, and is still in use as a gathering place. ''That simply
 is an apartment that Muslim students used in Moscow to meet for social
 reasons," McKay said. He said it's been a site for celebrations of everything
 from birthdays to the birth of a child.
 In court papers, authorities said materials sold at the apartment included
 articles and speeches by two radical Saudi sheikhs, Safar Al-Hawali and Salman
 Al-Ouda. Prosecutors say the two sheikhs have links to Osama bin Laden and al
 Qaeda.
 They have sought to connect Al-Hussayen to the two, with such evidence as
 an address book seized from Al-Hussayen's Moscow apartment that included phone
 numbers for both of the sheikhs, and intercepted phone calls and e-mails that
 showed contact with the sheikhs or their associates.
 Al-Kraida, when he was interviewed by authorities last February, indicated
 that he planned to return  to Saudi Arabia after he completed his master's
 degree in agricultural engineering at the University of Idaho. When
 immigration officials checked on his status this month, they learned that he
 had completed his degree requirements and had just moved out of his university
 housing.
 ''Due to Al-Kraida's admitted involvement with the defendant, Sami Omar
 Al-Hussayen, Al-Kraida is believed to be in possession of information germane
 to this matter which will be crucial to the prosecution. It is believed that
 if Al-Kraida travels to Saudi Arabia the United States government will be
 unable to secure his presence at trial via subpoena," FBI Special Agent Mary
 Martin said in court documents.
 Accordingly, U.S. Magistrate Judge Mikel Williams issued a summons, and
 Al-Kraida will appear before Williams on Nov. 4 in Moscow to determine the
 conditions under which his presence at AlHussayen's January trial will be
 guaranteed. Al-Kraida also was ordered to surrender his passport.
 ''This was not an arrest warrant," noted Jean McNeil, spokeswoman for the
 U.S. Attorney's office in Boise. ''We're not going to ask that he be detained.
 The only reason we're doing it is to ask for conditions of release… It's
 sort of saying to him, 'Please don't leave the country. Please stick around
 for the trial."'
 Al-Hussayen, a 33-year-old doctoral student who had never been arrested
 before last February, remains jailed in solitary confinement in the Canyon
 County Jail. Last month, he requested a contact visit with his wife and three
 young sons, but the court denied the request. Visiting procedures at the jail
 where he's incarcerated require visitors to be separated from inmates by
 security glass, while they talk via a telephone.
 The government has yet to respond to a request by Al-Hussayen's attorneys
 that two top al Qaeda officials, Khalid Sheik Mohammed and Ramzi Binalshibh,
 be brought in to testify in the case. The attorneys argued that since the
 government has identified the two as among the masterminds of the Sept. 11
 terrorist attacks and they're in U.S. custody, they should be asked whether
 Al-Hussayen played any role in the attacks.
 ''If they're truthful, they'll confirm that they've never heard of Sami
 Al-Hussayen," McKay said.

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854 or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net.  

Load-Date: October 25, 2003


End of Document