FBI's New Profile: More Agents Fighting Terrorism
Federal Times
July 7, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPOTLIGHT; Pg. 22
Length: 1549 words
Byline: By BRIDGETTE BLAIR, Graphic by Marcia Staimer / Photos by Associated Press, Graphic by John Harman
Body


The last year has been one of dramatic shifts in priority and focus for the FBI.
Many, if not most, of those changes center on the agency's move to recalibrate itself to take on new counterterrorism priorities.
The changes amount to a "wholesale transformation" of a law enforcement agency that responds to crimes to one dedicated to preventing terrorism and other crimes, said Richard Thornburgh, chairman of the National Academy of Public Administration's panel on FBI reorganization and a former attorney general.
"This shift is driving major institutional change," Thornburgh told a House panel last month.
Before the reorganization last year, 26 percent of the FBI's field agents were assigned to counterterrorism, counterintelligence and cybercrime. Now, that figure is up to 36 percent.
"It's the most pressing problem the country is faced with now," said Daron Borst, special agent in Las Vegas. "Throughout the bureau's history we have adapted to address the needs of the country. This is no different."
With the major changes, Thornburgh said the FBI's success hinges on holding headquarters officials responsible for counterterrorism and counterintelligence investigations, coordination with field agents and improved contact with other law enforcement agencies.
These are precisely the areas the FBI is focusing on, FBI Director Robert Mueller III has told lawmakers. The FBI has revamped its priorities and mission to reflect the importance of counterterrorism, and it has reorganized its work force to meet those priorities. It also has created new executive positions to oversee counterterrorism and other high-priority missions, restructured headquarters to clarify who is responsible for specific functions, and re-engineered its business practices.
The FBI's work is far from finished, experts say. The FBI still needs to increase staffing, improve how it balances its various missions, and use information technology to modernize its operations. The bulk of the transformation effort will take three to four years, Thornburgh said, with some aspects taking even longer.
"Institutional transformations do not occur overnight, and they involve major cultural change. . . . Many important tasks will continue for years into the future," he said.
Investigating Counterterrorism
The FBI's reorganization began in earnest in May 2002, when Mueller directed an overhaul of the FBI's headquarters and field structure. The FBI permanently reassigned more than 500 of its 11,000 agents from criminal investigations to work on counterterrorism, improve security and train new special agents, Mueller said. The FBI also moved 167 agents from criminal investigations to counterintelligence.
The FBI also reorganized its top management, from having a single deputy director to four executive assistant directors to oversee counterterrorism and counterintelligence, criminal and computer crime issues, law enforcement services, and administration.
It also has hired hundreds of agents and analysts to augment its investigations. In fiscal 2002, the FBI hired 923 agents. However, it was not fully successful in hiring agents with information technology, foreign language and other skills, said Comptroller General David Walker, head of the General Accounting Office, in June 18 testimony. In the first part of fiscal 2003, the FBI hired about 550 special agents - meeting most of its goal for the year.
The FBI also is in need of more intelligence analysts, clerical workers and other workers to support investigations, experts say. In fiscal 2002, the FBI filled only 643 of 1,465 vacancies, GAO said.
The FBI is trying to improve and speed up its hiring process. One positive move for the agency was streamlining its hiring process from 13 months several years ago to eight months now, Walker said.
Balancing Missions
Special agents in charge at field offices around the country have been in the tough position of deciding which criminal investigations could spare agents for transfer to counterterrorism efforts, said Peter Ahearn, FBI special agent in charge in Buffalo, N.Y.
"We are very clear that we have our priority - which, without a doubt, is to prevent another terrorist attack," he said.
The special agents in charge look at those areas where state, local or other law enforcement can pick up the slack. For example, in Buffalo, Ahearn said he is giving up some investigations into government fraud to inspectors general.
"We still have agents working bank robberies, we still have agents working organized crime, but those programs are filled only after our obligations relating to terrorism are addressed," said Borst of the Las Vegas division.
But some members of Congress do not support the FBI's shift toward counterterrorism prevention, saying the bureau should not be in the business of domestic intelligence functions. Sen. John Edwards, D-N.C., for instance, introduced a bill Feb. 13 that would move the FBI's domestic intelligence operations to the Homeland Security Department.
"The FBI is the best law enforcement agency on the planet, but Sept. 11 showed how it has failed as an intelligence-gathering agency," Edwards said at the time.
Reprioritizing
The agency's focus on counterterrorism has come at a cost to its other missions, experts say.
Officials around the country need to keep their sights set on the fact that the FBI still has other important missions - including espionage, cybercrime, white-collar crime, bank robberies, child pornography, kidnappings, public corruption and drug enforcement, said Nancy Savage, president of the FBI Agents Association.
"While we have reprogrammed a portion of this work force to support counterterrorism investigations in the last 21 months and many other personnel have assisted substantially in this area, there is a reckoning due as to this alignment of resources," Savage said in June 18 testimony.
Specifically, the FBI has reduced the number of agents working drug-enforcement cases by more than 400. Its number of new drug cases has dropped significantly - from 1,413 in fiscal 2001 to 944 in fiscal 2002 to 310 in the first six months of fiscal 2003, according to GAO.
A sister agency in the Justice Department, the Drug Enforcement Administration, has filled some of the gap, Walker said, but he was not sure how well local and state law enforcement officers could pick up the rest of the slack because of their own budget constraints and other homeland security duties.
But the change in focus was due to the FBI fulfilling its top need, Walker noted.
"We want to make clear that we are in no way intending to fault the FBI for the reassignment of their agents from drug enforcement to higher-priority areas" such as counterterrorism, Walker said.
Sharing Information
Although a frequent criticism of the bureau is that it does not work well with others, the FBI has made progress in sharing important information with other agencies in recent years, Ahearn said.
For example, the FBI is expanding its interagency joint terrorism task forces around the country. Also, Ahearn sees the creation of the Terrorist Threat Integration Center (TTIC) as another positive move. TTIC brings together analysts from the FBI, CIA, Homeland Security Department and other agencies.
However, Thornburgh said the NAPA panel he directs was unclear on exactly how much information has been shared between the FBI, the National Security Agency and other agencies, "though we can be reasonably assured it's not everything."
A major component of the FBI's modernization project will be to install its Virtual Case File this year. The system will take paper investigation files and put them in electronic form.
FBI officials say the bureau already has made some basic improvements to another high-profile information technology program, called Trilogy. The program involved installation of personal computers, printers and a high-speed communications network.
The FBI also is building a new investigative data warehouse, Thornburgh said, and it is encouraging contracts to make the best possible use of commercial, off-the-shelf computer products.
But the success of the new IT programs remains in question, Thornburgh said.
"The FBI is just catching up to where most other federal agencies are, and the jury is still out on whether the bureau will take full advantage of modern information technology," Thornburgh said.
-----------------------------
IN PROFILE
Top leaders:
Director: Robert Mueller
Deputy director: Bruce Gebhardt
Chief financial officer: Tina Jonas
Chief information officer: vacant
Chief human capital officer: vacant
Executive assistant directors:
Administration: Wilson Lowery Jr.
Counterterrorism/counterintelligence: Pasquale D'Amuro
Law enforcement services: Charles Prouty
Criminal investigations: vacant
Top 10 priorities:
1. Protect the United States from terrorist attack
2. Protect the United States against foreign intelligence operations and espionage
3. Protect the United States against cyberattacks and high-technology crimes
4. Combat public corruption
5. Protect civil rights
6. Combat transnational and national criminal organizations and enterprises
7. Combat major white-collar crime
8. Combat significant violent crime
9. Support federal, state, local and international partners
10. Upgrade technology to successfully perform the FBI's mission
Source: FBI

Notes

FACT BOX AT BOTTOM OF ARTICLE; 2 COLOR GRAPHS. 1 GRAPH WITH 2 COLOR PHOTOS. GRAPH HEDS: Changing Priorities. SOURCE: FBI. Fighting Terror. SOURCE: General Accounting Office analysis of FBI data

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document