FBI's anti-terrorism plan faces many obstacles
USA TODAY
May 30, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 588 words
Body

Today's debate: FBI reorganization plan
Our view: Critics push FBI to keep old duties while expanding anti-terror fight.
When the FBI publicly unveiled its new plan for reform on Wednesday, FBI director Robert Mueller tackled the one question on everyone's mind: Would the changes solve the gross intelligence failings that occurred in the months before Sept. 11? Mueller's answer was a yes, and while success depends on far more than changing the organization chart, an increased focus on terrorism seems certain to help.
Hundreds of investigators would drop work in other areas, chiefly drug enforcement, to track terrorists. Analysts would be hired and trained to bring together the bits of information found by agents in the field and by partner agencies like the CIA.
Those appear to address the FBI's failure to put together disparate clues before Sept. 11:
 * The agency was too timid to investigate "20th-hijacker" Zaccarias Moussaoui aggressively, even though he was in custody a month before the September attacks.
 * It lacked the coordination to link Moussaoui with a Phoenix agent's warning that Osama bin Laden's agents were using U.S. flight schools for training.
Clearly, the bureau needs to move from being an after-the-crime law enforcement agency toward a proactive intelligence service. But large-scale change is easier to promise than produce. In previous reorganization attempts, the FBI and Congress have proven themselves more likely to muddy the agency's mission than focus it. Unless Mueller and his boss, Attorney General John Ashcroft, demand that Congress reduce the agency's morass of responsibilities, counter-terrorism could remain an add-on to an old crime-fighting bureaucracy, not the central focus of a reinvigorated FBI.
That may prove a herculean task. Since the 1970s, Congress has created more than 1,000 new federal criminal statutes, each a new FBI burden. That deprives FBI agents "of time to address truly federal problems," according to an American Bar Association study. Instead, federal investigators and prosecutors fight minor crimes such as drug possession and traffic violations.
Then there are the duties that the FBI itself has fought hard to retain, like pursuing elicit drugs when there's already a Drug Enforcement Agency and battling illegal guns when the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms already has that role.
The FBI was formed to concentrate on large-scale crime outside the limited reach of state and local authorities. That suggests there's still a need for federal involvement in crimes such as multi-state bank robberies and civil-rights violations that only the FBI can be relied upon to pursue.
But major streamlining is possible without cutting those core activities. Under Mueller's plan, the FBI would only be dedicating one in four of its agents to terrorism, up slightly from the near-20% who tracked terrorists before Sept. 11.
Congress must still approve much of Mueller's reform proposal. And even before the press conference Wednesday, local law-enforcement groups were complaining that a sharpened focus on terrorism would dull the FBI's ability to fight street-level crime.
As the political process plays out, the danger isn't that the FBI will withdraw too much from its traditional responsibilities, but that it will fail to redefine its mission as aggressively as it must.
If the FBI reorganization is going to make the nation safer, the plan presented Wednesday can only be one step in a long process that makes counter-terrorism the agency's overriding job.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Win McNamee, Reuters; Mueller: FBI director met with reporters Wednesday to explain the agency's reorganization proposal.

Load-Date: May 30, 2002


End of Document