FBI's misconduct undermines our security; The threat of terrorism doesn't justify fishing expeditions into the lives of U.S. citizens.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
March 22, 2007 Thursday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12
Length: 300 words
Body


FBI officials warned Congress this week that counterterrorism efforts would suffer if lawmakers hinder the agency's ability to snoop through the records of U.S. citizens.
Perhaps these concerns wouldn't sound so self-serving if the FBI's documented abuse of its USA Patriot Act authority weren't so damning.
The Justice Department's inspector general, Glenn Fine, told angry House lawmakers Tuesday that the FBI may have violated the law or government policies 3,000 times since 2003 to collect the phone, bank and credit card records of foreign nationals and U.S. citizens. Most of the information, Fine said, could have been obtained legally.
Perhaps the agency's promises to reform its policies might be more comforting if Fine hadn't testified the agency's chaotic record-keeping ''significantly understates'' the actual use of the investigative tool in question, the national security letter.
How can the FBI credibly address a problem that its own records fail to disclose?
Fine's testimony elicited blistering responses from lawmakers from both parties, including several Republicans who sounded, well, betrayed.
''We stretched to try to give you the tools necessary to make America safe, and it's very, very clear that you've abused that trust,'' said Rep. Darryl Issa, R-Calif. 
Congress created the national security letter in 1986 as a way to allow the FBI to obtain electronic records without a judge's approval if the target was suspected of being a foreign spy. The Patriot Act let the FBI seize records from anyone considered a terror suspect.
The FBI general counsel, Valerie Caproni, said Tuesday that the problem was partly due to the agency's inexperience in conducting its national security work without the oversight of a judge.
That's an easy problem to fix.
The agency's inspector general

Load-Date: March 22, 2007


End of Document