FBI's new focus will be on preventing crimes
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
November 11, 1999, Thursday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 293 words
Body


WASHINGTON - In its most dramatic organizational overhaul in decades,
the FBI is changing its structure to address internal problems with
the handling of information and put a greater emphasis on preventing
terrorism and espionage, rather than simply responding to such crimes
after they happen.
In an interview, FBI Deputy Director Robert M. Bryant characterized
the restructuring, which bureau officials plan to announce today, as a
"sea change" that will encourage the sharing of information between
divisions and better communication between analysts and senior
officials.
"We collect a lot of information, but our predictive intelligence
is poor," said Bryant, the second-in-command at the bureau. "The
bottom line is, 'We don't know what we know.' '
The reorganization is an integral part of a broader transformation of
the FBI under Director Louis J. Freeh and reflects his commitment to
the bureau's growing role in fighting terrorism in the United States
and around the world. The FBI's counter-terrorism budget has more than
tripled in the past three years, while its overall budget has doubled
from $ 1.5 billion to about $ 3 billion since Freeh took the helm in
1993.
Under the restructuring, the number of major operating divisions at
the bureau will increase from two - the Criminal Division and National
Security Division - to four. A new Counterterrorism Division will
focus on terrorist threats and include the bureau's National
Infrastructure Protection Center and its computer crimes unit; an
Investigative Services Division will consolidate analysts who had
worked in separate divisions and will also include the bureau's
hostage rescue team and negotiators.
Bryant said the old system left analysts in different divisions
focused too narrowly on their areas of expertise.

Load-Date: November 16, 1999


End of Document