FBI, doctors team up to combat terrorism , Agency hopes program will help prevent an attack
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 10, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7C
Length: 331 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


PITTSBURGH - The FBI's Pittsburgh office and doctors in the region are trying to combat terrorism by sharing information that could prevent an attack.
Instead of reacting to an event as in the past, the FBI hopes the Strategic Medical Intelligence program will enable it to prevent or contain an attack, said FBI Special Agent Phil Smith and Michael Allswede, the UPMC doctor who helped develop the program.
A handful of doctors have undergone FBI background checks and have been given clearance to receive certain information from the FBI. If the doctors notice unusual incidents or, for example, think they have a patient with smallpox, they may alert the FBI, which could then follow up on it.
The program also can work the other way: If the FBI has reason to believe there may be some risk - perhaps even to doctors - doctors in the program may be alerted to be on the lookout.
One such scenario would be if the FBI learned from some intelligence that abortion doctors may be targeted for an anthrax letter campaign.
"It is an opportunity for the intelligence community, one more opportunity, to detect and interdict," Allswede said.
Doctors, all with terrorism expertise, represent UPMC, Carnegie Mellon University, West Penn-Allegheny Hospital System, Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia, and West Virginia University and Marshall University in West Virginia. Representatives of the Allegheny County and state health departments also participate.
So far, only the Pittsburgh FBI office is involved. Its jurisdiction covers western Pennsylvania and West Virginia.
Smith said FBI headquarters officials are aware of the program, but he doesn't know whether it will be adopted elsewhere.
"This concept is consistent with what our director has said in that we are involved in a fundamental shift in the FBI … to move to being more proactive and preventative," Smith said.
Allswede began working on the program in 1998 when he was involved with the National Domestic Preparedness Office.

Load-Date: May 12, 2003


End of Document