FBI: Attack was terrorism; Attackers linked to Syria's Nusra Front, Somalia's al-Shabab
Charleston Gazette-Mail
December 5, 2015, Saturday


Copyright 2015 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 1062 words
Byline: Richard A. Serrano, Brian Bennett, Jack Dolan and Soumya Karlamangla, Los Angeles Times
Body


SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. - San Bernardino shooter Syed Rizwan Farook had contact with people from at least two terrorist organizations overseas, including the Nusra Front, in Syria, and al-Shabab, in Somalia, a federal law enforcement official said Friday.
The revelations came as the FBI formally announced it is investigating the shooting spree as an act of terrorism.
Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, died in a police shootout Wednesday, several hours after bursting into a holiday potluck for the San Bernardino County Health Department, killing 14 people and wounding 21.
As the investigation expands, the law enforcement source said, agents are trying to learn more about the couple's contacts in the United States and overseas, "especially those in Pakistan where Farook visited and Malik was born. One key question, the official said, "is if they had any weapons or terror training in Pakistan.
The sources described "some kind of contact between Farook and people from the Nusra Front and al-Shabab. It's unclear what type of contact or with whom.
Malik pledged allegiance to the leader of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in a Facebook posting, according to two federal law enforcement officials.
Witnesses and police have said Farook, a county public health worker, had been at the party but left, possibly after a disagreement with a co-worker, and returned with Malik to attack the gathering. That could be construed as workplace violence, the source said, noting that evidence and witness recollections suggest that they shot Farook's supervisors first. Or, the source said, that "after they got away and were missing for several hours, they might have hoped to still launch a previous plan for an even larger strike.
The federal officials, who were not authorized to speak publicly about the matter, cautioned that the new evidence did not mean that the terrorist group directed Malik and her husband to carry out the Wednesday attack and that investigators think it instead suggests that the couple had become self-radicalized.
An acquaintance who prayed with Farook told the Los Angeles Times that Farook said he liked his wife because she wore a "niqab, a veil that covered almost all of her face.
Nizaam Ali, 23, said in an interview Friday that he occasionally talked to Farook at the San Bernardino mosque Dar al Uloom al Islamiyah of America.
Ali, a student at California State University, San Bernardino, remembered Farook saying something like, "That's what really made me interested in her, that's what made her stick out from the other women.
Ali said that he thought Farook liked Malik's niqab because it showed she was religious and wasn't embodying "the modern role of women today, working and all that.
Ali said he thinks wearing a niqab is courageous, especially in the West, where people aren't familiar with such clothing. The two men agreed about that, he remembered.
"Other than that, his wife never came up in other conversations, he said.
Farook met his wife online, a practice Ali said is common among his friends.
"In our community, it's different, he said, noting that it's difficult for Muslim men to find women to marry. "Internet has become something that eases it.
Ali said he had met Malik on a few occasions, but the niqab obscured her face.
"If you asked me how she looked, I couldn't tell you, he said.
Malik, who was born in Pakistan, spent time in Saudi Arabia before becoming engaged to Farook. She gained legal permanent-resident status in the United States after they were married last year.
One of the officials said Malik's post about the ISIL leader was made under a different name and had been removed, apparently by Malik herself, but FBI technicians were able to recover the post. Officials said the post strongly suggested the attack on Wednesday was premeditated.
Malik, 27, and Farook, 28, a U.S. citizen of Pakistani descent, made an unsuccessful attempt to destroy their electronic devices, a federal law enforcement source told the Times.
An attorney representing Farook and Malik's family said Malik did not speak about ISIL or terrorism.
"As far as I know, there was no discussion of any of that [among family members] Mohammad Abuershaid said.
The couple married about a year and a half ago, he said. "It wasn't like the family had much time to get to know her.
Abuershaid said the family is very conservative and that it would have been unlikely that Malik discussed her thoughts on world events, including the trouble in the Middle East, with her in-laws.
"Tashfeen was an individual who kept to herself most of the time, Abuershaid said.
The family has met with the FBI and plans to meet with agency officials again on Monday, the attorney said.
A senior federal official said agents believe Farook was in contact with a small number of extremists, adding that they have picked up indications that he "communicated with at least one individual whom U.S. officials were monitoring.
Farook's connection to the terrorism suspect might be only tangential, the source said, but the link suggests there might be a "deeper terror matrix behind Wednesday's attack.
The two had amassed an arsenal of weapons and explosives in their Redlands home, including a dozen pipe bombs and thousands of rounds of ammunition, officials said Thursday.
The arsenal suggested a level of planning that added to investigators' concern that the attack was far more than a spontaneous response to a workplace dispute.
"Certainly they were equipped, and they could have continued to do another attack, San Bernardino Police Chief Jarrod Burguan said at a news conference Thursday. "We intercepted them.
Farook and Malik fired at least 65 shots when they stormed the conference room at the Inland Regional Center, where 75 to 80 people had gathered for a holiday potluck. Twelve of the 14 dead and 18 of the 21 wounded were county employees, police said.
Friday morning, dozens of reporters were let inside the Redlands townhome where Malik and Farook lived. The doors and windows were boarded up and the home was sparsely decorated. The upstairs held a crib, baby toys and children's books.
In the middle of the living room, a Quran rested on a small black table. On another table was a lengthy list of items the FBI had seized in its investigation: Christmas-type lights, an iPhone, boxes and bags of ammunition, letters, a passport and gun accessories.

Load-Date: December 7, 2015


End of Document