FBI: Some watch-list hits not reported; Police fail to alert bureau of possible terrorism suspects
USA TODAY
June 4, 2008 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 527 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


WASHINGTON -- State and local police officers fail to notify federal authorities about encounters with possible terrorism suspects up to 10 times a day, a senior FBI official said.
The rate of failure represents missed opportunities to verify possible matches to suspects on the government's terrorist watch list  or to remove individuals from the list whose names had been added by mistake, Leonard Boyle, director of the bureau's Terrorist Screening Center (TSC), said in an interview.
Police are asked to contact the center when routine computerized background checks on individuals -- who may have violated traffic rules or been involved in a domestic disturbance -- trigger electronic alerts from the TSC.
The alerts indicate possible matches to individuals on the government's watch list of an estimated 400,000 people. Police notifications to the center result in the identification of  40 to 50 verified suspects each day.
Of those, Boyle said, a handful result in arrests.
Regular audits of the system reveal that officers do not respond to the alerts eight to 10 times daily. Federal authorities are not automatically contacted. As a result, Boyle said, they are forced to reconstruct the encounters through interviews and local police reports.
The government does not track the rate at which valid watch-list suspects are identified when the initial contacts go unreported, but Boyle said it is fairly common for the unreported encounters to result later in positive identifications of watch-list suspects. There is no evidence that a local reporting failure resulted in a terrorist act in the USA.
The terrorist watch list, however, was used to deny U.S. entry to Egyptian Omar Ahmed Ali, who in 2005 committed a suicide bombing in Qatar, killing one person and injuring 12 others, screening center spokesman Chad Kolton said.
The screening center was created in 2003 to fill domestic security gaps exposed by 9/11. Two of the hijackers, Nawaf Alhazmi and Khalid Almihdhar, were sought by federal investigators for more than a year before the attacks. Both went undetected, even though Oklahoma authorities had stopped Alhazmi and cited him for speeding five months before the attacks in 2001.
Boyle said a basic "unfamiliarity with the notification system and an unfamiliarity with the benefits of reporting" the contacts have been the most common explanations for not acting on the alerts.
"I would like to think that (compliance) would be higher," said Ronald Ruecker, president of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, the nation's largest organization of law enforcement officials.
Ruecker, public safety director in Sherwood, Ore., said the lack of reporting could be due to the "cultural shift" in law enforcement's post-9/11 emphasis on fighting terrorism. He said that focus hasn't completely resonated among police.  "It is a culture not easily changed."
Darrel Stephens, former president of the Major Cities Chiefs Association, said the compliance rate suggests that some officers intentionally do not contact federal authorities. Others may not  respond because of workload pressures and the time required to contact the center, he said. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: June 4, 2008


End of Document