FBI: 5 men arrested, wanted to blow up Ohio bridge
The Salt Lake Tribune
May 3, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World; Local
Length: 386 words
Byline: By Thomas J. Sheeran
Body


BC-US--Cleveland Arrests, 3rd Ld-Writethru,292
FBI: 5 men arrested, wanted to blow up Ohio bridge
AP Photo CD101, CD102, CD103
Eds: Adds information about suspects and alleged plotting, quote from FBI agent. Will be updated. With AP Photos.
By THOMAS J. SHEERAN
Associated Press
CLEVELAND » Five men, at least three of them anarchists, plotted to blow up a bridge near Cleveland, but there was no danger to the public because the explosives were inoperable and were controlled by an undercover FBI employee, the agency said Tuesday in announcing the men's arrests.
The target of the plot was a bridge that carries a four-lane highway over part of the Cuyahoga Valley National Park in the Brecksville area, about 15 miles south of downtown Cleveland, the FBI said.
Authorities said three of the men were arrested Monday and are self-described anarchists, not tied to international terrorism.
It wasn't immediately clear whether the men had attorneys. All of the suspects, ranging in age from 20 to 35, were expected to appear in federal court Tuesday afternoon.
The FBI said three were arrested on charges of conspiracy and trying to use explosives to damage property affecting interstate commerce. They were identified as Brandon L. Baxter, 20; Douglas L. Wright, 26; and Anthony Hayne, 35. Their hometowns were not provided.
Charges were pending against the other two men.
Baxter, Wright and Hayne considered different plots over several months, including distracting law enforcement with smoke grenades while trying to bring down financial institution signs in downtown Cleveland, federal authorities alleged. The defendants' finally settled on blowing up the bridge, authorities said.
"The individuals charged in this plot were intent on using violence to express their ideological views," Special Agent Stephen D. Anthony, who oversees the FBI's Cleveland division, said in a statement. "The Joint Terrorism Task Force will continue to be vigilant in its efforts to detect and disrupt any terrorism threat, domestic or international."
------
Associated Press writers Pete Yost in Washington and Kantele Franko in Columbus, Ohio, contributed to this report. Alt Heads:
FBI: 5 men arrested, wanted to blow up Ohio bridge Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet nonummy
Vendion parchic tes sunt eostionse volecer oremquam, comnietur rerspicia consed.

Graphic

 
FILE - This file photo provided by the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium and shows one of three leopards that were captured by authorities, a day after their owner released dozens of wild animals and then killed himself near Zanesville, Ohio on Oct. 18, 2011. Officials say five exotic animals will be returned to Marian Thompson, the woman whose husband released dozens of wild creatures last fall before killing himself. The Ohio Agriculture Department announced the decision Monday. It's unclear when the animals would be released to Marian Thompson. (AP Photo/Columbus Zoo and Aquarium, Grahm S. Jones, File)
FILE - In this Oct. 19, 2011 file photo obtained by the Associated Press, carcasses lie on the ground at the Muskingum County Animal Farm in Zanesville, Ohio. Ohio officials are clearing the way for the return of five surviving exotic animals to Marian Thompson, whose husband Terry Thompson freed bears, lions, endangered Bengal tigers and other animals on Oct. 18, 2011 before killing himself. (AP Photo, File)

Load-Date: May 3, 2012


End of Document