FBI: Naval base attack ‘terrorism-related'
Chicago Daily Herald
May 22, 2020 Friday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2020 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NATION_; Pg. 2
Length: 256 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


A shooting at a Texas naval air station that wounded a sailor and left the gunman dead early Thursday was being investigated as "terrorism-related," the FBI said, but divulged few details as to why. The suspect was identified as Adam Alsahli of Corpus Christi, according to three officials familiar with the investigation who were not authorized to speak publicly and spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity. 
At about 6:15 a.m., the gunman tried to speed through a security gate at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi, opening fire and wounding the sailor, a member of base security, U.S. officials told the AP. But she was able to roll over and hit the switch that raised a barrier, preventing the man from getting onto the base, the officials said. Other security personnel shot and killed the man. There was an initial concern that he may have an explosive device, but Navy experts swept the area and the car and found nothing. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss details about an ongoing investigation. Officials were still working to process the crime scene late into the day and had recovered some type of electronic media. The base was on lockdown for about five hours, but it was lifted shortly before noon. The main gate was reopened, though the gate where the incident occurred was still shut down. FBI Supervisory Senior Resident Agent Leah Greeves said at a news conference that investigators were working to determine whether a second person of interest was at large but did not elaborate.

Notes

Eds: UPDATES: Recasts to raise details and adds quote from Justice Department. Adds details on base. Eds: UPDATES: Recasts to raise details and adds quote from Justice Department. Adds details on base. EDITS: Corrects reference to wounded sailor as 'she' in 1 reference. Eds: UPDATES: Adds video. With AP Photos. AP Video.

Graphic

 
Associated Press The entrances to the Naval Air Station-Corpus Christi are closed Thursday following an active shooter threat.

Load-Date: May 22, 2020


End of Document