FBI: No terror link in lasers aimed at aircraft
USA TODAY
January 3, 2005, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 332 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson and Alan Levin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- A string of incidents around the country involving laser beams aimed at aircraft aren't linked to terrorism and are more likely the work of mischief makers, the FBI said Sunday.
The FBI attributed eight incidents in the past 10 days to pranks or accidental acts that tagged aircraft in Ohio, Texas, Oregon and New Jersey. Pilots reported that powerful laser beams apparently had been aimed at them during takeoffs and landings.
Lasers have been a growing concern in the aviation community. Laser pointers, devices the size of a pen that are used by public speakers, have enough power to cause vision problems in pilots from a distance of 2 miles, according to the Federal Aviation Administration. A pilot hit by a laser also could become distracted.
The Homeland Security Department issued a bulletin to law enforcement agencies in November warning that terrorist groups have expressed an interest in using them.
In the latest laser-flashing case, a police helicopter investigating an earlier laser incident near the Teterboro, N.J., airport was hit Friday evening by a beam coming from a neighborhood in Parsippany. Potential witnesses were being questioned Sunday by the FBI. No one has been arrested or charged. But an attorney for a Parsippany man said her client was questioned by the FBI.
Attorney Gina Mendola Longarzo said David Banach was playing with his daughter on the deck of their home Friday evening when they waved a handheld laser pointer in the air. Longarzo said Banach was aware that a helicopter was in the area but did not think the beam was powerful enough to reach the helicopter. Within minutes, Longarzo said, police and federal agents swarmed Banach's home.
"There is no connection to terrorism here," Longarzo said. "This is a man who has never had a parking ticket."
FBI spokesman Stephen Kodak said the investigation was continuing and that "several people" were being questioned. He said there is no evidence linking the New Jersey incidents to terrorism.

Load-Date: January 4, 2005


End of Document