Fears Grow of Terror Attacks if War Erupts, and Nations Tighten Security
The New York Times
January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk; Column 3;
Length: 1335 words
Byline: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times

By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11
Body


The Bush Administration said today that terrorists supported by Iraq were planning worldwide attacks against the United States and its allies in the event of war in the Persian Gulf. Several Government agencies are taking countermeasures both in this country and abroad, including increasing security at airports, tightening screening procedures at entry points and briefing corporations on how to thwart attacks.
Foreign governments issued similar warnings and said they are increasing security measures, especially at airports and airlines serving Europe and the Middle East, where the risks are thought to be highest. The British and German authorities have expelled Iraqis believed to pose a threat.
"The U.S. Government has evidence that terrorists supported by Iraq are planning to mount attacks in most regions of the world," said a State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher. "We believe the Middle East and Europe are the most likely locations, but we also have reports of terrorist planning in Africa, Asia and Latin America."
 
Steadily Tightening Security
 While the State Department's warning dealt with the possibility of attacks on Americans overseas and advised travelers abroad to be especially cautious, many defensive actions disclosed today suggested that attacks were also expected in the United States.
The Federal Aviation Administration is requiring airlines and airports in this country, as well as United States airlines operating around the world, to impose security rules that would be steadily increased as tensions increased, and particularly if bloodshed through combat or terrorism occurred. The procedures would be time consuming and inconvenient to passengers, especially after the onset of war.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service, a part of the Justice Department, moved to tighten screening procedures at all entry points, and the Coast Guard tightened security at some ports. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission warned nuclear power plants to be on guard.
The Administration's public warnings of possible terrorist attacks, like previous warnings about Iraq's nuclear and chemical weapons programs, could be viewed as a way of increasing pressure on Congress to authorize the use of force to oust Iraq's army from Kuwait. But the breadth of the measures indicates that the threat of terrorism, which has been repeatedly voiced by Iraq and its sympathizers, is taken seriously by the Administration.
Mr. Boucher said the warning was based on intelligence reports about activities like "surveillance of potential targets" by suspected terrorists, but he said that the information was not specific enough to identify particular targets or the sites of planned attacks. Officials would not not say whether the information had come from tips, from direct observations or from electronic eavesdropping.
In New York City, more than 200 security directors from large corporations met with Federal authorities and local police today to discuss tactics to thwart anti-American terrorism that the police expect if there is war in the Middle East. Participants said most of the discussion focused on how to control access to buildings and respond to bomb threats.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said that the city police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation had no hard evidence that terrorist groups sympathetic to Iraq had chosen specific targets in New York.
Commissioner Brown said that the department's high-tech command center, usually used to coordinate different agencies in disasters or city-wide celebrations, would be put into operation starting starting next week. The center, staffed by the F.B.I., the State Department and local law enforcement agencies, will handle questions and tips from private companies' security directors.
"Terrorism will be a means of the conflict if there is one," Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis of Italy said in an interview published today in an Italian weekly. He noted that there had been "explicit threats from extremist groups linked to Iraq."
Transport Minister Malcolm Rifkind of Britain issued a statement saying the risks "will increase substantially in the event of hostilities."
"No government can guarantee security," he said. "Members of the public should be aware of this when deciding whether to travel by air."
United States transportation officials said they were concerned about not alarming travelers unduly, especially at a time when airlines are losing money or are even in bankruptcy.
After the bombing of a Pan American flight from Germany to New York in 1988, the Government was criticized for not making public information about a possible terrorist attack. Since the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq on Aug. 2, the State Department has repeatedly warned of possible terrorist attacks, as in October, when it singled out cruise ships operating in the eastern Mediterranean as a possible target.
 
Inconveniences Are Expected
 The greatest dangers are to British and American interests in Europe and the Middle East, with aviation and other forms of transportation at the top of the list of likely targets, several experts agreed.
A copy of the Federal Avication Administration's security contingency plan, which was distributed to airports and airlines on Dec. 31 and reported today in USA Today, shows that domestic and international passengers are likely to notice tighter security even before any outbreak of war, and that if there are open hostilities passengers could be noticeably inconvenienced.
The plan envisions several stages of alert, starting with the "heightened tension" that already exists and culminating with "open hostilities." Airlines and airports must at all times be prepared to move quickly to the next higher level of alert. The F.A.A. security plan was obtained from aviation industry officials who had been consulted during its preparation.
At increasing levels of security, inspections of places where bombs might be hidden would be stepped up and uniformed or undercover police would patrol near ticket counters, perhaps using bomb dogs. Passengers and people without tickets would find it increasingly difficult to move around airports without being searched or questioned. Baggage, electronic goods that might disguise bombs, packages and cargo would be subjected to increasingly rigorous scrutiny. People who were considered to be suspicious might be interrogated or searched.
The measures would be implemented at many, but not necessarily all, United States airports, where they would affect passengers on foreign airlines as well as those on domestic airlines.
 
Safety Measures Abroad
 Foreign aviation officials are imposing similar precautions, especially in Britain, Italy and Germany.
The French Interior Ministry has increased patrols on Paris streets by a special paramilitary police unit. But a ministry spokesman said special measures have not been taken yet at airports and train stations.
A British expert on terrorism, Frank Brenchley, said that "our expectation has been from the time of the invasion of Kuwait" that Palestinian and Iraqi terrorists "will have been briefed to position themselves in Western countries for attacks and they will have done so."
Mr. Brenchley, chairman of the London-based Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism, said those terrorists ready to strike probably included members of Palestinian groups like Abu Nidal and Abul Abbas. "But the Iraqis also have their own terrorist capability," he added.
Last week, the British Government ordered 75 Iraqis, including seven diplomats, to leave the country, citing public threats and national security considerations. This followed the expulsion of 10 embassy staff members and 23 other Iraqis in September and another diplomat in November.
There are 5,000 to 6,000 Iraqis, mostly students, still in Britain.
Before he left London last week, one expelled diplomat, Naiel Abdul-Jabbar Hassan, said: "I am sure if there is any attack on Iraq, a lot of targets in countries in the West will be demolished."

Graphic

 
Photo: As a precaution against terrorist attacks supported by Iraq, the Federal Aviation Administration is requiring airlines and airports to increase security. Officer Jerry Issida and a bomb detection dog, Marlon, gave a demonstration at San Francisco International Airport. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: January 12, 1991


End of Document