fears at a temple
Defiance also as Cuomo labels Rockland attack that injured 5 an 'act of terrorism'
Daily News (New York)
December 30, 2019 Monday
Sports Final Edition


Copyright 2019 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 2
Length: 1000 words
Byline: Rocco Parascandola, Barry Paddock; and Shant Shahrigian

New York Daily News
Highlight: Gov. Cuomo meets with Rabbi Chaim Rottenberg, whose Rockland County home, next-door to his synagogue, was targeted in Saturday night attack on Chanukah celebration. Suspect Grafton Thomas (main photo), charged with five counts of attempted murder and one count of burglary, pleads not guilty in Ramapo Town Court. Far r., the alleged hate-filled madman in custody.AP
Body


Defiance mingled with fear pervaded a suburban New York synagogue Sunday, the morning after a hate-filled madman with a machete wounded five victims during a Chanukah celebration next-door in an attack Gov. Cuomo labeled an "act of terrorism."
Members of Congregation Netzach Yisroel in Monsey, Rockland County, prayed and danced outside the scene of the grisly attack hours after a judge ordered the suspect held on $5 million bail.
"We will not cave in to fear," Baruch Sandhaus captioned a Twitter video of dozens of men worshiping. "Through the darkness of Nazi Germany ... to the #MonseyStabbing ... Singing & Dancing with the Torah."
Still, the 75 or so shaken congregants at Sunday services were on edge, according to a worshiper.
"We're terrified," said Simon Guttman, 27, who attends Congregation Netzach Yisroel. "We are scared and it's heartbreaking."
Even with police on hand during the services, the sound of someone moving a garbage can outside the entrance startled congregants, he said.
"It's crazy that in 2019, almost 2020, we can't pray normally in a synagogue," Guttman told the Daily News. "People have to be scared."
Grafton Thomas, who lives in Greenwood Lake, Orange County, about 20 miles from Monsey, was charged with five counts of attempted murder and one count of burglary. He pleaded not guilty during his arraignment just before noon Sunday in Ramapo Town Court.
Thomas, 37, was covered with blood he had tried to remove with bleach when cops nabbed him in Harlem hours after the attack - and a bloody machete was found in his car, said prosecutors and police sources.
He was ordered held on $5 million bail by Judge Rhoda Schoenberger.
Thomas, sporting a shaggy beard, said nothing during his court appearance. He lives with his father, who has an auto body shop, sources said.
His lawyer, Kristine Ciganik, said in court he has no criminal record. Lohud.com reported he was charged with menacing and reckless endangerment last summer in Greenwood Lake, but the case was to be dismissed if he stayed out of further trouble.
Rockland County Assistant District Attorney Michael Dugandzic urged the judge to hold Thomas without bail, but the judge said the state's new prison reform laws prevent that, according to lohud.com.
Ramapo police - who cover the hamlet of Monsey - and the FBI are investigating whether Thomas was involved in a Nov. 20 attack on an Orthodox Jew in Monsey, said a law enforcement source.
Thomas "has a long history of mental illness and hospitalizations," said a statement Sunday by his family issued by another lawyer, Michael Sussman, who said he is taking up the case.
"We believe the actions of which he is accused, if committed by him, tragically reflect profound mental illness," the family statement said.
Weapons were found in Thomas' home, said a law enforcement source. The suspect's father told investigators he and his son have a strained relationship, and that he didn't know much of his son's recent activities, the source said.
Thomas, armed with the machete, allegedly entered Rabbi Chaim Rottenberg's home in Monsey's Forshay neighborhood about 9:50 p.m. on Saturday and wordlessly stabbed five people, including a son of the rabbi.
Congregants, who had just lighted a menorah, threw chairs and desks at the assailant to try to stop him.
Three victims were treated and released while two remain hospitalized, one in serious condition with a skull fracture, authorities said Sunday.
The stabber tried to make a run from the rabbi's home to the rabbi's synagogue next-door - but someone locked the door to keep him from going inside. He sped off in his car instead.
A witness who recorded the suspect's license plate and alerted authorities is credited with helping make the quick arrest possible.
License plate readers picked up Thomas' Nissan Sentra crossing the George Washington Bridge just after 11 p.m. on Saturday, allowing NYPD cops to nab the suspect in Harlem.
Thomas was "rambling nonsense" when police took him into custody, said a law enforcement source. 
"Everybody is wondering - what was the motive? Why did he do it? Was it targeted, not targeted?" Guttman said of the attack.
"We hope everybody ... will be OK," he added. "We hope this is the last one, the last attack on us."
Cuomo denounced the attack as "a blatant act of domestic terrorism that sought to inflict violence, incite hate and generate fear."
After visiting Rabbi Rottenberg in the morning, Cuomo directed the state police to increase patrols and security in Orthodox Jewish neighborhoods throughout the state. A Cuomo official said the move involved a "significant deployment" of state police forces but declined to provide a number, citing security concerns.
"It's a very sad situation," the governor told reporters after meeting with Rottenberg. "Hate and violence, that's all it was."
He vowed to push for a first-in-the-nation state law that would allow suspects in similar cases to be charged as domestic terrorists.
"Just because they don't come from another country doesn't mean they're not terrorists," Cuomo said. "They should be prosecuted as domestic terrorists because that's what they are."
Elected officials around the country denounced the violence - the latest in a horrifying streak of anti-Semitic attacks, which killed 11 in October 2018 in Pittsburgh, four people Dec. 10 in Jersey City, and one person in April in Poway, Calif.
"We will NOT allow this to become the new normal. We'll use every tool we have to stop these attacks once and for all," Mayor de Blasio tweeted, adding that the NYPD had deployed a "visible and growing presence" to synagogues in Brooklyn neighborhoods including Borough Park, Crown Heights and Williamsburg.
"We must all come together to fight, confront, and eradicate the evil scourge of anti-Semitism," President Trump tweeted Sunday. "Melania and I wish the victims a quick and full recovery."
Saturday's attack in Monsey, about 30 miles from the city, came after a streak of anti-Semitic incidents last week in the five boroughs.

Load-Date: December 30, 2019


End of Document