Fear and the nuclear terror threat; The mushroom cloud scenario has become a political fixture, as myths seem to be driving the debate.
USA TODAY
January 9, 2008 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 911 words
Byline: Michael Levi
Body


Politicians love to scare the wits out of people, and nothing suits that purpose better than talking about nuclear terrorism. From President Bush warning in 2002 that the "smoking gun" might be a mushroom cloud, to John Kerry in 2004 conjuring "shadowy figures" with a "finger on a nuclear button" and Mitt Romney invoking the specter of "radical, nuclear jihad" last spring,  the pattern is impossible to miss. Indeed the three-part political strategy is simple. Describe the havoc an attack would wreak. Suggest that without big changes to American strategy, a successful strike is pretty much inevitable. And now that you have people's attention, deliver the closer: You have a foolproof plan for eliminating the threat.
With every week seeming to bring another nuclear bombshell, the candidates have plenty of fodder. The assassination of former Pakistani prime minister Benazir Bhutto in late December has refocused attention on that fragile nuclear-armed nation. In November, a uranium smuggling operation was busted in Slovakia; barely a week later, a new intelligence report revealed that Iran had shuttered part of its nuclear program, but Tehran continued to push forward with its dangerous efforts to produce nuclear fuel. No wonder people are worried.
Here's the reality. The nuclear threat is real and deserves our utmost attention. An atomic bomb detonated in the heart of a major American city could kill hundreds of thousands. But it would be tougher for terrorists to pull off a nuclear attack than many people assume. (A dirty bomb would be easier to make and deliver, but its impact would be far less severe.) Many intelligence professionals know that, but our political culture doesn't do  moderation. The first step to getting smart about defense, then, is to bust some popular myths about nuclear terrorism.
The long road
Start at the beginning: To pull off a plot, a terrorist group needs to get its hands on a bomb or on the materials it needs to make one. It would probably target a nuclear facility directly, maybe a military base in the former Soviet Union or a civilian reactor in an obscure corner of the world. That's a big reason why we need to do a much better job of securing those sites. Our imagination, though, tends to focus just as much on a shadowy black market where nuclear materials from the former Soviet Union are bought and sold so long as the price is right. That fear is fueled by regular reports of intercepted nuclear materials and by the success of Pakistani engineer A.Q. Khan in building a genuine worldwide black market in nuclear technology -- but not in nuclear materials like uranium and plutonium.
Indeed when it comes to loose nukes, the black market image is misleading, since underground deals are hard for terrorists to engineer. Buyers and sellers need to worry about being turned in -- many illicit transactions have actually been stings. Terrorists should also be nervous about getting ripped off. When drug smugglers work with people they don't already know and trust, they tend to keep deals small, about $10,000 or less. A nuclear weapon or the materials for it would be worth millions.
If a group got its hands on nuclear materials, it would still need to build a bomb. To the Internet! The place is littered with tutorials on how to build nuclear weapons, and while a lot of what's out there is nonsense, there are places that get the basics right. (Suggestion for policymakers: Hire students who failed physics to make as many instructional websites as they can.) The problem for terrorists is that, as anyone who has ever tried programming a VCR can tell you, instructions are the easy part.
'The dirty work'
When it comes to nukes, it's the engineering and the dirty work -- machining, metalworking, electronics -- that's tough, something that the Ph.D. physicists who think about terrorism often forget. Let's not kid ourselves: With the right team, a terrorist group might pull the job off. But we have a lot more leverage here than a lot of people think. A group that made it this far would also need to get its bomb into the USA. Here the doom and gloom is a bit more justified. The United States has long, porous borders, and right now it only inspects a fraction of the cargo that comes in through its ports. Still, not everything is as bad as it looks.
In 2006, U.S. government agents tried to smuggle weapons-grade uranium across  the Canadian border. They made it through on three of four tries. Border security must be pretty useless, right? Not necessarily. Those odds of failing seem terrible from where we sit. But put yourself in the shoes of a terrorist leader contemplating a nuclear strike, add up all the other ways you might fail, and you might easily come to a different conclusion -- and perhaps not even start a plot in the first place.
Given the consequence of a successful attack, we'd be fools to convert from nuclear zealots who think the sky is falling to nuclear atheists who reject the existence of a real threat. But like a cop who leaves his Kevlar vest at home because he assumes that all bad guys have armor-piercing bullets, we'll miss opportunities to confront the threat if we exaggerate it. Better to be pragmatic agnostics: We should be skeptical if we're told that pulling off a nuclear attack is easy, but we should be smart about making it even harder.
---
Michael Levi, a fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, is author of the new book On Nuclear Terrorism. 

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Web Bryant, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION)

Load-Date: February 13, 2008


End of Document