Fearing Liability Suits, Many Directors Have Considered Quitting, Survey Says
The American Banker
December 3, 1986, Wednesday


Copyright 1986 American Banker, Inc.
Section: Pg. 2
Length: 432 words
Byline: By PHILIP T. SUDO
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Hundreds of directors of major U.S. corporations have considered resigning recently due to their increased exposure to liability suits, according to a survey released on Tuesday by Touche Ross & Co., a Big Eight accounting firm.
The survey, to which more than 1,100 directors responded, also found that the longer directors serve on boards, the more likely they are to consider resigning because of increased liability.
Three-quarters of the respondents serve on boards of companies with annual sales or assets of $1 billion or more; more than half served on more than one board.
Forty percent of the respondents serve as directors of banks -- the highest representation of any industry.
''The [survey] mailings were not disproportionate to banks,'' said Marcia Sherwood, manager of marketing and communications at Touche Ross. ''That so many bank directors chose to answer makes me think they had some very serious concerns they wanted to communicate.''
Ninety-three percent of those polled believe increased liability will lead to problems in recruiting talented, experienced people to serve on boards in the future.
Among the survey's other findings:
* Forty-eight percent of those surveyed felt that merger and acquisition activity has hurt the nation's economy. Harvey D. Brown, national director of marketing and communications, said an even greater percentage of bank directors ''viewed merger and acquisition activity as being detrimental, at least to the organization they represented.''
* Bank directors were no more concerned than other directors about Third World debt. A large majority, 81%, did not believe Third World debt will have an adverse effect in the next 12 months on the balance sheet of any company they serve.
''The lack of concern about Third World debt was surprising,'' Mr. Brown said. ''I think people assume there will be some kind of government intervention.''
* Less than a third of the respondents believe terrorism, including product tampering, will significantly affect business next year. Of those who think terrorism will have some effect, 85% believe the travel and leisure industry will be hurt, and 41% say this about the pharmaceutical and drug industry.
Twenty percent said they believed the banking industry would suffer from some form of terrorism. ''I think that's a function of how visible the multinational banks are in foreign countries,'' Mr. Brown said.
* Fifty-three percent of those surveyed believe nonbanking financial institutions will be the main source of financing in the next 12 months, compared with 35% who said banks would be the primary source.


End of Document