Fearing terrorism, U.S. will keep smallpox virus samples
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 23, 1999, Friday


Copyright 1999, Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. b 7
Length: 508 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


Highly contagious: World Health group wants stocks destroyed
WASHINGTON (AP) - Concerns that a new smallpox vaccine might be needed to combat a future terrorist threat led President Clinton on Thursday to reject appeals from scores of nations to destroy one of the last caches of the deadly virus.
World Health Organization officials, who recommended that the remaining stores of smallpox be destroyed, were unavailable for comment, a spokesman said.
The United States and Russia are the only two nations with known smallpox stocks, but the administration fears the virus could have fallen into other hands, raising the threat of bioterrorism. Smallpox is highly contagious and kills about 20 percent of those afflicted.
"No one else is supposed to have it," a senior administration official said. "We don't know who else might have it. But the virus stores very easily in freezers, so it could be elsewhere. We don't know what has happened in the last 20 years … who might still have the virus and may not be telling anyone that they have it."
"It could re-emerge as a terrorist threat," said the official, who insisted on anonymity. "It could re-emerge as an accident from a laboratory that doesn't know it has it. It could start spreading very quickly from that."
The WHO first recommended in 1996 that the U.S. and Russian laboratory caches be destroyed in June. The United States and scores of other nations agreed that the stocks should be destroyed. But Clinton ordered that the decision be reviewed.
The WHO reaffirmed its decision in January after polling its 191 member states to gauge support for destroying the caches.
A nine-member committee also recommended that if the stocks were not destroyed, the WHO should conduct regular inspections and inform member states that release of the virus into the environment would be considered "a crime against humanity."
Clinton concluded that the virus samples must be maintained to develop new drugs and vaccines to treat or prevent the disease, which was eradicated around the world in 1980 through an inoculation effort.
Announcing Clinton's decision, National Security Council spokesman Mike Hammer said, "The president has decided to seek a delay in the destruction of declared smallpox stocks." Russia also is opposed to their destruction.
Bioterrorism experts have said in recent months they believe the virus has been distributed to spots in Russia beyond the known laboratories, perhaps in places with less effective security controls.
A study released last month by experts at the National Academy of Science's Institute of Medicine recommended that the surviving laboratory specimens of smallpox be kept alive as a safety net in case the disease breaks out again.
The study warned that with much of the world's population no longer protected by inoculation against smallpox, the virus could pose a serious threat. Most Americans younger than 30 have never had the inoculation, and remaining smallpox vaccination stocks could treat only about 6 million people. Even those supplies are deteriorating.

Load-Date: April 23, 1999


End of Document