Fear du jour
Rubber & Plastics News
May 2, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 8
Length: 448 words
Byline: Edward Noga
Body


The word for today is ``paranoia.'' It rules.
A little paranoia is good for everyone: You become more watchful, take a little extra care. But looking over your shoulder all the time also can give you a sore neck. Or, if you're in a chemical-related business, make you a bit obsessive.
The case in point is a ``security alert'' from the American Chemistry Council that some people at rubber industry companies received. Here's how it starts:
``ACTIVISTS MAY ATTEMPT TO BREACH CHEMICAL FACILITIES: ACC has learned that activist environmental organizations may use the week of April 18-22-leading up to Earth Day on Friday, April 22-to focus on security at chemical facilities, up to and including attempts to gain unauthorized access.''
The warning went on to suggest ACC members should be alert to individuals doing surveillance on their sites, and if so, tell the cops.
We can breathe a sigh of relief that no ``incident'' did occur during that week leading up to that eco-terrorist bacchanal, Earth Day. I'll assume the ACC saved the day by following its own advice and turning in to local law enforcement the violent tree-huggers it knew about before they could act. I look forward to the trials.
I readily admit we live in paranoid times, and with good reason. People responsible for our welfare were asleep at the switch, and 9-11 occurred. Now security is of paramount importance.
And there's absolutely no doubt security at chemical-based facilities is vital. Then again, it always should have been vital.
But in spirit I probably am from Missouri: A born skeptic, my motto is ``show me.'' The campaign against the threat of eco-terrorism strikes me as a response to an exaggeration.
It's true some nut cases have resorted to vandalism in the name of ecology or animal rights, mainly out West. For example, one guy got 22 years in prison for torching three SUVs at a dealership in protest against global warming.
Widespread, organized ``terrorist'' actions? I think not. The expression ``isolated incidents'' would be a better description.
If you look around, though, you'll hear lots of verbiage about eco-terrorists running amok, threatening to rend the very fabric of our society. I'd call it hysteria. In today's America, ``terrorism'' is a loaded word, and lots of people roll it out to promote their self-interests. As a result, various states in which no mink coat has been doused with blood are considering draconian laws against any act labeled ``eco-terrorism.''
To paraphrase a Supreme Court justice speaking on another subject, I can't define terrorism, but I know it when I see it. And it's not vandalism.
Noga is editor of Rubber & Plastics News. His e-mail address is e-noga@crain.com.

Load-Date: May 5, 2005


End of Document