FEAR OF TERRORISM TRIGGERS RECONSIDERATION OF BAN ON ASSASSINATIONS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 4, 1998, Friday


Copyright 1998 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a8
Length: 463 words
Byline: JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The belief that Osama bin Laden will strike at the United States again is increasing pressure in official Washington to consider assassinating him, which would mean straying from long-established policy and practice.
The FBI, which is investigating the U.S. embassy bombings in Africa that bin Laden allegedly masterminded, says the exiled Saudi multimillionaire undoubtedly will launch another terrorist attack on an American target.
"We can predict with some certainty that we will see a reaction by bin Laden and his organization," FBI Director Louis Freeh told the Senate Judiciary Committee on Thursday.
The potential targets are not limited to embassies overseas.
"We've identified people in the United States or people who have transited the United States who are associated with him," Freeh said.
Bin Laden, Freeh said, poses "about as serious and imminent a threat as I can imagine."
Against that backdrop, committee members asked Freeh to consider the legality of assassinating bin Laden and other suspected terrorist leaders.
"What is present law with respect to their takedown?" said Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif.
Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., said, "I would very much like a legal memorandum from the FBI, stating whether or not the prohibition against assassination of heads of state applies to organized crime units, and/or terrorist units."
While the senators said they were not ready to advocate assassination, even consideration of the idea marked a sharp departure from the longstanding U.S. policy against assassination, a policy driven by pressure from Capitol Hill against the CIA in the mid-1970s.
In an interview after the hearing, Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., said the rules forbidding assassinations do not apply to situations in which the United States is virtually at war with an international terrorist organization.
"If you're undertaking a military action, there's no limit" on the use of force, Specter said. The United States could send commandos to try to arrest bin Laden, he said.
"There's always the possibility that you'll have a firefight. When you have a warrant for someone's arrest you can use whatever force you have, including lethal force," Specter said.
Freeh said that while the prohibition against killing heads of state is clear, he was unsure about the legality of assassinating others and would study the question.
In 1976, after extensive hearings that exposed CIA assassination plots, President Gerald Ford signed an executive order prohibiting U.S. officials from plotting or engaging in "political assassination."
The prohibition was broadened by Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan to state: "No person employed by or acting on behalf of the United States government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assassination."

Load-Date: September 4, 1998


End of Document