Fear factor War and terrorism are important issues, though how important depends on the party.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 4, 2007 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B1
Length: 1082 words
Byline: By Bill Lambrecht POST-DISPATCH WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Three years ago this week, the presidential election ended with a video of Osama bin Laden haunting the campaign and both major parties fixated on war and terrorism.
Now, one year away from the 2008 election - but just two months from the opening of the primary season - war and terrorism continue to be dominant issues. Voters in both major parties list the Iraq war as a top issue next year, and 70 percent say terrorism will be very important in picking a candidate.
But a partisan divide on terrorism has opened, with Democratic voters increasingly pointing to domestic issues such as health care and the economy as more important to them. Since 2004, the number of Americans identifying terrorism as a "very important" issue has declined by 8 percent, according to a poll released last week by the Pew Research Center.
With other surveys showing independents leaning Democratic at the moment and issues such as terrorism and gay rights that foster Republican unity now diminished, many analysts see next year as a Democratic year.
Nonetheless, Democrats will need to negotiate national security issues that in the past have offered more friendly terrain to the GOP.
The specter of terrorism lay behind the rise of one top Republican, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who is leading other Republicans by double digits in national polls. Behind him is the resurgent Sen. John McCain of Arizona and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson, with former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney next.
Asked what they like about Giuliani, GOP voters refer to his experience and his handling of the 9/11 crisis in his city.
Leadership and experience also are cited when voters are asked why they support New York Sen. Hillary Clinton, who leads in national polls over Illinois Sen. Barack Obama and other Democratic hopefuls. John Edwards, the former North Carolina senator, usually polls third in the Democratic field.
Of course, national polls at this point are only popularity contests that can't predict the swings of fortune that always occur in presidential primaries and caucuses. And next year's primary season promises to be like none before, after a rush by states to gain a say in the presidential sweepstakes.
Voters will barely have time to shake off New Year's hangovers when Iowa holds its precinct caucuses Jan. 3. By Feb. 5, around the time presidential campaigns used to begin, voters in nearly 30 states will have declared their preferences in primaries and caucuses.
The front-loaded process puts a premium on raising early money as well as avoiding mistakes on weighty issues such as national security.
WORLD COLLAPSE?
The outcome of this election will determine not just the speed of troop withdrawal from Iraq but also a fateful course for dealing with terrorism.
Will the nation proceed with its leaders convinced that Islamic extremism is a threat to our existence as grave as any in modern times? Or, in setting policies here and abroad, will the United States recover a semblance of its pre-9/11 bearings and treat terrorism more like global crime, albeit a virulent wave?
The answers will shape more than foreign policy. As evidenced in the Bush administration's vigorous use of executive power, the war on terror can alter civil liberties and government spending while reordering the nation's priorities.
The stretch run of the primary season has begun with President George W. Bush warning that a nuclear-equipped Iran could lead to World War III.
Such an aggressive tone sits well with Republicans like Giuliani, who joked last week that Clinton and Obama were "kind of debating" whether to invite bin Laden and Iran President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to the inaugural ball.
Romney, another Republican who vows to stand up to Iran, left no doubt about his global views when he asserted recently that Islamic jihadists seek "the collapse of the world as a civilized place."
STRIKING BALANCE
Meanwhile, at a candidate debate at Drexel University in Philadelphia last week, Democrats displayed conflicted sensibilities about threats to the United States.
Clinton was one of 30 Democrats to support a Senate resolution Sept. 26 calling on the administration to declare the Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization. The non-binding resolution also urged the White House to move forward with sanctions against Iran, which the Bush administration has since done.
In Philadelphia, her Democratic rivals accused Clinton of emboldening the president to strike Iran, likening the resolution to the Senate's authorization to invade Iraq.
"It literally gave Bush and (Vice President Dick) Cheney exactly what they wanted," Edwards said.
At this stage, the challenge for candidates is striking a balance between campaigning for the nomination and running in the general election, where their leadership and toughness likely will weigh more heavily on voters' minds.
"I am not in favor of this rush for war, but I'm also not in favor of doing nothing," Clinton responded, trying to walk that fine line. 
Meanwhile, Obama offered a Democratic worldview that will be tested in the coming months.
"We have been governed by fear for the last six years," he said. "And this president has used the fear of terrorism to launch a war that should have never been authorized. We are seeing the same pattern now."
Obama has set himself apart from this year's field by proposing "aggressive personal diplomacy" with Iran without preconditions for talks.
---
Agendas Likely voters were asked to identify the issues they consider "very important to their vote."
Democrats
1. Health care (88%)
2. Education (84%)
3. Economy (83%)
4. Social Security (81%)
5. Jobs (81%)
6. Iraq (80%)
7. Environment (72%)
8. Energy (70%)
9. Terrorism (66%)
10. Taxes (66%)
11. Budget deficit (66%)
12. Moral values (58%)
Republicans
1. Terrorism (77%) 2. Economy (74%) 3. Iraq (71%) 4. Moral values (68%) 5. Education (66%) 6. Immigration (65%) 7. Taxes (64%) 8. Jobs (61%) 9. Health care (59%) 10. Energy (55%) 11. Social Security (54%) 12. Budget deficit (52%)
Independent
1. Economy (77%) 2. Health care (76%) 3. Iraq (73%) 4. Education (70%) 5. Energy (68%) 6. Jobs (67%) 7. Terrorism (65%) 8. Social Security (62%) 9. Environment (60%) 10. Budget deficit (59%) 11. Taxes (59%) 12. Moral values (57%)
Source: Pew Research Center
---
Talk
STLtoday.com/presidentialbuzz - How much attention are you paying to the presidential race? Which candidates do you like and dislike? What issues will sway your vote? Join the ongoing discussion in our Presidential Buzz blog.

Notes

 PRESIDENTIAL COUNTDOWN: ONE YEAR TO THE ELECTION 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - (WHITE HOUSE)  PHOTO - (NEEDLE)  PHOTO - (MILITARY)  PHOTO - (ECONOMY)  

Load-Date: November 4, 2007


End of Document