FEAR OF TERRORISM GROWING IN U.S.
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 21, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P15A
Length: 540 words
Byline: Michael Precker
Body


Dallas Morning News
On Nov. 1, 1955, a United Air Lines plane exploded in midair and
crashed in Colorado, killing 44 people. The cause turned out to be a
bomb planted by a man who wanted to kill his mother, a passenger, for
the insurance money.
Few Americans at the time would have suspected that politics - or the
willingness to use random mass murder to terrorize a nation - would
ever be behind such a disaster.
Times have changed. With the investigation of the crash of TWA Flight
800 barely under way, President Clinton said he wanted "to urge all
the American people not to jump to unwarranted conclusions about the
tragedy."
But many people already had jumped, assuming that the destruction of
the Boeing 747 on Wednesday off the coast of Long Island was yet
another act of terrorism in a country that used to think it was immune
from such atrocities.
"It's changed because we're vulnerable," said Harvey Kushner, a
criminal justice professor at Long Island University in New York, who
studies and writes about terrorism.
Regardless of what caused the TWA crash, Dr. Kushner said, "we've been
victims of terrorism, and the two oceans that separate us from the
world are very short now. That's changed our psyche."
The result, said Robin Wagner-Pacifici, a sociologist at Swarthmore
College in Pennsylvania, is that terrorism automatically enters our
thinking as a possible cause of disaster.
"It's become one of the ways people have of trying to understand these
kinds of tragedies, and that's a relatively new phenomenon," she
said.
"Ten years ago they wouldn't have made that assumption. I think that
terrorism up until then was seen as something that happened in other
places, and terrorists were seen as something shadowy from other
religious or ethnic origins."
Wagner-Pacifici, who has studied public attitudes toward terrorism
here and in Italy, said Americans "were kind of slow in understanding
the vulnerability of the U.S. to terrorists."
"People still want to resist thinking about how this is going to
affect me on a daily basis," she said. "That sense of invulnerability
is very slow to die."
There have been plenty of lessons, from the bombing of a Pan American
jet over Scotland in 1988 to the World Trade Center bombing in 1993 to
last year's truck bomb that destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Building in Oklahoma City.
Craig McDonald, an associate professor of criminal justice at the
Rochester Institute of Technology, agreed that because of the attacks,
"we are recognizing that we are a target and it can happen."
But that, he said, isn't enough.
"I think it's almost a two-stage thing," McDonald said. "Stage One is
recognition that it could occur, and Stage Two is accepting that it's
here and there are countermeasures that need to be employed. I don't
think we have gone into a stage of acceptance that we are going to
have to live a little differently."
Joe Plaud, a behavioral psychologist at the University of North
Dakota, attributed that to the unwillingness to suffer extreme
inconvenience, and a relatively short memory.
Americans hear and read about gunmen shooting up post offices and
fatal crashes on the highway, he said. But they don't stop mailing
letters and they don't stop driving.
"We need our mail and we have to have our cars," Dr. Plaud said.

Load-Date: July 23, 1996


End of Document