Fear of Terrorism Affecting Yacht Race
The New York Times
May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 5; Page 9, Column 2; Sports Desk
Length: 693 words
Byline: By BARBARA LLOYD
Body


If this were any other year, the selection of three sailboats to compete in the Sardinia Cup race series this September would be a routine matter. But fears of terrorism in Europe have caused yachtsmen to think twice this year about sailing in Mediterranean waters.
Selection trials for the United States team are scheduled to begin Saturday in Newport, R.I. The small turnout of boats that signed up for the trials apparently fueled rumors of cancellation. Organizers of the competition, known as the Brenton Reef Series, squelched rumors last week that the competition was being called off by issuing a statement to the contrary. Eighteen yachts are entered for the May 10-15 event, compared with 40 last year.
''There was obvious concern that sending American boats to the Mediterranean, particularly with the terrorist activity there, might make them potential targets,'' said Robin Wallace, event chairman for the Brenton Reef Series. ''But I think people got anxious too quickly.'' Wallace noted that the turnout has been low this year in other major American regattas as well. Most of the boats involved are 35 to 50 feet and race under the International Offshore Rule for handicap ratings.
Wallace said the smaller turnout this year resulted from the fact that the Sardinia Cup isn't as popular as the Admirals' Cup, the British race series that was the object of last year's selection trials. The two events rotate on odd and even years. Also, preparations for the America's Cup Races are drawing away yachtsmen who ordinarily might be expected to campaign I.O.R. boats, he said.
 
Teams Also Compete
The Sardinia Cup series attracts teams as well as individual competitors from around the world. Slated for Sept. 4-14 at Porto Cervo, a wealthy sailing community on the northeast coast of Sardinia, the event is sponsored by the Yacht Club Costa Smeralda. In the last few years the club, founded in 1967 by the Moslem leader Prince Karim Aga Khan IV, has fostered numerous international yacht racing competitions.
American yachtsmen appear to be taking a wait-and-see attitude about Sardinia. But they are not the only ones concerned. The International Class A Yachting Association, an elite organization of owners who compete with 70- to 80-foot Maxi boats, have cancelled racing in the Mediterranean this summer. Instead, they are planning a Maxi regatta in Newport in early August.
Of the 18 boats expected in Newport this week, seven owners have indicated they are interested in competing for the Sardinia Cup team. Others are attracted to the series for the highly competitive racing it offers. William Koch of Dedham, Mass., plans to enter the trials with Buckaroo, his 40-foot racing sloop. But if he wins, he has decided he won't go to Sardinia. Koch, who is president of the Oxbow Corporation, a management-investment firm in Dedham, said he considers it too risky to ship his boat there.
''It's a dangerous part of the world right now,'' said John Klarfeld, Koch's spokesman. ''Yacht racing is too much of a high-profile activity.
 
We're saying, 'See America first.' ''
Reserving Judgment John Georges, owner of the 40-foot sloop Ragtime, is undecided. ''You have to reserve judgment,'' he said last week. ''As long as there are the same problems there, I wouldn't go. But you don't know what might happen in three to four months.'' Georges, who is chief executive officer of the International Paper Company in New York, said that it has been his goal to sail in the Sardinia Cup.
The United States Yacht Racing Union, the sport's national authority, has asked the State Department for advice. Steve Black, executive director of the racing union, said he was assured that yachtsmen have no higher chance of being targeted by terrorists than any other United States citizens.
''We're cautious people, but we haven't decided not to send a team,'' said Black. ''The bottom line is that there is a pretty good selection of boats and terrific racing ahead,'' he continued, referring to the the Brenton Reef Series. ''We are going to select a team, and I can't see - unless something changes radically - that we'd end up making the decision for these people.''


End of Document