Fear of terrorism should not cripple our nation, we must increase knowledge
The University News: Saint Louis University
September 15, 2011 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPED; Pg. 1
Length: 281 words
Body


The 10th anniversary of September 11 renews many sentiments.
Sorrow, pain and sympathy grip many of us. Soreness from the fear and distrust with the world that arose after the attacks also leaves us perplexed.
Although many Americans may have fallen victim to fear following 9/11, after 10 years, we should no longer allow fear of terrorism to haunt us.
As we refresh our memories of falling towers, commemorating the loss of thousands of lives, we often fail to remember the nation's recovery that followed. We tend to forget that it was Americans that rose to their feet and picked up the rubble.
After the images and losses had left their traumatic marks, Americans came to the aid of the ailing hearts to help pull the fabric of our society back together. In the face of crisis, many Americans resisted the emanation of Islamophobia.
We have learned that his war against terrorism does not have to be a physical war. By eliminating fear, we remove the very objective of terrorists. By eradicating distrust and insecurity with the world, and arresting more attempts to create it, terrorism will cease to be a weapon.
Ten years after the devastation of 9/11, the nation's awareness of the rest of the world has increased.
Through trust or distrust, Americans have become more aware of the ethnic and religious diversity inside America, as well as the rest of the world, and by learning about the events outside America, we reduce the unknown. We reduce fear.
Learning from the coalescence of humanity throughout history, as the world attempted to recover from the terrors of Nazi Germany and the Ku Klux Klan, there is no reason why we should not recover once again from the fear of terrorism.

Load-Date: October 28, 2015


End of Document