FEAR OF TERRORISM: U.S. FAMILIES ABROAD
The New York Times
April 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 52, Column 2; Style Desk
Length: 1391 words
Byline: By MARY DAVIS SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, April 4
Body


It was just 7:30 on a bright Roman morning, and a 40-year-old American woman was faced with what to her seemed like a life-and-death decision.
The radio news was full of attacks on Libyan boats and radar sites by American warplanes. The woman's instincts told her to keep her 13-year-old daughter home that day because the school she attended was too well known for its predominantly American student body. But she did not want to overreact. In the end, caution reigned.
When she called the school to explain her daughter's absence, the teacher was completely understanding. Many of the faculty shared her concerns, he said. There was even talk of formulating a ''dispersal evacuation plan'' for the students in case there was an attack on the school. The next day the school closed for Easter vacation a day early.
The mother, who asked not to be identified, was born and raised in Brooklyn, and has lived in Rome for more than 15 years. Until recently she felt completely at home here and thought it was the ideal place to live and raise her child. Now, with Americans apparently a target for Middle Eastern terrorists, she has begun to feel vulnerable and afraid for her family's safety.
 
Prudence vs. Excess
Like many Americans living in Rome, this mother is trying to cope with the threat of violence. Interviews with other parents, school officials, a child psychiatrist and a pastor revealed that the major problem is deciding what measure of precaution against the possibility of terrorist attack is prudent and what is excessive in a family and community context. The very elusiveness of terrorism makes this a question asked over and over without answer.
The latest conflict between the United States and Libya, with the resulting talk of ''suicide squads,'' quickly revived fears from the Dec. 27 attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports, which left 20 people dead, including 5 Americans. Such fears were worsened by the explosion Wednesday aboard a Trans World Airlines jet that killed four Americans on the way from Rome to Athens. Nine passengers were injured.
''It seems like a long time since Dec. 27 and the incident at Fiumicino,'' said the woman, who still has a New York accent. ''The first day back to school after the Christmas holidays I must have driven past the school a half a dozen times to make sure things were O.K.''
 
'The Same Anxieties'
''I had just recently begun to relax some,'' the mother said, ''but I feel the same anxieties now that I did three months ago.''
The day this woman's daughter stayed home from school, two vans of policemen carrying submachine guns took up position inside the school gates. Similar precautions were taken at many other locations in Rome readily identified with Americans. Emotional precautions are much harder to devise.
''When there is a threat to us,'' maintains Dr. Patricia Ceccarelli, mental health coordinator for the American Embassy in Rome, ''many people tend to either deny it or go into a state of panic. But I think it should be more a case of finding the middle ground. To do nothing, I think, is foolish. Taking precautions should be a matter of course. But to overdo is really living out some kind of fantasy. You can't go live in an armed camp.'' Dr. Ceccarelli feels there is little one can do to prepare people for terrorism. ''The only thing we can do for each other,'' she said, ''is to really talk about how we deal with our own fear.''
 
Accepting the Risks
''For example,'' she said. ''I was speaking with a 16-year-old American girl after the attack at Fiumicino airport. I asked her how she now felt about living in Rome and was she frightened by terrorists' threats. 'Look,' she told me, 'I had to think very carefully about the risks. But I decided I like living in Rome and I like where I go to school. I've accepted the risks and since doing so I feel very free to go wherever I like.' ''
In effect, Dr. Ceccarelli concurs. ''You have to weigh the risks of living in a vulnerable place like Rome,'' she said. ''It may just be that the risks involved aren't worth it for you. You may decide this just isn't the way you want to live your life.''
A principal at one of the many international schools in Rome with many American students says only a few American families have ''really hit the panic button'' over recent terrorist activities. He knows of only one family out of 300 from his school that has returned to the United States because of the security risks. Even so, he asked that the school not be identified so as not to draw attention to it.
Security measures have been increased at the school, the principal said, and a general security-awareness program has been started. ''Basically, we try to make everyone aware that they have to be more careful in their movements these days,'' he said. ''And, of course, we want the students to realize the more visible they are, the more risks they take.''
As part of the security program, teachers enter classrooms before any students are allowed in. They check the room for any unusual package or box and make sure nothing looks out of order. ''In the worst-case scenario,'' the principal said, ''we at this school would have to decide whether we want to continue operations or simply close. And we're not nearly at that point yet.''
Word travels quickly among Americans about which spots around the city are considered likely targets. Most seem fairly obvious. In general, popular haunts for American tourists and American nationals living here are viewed as high risk. These include stores and cafes along Via Veneto, the shopping areas around the Spanish Steps, which now includes a McDonald's restaurant, and, of course, any school or church known to have a significant American population.
One American woman who, with her husband, runs a small business in Rome views the situation this way: ''I have two daughters who are both dying to go to McDonald's. I let my 15-year-old attend the grand opening, but I said a prayer as she walked out the door. Now my 9-year-old inists on going.''
''But it seems like a game of Russian roulette to me,'' she continued. ''I got away with it once, but I'm not certain I want to take a chance on the next time. I don't think I'll ever let her go.''
The Rev. Edward P. Todd, rector of St. Paul's Within the Walls, an Episcopal church in the center of the city, recently moved to Rome from Israel. He finds the security situation in Rome much more disconcerting than the nearly constant threat of violence in the Middle East.
''In Israel, Americans as a group were not targets,'' he recalled. ''No one was gunning for us in particular. In Italy, it is exactly the opposite. As Americans, we are targets. The places we gather and our institutions are at risk. It's like we have little red flags over us.''
Mr. Todd says, however, that while some parishioners have expressed anxieties about security risks at the church - the congregation is roughly two-thirds American - it has not seemed to hamper church activities.Some changes have been discussed. ''For instance, there is a sign over the front gate of the church that reads 'St. Paul's American Church.' Since the Libyan crisis some members of the church have wondered whether it would be best to take it down.''
 
'I'm Too Blase'
The church has security measures on Sunday mornings and when there are open events at the church, but they are handled from within the parish. ''The feeling is,'' Mr. Todd said, ''that asking for security from outside sources might be the best way to draw attention to ourselves. But I'm not overly concerned. In fact, I probably err in the opposite direction. I'm too blase.''
Some Americans living in Rome think they are in a precarious situation. Their lives seem to revolve around choices that are difficult but essential to make.
''Do you keep your children in one school,'' Dr. Ceccarelli asked, ''or do you send them to another one that seems safer? Do you fly somewhere for a vacation or drive because you're afraid to use the airport? Do you spend all your energy trying to isolate your family or do you get on with life and ignore the warning signs. At some point, we all have to make these choices.''
''There are dangers inherent to living in almost any city,'' she adds. ''You have to decide whether ultimately you would rather just go and live somewhere else and deal with other kinds of risks.''


End of Document