Fear stifles honest debate; In both political parties and in our culture at large, speech codes and political correctness handcuff progress.
USA TODAY
July 27, 2011 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 896 words
Byline: Juan Williams
Body


These are the new terms of debate in America: Speak your mind and you face being stigmatized, scorned and, in my case, fired. Last October, I mentioned in a TV debate that after 9/11, seeing people in Muslim garb in airports makes me nervous. I was told I was a bigot for having such thoughts, and was promptly fired from my job as an NPR news analyst.
This contagion has spread throughout our body politic. It's all over the painfully arthritic debate on raising the debt limit. Neither Republicans nor Democrats can move the debate forward. Both sides are infected by pledges and speech codes that inhibit honest debate and compromise.
Even among Republicans, the disease has been debilitating. House Speaker John Boehner, of Ohio, has been unable to move his second in command, Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia, to accept a deal that is overwhelmingly favorable to Republicans. It includes sharp spending cuts and entitlement reform, but the GOP is balking because Democrats ask that the deal include small tax increases on the very rich.
A future at risk
Instead of honest, reasonable debate and compromise, the nation's economic future is at risk. Rigid hard-liners insist on deficit reduction plans that have no chance of going anywhere but give the Republicans the ability to make the empty claim -- using politically strategic speech code -- that they have a plan and the Democrats do not. The point is not that one side needs a plan. It is that the nation needs both sides to make a deal and keep the country from the certain economic turmoil that comes with default on our debts.
Speech codes are evident among Democrats, too. They are not allowed to say that endless unemployment benefits and sweetheart benefit packages, as part of contracts agreed to by public unions and the politicians they put in office, are outright corruption.
This assault on honest debate extends into social policy. No one is supposed to talk about family breakdown and the number of out-of-wedlock births in the nation. If you do, be prepared to be charged with airing dirty laundry and wreaking psychological damage on the children of single women. Ask Bill Cosby about the attacks on him after he tried to start just such a debate. Ask President Obama what happened after he said too many black men fail as fathers. Instead of debating the topic, Jesse Jackson accused him of talking down to black people and said Obama should be castrated.
Similarly, the NRA's power  makes it nearly impossible to have a national dialogue on gun violence.  No one is supposed to talk about our  tremendous appetite for illegal drugs. And no good Republican is supposed to say the nation needs immigration reform without being scolded by the GOP base for offering "amnesty" to illegal immigrants.
The result? Stifled discussions rooted in the fear of what might happen if we say the wrong thing on any topic of importance. This silent killer isn't allowing us to address real issues or find real solutions. Americans of all political stripes tell pollsters the current politics of polarization and paralysis frustrates them and make them fear for the future of the nation. Political language and political practice form a symbiotic circle. When one fails, they both fail.
The American body politic is ensnared in a constant election cycle that never seems to end and celebrates extreme viewpoints, attack ads, hotheads in town hall meetings and  senators fleeing their state instead of using their words, their power of persuasion in debate and politics. We are now accustomed to niche websites, magazines and TV shows that present only one point of view  that often demonizes any contrary viewpoint. And before anyone lays into Fox News --  consider the fact that I'm there speaking freely.
What can't be said
Politically correct speech is  so ingrained in our daily lives that to bluntly say immigrants need to assimilate -- to learn English, to be patriotic, to abide by U.S.  standards of law -- is now to risk attack by one civil rights group or another for being insensitive to people who want to celebrate their roots.
Religious organizations make it nearly impossible to talk about the fact that mature, married women make personal decisions to have abortions.
The Obama administration  refuses to use the term "terrorists" for fear of offending Muslims who sympathize with the political goals of the terrorists who use violence against civilians. Agreeing with political goals is OK. But the Obama administration crosses the line into speech codes when officials fail to call terrorism a crime against civilization. Terrorism is wrong, and the administration should have no hesitation in calling it terrorism.
For all the free speech that has  flowed forth in this country and the world courtesy of 1776, let us not forget that it was a willingness to speak honestly in debate and take the risk of compromise that produced the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
Free and honest "public debate" is lost as every side presents absolute pledges to the most extreme elements in its  base and refuses to engage in compromise. It is up to the American people to fight back against speech codes and political correctness and reclaim our right to honest intellectual exchange -- real debate.
Juan Williams, a Fox News analyst, is the author of the new book Muzzled: The Assault on Honest Debate. 

Load-Date: July 27, 2011


End of Document