Federal authorities detain one person in connection with suspicious packages
The Plainsman: Auburn University
October 26, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 594 words
Byline: Noah Bierman
Body


WASHINGTON - Federal authorities announ-ced Friday that they have detained someone in connection with the spate of suspicious, potentially explosive devices sent to prominent critics of President Trump in recent days.
A spokesperson for the Department of Justice, Sarah Isgur Flores, said on Twitter that the department would hold a news conference at 2:30 p.m. EDT to discuss the case.
"We can confirm one person is in custody," she tweeted.
Earlier Friday, the FBI found two more packages with suspicious devices - sent to New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker and to former Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper - while Trump attempted to downplay the seriousness of the acts of terrorism as a political ploy intended to help Democrats.
"Republicans are doing so well in early voting, and at the polls, and now this 'Bomb' stuff happens and the momentum greatly slows - news not talking politics," Trump tweeted early Friday. "Very unfortunate, what is going on. Republicans, go out and vote!"
Trump's tweet is in direct contradiction to law enforcement officials, who said repeatedly at a Thursday news conference that the devices need to be treated as potentially dangerous and active bombs, even if they did not detonate. They have also called the plot an act of terrorism.
Trump's tweet, on the edge of embracing "false flag" conspiracy theories about the packages, is yet another striking departure from normal presidential behavior in the face of such acts.
Sign up for our newsletter
Get The Plainsman straight to your inbox.
The FBI confirmed the package to Booker on its social media account, saying it was recovered at a U.S. Postal Service facility in Florida and was similar in appearance to others directed toward prominent figures including former President Obama, Hillary Clinton, former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr, investor and philanthropist George Soros and Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Calif.).
New York City police said the Clapper package - sent care of CNN's New York office like a similar package sent to the news outlet and directed toward former CIA director John Brennan earlier in the week - was discovered at a mail facility in Manhattan, forcing the temporary evacuation of residents, a post office and a nearby educational facility.
"This is definitely domestic terrorism. No question about it in my mind," Clapper told CNN.
Clapper and Booker, like the other targets, have clashed publicly with Trump. But even as the targets share commonalities, authorities have still not established a motive or named a suspect.
Law enforcement officials have said at least some of the packages were sent from South Florida. They are marked with the return address of Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Florida Democrat who previously led the Democratic National Committee.
Trump previously called Clapper the "world's dumbest former intelligence head, who has the problem of lying a lot."
Trump has also accused Clapper, who served in the Obama administration, of lying to Congress.
Booker, a Democrat believed to have presidential ambitions, is a frequent target of Trump in his political rallies.
Trump briefly called for unity in the face of the attacks but has since lashed out at his critics, saying he has been unfairly blamed.
Wasserman Schultz, speaking to reporters in South Florida on Friday, called the perpetrator "sinister," "evil" and "horrific."
"I really don't know," she said, when asked why her return address was used. She said the moment pointed to the need for political comity. "None of us should be treating our opponents like the enemy."

Load-Date: October 26, 2018


End of Document