FEDERAL ANTI-TERRORISM LAW PASSES MUSTER IN MILITIA CASE case case
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
May 16, 1997, Friday friday friday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A P2A P2A
Length: 506 words
Body


MORGANTOWN (AP) - A federal anti-terrorism law used for the first time
in charging the leader of the Mountaineer Militia and another
defendant has withstood its first test.
A federal magistrate rejected an argument by lawyers for militia
leader Floyd "Ray" Looker and Clarksburg fire Lt. James "Rich" Rogers
that the 1994 law is unconstitutionally vague.
Looker and Rogers are among seven men with ties to the Mountaineer
Militia accused of plotting to blow up the FBI fingerprint center in
Clarksburg last year.  year.  year.
"A person who wanted to obey the law could understand the offense,"
Magistrate James E. Seibert wrote Wednesday in U.S. District Court in
Wheeling.
The law that makes it a crime to provide resources to terrorist
organizations was used for the first time against Looker and Rogers,
U.S. Attorney William Wilmoth said.
Rogers is accused of making photograph copies of blueprints of the FBI
center. Looker sold them to fictitious Middle East terrorist for
$ 50,000, prosecutors allege.
Resources identified under the law include money, lodging, safe
houses, false documents, communication equipment, weapons, explosives,
transportation and "other physical assets."
Defense lawyers contend the wording "other physical assets" is so
broad people must guess its meaning.
Assistant U.S. Attorney David Godwin conceded the wording is broad but
said the law is specific.
He said it targets those who provide resources knowing they will be
used in a terrorist act.
The magistrate agreed.
"Don't give anything to a person who wants to use that object to
commit a crime. I think it is clear and therefore not
unconstitutionally vague," Seibert wrote.
It is up to U.S. District Judge Frederick Stamp Jr. to accept or
reject the magistrate's recommendation.
"I think that the law that Congress drafted is sufficiently clear to
allow a defendant to know what he's being charged with, which is what
the Constitution requires," Wilmoth said.
Rogers' attorney, Gary Zimmerman in Pittsburgh, said Thursday he
likely would appeal but declined further comment, saying he had not
yet received the ruling.
Rogers, of Jane Lew, Lewis County, faces two counts, while Looker, of
Stonewood, Harrison County, faces three counts.
The five others charged with Looker and Rogers are from West Virginia,
Ohio and Pennsylvania. The five and Looker face other charges
including conspiracy to make explosives and transporting explosives
across state lines.
On other motions issued this week, Seibert refused to suppress
evidence seized from Rogers. Those items included a handgun and
shotgun shells taken from a bag under his fire station locker.
Rogers contended FBI agents never read him his Miranda rights and they
misled him into believing they were looking only for photographs
before they searched the bag.
Zimmerman also argued in his motions that an FBI agent failed to raise
questions as to whether Rogers actually took the photographs when
seeking the original search warrant.
Rogers told the informant in the case that someone else took the
photographs, Zimmerman's motions said.  said.  said.

Load-Date: May 16, 1997


End of Document