Federal Bureau of Investigation busts militia 'plot' to abduct Michigan Gov Gretchen Whitmer
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 9, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 549 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


President Trump looks out from the White House after his release from Walter Reed Medical Center this week.
Members of the group had anti-government views and were plotting to kidnap the Democrat from her summer home, the affidavit filed in court and revealed on Thursday.
The FBI thwarted a plot to kidnap Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, and charged six people saying they had contemplated a violent overthrow of the government.
The total number of men charged in the alleged plot to kidnap Whitmer is now 13.
MI attorney general Dana Nessel disclosed additional state charges against seven men affiliated with the Wolverine Watchmen for allegedly violating the state's anti-terrorism act by conspiring to kidnap the governor and propagate violence. I condemn all White supremacists.
"Just last week, the president of the United States stood before the American people and refused to condemn white supremacists and hate groups, like these two MI militia groups". They want their lives back again, safely!
"Hate groups heard the president's words not as a rebuke, but as a rallying cry, as a call to action", Whitmer said in an address from Lansing.
She brought up last week's presidential debate, where Trump repeatedly had to be asked to condemn white supremacists groups until he finally said that those groups should "stand back and stand by".
The bottom line is, Republicans have zero interest in combatting white supremacy and violent extremist groups since that is their voting base.
TD demands urgent supports for Portlaoise home hit by Covid-19
There are calls for a "thorough investigation" into the rising number of cases of Covid-19 in nursing homes. The hospital has been helping the home since September 30 after Toronto Public Health issued an order.
"Just last week, the president of the United States stood before the American people and refused to condemn white supremacists and hate groups like these two MI militia groups", Whitmer said at a press conference. They carry weight. When our leaders meet, encourage or fraternise with domestic terrorists, they legitimise their actions and they are complicit. "When they stoke and contribute to hate speech, they are complicit".
Miller then accused Whitmer of having "hatred in her heart towards President Trump" and claimed that the president is quick to condemn radical groups, both on the right and left. "America stands united against hate and in support of our federal law enforcement who stopped this plot", McEnany said.
Whitmer and Trump have been frequent critics of one another in recent months, sparring over the the coronavirus crisis and how best to resolve it.
On May Day, dozens of protesters, some of them heavily armed, occupied the MI state capitol building with some chanting "lock her up" in reference to Ms Whitmer.
Another person alleged to be involved in the plot,Daniel Harris, suggested in an encrypted group chat that they "Have one person go to her house".
The Michigan governor said she has made "tough choices to keep our state safe" and expressed sympathy for losses suffered by local residents and businesses.
Former Vice President Joe Biden, who hopes to unseat Trump in the November 3 general election, also sought to connect the president's rhetoric to domestic terrorism.
"I just wanna make the world glow, dude".

Load-Date: October 9, 2020


End of Document