Federal prosecutors inflated figures on terror convictions
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
February 22, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 390 words
Byline: LAURIE KELLMAN, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- In the year after the Sept. 11 attacks, federal prosecutors exaggerated their success convicting would-be terrorists by wrongly classifying three of every four cases as international terrorism, congressional investigators said this week.
Overall, almost half of 288 convictions deemed terrorism-related were wrongly classified as such for the 2002 fiscal year that began three weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, said the General Accounting Office, Congress' nonpartisan watchdog agency.
The GAO concluded that the Justice Department "does not have sufficient management oversight and internal controls in place to ensure the accuracy and reliability of terrorism-related conviction statistics included in its annual performance reports."
The inaccuracies hampered "the Congress' ability to accurately assess terrorism-related performance outcomes of the U.S. criminal justice system," the GAO said.
The Sept. 11 attacks reshaped law-enforcement's mission as federal officials from Attorney General John Ashcroft to the FBI declared that preventing future attacks would be a priority for the Justice Department and would require millions more federal dollars.
And, in fact, the number of reported terror-related convictions jumped, the GAO found.
In five years before the attacks there were an average of 35 terrorism convictions reported annually. In the year afterward, the report said, prosecutors reported 160 terror convictions.
But the GAO said prosecutors wrongly classified at least 132 of 288 convictions 46 percent as terrorism-related for fiscal 2002. All were reclassified.
One category of the reported terrorism convictions, "international terrorism," was particularly misreported.
Of 174 convictions originally classified under that category, only 43 were verified as such, the GAO said.
Prosecutors blamed the discrepancies on the limited time their staffs had to evaluate the data. The GAO noted that the Justice Department and the prosecutors who report to it have since enacted a series of changes to correct the figures and ensure that future annual reports would be accurate.
But one member of Congress said the revisions undermined the war against terrorism.
"Playing shell games with numbers is counterproductive," said Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont. "It blurs our focus and undercuts accountability and credibility."

Load-Date: February 24, 2003


End of Document