Federal agency tracked bank transactions
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 23, 2006, Friday


Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 447 words
Byline: JEANNINE AVERSA, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - A secret Bush administration program to track people suspected of bankrolling terrorism drew protests from Democrats in Congress today while Republicans defended the effort as vital to waging a global war against terrorism.
Treasury Department officials acknowledged that in the weeks immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks they obtained access to an extensive international financial database in order to track down the sources of terrorist financing.
The information was obtained through use of subpoenas, which Stuart Levey, Treasury's undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, called a "legal and proper use of our authorities."
Treasury Secretary John Snow insisted that the effort was not "data mining or trolling through the private financial records of Americans. It is not a fishing expedition, but rather a sharp harpoon aimed at the heart of terrorist activity."
Both Snow and Levey scheduled a news conference for later today to answer questions about the program, which was revealed on Thursday after several major newspapers rejected administration requests to keep it secret.
Rep. Ed Markey, D-Mass. and co-chairman of the Congressional Privacy Caucus, said today that there were disturbing similarities between the bank monitoring program and the secret surveillance program for telephone calls that was revealed last year.
"Like the domestic surveillance program exposed last December, the Bush administration's efforts to tap into the financial records of thousands of Americans appear to rely on justifications concocted without regard to current law," Markey said in a statement.
"If the administration wants to fight terrorism legally, then it should ask for the authority it needs and then follow the law that Congress passes," Markey said. "Don't claim 'temporary emergency' and then operate in secret for five years."
However, Republicans defended the effort. Amy Call, a spokeswoman for Senate Republican leader Bill Frist, said Friday that he had been briefed on the program and had "full confidence in the effectiveness of, and the legal authority for, this vital anti-terrorism tool."
Dana Perino, deputy White House press secretary, said that "one of the most important tools in the fight against terror is our ability to choke off funds for the terrorists."
Under the program, U.S. counterterrorism analysts could query an international database known as Swift to look for information on activities by suspected terrorists as part of specific terrorism investigations, a Treasury Department official said. They would do so by plugging in a name or names, the official said.
The program involved both the CIA and the Treasury Department.

Load-Date: June 23, 2006


End of Document