FEDERAL SURVEILLANCE POWERS PASS SENATE VOTE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 15, 2020 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2020 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A-2
Length: 322 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


The Senate has passed legislation that would extend a set of expired federal surveillance tools designed to help law enforcement officials track suspected terrorists and spies, moving one step closer to reviving them.
The legislation passed the Senate, 80-16, on Thursday, but it's unclear how quickly the legislation can become law. The House passed the bill in March, but will have to pass it again. President Donald Trump has said he will support the compromise.
The provisions at issue allow the FBI to get a court order for business records in national security investigations; to conduct surveillance without establishing that the subject is acting on behalf of an international terrorism organization; and to more easily continue eavesdropping on a subject who has switched cellphone providers to thwart detection.
USPS launches delivery fee review
Weeks before a GOP donor and top White House ally becomes postmaster general, the U.S. Postal Service has quietly launched a review of its package delivery contracts.
The moves, confirmed by six people with knowledge of the Postal Service's inner workings but not authorized to speak publicly, underscore how President Donald. Trump is moving closer to reshaping an independent agency he has dubbed "a joke."
The Postal Service in recent weeks has sought bids from consulting firms to reassess what the agency charges companies such as Amazon, UPS and FedEx to deliver products on their behalf.
Engineer may be tried again in fatal derailment
The Amtrak engineer who operated a train that derailed in 2015 in Philadelphia, killing eight people, can be tried criminally for the deaths and injuries, a Superior Court judge said Thursday.
The case against Brandon Bostian had been dismissed last July, but Superior Court Judge Victor Stabile ruled the dismissal was based on fact-finding that should happen in a trial.
Mr. Bostian's lawyer, Brian McMonagle, said he would appeal the decision.

Load-Date: May 16, 2020


End of Document