Federal prosecutors will try to ferret out terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 27, 2001, Thursday, 2 Late Tampa Edition


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: TAMPA & STATE; BRIEFLY; Pg. 3B; DIGEST
Length: 317 words
Dateline: TAMPA
Body


The U.S. Attorney's Office in Tampa, like others around the country, has  set up an anti-terrorism task force to help disseminate information and develop investigations and legal strategies to deal with terrorism.
Robert O'Neill, the office's first assistant, will meet with representatives of other federal, state and local agencies to coordinate activities. Implementing a task force also sets up a standing operational structure in case of terrorist attacks in the area, officials said. The U.S. Attorney's Office did not want to provide details.
TPBRFS27
Other local branches of federal agencies, including the FBI and the U.S. Marshals Service, did not want to talk about any specific activities or investigations regarding the recent terrorist attacks.
Jury: Female officer didn't
prove discrimination
TAMPA - After an eight-day trial in U.S. District Court, a jury decided Wednesday that a former Tampa police officer failed to prove she was discriminated against and forced to resign.
Harriet Mason, 38, a patrol officer for five years, sued in 1999.
She alleged that her superiors at the Tampa Police Department wrongly accused her of cowardice, insubordination, untruthfulness, incompetence and being unfit for duty. She was stripped of her police powers and sent to see a psychologist.
After returning to duty, Mason claimed she was harassed and eventually forced out of the department. The jury decided that Mason had not made her case.
Driver sought after
car hits Valrico man
TAMPA - Hillsborough  deputies are searching for a motorist who hit and critically injured a  Valrico man Tuesday night.
Deputies said the vehicle was southbound on Pearson Road near Durant Road and struck Gary Sims, 47, who was walking north on Pearson.
Deputies said Sims tried to get out of the way by running onto the shoulder of the road.
Anyone with information  may call the Hillsborough Sheriff's Office at (813) 247-8000.

Load-Date: September 27, 2001


End of Document