Federal funding to boost hospitals; Grant aims to improve response to terrorism or natural disasters
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 27, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Tristate; Pg. a3
Length: 360 words
Byline: ERIK HOGSTROM
Dateline: Dubuque
Body


Local health care providers should benefit from the latest round of federal funding.
Federal officials recently announced a $$ @5.4 million grant to Iowa to help strengthen the ability of the state's hospitals and other health care facilities to respond to bioterrorism attacks, infectious diseases and natural disasters. 
"The bioterrorism funds are helping build and improve our public health infrastructure system," said Mary Rose Corrigan, public health specialist with the city of Dubuque.
The latest funding is part of a nationwide commitment of $$ @498 million in grants that the federal Health and Human Services Department is sending to the nation's hospitals. 
State officials will use the grant to improve the readiness of health care facilities that would respond to a large numbers of casualties.
Hospitals will apply for improvement grants from the state health department.
A subcommittee of the Iowa Department of Public Health has helped identify priorities among the state's hospitals.
"Hospitals are asked to apply to fill these various responsibilities," said Kevin Teale, a state Health Department spokesman.
The state's hospitals can use the money for rapid, temporary expansion of bed capacity to accommodate mass casualties, increase isolation and decontamination capacity, identify qualified volunteer health care workers to augment hospital staff and plan for hospital-based and community pharmaceutical caches.
Federal grants already have helped prepare the Dubuque area for disease outbreaks or bioterrorism attacks.
"The funds have provided us with a lot of training and equipment and helped us come up with some planning strategies," Corrigan said. "It is enabling public health to go to the next level."
Other uses for the federal program money include providing behavioral health services and trauma and burn care and buying communications equipment and personal protective gear.
Federal officials have spent $$ @3.7 billion on state preparedness since Sept. 11, 2001. 
"It has been a good exercise," said Nan Colin, of the Dubuque Visiting Nurse Association. "It has allowed us to assess our capacity and see where we need to improve things."

Load-Date: May 27, 2004


End of Document