Federal judge will consider terrorism enhancement when sentencing ISIS recruit
The Daily Cardinal: University of Wisconsin - Madison
February 10, 2017 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 374 words
Byline: ED TRELEVEN etreleven@madison.com
Body


A federal judge ruled Thursday that a federal terrorism sentence enhancement will apply when he sentences a former Madison man who attempted to join the Islamic State terrorist group in 2014.
Joshua Van Haften, 35, who flew to Turkey and attempted to cross to Syria to join IS, pleaded guilty in October to attempting to give material support to a terrorist group. Van Haften faces a sentence of up to 15 years in prison, which U.S. District Judge James Peterson will decide on Feb. 17.
But left open after Van Haften's plea hearing in October was whether a federal sentencing enhancement for terrorism applied.
The enhancement pushes Van Haften's advisory sentencing guideline range to 30 years to life.
The enhancement wouldn't increase Van Haften's potential sentence beyond the 15-year maximum, but it could influence how much of that sentence Peterson imposes.
In his ruling Thursday, Peterson wrote that for the enhancement to apply, Van Haften's crime had to be "calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct."
Prosecutors said Van Haften's purpose in going to Turkey was to take up arms against the U.S., made clear by his activity on social media, which included "liking" Facebook postings by IS leaders and their followers. His own comments included writing that "I'm gonna kill me some American soldier boys."
Van Haften's lawyer, Joseph Bugni, argued that Van Haften went to join IS so he could be part of a Muslim community "at the end of the world," and statements about killing Americans were merely expressions of frustration at his treatment as a sex offender. Other statements by Van Haften demonstrated delusional thinking, Peterson wrote, summarizing the defense argument.
Peterson said Van Haften's conduct "was indeed calculated to influence or affect" government conduct, and was calculated to retaliate against the government for its treatment of Muslims and of Van Haften as a sex offender.
Although Peterson found that the sentencing enhancement applies, he wrote that he will also consider Van Haften's "delusional world view" and the possible impact of a childhood brain injury he suffered in assessing the danger that Van Haften may pose.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document