FEDS GET TOUGHER TO BLUNT TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 27, 2004 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 547 words
Byline: DAN EGGEN AND SPENCER S. HSU, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Agencies across the federal government are launching an aggressive and unusually open offensive aimed at thwarting terrorist plots before and during the presidential election in November.
 Numerous law enforcement and counterterrorism officials also warned last week that a heightened threat of terrorist attack will persist through the January inauguration.
 The government's strategy will include heavy surveillance by the FBI, increased checks of terrorism watch lists by local police and heightened security at polling places on Nov. 2, officials said.
Counterterrorism officials concede they do not have new or specific intelligence outlining plans for an attack, but say they remain alarmed by indications that al-Qaida and other terror groups might seek to influence U.S. elections as they did in Spain last spring by setting off bombs on Madrid commuter trains. By publicizing the government's efforts, which will begin in earnest later this week, authorities say they hope to forestall any plans for similar attacks in the United States.
 The FBI, which is sharply limiting personal leave and transferring hundreds of agents to the effort, will focus heavily on individuals within the United States who are suspected of having ties to al-Qaida and other terrorist groups or who sympathize with their causes, according to officials who have been briefed on the plans.
 Officials said the FBI's tactics, which will be outlined in an electronic communication to field offices, will include aggressive and often overt surveillance, widespread interviews and, in some cases, arrests. Local police will be urged to run the names of suspicious people through the federal government's terrorism watch list, even during traffic stops and other minor encounters.
 Earlier this month, the FBI's " '04 Threat Task Force" issued an advisory saying there was no intelligence detailing the timing, status or targets of any plot, but it said an increased threat of terrorist action will continue through the Jan. 20 inauguration, according to sources with access to the memo.
 A national election security planning bulletin will be sent tomorrow to the 50 states and the District of Columbia, containing guidelines to governors and elections officials for coordination of law enforcement, polling place and ballot-counting security, legal powers to order emergency election changes and public communication from now through Election Day.
 Authorities are focused on a series of dates, starting with the annual meetings that begin Friday at the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, both of which remain under a heightened "orange alert" along with other potential financial targets in Washington, New York and New Jersey.  State and federal officials said the threat window will remain open through the Nov. 2 elections, the Dec. 13 electoral college ballot and the inauguration.
 Agents from various federal departments have begun visiting rental car and truck firms, as well as limousine companies, around the country to urge them to be on heightened alert for suspicious activity that might indicate a planned car- or truck-bomb attack. Airline security officials have tightened procedures at airport checkpoints to hunt for explosives that might be hidden under a passenger's clothing.

Load-Date: September 28, 2004


End of Document