Feds study anti-terrorism technology;
Big promise shown by X-ray device
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 30, 2005 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 574 words
Byline: JULIA MALONE
Body


Boston --- In the search for ways to make the nation safer from terrorists, the technology known as "backscatter" X-rays is among the most promising.
It uses low-level X-rays to see through clothing and detect hidden weapons, peer into moving trucks or inspect cargo containers without opening them.
The technology won a nod earlier this month from Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff, who told a Senate panel that only advanced technologies such as backscatter X-rays will improve the accuracy of airport passenger inspections.
Even so, as hundreds of scientists and hopeful entrepreneurs gathered in Boston this week for back-to-back conferences on homeland security, federal officials warned that it could take years before the government deploys this and many other of the newest inventions.
Charles E. McQueary, undersecretary for science and technology at the Homeland Security Department, said in an interview between sessions that the backscatter technology appears to have great potential but is not yet ready for widespread use at airports.
"The issue on that is how much you see when you look through the clothes," he said. Developers are working on a solution to the privacy problem, he said, predicting that a version of this equipment would be installed at airports in the next few years.
"As technology goes," McQueary said, his 2-year-old, $1 billion-per-year operation for homeland security is still relatively new. "We're not ready to have things come out of the pipeline just yet," he said, adding that his office is still drawing up its research strategy.
That did not deter hundreds of scientists, companies and university officials from attending the Boston gathering in hopes of winning contracts for developing better ways to detect dangerous substances, assess risks and defend the nation's computer systems.
At a packed session for small businesses, Homeland Security Department official Jane Alexander warned that her agency was looking for fast delivery of technology that's already tested.
Businesses may have "the revolutionary kind of technology that would greatly change the way our operators function in the field," Alexander said. "But we have very small amounts of money for that."
Up to 90 percent of her department's tech purchases are aimed at plugging the most obvious vulnerabilities with whatever tools are available.
Alexander, deputy director for advanced research projects for homeland security, cited BioShield, a federal program that tests the air for toxins in 30 of the largest and more critical U.S. cities.
The program uses low-tech filters that are attached to federal structures and which must be picked up daily for lab testing.
The program is so labor-intensive that it would cost billions of dollars to operate it nationwide, Alexander said.
She said her agency is now looking for manufacturers who can provide sensors that are capable of sending alarms automatically when they detect toxins in the atmosphere. And by the way, she said, the sensors have to be ready in two years.
The competition to produce homeland security technology is "a bit like a draft in pro sports," said Thadeas Kochanski, technical chairman for part of the three-day gathering that ended Thursday.
Just as some athletes are high scorers in college but might not make it in the pros, Kochanski said, "there are things that sound exciting and look very promising, but for whatever reason, they can't make it into the field."

Graphic

 
J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE / AP Michael Chertoff, named homeland security secretary by President Bush, favors the cutting-edge X-ray "backscatter" technology.

Load-Date: May 19, 2005


End of Document