Feds to Classify Death by Terrorism
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
September 12, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. D2
Length: 501 words
Byline: TROY GOODMAN, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


To help account for those killed in the Sept. 11 or anthrax attacks last year, state and federal health officials have adopted a new set of classifications for terrorism-related deaths and injuries.
The so-called "death codes" won't matter much to families of victims because the classifications don't appear on death certificates, according to Bob Anderson with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
But the new terrorism codes are important to health statisticians, who previously lumped such victims into homicide classifications, which include murder and other unlawful slayings.
"We decided it's important to know which deaths were due to the terrorist activities," said Anderson, the chief statistician in the CDC's mortality branch of the National Center for Health Statistics. "We really haven't had a reason to use that type of classification before, thankfully."
The new classifications, spelled out in a memo to the Utah Department of Health this week, are only to be used in incidents designated as "terrorist-related" by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Such designations were put in place a few weeks ago; Anderson said all victims of 2001 will be grandfathered into the new codes.
The categories are spelled out in 12 pages that describe the type of attack, such as terrorism involving nuclear weapons, firearms, chemicals or the destruction of an airplane or building. There is even a classification for death by terrorism in a depth-charge blast, an attack by lasers or a Sarin gas release.
Experts says the new codes will help them keep perspective on the annual U.S. homicide rate, which dropped 4.5 percent between 1998 and 1999 and continues to do so. Overall, Anderson said the national homicide rate has declined 28 percent since 1997.
"It's important from the standpoint of public health surveillance to be able to separate [terrorism-related] deaths from other homicides," he said. "Over time we've seen a fairly constant drop in homicides and what we really want to know is if we separated out the deaths from terrorist attacks, is the death rate still going down?"
Data on death rates for 2001 are being completed for release next month.
Accounting for the exact number of deaths in the Sept. 11 attacks has caused some concern, especially in the hardest-hit New York area where some reported missing turned up alive and where medical examiners are struggling to catch up.
As the tally now stands, 3,025 people were killed on that day or in the weeks that followed; that number includes the 19 hijackers, more than 2,800 killed or still missing from the World Trade Center, 184 killed at the Pentagon and 40 killed on Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania.
"But there are still 35 to 40 people on the list of the missing whose names might be removed from the final count altogether," said a report in The New York Times on Wednesday. "So it will be some time before the final number -- sure to be somewhere around 3,000 -- is ready to be entered into the history books."

Graphic

 
An empty ferry crosses the Hudson as a cloud of smoke and debris cover lower Manhattan after the Sept.11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Federal officials will now classify the slayings as deaths caused by terrorism instead of homicides.

Load-Date: September 12, 2002


End of Document