Feds give Utah and SLC $4.7 million for disaster and terrorism prep; Safety  Money generally used to fund first-responder needs.
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 2, 2017 Friday


Copyright 2017 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: UTAH NEWS; Politics
Length: 275 words
Byline: By Luke Ramseth The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Utah and the Salt Lake City metro area picked up a combined $4.7 million in U.S. Homeland Security grant funding for the year -- money typically used by local agencies to prepare for disasters and terrorism attacks, federal officials said Friday.
The state was awarded about $3.7 million for the State Homeland Security Program, a funding level that has remained fairly consistent in recent years, officials said. The money is divvied up to regions, then down to counties and cities.
It has been used in the past to buy disaster kits for first-responders, protective clothing, and to fund training and exercises, said Cory Lyman, Salt Lake City's emergency management director. A quarter of the funding is earmarked for local law enforcement and terrorism prevention.
For the first time since 2014, Lyman said the Salt Lake City area was awarded an additional $1 million under Homeland Security's Urban Area Security Initiative grant. The urban-area funding has been more sporadic since the program began in 2008, Lyman said, in some years only going to the largest 20 or 25 American cities.
He expected the money to go toward purchasing additional safety equipment to be used in a disaster or attack, as well as paying for training at public safety agencies in the Salt Lake Valley. Some may also go to reinforcing critical infrastructure protection, such as oil refineries and power plants. Money might also be used for an improved public alert warning system in the future, he said.
A 17-member Salt Lake City urban area working group will decide specifics of where the money should go in the coming weeks, Lyman said.
lramseth@sltrib.com
Twitter: @lramseth

Load-Date: June 12, 2017


End of Document