FEDS CONDUCT EXERCISE TO COMBAT TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
SEPTEMBER 17, 1998 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 22
Length: 388 words
Byline: Reuters
Body


The Army yesterday gave Philadelphia's law enforcement and rescue crews a daylong taste of what it might be like if "terrorists" unleashed deadly sarin nerve gas during a civic luncheon for 1,500 people.
Sirens shattered the calm of Philadelphia's Fairmount Park as hundreds of police, firefighters and federal troops rushed to the aid of city workers pretending to be victims of the attack.
"You can't predict an Oklahoma City. You can't predict what happened in Tokyo. And you can't predict what happened in New York," Army Col. Richard Breen shouted as the roar of a passing fire engine threatened to drown him out.
"It's better to be pro-active and train people so that a city like Philadelphia can take corrective actions and take care of its citizens if, God forbid, something like this really were to occur."
The drill was part of a Defense Department program to train cities to cope with chemical, biological and nuclear terrorism. The exercise, the biggest yet to be staged by the U.S. Army Chemical and Biological Defense Command, involved beat cops, bomb disposal experts, hazardous material teams, firefighters, ambulance crews, National Guardsmen, federal emergency managers, FBI agents, the Coast Guard and the Red Cross.
But organizers refused to say how many people took part.
"We would not want to broadcast to anyone who might have this sort of thing in mind just what our personnel and equipment strengths would be to meet this type of emergency," said Philadelphia Managing Director Joe Certaine. "There's no predicting where there might be an attack or what kind of agent might be used."
Fear of attacks in the United States has escalated since the August bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and U.S. retaliatory strikes on targets allegedly linked to Saudi dissident Osama Bin Laden.
Separately, defense experts have long believed that the threat of a covert assault on U.S. soil with chemical, biological or nuclear weapons was far greater than a Cold War-style missile attack from a distant hostile state.
Under the Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, drafted in response to the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings, Congress allocated $100 million for domestic preparedness in 120 cities and put the Pentagon in charge of the project. So far, 31 cities have completed training.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Firefighters take a bite out of terror. MAKE BELIEVE: Philadelphia firefighters used Memorial Hall in Fairmount Park yesterday to stage a mock terrorist attack as part of their anti-terrorist training. Above: Actors leave the Hall building after being contaminated in a chemical attack. Right: A firefighter rinses down another actor, who was exposed to contaminants. Below: Members of the Army's Chemical and Biological Defense Command from the Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground were on hand to watch. (ALEJANDRO A. ALVAREZ, DAILY NEWS) (Page 9)

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document