Fee disclosure debate rages between brokers; Contingent payments making a comeback, say some executives
Business Insurance
September 24, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 940 words
Byline: GLORIA GONZALEZ
Body


HALIFAX, Nova Scotia-Although transparency is a key element to broker compensation arrangements, disclosing potential conflicts of interest to risk managers does not mitigate the possible impact of such conflicts, according to a Willis Group Holdings Ltd. executive.
While other brokers expressed confidence that transparency is a sufficient method for managing broker compensation issues, London-based Willis does not accept supplemental or contingency fees because of the inherent conflicts associated with such payment structures, regardless of whether disclosure occurs, said Donald Bailey, chief executive officer of Willis North America in New York.
``The whole issue of transparency removing the conflict is just offensive to me,'' Mr. Bailey told attendees of the 32nd RIMS Canada Conference, held by the Canadian arm of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc., conference on Sept. 17. ``It doesn't remove the conflict. A conflict is a conflict.''
Broker compensation is an evolving issue with the four largest brokers not accepting contingency fees and with Chubb Corp. and Travelers Cos. Inc. now offering supplemental fees, said Roger Egan, chief executive officer for Integro Ltd.
``I believe that (contingent commissions are) coming back,'' Mr. Egan said, citing the agreements that some of the large brokers have recently negotiated with regulators on fee payments. ``They will be different. They will be flat. They will be nonvariable. They will be consistent. They will be transparent.''
The key issue is the potential for conflict of interest in payment arrangements, which the industry has not had the necessary focus on, Mr. Egan said. ``To my way of thinking, transparency is a great antidote to the potential for conflict of interest,'' he said. ``I think with transparency, that form of income will become subject to negotiation with buyers in terms of what overall compensation will be for brokers.''
While contingent and supplemental commissions may be legal and acceptable from a regulatory standpoint, receiving them is not appropriate from a business perspective, Willis' Mr. Bailey said. ``I support our position, which is principle based,'' he said. ``The way we run this business is not about what's legal, it's about what's right to do.''
While Joe Plumeri, chairman and CEO of Willis, has tried to shift the industry's focus in this direction, ``I don't think it's happened and I think (contingent commissions) will come back and I expect that if they do come back, and are fairly universal, Willis will take them as every other broker does right now, small ones anyway,'' Mr. Egan said.
Willis will not take the fees, Mr. Bailey said in response. ``Delivering value has replaced contingents,'' he said. ``We don't need contingents to run our business. It's as simple as that.''
Contingency fees will not disappear, particularly in the agency-based system in the United States, said Philip Moyles, executive vp of Marsh Inc. in New York. A broker representing a client is a very different relationship than an agent acting on behalf of insurance companies, he said.
``It's all about the disclosure,'' said Mr. Moyles, who replaced former Marsh CEO Brian Storms on the panel. ``It's all about the conversation. It's all about the value proposition based on who you are.''
The focus for Chicago-based Aon Corp. is on ``making sure there is transparency in the industry and a level playing field and making sure that we price for our services in an appropriate way that is transparent,'' said Stephen McGill, chief executive officer for Aon Risk Services Americas in Chicago.
In addition to broker compensation, the panelists discussed other major issues in the insurance industry such as terrorism.
Congress is considering the Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act, which would extend the government backstop for terrorism coverage for 15 years and expand its scope to cover group life risks and domestic terrorism acts. Last week, the Office of Management and Budget, though, said senior Bush administration officials will recommend that the president veto the current TRIREA bill because the backstop ``should be phased out in favor of a private market for terrorism insurance.''
Government participation is essential to manage the terrorism risk because a biological or chemical attack would cause losses that would exceed the industry's surplus, Mr. McGill said.
Losses from such an attack are estimated to be between $500 billion and $700 billion while available capacity in the standalone terrorism market amounts to about $1.5 billion and reinsurance capacity ranges between $8 billion and $10 billion, said Mr. McGill. ``If TRIA doesn't extend, then capacity for terrorism in the U.S. is going to evaporate and evaporate overnight,'' he said. ``That's going to be a significant challenge for (risk managers) and I think it's going to be a significant challenge for the U.S. economy.''
The House bill faces a ``tough'' test in the Senate, particularly with the administration's opposition, Mr. Bailey said. ``I worry a little bit about the politics that play out,'' he said. ``It's a very partisan issue right now.''
The bill likely will be amended to feature at most a 7- or 8-year extension without nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological coverage and passage will take a few more months, Mr. Bailey said.
A potential solution to terrorism risk in the United States could be modeled on the United Kingdom's Pool Re system, a reinsurance vehicle in which participating insurers are responsible for losses up to a certain level with the government covering losses beyond that level, Mr. Egan said.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Stephen McGill, Aon Risk Services Americas

Load-Date: September 28, 2007


End of Document