Feelings high at hearing on Muslims Chair talks of 'realities'; Democrat loudly objects.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 11, 2011 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 868 words
Byline: From staff and wire reports Jesse Bogan and Bill Lambrecht of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report.
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - Amid tight security, a House of Representatives committee launched a controversial - and at times emotional - investigation Thursday into the radicalization of American Muslims, an inquiry its chairman described as necessary to "put aside political correctness and define who our enemy truly is."
Homeland Security Committee Chairman Peter King, R-N.Y., struck a largely balanced, civil tone as he opened the hearing. He said he was undeterred by criticism that the inquiry, the first in a series, unfairly characterizes the nation's Muslims as prone to terrorist indoctrination.
"The overwhelming majority of Muslim Americans are outstanding Americans," King said. "But there are realities we cannot ignore."
Members of the House Homeland Security Committee argued over the legitimacy of the hearing, with some calling it an unwarranted attack on Muslims while others countered that opponents were letting political correctness blind them to a security threat.
"This hearing today is playing into al-Qaida right now around the world," said Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas. She said the hearing was "an effort to demonize and castigate a whole broad basis of human beings." Lee raised her voice to a shout at times. Noting the number of Muslim witnesses at the four-hour hearing, she said, "Muslims are here cooperating; they are doing what this hearing suggests they do not do."
Fellow committee member Rep. Billy Long, R-Mo., described as "heart-wrenching" the testimony he heard about a young Tennessee man who grew distant from his family, traveled to Yemen and, when he returned, opened fire on a military recruiting station in Arkansas. "I hope that they make people more vigilant in the Muslim community, just as in all communities," Long said.
In the small, packed hearing room, Muslim Americans criticized Muslim leaders and organizations. They accused them of ignoring the allure of groups such as al-Qaida to young Muslims, and of not cooperating enough with law enforcement to root out terrorism.
"The course of Muslim radicalization in the United States over the past two years makes it exceedingly difficult for anyone to assert with a straight face that in America we Muslims do not have a radicalization problem," M. Zuhdi Jasser, the president of American Islamic Forum for Democracy, testified in prepared remarks.
On the other hand, Rep. Keith Ellison, D-Minn., one of two Muslim members of the House, and Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca offered rebuttal testimony. They said that the Muslim-American community is an ally in combating terrorism.
Baca, quoting figures from the Muslim Public Affairs Council, said seven of the last 10 al-Qaida terrorist plots were foiled with the help of Muslim Americans. A study by North Carolina's Triangle Center on Terrorism and Homeland Security credited tips from Muslim Americans with thwarting 48 of 120 terrorism plots allegedly involving Muslim Americans over the last 10 years.
Baca and Ellison warned that King's hearings could damage that cooperation. "It is counterproductive to building trust when individuals or groups claim that Islam supports terrorism," Baca said.
King said he would continue the hearings at a later date.
Mohammed Ibrahim, chairman of the Islamic Foundation of Greater St. Louis, didn't have a sharp reaction to the hearings, saying he trusts in the democratic process. "We have full faith in the democracy that we have," Ibrahim said.
He said the basic tenets of Islam involve peace. "The overwhelming majority are peaceful Muslims," he said. "Violence is strictly prohibited."
Minhajuddin Ahmed, a recent prayer leader at the Daar Ul Islam mosque in Ballwin, said "terrorism has no religion" and encouraged fellow Muslims to reassure that point. "It is incumbent upon Muslims living in America to demonstrate to others the realities of the peaceful teachings of Islam, not only through lip service but actions," he said.
The group Interfaith Partnership/Faith Beyond Walls of Metropolitan St. Louis, which represents a wide range of faiths, offered a more condemning take on the hearings.
"We join together again to speak out against the Islamophobia that is darkening our country," said a statement by the group. "We ask why a Congressional committee is targeting the Muslim community as a whole. We ask if this is done to the Muslims and we don't speak up, who will be next?
"As religious leaders, we condemn the rise of hate and hate language which is not in keeping with our American ideals."
Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer, R-Mo., said he believed that the hearing "was in no way an attack against the Islamic religion." In a statement, Luetkemeyer stated there are "clear cases where Muslim radicalization has been used as a weapon against our country. We need to stand united against al-Qaida and its ideology. The bottom line is that we have to protect our nation against another terrorist attack and there is clearly nothing remotely wrong with that."
But Rep. Jerry Costello, D-Ill., was among those who wasn't in favor of Congress delving into the issue. A spokesman said that Costello "believes that it was not necessary to hold the hearing, and that it did not provide any new information to Congress or the public."

Load-Date: March 12, 2011


End of Document