Feel Relieved? Not So Fast, Partner
The New York Times
July 14, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1; NYC
Length: 735 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN
E-mail: haberman@nytimes.com
Body


FIVE summers ago, a car bomb exploded in Netanya, an Israeli city on the Mediterranean, and everyone's first reaction was to fear the worst. It had to be another terrorist attack, people figured. Netanya, lying a mere 10 miles from the West Bank, had become all too vulnerable to Palestinian suicide bombers.
  But assumptions turned out to be wrong. The attack, which proved nonfatal, was the work of Israeli criminals, the police said. One mobster had tried to do in another.
What a relief, people said; it wasn't terrorism. ''I prefer a criminal attack,'' Yehuda Madar of Netanya told me at the time.
  These days, New York has that in common with faraway Netanya.
  Bad things happen here, some bearing the potential for a huge loss of life. But as long as they are not the work of terrorists in search of martyrdom or who knows what, our reaction tends to be the same as it was in Netanya: Whew! We dodged a bullet.
  We experienced the phenomenon this week after an explosion destroyed a town house on East 62nd Street and wounded a few people, including the doctor who owned the property. First came fears of terrorism. Then came relieved sighs. From what the police say, the doctor, chasing whatever demons, may have blown up his own house. What a lucky break for us, most New Yorkers said.
  But why the high fives? With an altered circumstance or two -- say, people walking by at the wrong moment -- dozens could have been killed.
  The fact is that, despite the terror and high body count of Sept. 11, 2001, New Yorkers are far more likely to be maimed or killed by a deranged fellow citizen than by someone with a Qaeda decoder ring.
  A few weeks ago, a man wounded four people during a 13-hour stabbing spree in Manhattan. Five people were stabbed in a similar rampage last year, three others in yet another attack the year before. Remember the driver who went on a hit-and-run spree in Midtown four years ago, killing a pedestrian and injuring two dozen others? Barely a weekend passes without some drunken dope losing control of his car and killing three, four, five or more innocents. The list is long.
  So why do we derive comfort from knowing that a disaster is caused by a disturbed soul or a souse? Mayhem is mayhem. And unless New York undergoes radical change, we are likely to have many more demented people among us than terrorists.
  ''We tend to underreact to risks that are familiar -- they kind of recede into the background -- and overreact to risks that are new, in part because we don't know how bad they are,'' said George Loewenstein, a professor of psychology and economics at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. Car wrecks and people going crazy -- those are ''known risks,'' Dr. Loewenstein said. But terrorism, 9/11 notwithstanding, still falls into an ''unknown-risk category,'' and that is scary.
  Paul Slovic, a psychologist who is president of Decision Research, a research institution in Eugene, Ore., said that ''terrorist acts unnerve us because they do not follow the normal 'disaster plot,' which has a beginning, middle and end. We don't know what the scope of the planned aggression is.''
  ''Terrorism, perverse as it is, has a rationality to it,'' Dr. Slovic said. ''This seems worse than the deeds of one who is 'not in their right mind.' The 'right mind' of the terrorist wants to terrorize us.''
  With the town house explosion, there is an added factor, said Anthony R. Mawson, a professor of public health at Jackson State University in Jackson, Miss. Many people, he said, view the doctor as ''a man to be pitied rather than one to be feared.''
  BUT what if that attitude were to change? What if we began to regard the one who caused the explosion, whoever he was, as no better than a terrorist?
  Dr. Kerry J. Sulkowicz, a Manhattan psychoanalyst, said he would not be surprised if some New Yorkers now walk nervously past town houses wondering if they might go boom. ''It is, of course, highly unlikely,'' Dr. Sulkowicz said. ''But that's the effect of terrorism, to make people think that way.''
  For now anyway, we remain in Netanya mode: relieved that what occurred on 62nd Street falls comfortably into ''the not-threatening-to-me category,'' as Dr. Loewenstein put it.
  It might be worth noting, though, that bombs have gone off in Netanya several times in the last few years, with casualties in the dozens. That feeling of relief? It didn't last long.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 14, 2006


End of Document