Feingold drops effort to block Patriot Act - Correction Appended
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 16, 2006 Thursday


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. d5
Length: 240 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


With few if any allies, Sen. Russell Feingold dropped his effort late Wednesday to block the USA Patriot Act, clearing a path for Senate debate. 
But he promised to try to add new protections for civil liberties during proceedings later this month.
"I have no desire to inconvenience my colleagues or force votes in the middle of the night," Feingold, D-Wis., said in a brief statement on the Senate floor.
Feingold stuck to his objections, saying protracted talks with the White House over the law's protections for civil liberties produced only a "fig leaf" to cover weaknesses that leave people vulnerable to government intrusion.
"What we are seeing is quite simply a capitulation to the intransigent and misleading rhetoric of a White House that sees any effort to protect civil liberties as a sign of weakness," Feingold said during a floor speech Wednesday.
Feingold did not say what his amendments would propose as Congress raced to renew the act's 16 provisions set to expire March 10. But any attempt to change the legislation would face an uphill battle, according to Majority Leader Bill Frist.
"The outcome here is absolutely predetermined," the Tennessee Republican said, expressing frustration with the delay. "It's going to pass with overwhelming support."
While the filibuster was a lone endeavor, Feingold had plenty of company in wanting the 2001 terrorism law to contain more curbs on the government's power to investigate people.
Correction


Headline: Feingold drops effort to block Patriot
Published: 02-16-2006
* In a story on Page 5D Thursday, The Associated Press reported erroneously that Sen. 
Russell Feingold, D-Wis., had dropped his effort to block the Senate from renewing the Patriot Act. Feingold agreed Wednesday night only to postpone a Senate vote on overriding his objection to considering a bill for renewing the anti-terrorism law.
Correction-Date: February 17, 2006

Load-Date: February 16, 2006


End of Document