Feingold seeks censure of Bush over spying
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 13, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 496 words
Byline: Douglass K. Daniel, Associated Press
Body


A liberal Democrat and potential White House contender is proposing to censure President Bush for authorizing warrantless domestic eavesdropping, saying the White House misled Americans about its legality.
"The President has broken the law and, in some way, he must be held accountable," Sen. Russell D. Feingold (D., Wis.) said in an interview. Feingold also announced the move in an appearance yesterday on ABC's This Week.
A censure resolution, which simply would scold the President, has been used just once in U.S. history - against Andrew Jackson in 1834.
Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R., Tenn.) called the proposal "a crazy political move" that would weaken the country during wartime.
The five-page resolution to be introduced today contends that Bush violated the law when, on his own, he set up the eavesdropping program within the National Security Agency after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
Bush contends that his authority as commander-in-chief, as well as a September 2001 congressional authorization to use force in the fight against terrorism, gave him the power to authorize the surveillance.
The program grants intelligence officers the power to monitor - without court approval - the international calls and e-mails of U.S. residents, when those officers suspect terrorism may be involved.
The White House had no immediate response yesterday.
The proposed resolution says the President "repeatedly misled the public," before the disclosure of the NSA program in December, when he indicated the administration was relying on court orders to wiretap terrorism suspects inside the United States.
"Congress has to reassert our system of government, and the cleanest and the most efficient way to do that is to censure the President," Feingold said. "And, hopefully, he will acknowledge that he did something wrong."
Feingold, considered a presidential contender for 2008, said he had not discussed censure with other senators but that, based on criticism leveled at Bush by both Democrats and Republicans, the resolution made sense.
The President's actions were "in the strike zone" in terms of being an impeachable offense, Feingold said. The senator questioned whether impeaching Bush and removing him from office would be good for the country.
In the House, Rep. John D. Conyers of Michigan, the top Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee, is pushing legislation that would call on the Republican-controlled Congress to determine whether there are grounds for impeachment.
Frist, also appearing on ABC, said that he hoped al-Qaeda and other enemies of the United States were not listening to the infighting.
"The signal that it sends, that there is in any way a lack of support for our commander-in-chief who is leading us with a bold vision in a way that is making our homeland safer, is wrong," Frist said.
Jackson was censured by the Senate in 1834 after he removed the nation's money from a private bank in defiance of the Whig Party, which controlled the Senate.

Load-Date: March 13, 2006


End of Document