Fence Post
Chicago Daily Herald
February 1, 2009 Sunday
D1 Edition


Copyright 2009 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 508 words
Body


End of the words ‘terrorism/terrorist'
As the Bush administration fades into the sunset, so too should the use of the word pair "terrorism/terrorist." These overworked words mean everything and they mean nothing.
They mean everything when your leaders desire to remake the Middle East in their image at the point of a $600 billion military juggernaut but lack a marketing campaign. The administration advertising writers were truly gifted by the 9/11 attacks and came up with "The War on Terrorism." The beauty of this slogan was that it allowed the administration to wage war anywhere, anytime it wished. The targets of their warfare were reduced to either being terrorists or aiding terrorists. They could kidnap anyone around the world at will and have them tortured in torture-friendly lands simply by labeling them "suspected terrorists." They could set up the Gulag at Guantanamo to hold them endlessly without a shred of legal protection, which, if granted, would determine many were utterly "terror free." Some were simply sold to the American invaders by Afghan and Iraqi tribal chiefs under our "cash for terrorists" program.
The words mean nothing because they do not shed an iota of understanding to the complex world we inhabit. They mean nothing because they stifle real debate about the sanity and legality of our military ventures. They mean nothing because they could just as easily be applied to American administrations throughout history. The first terrorists? Weren't the Founding Fathers nothing but a bunch of terrorists in the eyes of British owners of the American colonies? Wasn't the American army that invaded Mexico in 1846 viewed as a terrorist horde by the folks who had Texas and a handful of other western states stolen from them? Oh, I forgot. That wasn't terrorism; merely Manifest Destiny.
Walt Zlotow
Glen Ellyn
Will we have to run to post office?
Some of us oldies will remember that in Chicago the mail was delivered twice a day. Now we have it once a day, excluding Sundays and certain defined holidays. It is being proposed that it be delivered five times a week. Do you suppose that we will soon be moving forward by each picking it up at the post office?
Dick Major
Carol Stream
Pols: Worry about state, not careers
I am so happy our politicians in this once-great state of Illinois have thrust this state into not only the limelight, but the national limelight. Watching Roland Burris on CNN and some of the other 24-hour news channels was disgusting. Everyone feels they are right. I only wish these same politicians were as concerned about the poor condition of our state as they are about their own careers. Just this morning with less than an inch of snow, 16 cars piled up on the Eisenhower Expressway into Chicago. I drove on state Route 83 at 10 a.m. and it was a sheet of ice. This state does not care about the public safety; they are to worried trying to cover their tracks in case of a bigger investigation. It is a very sad state of affairs in this, the second-best state in the union.
Don Loresch
Elmhurst

Load-Date: February 1, 2009


End of Document