Ferguson reveals extreme local police militarization
Spartan Daily: San Jose State University
September 15, 2014 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 594 words
Byline: Samuel Brannan
Body


The death of Michael Brown, which caused eruptions of protests and further police violence last month in Ferguson, Mo., has unfolded many issues within local police departments nationwide.
Most notably are the published images of police forces wielded from head to toe with heavy-duty military equipment such as Kevlar vests, automatic rifles and tear gas.
The conflict revealed an ulterior issue: over militarization in the local government.
The government is blurring the lines of soldier and police officer, even though there are distinct purposes between the two.
A soldier fights outside threats, like terrorism which requires more advanced equipment and weaponry, whereas a police officer maintains order in their community.
In most images, it appears as though Ferguson's police is prepared for a fight in a war zone. In reality, these police officers are excessively geared up for a much less dangerous task of calming disruptive and peaceful protesters.
The police had the right to establish order once protests got out of hand, but the violence escalated more than it would have because of the formidable presence of the army-like Ferguson police force.
Recently in the Bay Area, local police departments are receiving retired military equipment such as grenade launchers, armored vehicles and an 85-foot speed boat armed with machine guns according to San Jose Mercury News article, "Bay Area Police Departments got millions in Military Surplus, records show."
San Jose recently returned a 15-ton mine-resistant ambush protected vehicle , which was donated to the city by the Department of Defense.
This kind of vehicle can be a beneficial asset to the city if needed in an extreme emergency, but the city did the right thing by returning a military vehicle that is more likely to contribute to more deaths of innocent people.
According to the same Mercury News article, the police department chose to return the vehicle because they did not want to create a divide in the community and also wanted to retain the city's trust.
Beefing up police departments began in the 1980s when drug-trafficking and gang violence prevention became a big priority for police departments.
A general feeling of vulnerability after 9/11 caused many to live in fear, so it was not alarming seeing police departments making upgrades.
Congress passed a military transfer program, also known as Pentagon-to-Police, in the 1990s to help combat drug trafficking, and over the years, an accumulation of military-grade acquisitions has made some city's police departments even stronger than their local National Guard counterpart.
Florida local law enforcement has piled up 45 MRAPs, although the Florida National Guard does not have any according to the International Business Times.
At the national level today, The New York Times reported that police departments nationwide have acquired 435 armored vehicles, 533 planes, 93,763 machine guns and 432 mine-resistant armored trucks in U.S. Military hand me downs since 2006.
It is not a surprise these upgrades, which were intended for anti-terrorism, would eventually be misused like they were in Ferguson.
Local police agencies exist to maintain order in our communities and although Ferguson police forces were dealing with disorderly protests, it was far too much.
Police departments should take Ferguson as a lesson and follow San Jose's lead by eliminating their unnecessary military equipment and vehicles.
It is time for the government to outlaw heavy weaponry and equipment for non-military agencies who are not trained to use such weapons.

Load-Date: September 17, 2014


End of Document