Few accept federal offer of visas for terror tips
 Philadelphia Inquirer
February 1, 2003 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 885 words
Byline: By Thomas Ginsberg; Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The logic looked impeccable: Foreign terrorists lurk among foreigners, and foreigners want to live in America. So why not give foreigners a visa in return for ratting out suspected terrorists?
The idea, it turns out, has sputtered in practice so badly in the last 15 months that some experts think it raises questions about the wisdom of this tactic in the Bush administration's war on terrorism.
The S visas - nicknamed "snitch visas" and good for three years of legal U.S. residence - were granted to just 35 informants and their relatives in the fiscal year after Sept. 11, according to the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
That was a third or less than the number granted in three previous years: 97 in fiscal 2001 (which began in October 2000); 141 in 2000; and 105 in 1999. And not one of them was the special S-6 visa for information about terrorism.
While the program was small in number to start with, the dismal result is exactly opposite of what many hoped after the attacks. Thousands of agents and officers were redeployed around the country and world to cull information from or detain foreigners, especially young Muslim men. Surely one of them would blab in return for getting into, or staying in, America.
Attorney General John Ashcroft articulated the hope when he promoted the program in November 2001, saying "terrorist activity rarely goes entirely unnoticed, and noncitizens are often ideally situated to observe the precursors to, or early stages of, terrorist activity."
For those who give "reliable and useful information," Ashcroft said, "we will help them make America their home."
More recently, U.S. officials again dangled the prize of legal residency in their search for leads about the Washington-area sniper last fall.
Congress created the program in 1994 for foreign nationals living here or abroad, and since has capped the number at 200 a year for criminal informants (S-5 visas) and 50 a year for terrorism informants (S-6 visas). Immigration advocates generally welcome the program as a gesture of cooperative faith in, not antagonism toward, immigrants.
After Sept. 11, many federal agents were transferred to antiterrorism work and consequently the number of criminal-informant visas, many for drug-trafficking cases, dropped.
But the number given explicitly for terrorism tips did not rise in response, even during one of the most intensive hunts for terrorism leads in U.S. history. Only five people have been rewarded with terrorism-informant visas since the mid-1990s, the Justice Department said.
Nonetheless, "the Justice Department does feel the program is successful," said Nancy Cohen, an INS spokeswoman. "You're still getting very important information for law enforcement. It only takes one person to give very, very valuable information."
It is slightly harder to get a visa for dropping a dime on terrorists than on criminals. In the latter, the Justice Department alone may grant approval. In terrorism, approval also must come from the State Department. As a result, prosecutors may have put terrorist tipsters in the criminal category to make getting a visa easier, one official said.
Still, the dwindling total in Ashcroft's "Responsible Cooperators Program" raises a core question: Are would-be tipsters and witnesses too scared to come forward, or do they simply not exist among immigrants? Either conclusion might have wider implications for immigration and antiterrorism measures.
"What it could tell you is that there are a whole bunch of people here, even illegally, who don't have anything to share or they'd be all over this thing," said Philip Anderson, an antiterrorism expert at the nonpartisan Center for Strategic and International Studies. "How many people have written about sleeper cells here?… If they had information, wouldn't they be giving it up to stay three more years? I just do not think they have anything."
David Cole, an immigration-law expert at Georgetown University, disagreed. He said he believed odds were good that some eligible people had useful information but the government had inadvertently scared them from coming forward.
"There has been a kind of zero-tolerance attitude [for immigration violations] directed exclusively at the Arab-Muslim community," Cole said. "So if you are a person who might have information but you're out of [visa] status, you might be reluctant to come forward. If they conclude you're not eligible for the visa, you might be deported… . It's a high-risk proposition."
Another possible explanation is not a lack of willingness, but the overall difficulty of qualifying for the visa and mounting a terrorism case.
"How many people have been prosecuted for terrorism? You could count it on one hand," said Michael Brave, former chief of intelligence and investigations at the Justice Department's Office of Enforcement Operations, which decides on the S visas. "If you have had so few prosecutions, you wouldn't have that many witnesses."
Jorge Martinez, a Justice Department spokesman, pointed out that applicants must have the endorsement of a law-enforcement officer and prosecutor, provide critical information, and face a real physical threat as a result of cooperating.
"That's a lot of criteria to meet," he said.
Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or tginsberg@phillynews.com  

Load-Date: February 1, 2003


End of Document