Fiery Trump, sober Clinton at odds over Orlando attack
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 14, 2016 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 965 words
Byline:  Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - Donald Trump vowed Monday to impose a broad ban on immigration from areas of the world with a history of terrorism and suggested some Muslims in the United States are turning a blind eye to unfolding plots, as he outlined an aggressive response to the deadly attack in Orlando, Fla.
Hillary Clinton, Trump's presidential rival, was more measured in her own remarks, warning that demonizing all Muslims for the actions of a few would only benefit extremist groups. She pointedly blamed American partners in the Middle East - Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Qatar - for not stopping terrorism funding emanating from their countries and called for tougher gun control legislation in the U.S., including outlawing assault weapons like one used by the Orlando shooter.
"I believe weapons of war have no place on our streets," Clinton said. Though she drew implicit contrasts with Trump, she never mentioned him by name, saying "Today is not a day for politics."
Trump clearly disagreed, criticizing Clinton harshly and often.
The two candidates' dramatically different proposals - as well as their contrasting styles - underscored the choice Americans face in the November election. Democrat Clinton's vision builds on President Barack Obama's campaign against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and expands on his gun control executive orders, while Republican Trump is calling for a drastically different national security posture.
Though the Orlando shooter was born in the U.S., Trump continued to propose sweeping changes to the nation's immigration rules as the cornerstone of his anti-terrorism plan.
He redoubled his previous call for a temporary ban on Muslims coming to the U.S., saying that policy would stay in place until the government can "properly and perfectly" screen immigrants. Going further, he also said he would use presidential discretion to "suspend immigration from areas of the world where there's a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe and our allies."
The businessman did not specify what countries would be affected or whether the suspension would apply regardless of religion.
Clinton said such proposals would only make it more difficult for law enforcement to work with Muslim communities.
"Inflammatory anti-Muslim rhetoric and threatening to ban the families and friends of Muslim Americans, as well as millions of Muslim business people and tourists from entering our country, hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror," she said.
Trump pledged to protect all Americans "wherever they come from, wherever they were born." But he repeatedly referred to Muslims in a negative context.
Though the Orlando shooter - Omar Mateen, 29 - was born in the United States, Trump noted that he was "born to Afghan parents who immigrated to the United States." He said Muslim communities must turn over to law enforcement "people who they know are bad," adding "they do know where they are."
He also said gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in the Muslim world, and said Clinton could not claim to be an ally of the LGBT community if she supports immigration from such countries.
"Ask yourself, who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community: Donald Trump with actions, or Hillary Clinton with her words?" Trump said. However, the businessman has said he opposes gay marriage - the official position of the Republican Party - while Clinton and Democrats back same-sex unions.
The Republican did not repeat suggestions he'd made in earlier television interviews that Obama may not be taking tougher action against terrorism because he may sympathize with the perpetrators.
"He doesn't get it, or he gets it better than anybody understands," Trump said on Fox News Channel's "Fox and Friends." "It's one or the other. And either one is unacceptable."
Clinton said her anti-terrorism efforts would center on identifying "lone wolf" attackers - those who may be radicalized but not connected to a broader network or carrying out plans on behalf of any group. Obama said Monday that the Orlando attacker appeared to fall into that category.
Clinton also reiterated her call for tougher gun control measures, a policy proposal that has been a centerpiece of her presidential campaign. In addition to her support for an assault weapons ban, she also said Americans should be able to agree that "if the FBI is watching you for a suspected terrorist link, you shouldn't be able to just go buy a gun with no questions asked."
The FBI said Mateen had twice come to its attention, but the investigations did not reveal any definitive links to terrorist groups or plots. Mateen purchased at least two firearms legally within the past week or so, according to federal authorities.
HOUSE DEMOCRATS ERUPT
Democratic lawmakers erupted Monday on the House floor with loud criticism of House Speaker Paul Ryan and other Republican leaders for leaving the nation's gun laws untouched. Some protested by leaving the House floor during a moment of silence honoring the victims.
Democrats yelled "Where's the bill?" and "No leadership!" Monday evening after Ryan held a moment of silence for 49 people killed at an Orlando nightclub early Sunday.
The disruption came after South Carolina Rep. Jim Clyburn, the No. 3 Democrat in the House, attempted to ask Ryan on the floor when bills curbing gun use would be considered. Before Clyburn could finish, Ryan ruled his question out of order and directed the House to move to the next vote.
---
HILLARY CLINTON ‘The terrorist in Orlando targeted LGBT Americans out of hatred and bigotry, and an attack on any American is an attack on all Americans.'
DONALD TRUMP ‘Muslim communities must cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad - and they do know where they are.'

Graphic

 
 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks at the Cleveland Industrial Innovation Center, Monday, June 13, 2016, in Cleveland. (AP Photo/Tony Dejak)  Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks at Saint Anselm College Monday, June 13, 2016, in Manchester, N.H. (AP Photo/Jim Cole)  Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, left, accompanied by Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, right, speaks at a rally at a warehouse for the company "Team Wendy" which produces helmets for military, law enforcement, and rescue teams, in Cleveland, Monday, June 13, 2016. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)  President Barack Obama pauses while speaking to members of the media in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, Monday, June 13, 2016. Obama said there's no clear evidence that the shooter at an Orlando nightclub was directed to conduct his attack or part of a larger plot. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)  

Load-Date: June 14, 2016


End of Document