FIFA, Germany downplay World Cup safety concerns; Critics say security plans don't properly address crowd control outside stadiums, terrorism
Business Insurance
June 12, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 37
Length: 846 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


BERLIN-The prospect of violence at FIFA World Cup matches in Germany has some worried that there are flaws in security and safety planning for the tournament.
An expert in disaster preparedness has criticized the Zurich, Switzerland-based Federation Internationale de Football Assn. and other organizers of the World Cup for what he said is a lack of planning to handle injuries and chaos that could ensue if hooliganism or terrorism erupts at the soccer matches. A consumer safety organization has claimed some of the 12 stadiums hosting the matches in Germany have design flaws that make them unsafe.
FIFA says the concerns are unfounded and a spokesman for the German Ministry of the Interior in Berlin said, ``We are very well prepared'' to protect fans. Criticism, though, did prompt changes at some of the stadiums before the matches began June 9.
Wolf Dombrowsky, a professor and head of the Disaster Research Center at the University of Kiel in Kiel, Germany, said he is especially concerned about plans to handle violence that could occur among crowds of fans without tickets who gather outside the stadiums to watch games on video screens.
``Inside the stadiums, you have trained speakers to address the people on how to behave'' and direct them to marked exits and escape routes if problems arise, Mr. Dombrowsky said. Such help on how to react ``is not available outside the stadiums,'' he said.
Crowds watching the games outside the stadiums are ``much more uncontrolled,'' Mr. Dombrowsky noted.
Mr. Dombrowsky said he also fears that hospitals in cities where stadiums are located will not have adequate supplies to treat ``mass casualties'' if violence does strike during the World Cup. ``It is almost completely unknown what the resources for the hospitals are in terms of medicines and other supplies,'' he said.
The FIFA spokesman said in an e-mail that the soccer association has met with the Ministry of the Interior and ``is very comfortable'' with security arrangements for the tournament.
The ministry's spokesman said emergency drills were held before the start of the World Cup in all 12 venue cities. Evacuation plans are in place and the ministry has evaluated Germany's national disaster response plan to make sure it will be adequate to respond to incidents of violence, he said.
Police will be present in large numbers both inside and outside the arenas, according to the spokesman.
Meanwhile, a consumer safety organization, Stiftung Warentest in Berlin, has raised concerns about the design of some of the stadiums where matches are being held.
The group hired safety experts that it declined to identify to help inspect the stadiums in October 2005.
``What we found is that there are some problems,'' said Holger Brackemann, head of product testing at Stiftung Warentest.
Among the most serious problems identified by the organization was a photographers' moat that separates fans from the field at Berlin's Olympic Stadium. Spectators automatically run towards the field when a panic occurs, Stiftung Warentest said, and the approximately 6-foot-deep ditch had blocked that escape route.
The group's concern led to changes at the stadium.
``There have been discussions on the best way to solve that and it was decided to install permanent bridges to enable people to evacuate onto the (field of play) in an emergency,'' said the ministry spokesman.
Stiftung Warentest said escape routes also were blocked at stadiums in Gelsenkirchen and Leipzig, and fire protection measures were inadequate at stadiums in Dortmund, Frankfurt/Main, Hamburg, Kaiserslautern and Stuttgart.
Faring better in the organization's inspections were stadiums in Cologne, Hanover, Munich and Nuremberg, where only minor safety deficiencies were cited.
``Minor changes'' have been made at venues other than Berlin's Olympic Stadium to ensure fan safety, the ministry spokesman noted.
FIFA said it is confident that fans will be adequately protected during the matches. The association's spokesman said Stiftung Warentest's concerns ``proved to be rather unfounded.''
Mr. Brackemann said Stiftung Warentest sparked an emotional controversy with its findings and FIFA ``stopped discussions with us before we entered the level of detailed discussions'' concerning what the group perceived as safety flaws.
Mr. Dombrowsky indicated he is fairly confident problems inside the stadiums can be handled. ``The main problems will happen outside,'' he noted, where fans are partying during the games in an uncontrolled atmosphere.
The possibility of terrorism, which looms over all major events, creates a particular challenge, Mr. Dombrowsky said.
Germany is ``a completely illiterate society'' with regard to terrorism, Mr. Dombrowsky said, ``which makes the problem worse.'' Germans have not been adequately advised as to how to respond to a terrorist attack, he said, and likely would be at a loss as to how to behave if one occurs. ``Nobody knows anything-how to behave, what to do,'' he said.
The interior ministry said it had no evidence that any terrorist activity has been planned for the World Cup.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: British transport police teamed with German police in Frankfurt, Germany, as British fans arrived last week for the World Cup. Germany promised a strong police presence inside and outside stadiums hosting the matches.
Art Credit: Empics/Landov

Load-Date: June 16, 2006


End of Document