FIGHT TERRORISM, SRI LANKA PRESIDENT ASKS
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 20, 1999 Monday SF EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 496 words
Byline: Dilshika Jayamaha, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka
Body


Speaking from her hospital bed, President Chandrika Kumaratunga appealed to Sri Lanka's minority Tamils yesterday to join her in fighting terrorism, just hours after surgeons operated on her right eye to remove shrapnel from a suicide bombing attack.
Kumaratunga was wounded in the explosion Saturday night at her final campaign rally before tomorrow's presidential election. Twenty-two people were killed, and 11 others died in another suicide bombing at an opposition party gathering nine miles away, police said. They said 137 people were injured in the attacks.
While no one claimed responsibility for the bombings, police believe they were carried out by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, who have been fighting for an independent state in the northeastern part of the island for 16 years.
"The Tamil people must clearly and without hesitation decide whether they are going to continue to strengthen the hand of terror and murder by their secret, silent or partial support of the LTTE," Kumaratunga said in English during the five-minute radio and television address to the nation.
Of Sri Lanka's 18.6 million people, 3.2 million are Tamils. Although not all of them support the Tamil Tiger rebels' extreme methods, many sympathize with the group's demand for a homeland. The majority of Sri Lanka's population are Sinhalese.
While Kumaratunga spoke from her hospital bed, state-run television did not carry a live picture of her. Instead, it displayed a still picture of her from an election poster. She sounded calm, and paused several times during the speech. "I am well, and shall be up and about very soon," the president said, appealing for calm.
Her physician spoke briefly before the address, and said the president was recovering well.
President Clinton, Indian President K.R. Narayanan and Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee sent messages of deep concern and sympathy to Kumaratunga.
The cabinet met for an emergency session, and decided to go ahead with the elections, in which Kumaratunga is seeking another five-year term.
The cabinet also ordered an investigation into the security lapses that allowed a suicide bomber to infiltrate the presidential security ring.
It is difficult to tell how the bombings will affect the elections. While some analysts said the attacks could arouse sympathy for Kumaratunga among Sri Lanka's 11.5 million registered voters, disillusionment runs deep over her failure to end the civil war during her first term.
Still, people are uncertain about the abilities of her chief rival, Ranil Wickremesinghe - or any of the other nine candidates - to do any better.
Kumaratunga, who came to power in 1994 on a promise to stop the war, has said she wants a renewed mandate to accomplish that mission. In 1995, she held talks with the Tamil Tiger rebels, but the guerrillas broke off talks abruptly, and called off the cease-fire. The fighting has continued ever since. An estimated 61,000 people have been killed over the last 16 years.

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document