Fighting Counterfeiters Also Helps Fight Terrorism
Federal Times
August 19, 2002 Monday


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 15
Length: 829 words
Body


As part of America's homeland security strategy, the House and Senate have proposed similar measures to block a major gap in American defenses against terrorism: the self-funding of terrorists and others by counterfeiting U.S. currency.
These proposals will help the Treasury Department to counter the counterfeiters. It has long recognized that counterfeiting is becoming increasingly easy for two reasons: recent advances in computing, electronic scanning and color printing technology; and U.S. bank note designs that are one of the easiest in the world to fake.
Accordingly, the Treasury periodically updates its traditional techniques of bank note design, engraving and paper, and plans to introduce a new series of multicolored bills starting in late 2003. Unfortunately, these techniques are no longer sufficient to counter the sophisticated resources available to state-sponsored or independent terrorist groups, or even those technologies available to ordinary counterfeiters.
This point was underlined by the July 20 Customs Service arrest at the Detroit airport of a suspected al-Qaida member carrying $12 million in counterfeit cashiers' checks drawn on West America Bank. Reportedly, the forged checks were of very high quality and looked extremely convincing.
The problem with $50 and $100 bills is that their conservative and relatively static design has made them the target of choice for counterfeiters involved in international gray- and black-market transactions.
Interpol estimates that legitimate $100 bills make up 30 percent to 40 percent of all the $100 bills circulating outside the United States. The rest are counterfeits that help fund terrorist activities, money laundering, drug deals and illicit arms trades. Such counterfeiting is taking place on a massive scale, as shown by the Philippine National Bureau of Investigation's reported seizure recently of U.S. $100 bills and Treasury notes with a face value of over $1.7 trillion, plus computer and printing equipment. The fake $100 bills sold for $4 each.
Sophisticated state-sponsored entities have developed and distributed a virtually undetectable fake bank note, the so-called super dollar. These $100 bank notes came into circulation during the early 1990s. They pose a danger to our currency and economy because they are able to defeat nearly all measures used by local and regional banks to detect bogus bills.
Fortunately, there are new security technologies that can defeat even the most advanced counterfeiting efforts. Principal among these is the Optically Variable Device - advanced metallic foils, which are incorporated into paper currency during the printing process. They provide the highest level of bank note security protection available today.
Such devices are used on most major currencies - except the American dollar. The European Union's successful introduction of the Euro on Jan. 1 was the largest circulation of a new paper currency in a single day: some 10 billion notes in 12 countries.
As a further safeguard against counterfeiters, the European Union intends to recall all the first-issue Euros after five years and replace them with a second issue incorporating the next generation of Optically Variable Devices.
Washington now is taking similar steps to leapfrog the current capabilities of counterfeiters.
For example, the Senate Treasury, Postal Service and general government appropriations bill passed on July 17 directs the Treasury Department to consider "the best available, most cost effective anti-counterfeiting technology and security devices for U.S. currency, including . . . Optically Variable Devices." The House bill contains parallel language.
The Senate bill also provides $2 million more than President Bush's request for the development of technologies "to help identify the size of the universe of counterfeit currency and better understand the circulation patterns of currency."
With bipartisan support, such steps will enable Washington to:
Stop rogue states, terrorists and criminals from funding their anti-American activities by continuing to counterfeit U.S. dollars.
Severely limit the use of U.S. currency in gray- and black-market transactions.
Eliminate the U.S. vulnerability to counterfeit currency attacks designed to create inflation and cause economic dislocation.
Washington should start by creating $100 bills that cannot be counterfeited to drive the fakes out of circulation.
This action will require careful technical preparation as well as a major public education campaign. Americans traditionally have been suspicious of government alterations to the greenback and will need to understand why our currency has to be changed and strengthened.
But the case for taking such action in the war on terrorism is overwhelming. The European Union has made the Euro probably the hardest currency in the world to counterfeit. It is time for Washington to take advantage of new technology to produce bills and cashier's checks that cannot be faked.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document