Fighting for TRIA
Business Insurance
October 24, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 6
Length: 789 words
Byline: Paul Winston, Editorial Director
Body


To paraphrase the Secretary of Defense, you go into 2006 with the TRIA you have, not the TRIA you'd like to have.
That may well be the case as the clock winds down on this session of Congress. It is increasingly uncertain whether lawmakers have the time to devote their attention to renewing the federal backstop for private terrorism insurance. Between considering hurricane relief measures, Supreme Court nominees and cheeseburger liability reform, there is little time for lawmakers to give their full consideration to reauthorizing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act-due to expire at year end unless Congress acts.
Why has possible action on this important effort come so close to the wire?
A big reason is that the Treasury Department did not issue its mandated report on the law until the last minute. There's also the crowded agenda mentioned above.
But I believe there also was less urgency at an earlier stage because the lobbying effort on this issue is too limited. Lawmakers needed to hear from more than insurers, reinsurers, brokers and risk managers, all of which have been at the forefront of pushing for TRIA reauthorization.
Where are the leaders of companies that will be affected by a dearth of terrorism coverage? To date, I have seen few, if any, high-profile CEOs calling for TRIA. Instead, many seem content to let their risk managers carry the torch, as if it's merely an arcane insurance issue for them to sort out.
Speaking at the Katie School of Insurance and Financial Services Executive Forum in Chicago last week, Arlene Corsetti, executive vp of Willis Inc. in San Francisco, commented on this lack of support from top management and corporate boards.
``After 9/11, there was great interest by CEOs, CFOs and COOs in insurance,'' but that has now disappeared, she said. ``I'm amazed at how short that attention span was.''
Not only are top executives missing in the debate, but also the rank and file. Where is the voice of individuals who will find their jobs at risk if the law lapses? That could occur, for example, as building projects stall for lack of financing without adequate terrorism coverage, or as employers withdraw from high-risk urban areas to lessen the burden of workers comp premiums that will surely soar. Such dislocations can easily produce a domino effect in our interconnected economy.
When TRIA was enacted in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks four years ago, there was much written about insurance groups coming together with risk managers to lobby for TRIA. And that did occur. But the constituency that truly got the attention of politicians was when the building trades, realizing their union members could soon be idled on construction projects, got involved and pressed Washington.
In a recent online panel discussion on TRIA sponsored by Business Insurance, Brad Wood, senior vp-risk management for Marriott International Inc., underscored how the risk of a terrorist attack anywhere affects businesses and individuals nationwide.
``The events of Sept. 11 were far reaching. It affected multiple lines of insurance-not just the property insurance, but in our world we saw workers compensation claims, we saw liability claims, we saw life claims, we saw health insurance claims-coming across all products simultaneously. The impact on business went well beyond the borders of New York City to Washington D.C. In our world, it also went to the kitchen workers in Seattle, who lost their jobs. It went to the airport taxi cab drivers in Los Angeles, who found few riders.
``For policyholders, whether you're in the heartland or the large cities, we've got to think about this much beyond our own individual insurance challenges. Because collectively, our success is built upon the stability of each other in the event of another terrorist attack. These interdependencies that we all have are critical to protect business to business relationships,'' Mr. Wood said.
The full TRIA panel discussion can be viewed online by visiting www.businessinsurance.com/webinars.
Congress clearly has many distractions at the moment. If the risk management and insurance communities are to win a meaningful consideration of TRIA-improving the odds that some form of a federal backstop for the private terrorism insurance market remains intact-they must strive to gain new and important allies in this effort. Grab the attention of corporate CEOs and corporate shareholders. Reach out to union leaders and union rank and file workers.
With that support, it will be harder for Congress to continue to make TRIA a lower priority. Without it, it's anyone's guess whether lawmakers will act in time.
Editorial Director Paul Winston's commentary appears fortnightly. He can be reached at pwinston@businessinsurance.com

Load-Date: October 28, 2005


End of Document