Fighting Terrorism, and Lassitude 
 The New York Times
October 29, 2002 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30
Length: 535 words
Body


An American diplomat gunned down yesterday in Amman, Jordan, appears to be the latest victim of a renewed global terrorism campaign. Al Qaeda or allied groups are believed responsible for recent attacks against American Marines in Kuwait, a nightclub in Bali and a French tanker off the shore of Yemen. Too often in the past, Americans have been tempted to regard such attacks on Western interests around the world, tragic as they may be, as signs that terrorists lack the reach to strike targets within the United States. We cannot afford to succumb to that temptation ever again. 
     Yet, a little more than a year after the Sept. 11 attacks, complacency has reasserted itself as one of terrorism's main allies. The Bush administration and Congress have allowed plans for a new Homeland Security Department to get bogged down in a partisan squabble over labor issues. The unfortunate message this sends to the American people is that establishment of the new department is not important. 
 Some Americans are trying to counter the sense of complacency. George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, has compared recent attacks overseas to Al Qaeda activities that preceded Sept. 11. Last week the Federal Bureau of Investigation issued a warning that Al Qaeda may be planning to attack the transportation system, possibly passenger trains. 
A thoughtful report issued last Friday by a task force of experts sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations and headed by former Senators Warren Rudman and Gary Hart warns that America remains "dangerously unprepared to prevent and respond to a catastrophic terrorist attack on U.S. soil." The two men were co-chairmen of a national security panel that presciently warned in early 2001 of the dangers of a major terrorist attack and called for creation of a homeland security department.
The new report spotlights the most glaring vulnerabilities, including the fact that local law enforcement officials still operate without access to terrorist watch lists and other federal intelligence. Local and state agencies are also ill equipped, according to the report, to respond to a serious chemical or biological threat.
The federal government has acted aggressively to protect the nation's aviation system in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, but ports, railroads and the trucking industry remain alarmingly exposed. So are oil refineries and power and chemical plants. The council's report emphasized the danger of terrorists' using shipping containers to carry out a devastating attack. 
Lethargy and parochial interests have helped derail worthy Congressional proposals to bolster security at ports and industrial facilities, which are largely private property. An effort to establish federal mandates for port security has been held up by a squabble between the House and Senate over whether shippers should pay a fee to help cover the cost. The chemical industry has succeeded in resisting efforts to have the Environmental Protection Agency impose new security regulations for its facilities. Congress and the Bush administration must heed the growing multitude of warnings and start working together after next week's election to address these vulnerabilities. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 29, 2002


End of Document