Fighting Terrorism Starts At Home
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 13, 2007 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 11
Length: 577 words
Byline: BILL MCCOLLUM
Body


BY BILL MCCOLLUM
Many of us can recall exactly where we were when we heard the news of the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. I was driving on the George Washington Parkway just opposite the Pentagon, when I heard the report on the radio that United Airlines Flight 175 hit the World Trade Center. Minutes later, American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon.
The horrific nature of these terrorist acts on American soil personally affected me not only as a Navy veteran and a former Congressman, but also as a husband and father. Six years after the attacks, we are still facing that threat of terror. Fortunately, our nation has been kept safe and secure.
While the entire nation recalls how the 9/11 attacks changed our lives, these very terrorists had connections to our state. Thirteen of the 19 terrorists lived in Florida, had a Florida driver's license or had trained at Florida flight schools. Mohammed Atta, the leader of the terrorist cell, had an arrest record in Florida for driving without a license. After he failed to attend his court hearing, the judge issued a warrant for his arrest. Still, he was able to obtain a valid Florida driver's license as well as leave and re-enter the United States, all with an arrest warrant pending against him.
One of the most important lessons we learned from 9/11 was the need to streamline the system of sharing intelligence between our local, state and federal law enforcement agencies. We have made significant improvements in this arena - over the past few years, Florida has enacted its own security structure. Chief in this structure is the Domestic Security Oversight Council which consists of state agencies and law enforcement officials who have a critical role in Florida's security. This council acts as an advisory body and funding mechanism to those who directly investigate threats and respond to a wide range of potential hazards.
Another key component of Florida's security structure is the Fusion Center network. Fusion Centers, staffed by state and federal officials, analyze and "fuse" together disparate intelligence and law enforcement reports to yield actionable products in order to reduce threats in local communities.
While Florida's domestic security preparedness is reputedly the best in the nation, there is more to be done. Florida is home to 14 deepwater ports, therefore, we need the strongest port security possible. There is a need to effectively screen cargo before it reaches these ports. The public needs to be better educated about how to report suspicious behavior and our state must remain focused on securing the specialized equipment necessary to stay well-informed, prepared and protected
For Americans, 9/11 was a wake-up call. It reminded us to be more attentive of our surroundings. To that end, ordinary people have helped prevent disasters and save lives. One store clerk at a Circuit City helped expose the Fort Dix plot which led to the arrest of the six conspirators on May 7, 2007. A smart flight attendant saved a Boeing 767 full of passengers from Richard Reid, the self-identified al Qaida operative and would-be "shoe-bomber." Inspired by these individual acts, along with the brave actions of so many on 9/11, we must strive for a stronger, safer nation in the face of terror.
Bill McCollum is Florida's attorney general.
Photo: Bill McCollum
Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

OTHER VIEWS

Load-Date: September 19, 2007


End of Document