FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM IS NEVER EASY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 7, 1989, SATURDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 306 words
Body


Saudi Arabia displayed its customary way of dealing with terrorists recently when 16 pro-Iranian Kuwaitis were beheaded in public in the holy city of Mecca. A leader of the condemned men said Iran had recruited and trained them.
They were sent to plant bombs and commit other terrorist acts during the annual Moslem pilgrimage, as part of the conflict between Saudi Arabia and Iran.  An unknown terrorist group may be involved indirectly in the bombing of a French DC-10 jetliner that exploded more than two weeks ago over Niger. All 171 passengers and crew members were lost. Investigators suspect the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command.  Even if French authorities capture those who placed the bomb and win convictions in court, these terrorists won't be beheaded. In France, capital punishment isn't legal. Nor is it in any other democratic country on the front line against terrorism except, in some cases, the United States.  This is a key distinction in the war against terrorism. Democracies should be proud to observe it.  For democracies, the shock value of killing terrorists in public is outside moral bounds. The alternative is more effective in the long run, but more frustrating in the short run. That alternative is a dedicated cooperative effort of these countries, plus as many others as wish to join, to deny terrorists land for training camps; passports; money for food, weapons and transportation; and safe houses. This means isolating countries such as Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea, which have sponsored terrorism, until they change their policies.  Saudi Arabia's method, while inhumane by Western standards, applies only to Saudi Arabia. The cooperative, democratic way can be more effective, however, because of the combined diplomatic, political and financial power of those nations.

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document