FIGHTING THE DARK FORCES Finest deploy small army in bid to nip terror in bud
Daily News (New York)
August 19, 2007 Sunday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 23
Length: 1024 words
Byline: BY TINA MOORE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body


THEY ARE UNDERWATER inspecting the base of the Brooklyn Bridge, swarming Wall Street and Times Square and monitoring Arabic and Urdu cyber-chat-rooms where radicalism thrives.
They are in Israel and London - 10 cities around the world in all - learning from other terrorist attacks and about emerging plots.
Every day, 1,000 NYPD cops work the counterterrorism beat on an approximately $200 million budget, Deputy Police Commissioner Paul Browne said.
About 550 of those cops are assigned exclusively to counterterrorism. Another 450 are uniformed cops and detectives participating in a variety of counter-terrorism operations that change according to intelligence and world events.
"It's a work in progress, so to speak," said Maki Haberfeld, chairwoman of the Department of Law, Police Science and Criminal Justice Administration at John Jay College of Criminal Justice. "New things are happening around the world. You say, 'Are we prepared for this?' "
According to a report prepared by the Washington-based Police Executive Research Forum, the NYPD has transformed its operating philosophy, organizational structure and daily responsibilities since Sept. 11, 2001.
One of the first things Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly did when he took over in January 2002 was to create the NYPD's Counter Terrorism Bureau.
The bureau consists of about 250 officers dedicated to counterterrorism activities.
The Intelligence Division, beefed up substantially over the past six years, uses about half of its 600 cops on counterterror functions. Before 9/11, the division spent most of its time and resources on protecting dignitaries and developing intelligence on traditional criminals.
The 450 officers assigned counterterrorism duties on a daily basis include detectives and regular officers, such as a scuba diver checking the Brooklyn Bridge.
The detail includes another 150 cops who "surge" twice every day on potential terror-targets, such as Times Square or Herald Square, Browne said.
The Counter Terrorism Bureau also analyzes the worldwide terror threat, administers training for cops, researches established and emerging threats and conducts risk assessments on the city's infrastructure, according to the Police Executive Research Forum report, which was based on research from the National Institute of Justice.
The report says Kelly receives a terrorism "briefing package" compiled with so-called open-source material, such as news media reports, and confidential information developed by the NYPD Intelligence Division.
Kelly then meets with officials from the Counter Terrorism Bureau and the Intelligence Division for an hour to discuss terrorism related issues and deploy cops appropriately, Browne said.
Mitchell Silber, an NYPD senior intelligence analyst, said the department understands the importance of investigating a worldwide threat on a local level.
"Our philosophy is, 'Let's understand our communities, know the different shop owners, know the people and their backgrounds,' " he said.
Silber said the Intelligence Division develops "organic investigations" at the street level to detect attacks while they're still in the planning phase.
The PERF report quotes one division official as saying that gathering intelligence involves "developing the confidence of the public . . . so that they are willing to provide information" and "dealing with the right guys on the street," in particular, "developing good confidential informants."
In 2004, an organic investigation helped foil a terrorist plot to detonate bomb-filled backpacks in an attack on Herald Square, Silber said.
In that case, terrorists hoped to bomb the bustling station on Aug. 24, three days before the Republican National Convention, police said.
The investigation began when a police informant approached Shahawar Siraj at Islamic Books and Tapes in Bay Ridge. Silber said knowing that Islamic books and tapes were a "radicalization incubator" was key in that case.
"The threat was one that grew up in Westernized cities," he said. "The only way to stop that plot is knowing the city at a granual level."
The division also reaches out to business owners through Operation Nexus, which looks for unusual business practices that could have links to terror.
Investigators have a particular interest in radioactive materials, Browne said.
"One of our ongoing concerns is a dirty bomb," Browne said.
The NYPD runs "Operation Rolling Vigilance" to stop and inspect trucks that could be carrying chemicals or radioactive materials.
The operation was stepped up substantially this month when a Web site with ties to Israeli intelligence reported picking up online chatter of a dirty bomb threat.
"This whole concept of counterterrorism after 911 is a very mobile concept," Haberfeld said. "The NYPD is the best among all the forces in the United States when it comes to their preparedness." tmoore@nydailynews.com
GRAPHIC: SAFEGUARDING THE CITY
A thousand NYPD cops work the counterterrorism beat on an approximately $200 million budget.
Here's a look:
NYPD Counter Terrorism Bureau
250 cops
Analyzes the worldwide terror threat for purpose of deploying police assets
Administers counterterrorism training for NYPD personnel
Researches established and emerging threats
Conducts risk assessments on critical infrastructure
Develops plans for protecting key sites
NYPD Intelligence Division
300 cops
Field Intelligence officers are assigned to police precincts as well as borough commands to provide a link between the street cop and the Intelligence Division.
Agents vet and field calls to the city's terrorism tip hotline, (888) NYC-SAFE.
Oversees "Operation Nexus," a program that reaches out to businesses across the nation to identify suspicious activities that could be linked to terrorism.
Investigates emerging threats and examines terrorism response in other cities. Also, monitors chat sites and locations where terror plots take shape.
Other protective measures
Another 450 uniformed cops and detectives participate in a variety of counterterrorism operations that change according to intelligence and world events.
Source: Interviews with NYPD officials and report by the Police Executive Research Forum

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC;INFOGRAPHIC, City's Finest stand guard at the New York Stock Exchange. Photo by AP NYPD heavies (l. to r.): Raymond Kelly, Intelligence Division's David Cohen, Counter Terrorism Bureau's Michael Sheehan. Photo by Chet Gordon/Daily News One of 250 counterterrorism officers works hard protecting city from possible threats. Photo by MCT

Load-Date: August 19, 2007


End of Document