FIGHTING IDEAS WITH FIRE;
 WHERE THE 'WAR ON TERRORISM' GOT OFF TRACK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 16, 2003 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; TO THE POINT
Length: 849 words
Body


A major issue in the presidential election campaign that is already upon us will be whether terror is a dangerous political weapon to be brought under better control or a dangerous political ideology to be neutralized, if not unconditionally defeated in a "war."
 One does not wage war on tactics or weapons. One eschews their use, resolves to put them under lock and key as with poison gas and nuclear bombs. One does, however, wage war, hot and cold, on political ideas that are seen as antithetical to global security and human decency, as with anarchy, communism and fascism, and the people who institutionalize those ideas and work actively to make them manifest.
The "war on terrorism" that was launched two years ago by President Bush got off the track from day one because enough attention was not given to this distinction. No one of consequence opposed going after Osama bin Laden following 9/11, nor ousting the Taliban, who had been host and nurturer to his murderous schemes in Afghanistan caves and training camps. Hunting down al-Qaida operatives throughout the world also was broadly and immediately seen as both justified and prudent.
 The same went for heightened security and a much higher awareness that distinctions between anti-American terrorist plotting at home and abroad were largely meaningless.
 Whether in Kenya, Bali, Yemen or Washington, D.C., the consequences of poor intelligence and inadequate resolve had proved demonstrably lethal to U.S. interests. If people were to be safe from global initiatives like al-Qaida's, national governments, with Washington leading the way, had to do a better job.
 The problem came with moving from the particular to the general, from an all-out effort to destroy a radical Islamic cult to a movement against a vague phenomenon identified as "global terrorism." Everything from the Shining Path in Peru to the IRA in Northern Ireland to Hamas in Palestine seemed to fall under that umbrella, and it opened the doors to critics of many stripes.
 Were would-be bombers in Chicago and Detroit, "enemy combatants" or criminals in the manner of a Weatherman or a Black Panther? Civil libertarians took one position, the Justice Department another. Governments, whether in Israel or Moscow or Delhi, saw new opportunity in Washington's "war" declarations and were quick to appeal for additional support in long-running separatist battles, forcing the Bush administration to back off.
 It became clear both inside and outside the Bush administration about a year ago in the debate leading up to the Iraq invasion that "a war on terrorism" was not a foreign policy. It had been a necessary response to a newly appreciated danger that remains. The appropriate tactics for that effort going forward are a legitimate subject of national debate because refinements are needed, but they are primarily a domestic issue and should be treated as such.
 *
 Getting terror off center stage permits focus where it belongs, on the "big idea" of the Bush administration that was summed up in what already has been dubbed his "Age of Liberty" speech 10 days ago.
 In it the president said it was the policy of the United States to promote democracy in Iraq and those nations of the world where it does not exist. It is no longer enough to identify potential dangers to be contained or isolated (as with Cuba or North Korea), but the United States would and should actively support governmental change where democracy is not in place.
 He had tough words for Iran, Syria and the Palestinian Authority, identified Cuba, Burma, North Korea and Zimbabwe as "outposts of oppression," and mentioned China, Egypt and Saudi Arabia as states where people were not free in the way they should be. He also conceded that accommodating a lack of freedom in the Middle East was something the United States had done for the past 60 years, but that he was now changing that policy because it had not worked.
 He said that encouraging democracy was not "cultural imperialism" or "cultural condescension." He said that "modernization," which went hand in hand with democratization, was not "Westernization." He said critics had called Ronald Reagan "simplistic, naive and even dangerous" when he pledged 21 years ago to bring democracy to the European nations under Soviet domination, but that Reagan's views were courageous, optimistic and correct. The same, Bush suggested, was true in the current case.
 Whatever else you may say about this position, you must conclude that it is in the tradition of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt, who attempted to root U.S. foreign policy in moral values. You must also concede that for most of the past 60 years, because of the influence of men like George F. Kennan and Henry Kissinger, U.S. foreign policy has emphasized pragmatism and consensus, accommodated ambiguity and been wary of moralism.
 Finally, you must acknowledge that by whatever name, "democratic imperialism" or a new "age of liberty," the issue here is not partisan nor a matter of presidential personality, but a fundamental change that demands thorough debate.

Notes

First of two columns John G. Craig Jr. is the former editor of the Post-Gazette (jcraig@post-gazette.com, 412-263-1641).  

Load-Date: November 19, 2003


End of Document