Fighting terrorism, neighbor by neighbor;
Falcon Heights residents gathered and discussed ways to keep their community safe.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 30, 2001, Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6B
Length: 424 words
Byline: Kavita Kumar; Staff Writer
Body


RSEC:             Since Sept. 11, many Minnesotans have been asking: What can we do to help?
     About 90 Falcon Heights residents from five generations, ranging in age from 13 to 92, gathered at their City Hall on Monday night to discuss just that.
     Forming a circle, the invited residents each gave a suggestion to keep the community safe. Know your neighbors. Be vigilant. Be informed. Respect diversity. Vote. Maintain your sense of humor.
   Falcon Heights is a northern St. Paul suburb of about 5,800.
     Jim Gambone, an author and Orono resident who has conducted intergenerational dialogues for years, organized the event and hopes to hold similar conversations in Minnetonka and Willmar, with the goal to do it in cities across the country.
     The concept has been suggested to Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge as a national model, Gambone said.
     "Certainly we're not naive enough to think this dialogue will end terrorism," he said to the residents Monday night. He said one of the translated training manuals used by the Al-Qaida terrorism network says to infiltrate a community, one must go to where the people are isolated and don't know their neighbors.
     Bill Downing, 80, suggested that each neighborhood collect the names and phone numbers of everyone on their street in case of an emergency.
     "Even though we live in a friendly city, there are too many blocks where people don't know those who live close by to them," he said while broken up into a small group.
     The older residents gave advice to the young people who have not known war. Many cautioned not to put all people from ethnic backgrounds similar to the terrorists' into the same category. Others also suggested not to expect a quick resolution.
     Reid Grano said each generation will offer advice, but "think for yourselves. . . . Question everything."
     When the young people were asked what sacrifices they thought they might have to make, some said friends and relatives might lose their lives. Alex Kuettel, 13, said he might have to use his time to volunteer and to give up his earnings from lawn-mowing and baby-sitting.
     He said that he had reservations before coming to Monday night's event, but that he was glad he participated.
     "I learned to keep an open mind," the eighth-grader said. "And it makes me feel a little safer."
     A report of the meeting will be mailed to all Falcon Heights residents soon. A follow-up meeting is scheduled from 7 to 9 p.m. Nov. 15 at City Hall.
    _ Kavita Kumar is at kkumar@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document