Fighting Qaddafi With a Wet Noodle
The New York Times
December 10, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 491 words
Body


Boycott Libyan oil? That would be a morally justifiable, and popular, response to Libyan terrorism. At first glance it might seem effective, too. But a closer look suggests that economic sanctions might well generate a backlash, strengthening Colonel Qaddafi's standing in the Arab world.
Editorial discusses President Reagan's proposed boycott on Libyan oil as reprisal against Libyan leader Colonel Qaddafi's support of terrorism
Libya's role as international outlaw is clear. The reported plot to assassinate President Reagan would be just one of a series of Libyan terrorist acts. Colonel Qaddafi's soldiers, arms and money have supported efforts to destabilize northern Africa from Nigeria to Ethiopia. No less clear is the source of Libya's power: oil. In 1980 Libya earned $22 billion from oil exports, more than it needed to support a high standard of living and ambitious economic development while bankrolling terror worldwide.
The argument for boycott is that with his oil income threatened, Colonel Qaddafi would be forced to scale back his foreign adventures; the loss of face might even lead to his fall. Moved by this argument, Senate liberals and conservatives both are urging President Reagan to cut off American oil imports from Libya and to ask our European allies for similar sanctions.
But there is one flaw to this strategy. In the words of John Lichtblau, an oil economist, ''It's a wet noodle … meaningless.'' A withdrawal of all Western technicians from Libya would be an irritant, perhaps interrupting oil production. And direct sanc-tions by the major oil importers might block established marketing channels for Libyan crude. But international transactions in oil are almost impossible to stop - the commodity is too anonymous and the potential for profit is too large.
By offering modest discounts, Libya could almost certainly entice other buyers to take up any boycott slack. In fact, those hit hardest by the boycott would probably be specialized American importers, who now depend on Libya for very low sulfur fuel - like Con Edison.
Those who insist on more evidence of the futility of a boycott might look at current oil sales. Libya shipped 1.5 million barrels a day in 1980. This year, exports have fallen to just 600,000 barrels a day because Libya has clung to premium prices in a slack market. If Colonel Qaddafi can stomach a two-thirds cut in exports for an extra couple of dollars a barrel, there's every reason to believe he would be willing to parry a boycott by scrambling for less principled customers.
Economic sanctions are appealing in the case of Libya because they are a moderate counter to immoderate provocation. But the unhappy truth is that an oil embargo can't work. At best, it would force Libya to pump a little more oil. At worst, it would cast Colonel Qaddafi as the victim of Western imperialism, strengthening his position at home and in the third world. Wet noodles, alas, are poor weapons.


End of Document