Fighting terror takes more than might;
Terrorism is the weapon of extremists - so fighting extremism is the key.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
June 8, 2004 Tuesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2004 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12
Length: 395 words
Body


When Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld spoke in Singapore on Saturday, he said something that America's lawmakers should pay close attention to: The United States isn't paying enough attention to Islamic extremism.
Of course the nation is intently focused on the war on terrorism, but as Rumsfeld said, terrorism is the symptom of a greater issue.
"We're focusing on terrorist networks, we're focusing on trying to defend against terrorist attacks, but terrorism is simply a technique being used by extremists," he said during an international security conference. "It is not the problem in and of itself - it's a weapon that's being used."
That means the United States, while continuing to capture extremist leaders and break up terrorist networks, also should aggressively work to understand the reasons why people turn to extremism in the first place.
Rumsfeld said that it isn't clear whether extremists are training new terrorists faster than the United States can deal with them.
"It's quite clear to me that we do not have a coherent approach to this," Rumsfeld said.
This is a very significant statement, because it's an acknowledgement that it will take more than military force to disable the terrorist networks that threaten American security. When the nation entered this war on terror, President Bush said it would be a long haul. This is why.
Extremism is an idea, and that's not something that can be held in a jail cell or killed on the field of battle.
The roots of extremism are complex, but economic desperation is a factor. Young men and women who are frustrated with the way their lives are going - unemployed and living in poor conditions - will sometimes turn to a cause to find meaning. These are the vulnerable people that extremist leaders will target for recruitment.
It happened in Afghanistan, and it will happen in Iraq if the United States leaves before it's stabilized economically and socially.
Anger and resentment are fueled by failures such as the unbelievable Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal, which has injured America's progress with the war on terror. The placement of the Israel/Palestine crisis on an apparent back burner doesn't help, either.
The war on terror can't be won on the battlefields. It has to be won by understanding the conditions that lead to terrorism in the first place and working with our Arab allies to counteract them.

Load-Date: June 8, 2004


End of Document