Fighting Terrorism – From A Villa
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 30, 2006 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 4
Length: 714 words
Byline: Jim Beamguard
Body


He occasionally gets to relax in a villa in the city of Manama, but most of the time Brad Fancher is busy dispatching ships to thwart terrorists. The Navy lieutenant, junior grade, left Texas for Bahrain just one week after getting married. From his post in the peaceful, island nation in the Persian Gulf between Saudi Arabia and Iran, he spoke recently with Tribune editorial writer Jim Beamguard.
What is your assignment? I'm watch officer for maritime security operations, Fifth Fleet. Mainly in the Arabian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Gulf of Oman and the Indian Ocean. It's counterrorism operations. We close down venues of attack. Stop terrorists from transporting goods.
How is the war on terror going? I think things are going well. Our presence in the region really does counter a lot of what could be going on. A warship helps to deter terrorists.
Do your ships get shot at? Actually, I'm not going to answer that one.
Where are you from? I'm from a small town in Texas. I graduated from Purdue University. Got commissioned, went to Japan for two and a half years.
Are you married? I came back for 30 days between Japan and coming out here. I got married in January, a week before I left.
I'm supposed to go back for a ceremonial wedding the 29th of this month [July]. She is in Beaumont, Texas. Kristen is trying to get through medical school.
Is it hard to be separated after being married only a week? It was extremely tough. They say the first year of marriage is the hardest.
Where do you live? I have a little villa in town. I think I'm the only American in my little community where I live.
Do you feel safe there? I was a little nervous at first because I was in an Arab country. But my landlord is an extremely nice guy.
Is Kristin jealous of your assignment? She's definitely jealous about the whole little villa thing. If it was up to her I would definitely be home. She likes to travel, too.
Are you seeing the world? I've actually been completely around the world two and a half times. I've been to 20 different countries in the last three years. I've definitely seen the world.
What do you do for fun? This is a small island. There's not really that much out here. They have a really large European population. Lot of styles of restaurants. Traditional open air markets. Those are fun to go to. I go and haggle with the locals over prices.
What's the mood in Bahrain? It's a little more relaxed atmosphere than most of the countries in the region. The locals I know are really friendly.
Do you speak Arabic? No. I've ordered a lot of food that I've definitely been surprised. Most of my conversations are with my landlord. He's very fond of Americans. He brings his family over.
Have you saved anyone at sea? We try to help out vessels in distress. Most of the time they're having engine problems and we'll send a coalition ship to help them out.
I got one phone call from the owner of a merchant ship, carrying 20,000 tons of coal to Kenya, that the ship had sunk. Completely sunk off the coast of Somalia. His entire crew of 18 was on a little lifeboat floating around.
They had a satellite phone with a dying battery. He called me, and he was a nervous wreck.
British and American ships were in the area but hundreds of miles away. I got them heading in that direction. Then I called around. A Norwegian and an American merchant ship were in the area. They agreed to go out and search. They started a little after noon. The Norwegian ship saw a flare go up about 2 o'clock in the morning [and rescued the Indian crew.]
What's the hardest part about your job? There's a lot of pressure out here. It's an operational area. Definitely living overseas is stressful.
What's the best thing? It definitely gives you opportunities. I'm 26 and a couple of years out of college, and my amount of responsibility is something you would never see in the civilian world. You get stuck in situations to see if you can excel or not. You find out a lot about yourself out here.
Photo credit: U.S Central Command
Photo: Naval officer Brad Fancher, stationed in Bahrain, says living overseas is stressful, but his military job has given him opportunities he would not have had otherwise.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO
.

Load-Date: August 1, 2006


End of Document