FIGHT ON EXTRADITION RAISING DEBATE ON POLITICAL TERRORISM
The New York Times
October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 624 words
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 25
Body


More than two years ago, Federal agents, acting on behalf of the British Government, arrested a San Francisco man, William Joseph Quinn, on charges of murder and conspiracy to cause explosions.
Since September 1981 Mr. Quinn, 35 years old, has been held without bail while the courts decide whether he can be extradited for trial in London. The debate has focused on the nature of political violence and the definition of terrorism.
British effort to extradite alleged IRA terrorist from US raises debate on nature of political violence and definition of terrorism; extradition arrangement between US and Britain recognizes that extradition request may be denied if offense charged is regarded as political; however, cases involving 'cold-blooded murder' have not been allowed to claim political exception (M)
''I find it extremely distressing that they are holding him in jail,'' said Colleen Rohan, a San Francisco lawyer who, along with Patrick Hallinan, is representing Mr. Quinn.  ''It's really being done for the convenience of Britain. Our Government has nothing against him.''
 
He Went to Ireland in 1971
Their client is accused of becoming a member of a unit of the banned Provisional Irish Republican Army sometime after he traveled to Ireland in 1971. He was said to have killed a police constable, Stephen Tibble, in London in 1975. He is also accused of conspiracy to cause explosions ''likely to endanger life or cause serious injury to property.''
The extradition arrangement between the United States and Britain recognizes an exception: A request for extradition may be denied if the offense charged is regarded as political. In such a case, the person charged must show that the acts in question occurred in a rebellion or uprising and that they were directed toward political ends.
Mr. Quinn's defense has relied heavily on two previous cases in which Federal magistrates held that two Irish nationals could not be extradited for violence related to the I.R.A. because the acts were directed toward political ends.
Government prosecutors, however, rely on a decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit that held that Abu Eain, a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization whose extradition was sought by Israel in a bombing could not claim the political exception. The incident, the court said, was ''intended to result in the cold- blooded murder of civilians incidental to a purpose of toppling a Government.''
In that case, the court warned that the political offense exception ''should be applied with great care lest our country become an encouragement to terrorists everywhere.''
In September 1982, Federal Magistrate F. Steele Langford held that while the charges against Mr. Quinn did involve a time of political uprising, he had not shown that they were intended to further the uprising. He said Mr. Quinn could be extradited.
 
Judge Agrees With Argument
Lawyers for Mr. Quinn filed for a writ of habeas corpus arguing that the magistrate had erred, On Oct. 3 this year Federal District Judge Robert P. Aguilar agreed.
Judge Aguilar held that the bombings were meant to force the British to bargain and that the killing of the constable was likely to have been to prevent discovery of a bomb factory.
In holding that the Eain case did not apply, Judge Aguilar said, ''The advent of the popularity of terrorism raises some serious questions as to the propriety of the political offense exception.''
On Oct. 14 the court granted the Government's request to keep Mr. Quinn in custody pending final disposition.
''We're going to pursue every appellate remedy very vigorously,'' said Assistant United States Attorney Mark Zanides. ''We regard this case as very significant in principle and in particular.''


End of Document