Filipino firm faces terrorism risk
Business Insurance
November 7, 1988


Copyright 1988 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 46
Length: 1378 words
Byline: By STACY SHAPIRO
Dateline: BRISBANE, Australia
Body


Extortion, kidnapping and assassination are very real threats for the San Miguel Corp. in the Philippines.
The largest company in the Pacific nation receives extortion demands about once a week, said Col. Filemon A. Elefante, San Miguel's assistant vp and corporate security director.
And in the last two years, one San Miguel executive has been killed and another kidnapped because the company refused to meet such demands.
The brewery and food products manufacturer also has been faced with product extortion threats and holdups, all of which have cost about 3 million pesos ($ 144,000) in losses since January, Col. Elefante said.
"This (3 million peso) figure does not only pertain to the money taken from salesmen but also includes losses suffered as a result of the burning of company trucks and the loss of goods taken by the perpetrators," he said.
Manila-based San Miguel is seeking to minimize terrorist losses by following guidelines it established that emphasize that the company will not give in to extortion and that the lives of all employees are "paramount over that of the security of its business assets," said Col. Elefante.
During a workshop at the First World Congress on Risk & Insurance Management last month, Col. Elefante offered his first-hand experiences with terrorists to risk managers.
Terrorism "quite simply is a tactic or means to achieve an end," he said.  "As distinguished from mere vandalism and non-political crimes, terrorism means motivated violence for political ends.  Terrorism presents a clear danger to international business."
Terrorism in the Philippines is carried out by three major factions of insurgents who oppose the government of President Corazon Aquino, Col. Elefante noted.
Of the three factions in the country, the Communist Party "poses the most serious threat through the three most powerful arms of their revolution: the party itself, the New People's Army and the National Democratic Front," he said.
The Communist Party "has a dedicated and determined leadership, a dynamic organization and resources to wage a sustained campaign day by day," said Col. Elefante.  Its ranks have grown from 155 members in 1969 to 25,800 as of June 30 this year, he said.
The New People's Army is the most visible among the three arms of the party, he noted.  The New People's Army has raided military detachments and police stations; ambushed military convoys and foot patrols; and assassinated military personnel and police, he noted.
But in what appears to be a shift in strategy, the NPA is now increasing its raids on businesses, said Col. Elefante.  This includes hijacking delivery trucks, destroying productive equipment and disrupting production activities.
Most of the NPA terrorist attacks on businesses are attempts to extort "progressive taxation." These demands for money are directed at large agro-industrial firms, commercial establishments, wealthy individuals and sometimes ordinary citizens, he said.
"Coercion for resistance in the payment of progressive taxes range from partial paralyzation of business operations to complete closure through raids, sabotage, destruction of equipment, kidnap for ransom and even assassination," he said.
The other two insurgent organizations in the Philippines are:
* The Moro National Liberation Front, which is composed of disgruntled Muslims in the southern Philippines who want to establish a separate country.  The MNLF currently is consolidating and strengthening its forces through recruitment to sabotage the government, assassinate officials, attack military units and take over major ports to isolate the region it wants to declare as an independent state.
"The MNLF will continue to threaten to resume armed hostilities and conduct agitation propaganda activities to destabilize the situation in the south," said Col. Elefante.
* The Ultra-Rightist group, composed of loyalists to former President Ferdinand Marcos, which has little popular support and faces leadership problems.  However, it is still continuing armed activities and attacks on government installations.
San Miguel, which has grown sevenfold in the last decade with current assets exceeding 15 billion pesos ($ 720 million), has had specific threats from several of these factions, Col. Elefante told conference members.
For example, the corporation receives taxation demands and other threats at least once a week at one of its installations, he said.
Specifically, on June 24, San Miguel received a letter from Salvador Guerroro of the New People's Army demanding 5 million pesos ($ 240,000) a year in progressive taxes.  In July, the corporation also received a letter demanding 4 million pesos ($ 192,000) in progressive taxes.  "Threat letters from the NPA are either in English or the local dialect," said Col. Elefante.
Also on June 30, 1987, the NPA assassinated one of San Miguel's supervisors by shooting him in front of the farm gate at the Cabuyao Magnolia Poultry farm, which is owned by San Miguel.
The MNLF also staged a kidnapping of a resident manager and a male nurse at the company's Tagbita Mines for refusal by the company to pay 75,000 pesos ($ 3,600) in taxes to the MNLF.  San Miguel negotiated with the MNLF for three months before the employees were released unharmed.
The NPA on June 1 also raided one of the company's chicken farms, took one hostage, carted away office equipment, firearms and live chickens and eggs before four of 18 bundles of dynamite planted in the breeding house exploded.
The loss was estimated at an additional 500,000 pesos ($ 24,000) and was spurred by the company's refusal to pay revolutionary taxes.
To counteract these threats, San Miguel has set up a strong corporate security system, said Col. Elefante, who is in charge of plans for the entire company.
Line managers also are responsible for their own divisions' security.  As part of the security measures, San Miguel asks customers to pay in checks rather than cash, employs ex-marines as security guards and has salesmen use "bait money" to prevent kidnappers from harming them, said Col. Elefante.
The company set up a crisis management team after the kidnapping at its mine.  The team is divided into the long-term decision-making authority at the head office; the management policy committee, which bears the authority to make all decisions during a crisis; and the incident management team, which is responsible for carrying out the decisions.
The kidnapping made the company realize that the management policy committee and the incident management teams should be separate, said Col. Elefante.  The separation "is to protect the policymakers from the effects of the immediate emotional pressure experienced by the negotiating team, resulting from their direct contact with the kidnappers."
The crisis management team should be small and include employees who are not essential to the daily operations of the company.  "Extortion or kidnapping incidents may range from those lasting a matter of days to months or perhaps several years," he said.  "Deputies or alternates should be clearly identified to prepare for such a protracted incident."
In addition to the team, San Miguel has a control center manned 24 hours a day that links the corporate head office with its line operations.  This ensures that no matter where a threat is received or an incident occurs, "the details are passed as quickly and securely as possible to all concerned," said Col. Elefante.
Despite the threats, the company continues to rely on its written policy to minimize losses, said Col. Elefante.  The policy statement says:
* The company is a non-political organization and will support government policies involving the national interest.
* The company will "in no way pay a progressive tax to the CPP/NPA and other insurgents, nor will it confer with and enter into any deal with insurgent groups especially if it would compromise the company."
* The lives of company employees are "paramount" over that of the security of its business assets.  Every effort should be made to protect the lives of employees and executives.
* When necessary, the company will withdraw its trucks or suspend business operations temporarily in areas controlled by insurgents to minimize or prevent harm to personnel and/or damage to company property.


End of Document