Film Review: 'Body of Lies' an intriguing, enthralling spy story
University Wire
October 21, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 The Maine Campus via U-Wire
Length: 504 words
Byline: By Kyle Kernan, The Maine Campus; SOURCE: U. Maine
Dateline: ORONO, Maine 
Body


"Body of Lies" begins with a stirring quote by poet W.H. Auden: "What all school children learn / Those to whom evil is done / Do evil in return."
As the war on terror ensues, it grows more difficult for America to fight actual terrorists. They live in worlds on the verge of utter disorder. The landscape of war is muddled with new technologies and materialistic comforts.
This stark difference in realties tarnishes understanding of Middle Eastern nations, creating a serious problem in the way the United StatesÂ deals with them. This is what "Body of Lies" explores.
The film centers around two CIA agents, Ed Hoffman (played smugly by Russell Crowe) and Roger Ferris (a whiskered Leonardo DiCaprio). Hoffman calmly gives orders to Ferris via cell phone as he sits idly by his computer or at his daughter's soccer game while Ferris conducts missions across the globe. Ferris is willing to work with other nations in thwarting terrorism as Hoffman gives little to no consideration to adhering to the moral code of foreign diplomacy.
Hoffman is always eating or inactive. He's seen in one moment loading his minivan, the back door conveniently shutting automatically. Through Hoffman, the film paints a message that Americans' lazy lifestyles have seeped into the nation's foreign diplomacy. Ferris empathizes and reasons with foreign officials; Hoffman is merely apathetic toward them.
Ferris becomes conflicted with his own ways of dealing with suspected terrorists and advisors and the indifferent idealism of Hoffman. Ferris constantly aims to protect his informants while staying focused on his objective to find terrorists. Through his orders from Hoffman, Ferris sometimes treats both one and the same. This separation of ideals makes the film enthralling to watch.
A cloud of murkiness and shadow hovers over every frame. The sounds of searing violins rise up in moments of tension and eloquently highlight an ominous threat on Ferris. Hoffman seems to constantly go behind his back in carrying out missions which hurts Ferris' stability with his mission and foreign officials in Middle Eastern nations. The film centers on his relationship with a foreign advisor from Jordon, played mysteriously by Mark Strong.
The film has jarring action scenes, and the plot moves quickly. DiCaprio shines with authentic intensity and vigor in a role similar to his turn in "The Departed."
He's batted around a lot in this film, and it is a testament to DiCaprio's immersion in his roles. Crowe has never played such an indifferent, obnoxious role, which makes the viewer forget it's even him.
"Lies" is an intriguing viewpoint into American diplomacy to combat terrorism, often seen as aggressive and selfish. To Hoffman, agents are as expendable as the Islamic martyrs who give their lives for their ideals.
Can there be a just way to combat terrorism without becoming something evil ourselves? "Body of Lies" begs you to ask the question. How different are we from the terrorists we're trying to pursue?
(C) 2008 The Maine Campus via UWIRE

Load-Date: October 21, 2008


End of Document