Film sparks debate on terrorism at U. Virginia
University Wire
October 18, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Cavalier Daily via U-Wire
Length: 469 words
Byline: By Thomas Madrecki, Cavalier Daily; SOURCE: U. Virginia
Dateline: CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. 
Body


University of Virginia students vociferously responded to Hoos for Israel and Students Defending Democracy's showing of the film "Obsession" on Wednesday night.
The film, an opinionated compilation of television footage and testimony, drew heated reaction from the mostly university student crowd in its portrayal of world terrorism, jihad, ideological movements and a supposed parallel between Nazi fascism and Islamic extremism.
A discussion session after the end of the movie was mediated by Law School faculty member Frederick Hitz, who formerly served as inspector general of the CIA.
"Immediately after 9/11, there was this great realization that terrorism could come to America," said Marie Cohen, Hoos for Israel president and co-president of Students Defending Democracy. "Unfortunately, though, there has been a lack of understanding since then. Jihad, which seeks to destroy moderate democracy, still exists."
Cohen said she believes the film succeeded in making the case that a war between radical Islam and the Western world is ongoing, adding that the groups' intention in showing the film was to educate members of the university community in this regard.
"I wish no one had to be afraid," Cohen said. "I wish we could all sleep safely in our beds."
Many students, however, criticized the film as one-sided and narrow-minded, focusing on multiple occasions on what they perceived as historical inaccuracies or omissions in the film.
Graduate College student Omer Shaukat said the movie "works by the power of suggestion only" and never even attempted to define fascism and terrorism.
Shaukat added that one of the main problems inherent in the film is its use of certain speakers and figures.
In one instance in the film, a former Hitler Youth commander makes several claims regarding the world of radical Islam and the Nazis' relationship with Mohammad Amin al-Husayni, who was then the Mufti of Jerusalem. Shaukat expressed dismay with the commander's comments about a cause, on behalf of which Shaukat believed the commander was not fully qualified to speak.
The Hitler Youth commander "has no authority to say anything about Islam," he said.
Shaukat also said the movie was factually incorrect on numerous occasions.
"The movie portrays half-truths, and whatever truths the movie does portray, it portrays them in the wrong way," Shaukat said.
Muslim Students Association President Mohammad Hemyari said the movie uses its intended audience to its advantage and functions largely as a propaganda-like tool.
In several instances, the debating became too vigorous for the forum, and Hitz raised new questions or issues to foster a broader debate.
"Terrorism may be like poverty," Hitz said. "It's always with us; it waxes and wanes, but what's important is that we deal with it."
(C) 2007 Cavalier Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 18, 2007


End of Document