Final St. Louis defendant in terror funding case gets 4 years in prison
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 11, 2020 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 413 words
Byline:  By Robert Patrick St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


ST. LOUIS - A St. Louis County woman was sentenced Tuesday to four years in federal prison for helping supply money and equipment to a man who fought and died in Syria for the Islamic State.
Sedina Hodzic also will be deported back to Bosnia when she is released from prison.
Hodzic was one of five defendants from the St. Louis area and elsewhere indicted in U.S. District Court in St. Louis in 2015. All have pleaded guilty and admitted helping Ramiz Hodzic, Sedina Hodzic's husband, send money, military uniforms, rifle scopes and other equipment to Abdullah Ramo Pazara and others overseas.
Pazara, who originally is from Bosnia like his co-defendants, lived in St. Louis County, became a U.S. citizen and then left in 2013 for Syria, where he rose to become an ISIS commander. Prosecutors have said he boasted of murder, beheadings and enslavement while there. He died in September 2014.
In 2019, Sedina Hodzic pleaded guilty to a felony conspiracy charge involving supplying material support or resources to those seeking to kill others in foreign countries.
In the court hearing Tuesday, held via Zoom, Sedina Hodzic said, "I know that what I did was wrong and illegal and I really want the court to know how very sorry I am."
"There is nothing in the world that I wouldn't do just to take it back," she said.
The recommended sentence for the charge was 15 years in prison, but Hodzic's lawyer Kim Freter asked for "as much mercy as possible," citing the deportation and the potential for separation from Hodzic's children, who are U.S. citizens. She also said that Hodzic suffered as a teenager when her town was bombed during the Bosnian war and cut off from food and electricity.
U.S. District Judge Catherine Perry said that the guidelines for the crime were too harsh for someone with no prior criminal convictions. Perry also said that Hodzic was remorseful and facing other serious consequences in the case.
Ramiz Hodzic, 46, and Nihad Rosic, 32, of Utica, N.Y., are serving eight-year sentences. Rosic was blocked twice from traveling to Syria to fight by the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force.
Armin Harcevic, 42, formerly of St. Louis County, currently is serving a 5½-year sentence.
Jasminka Ramic, 48, of Rockford, Illinois, pleaded guilty in 2015, the same year the group was charged, was sentenced to three years in prison, and has already been released.
Mediha Medy Salkicevic, of Schiller Park, Illinois, 40, was sentenced to 6½ years in prison and was released in August.

Graphic

 
 Ramiz Zijad Hodzic and his wife, Sedina Unkic Hodzic.  FBI agents search the home of Ramiz Zijad Hodzic and his wife in the 4300 block of Chateau de Ville Drive in St. Louis County after a federal indictment was unsealed on Friday, Feb. 6, 2015, implicating the couple and four other Bosnian immigrants in providing material support to terrorists overseas, including the Islamic State group and al-Qaida in Iraq. (Cristina Fletes-Boutte, cfletes-boutte@post-dispatch.com)  Armin Harcevic, of California and formerly of the St. Louis area, was sentenced to 5½ years in prison after he pleaded guilty here to a charge in a terror-funding plot.  Mediha Salkicevic, of Illinois, pleaded guilty to a federal charge of conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists for her role in funding a St. Louis County man who fought and died in Syria.  Ramo Pazara is shown in a Facebook photo and his 2013 naturalization ceremony held at the Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site.   Abdullah Ramo Pazara, in an undated photo from his time overseas. 

Load-Date: November 11, 2020


End of Document