Financial woes push some issues to the back burner
Business Insurance
October 13, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 30
Length: 339 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


WASHINGTON-Although the 110th Congress marked its most significant risk management achievement less that a year after it convened, it left several other risk management-related issues to be dealt with by its successor next year.
Both houses of Congress approved the extension of the federal terrorism insurance backstop less than two weeks before the program was slated to expire on Dec. 31, 2007.
The compromise legislation extended the program for seven years and expanded its coverage to acts of domestically originated terrorism as well as those that originated overseas. President Bush, who had resisted any expansion of the program, signed the extension into law without ceremony late last year.
The House also moved swiftly to approve the Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act. The measure, which would streamline the regulation of reinsurer and surplus lines insurers, generated little controversy in either house. But despite the intention of Senate Banking Committee Chairman Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., to move the bill forward before Congress adjourned this fall, the financial services turmoil moved the issue to the Senate's back burner for the current session.
A similar fate befell legislation that would have created an Office of Insurance Information within the Treasury Department. Rep. Paul Kanjorski, D-Pa., introduced a bill that would have created such an office-which was supported by the Bush administration-but the bill never made it even to the House floor before the financial market crisis focused attention elsewhere.
Congress did manage to extend the National Flood Insurance Program beyond its Sept. 30 sunset, but only through early March 2009. The House extension bill would have required the program to offer windstorm as well as flood coverage, a move opposed by much of the insurance industry.
The Senate bill did not contain the wind provision, but negotiators for both houses failed to reach an agreement on that and other issues, leaving it to the next Congress to determine the program's future shape.

Load-Date: October 17, 2008


End of Document