Final Bill Near on Student Lending Reform
American Banker
December 20, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 4; Vol. 170; No. 242
Length: 283 words
Byline: Michele Heller
Body


Congress is poised this week to finish revamping the government's student
loan guarantee program in a way that will cut into bank profits.
The House on Monday approved wide-ranging deficit reduction legislation
meant to save $39.7 billion over the next five years. The legislation would
eliminate millions of dollars in subsidies the government pays lenders when
interest rates are low and make other changes that would cut lender yields.
Those changes include giving students a fixed interest rate when they
consolidate loans and reducing federal insurance by 1 percentage point, to
97% of the loan.
Unlike earlier versions of student lending reform, the final bill does
not include incentives to encourage students to bypass private lenders and
borrow directly from the government.
The Senate was expected to vote on the bill as early as Monday night.
Over the weekend the House and Senate approved legislation to extend
until 2007 the government's terrorism insurance program, which had been set
to expire Dec. 31. The extension ensures that property owners can purchase
insurance to cover acts of terrorism.
Under the program, established after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the
government pays a portion of claims on property destroyed in substantial
terrorist strikes and mandates that insurers sell policies to cover smaller
strikes.
The bill extending the program increases the amount insurers must pay if 
there is an attack.
Taxpayers would have to pay a portion of claims of over $50 million next
year and over $100 million in 2007. Under the original program, the
government's obligation this year would be triggered by claims of over $5
million.
http://www.americanbanker.com            http://www.sourcemedia.com

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document