FINANCIAL LEADERS MEET: SCHOOLS TOUTED FOR BATTLING TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 22, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 366 words
Byline: MARTIN CRUTSINGER, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- World financial leaders, under pressure to battle poverty far more effectively after Sept. 11, announced a major effort to educate more poor children on Sunday as they concluded weekend discussions on the global economy.
They failed, however, to settle a contentious dispute between the United States and Europe over a World Bank loan program for the world's poorest countries.
World Bank President James Wolfensohn sought to play down the failure, saying that there was a real commitment among all countries to keep the program "strong and growing" under new guidelines emphasizing country accountability.
The World Bank initiative on education will select 10 poor nations for a pilot program to develop the best approaches to achieving universal primary education by 2015. Currently, 125 million children in poor nations, two-thirds of them girls, do not attend school.
The pilot program is expected to cost between $ 2.5 billion and $ 5 billion. Among countries under consideration for the pilot program are Tanzania, Malawi, Senegal and India.
Protesters who contend globalization works for the wealthy but not the poor staged demonstrations outside the meetings Sunday.
The crowd, estimated at about 1,000 people, was mostly peaceful. There were no arrests.
The crowds were much smaller than on Saturday, when tens of thousands marched in support of Palestinians and against the Bush administration's war on terrorism.
While three days of rallies and protests have been relatively peaceful and without arrests, police worried the worst was to come today. People advocating a halt to U.S. military aid to Colombia planned to disrupt the morning rush hour with a march and sit-ins to block traffic.
During a rally Sunday at the Washington Monument, police moved into the crowd to stamp out a small fire after an American flag was set aflame.
Complaints against global capitalism have gained new urgency since the Sept. 11 attacks. Wolfensohn has been a leading proponent of the view that the United States and other wealthy countries will not defeat terrorism unless they commit more money to eradicate poverty.
ON THE WEB
International Monetary Fund:
www.imf.org 
World Bank:
www.worldbank. org

Graphic

 
Evan Vucci/The Associated Press * An unidentified man, in white shirt, tries to stop protesters from burning an American flag Sunday near the Washington Monument.

Load-Date: April 22, 2002


End of Document