FINANCE CHIEFS MEET TO TALK ECONOMY, TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 17, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Business; Pg. e2
Length: 399 words
Byline: TRACI CARL, Associated Press writer
Body


OTTAWA -- Finance ministers from around the world gathered Friday to discuss choking off the assets of terrorists and jump-starting the lagging global economy in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
The meeting of the Group of 20 nations was originally planned for India, but was moved to Ottawa after Indian officials said they were concerned about security.
Policy-making bodies of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank also are in Ottawa, holding talks postponed in late September due to the terrorist attack on Washington.
Security in the heart of Canada's capital was tight, with police sealing off central streets where the meeting sites are located and masked officers sighted atop some buildings.
Officials said they expected some protests, but nothing on the scale of the tens of thousands of demonstrators at the Summit of the Americas in Quebec City in April.
During the weekend meeting of finance ministers from the European Union and 19 industrialized and developing nations, U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will seek commitments to strengthen an international crackdown on funds for terrorism.
"There exists today an overwhelming consensus on the need to wrest from the grip of terrorists the funding that they rely upon to finance their violence," said Canadian Finance Minister Paul Martin, the meeting's host. "Without money, they cannot buy weapons. Without cash, they cannot fuel their cause."
During a luncheon speech Friday, Martin called for an internationally coordinated effort against terrorist assets, saying: "Otherwise, blood money will simply shop jurisdictions until it finds an accommodating home."
Martin urged wealthier nations to provide smaller, poorer countries with the resources to carry out their fight against terrorism.
He called for alleviating poor countries' debt and following through on promises in Doha to make sure globalization helps the developing world. The global slowdown, combined with the economic impact of the attacks, will likely hit poor countries harder, Martin said.
The Group of 20, created in 1999 to address international financial concerns, represents the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European Union, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Load-Date: November 18, 2001


End of Document