FIND THE BASTARDS! * Videos give clues in hunt for bombers * Gov says it was 'obviously an act of terrorism'
Daily News (New York)
September 19, 2016 Monday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 673 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA, ERIN DURKIN and GINGER ADAMS OTIS NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Alyn Ackermann, Thomas Tracy, Ryan Sit and Jefferson Siegel
Body


AN ALL-OUT search was launched Sunday by the NYPD and federal law enforcement for the terrorists who set off a bomb on a crowded Manhattan street - and planned to detonate a second one four blocks away.
A source with knowledge of the probe said officials are pursuing information that the blast on W. 23rd St. between Sixth and Seventh Aves. around 8:30 p.m. Saturday was an act of terror and not the work of a random person.
Cops and federal agents were trolling through all available evidence - including a scrap of paper found in the second device, a pressure cooker filled with explosives and wired to a flip-style cell phone.
The most tantalizing evidence includes a video of a man dropping something into or beside the dumpster on W. 23rd St. where an explosive device detonated injuring 29 and flooding the area with NYPD and FDNY responders, a police source said.
Cops also had video of a man leaving a piece of luggage at the second site on W. 27th St. where another unexploded device was found.
After he left, two other people stopped and removed the device from the bag. They took the luggage with them and left the device behind, the police source said.
Gov. Cuomo, who toured the scene early Sunday with Mayor de Blasio, said nothing so far linked the explosions to any overseas extremist groups. But a bomb going off in the city was "obviously an act of terrorism," he added.
"When you see the damage, we were fortunate there were no fatalities," he said.
The mayor wouldn't say it was a terrorist act, saying only that it was "intentional."
The bomb that exploded was dropped in a dumpster near a residence for the blind. Its ground-shaking detonation blew out windows and sent shrapnel flying as pedestrians ran for their lives.
The NYPD said that bomb was "similar" to the second device found four blocks away on W. 27th St. three hours later by two state troopers sweeping the area.
"The materials found, twisted metal, are consistent with the type of metal used in cookware, including pressure cookers," said a police source.
Both devices were filled with small ball bearings or metal BBs, The New York Times reported, similar to the pressure-cooker bombs the Tsarnaev brothers detonated at the Boston Marathon in 2013.
The NYPD issued a heightened alert for the city and all its officers after the bomb squad realized the second device was "live" - meaning it could have gone off if it hadn't been found, the source said.
Cops also checked out a Tumblr page posted Sunday from someone claiming responsibility for the violence.
"I'm the NY Bomber," the page (inset) declared, above a "manifesto" that said the blasts were meant to further gay rights and bring attention to LGBTQ issues.
The site was being vetted like all tips, officials said, and later discredited.
An unknown man also called an NYPD facility right after the bomb went off and told cops "there is going to be more," the source said.
But it wasn't clear if the caller had any connection to the blast or was just an angry person, the source said.
The unexploded device was removed about 2:25 a.m. and taken to the department's firing range at Rodmans Neck in the Bronx. Cops defused it late Sunday.
Some of the evidence would be sent to an FBI lab in Quantico, Va., for analysis, Cuomo said.
After his rare public appearance alongside Cuomo, the mayor held a press briefing with his new top cop, Police Commissioner James O'Neill.
"It was intentional. It was a violent act. It was certainly a criminal act. It was a bombing. That's what we know," de Blasio said, insisting it was too early to say if it was terrorism.
The mayor and NYPD officials said investigators were exploring whether the Chelsea bombing was connected to an explosion of pipe bombs earlier Saturday in New Jersey but didn't give details.
But law enforcement officials found that all three devices were designed to be detonated using a cell phone as a trigger, ABC News reported, citing police sources.
Al Della Fave, spokesman for the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office, said the FBI took over its probe Sunday.

Graphic

 
Gov. Cuomo (far left) and NYPD Commissioner James O'Neill and Mayor de Blasio (near l.) speak about bombing. Main photo, investigators work at scene Sunday. People watch (left) the police response after the blast on W. 23rd St. A victim is seen bleeding in still taken from video (right). JAMES KEIVOM/DAILY NEWS; LUIZ C. RIBEIRO; THEODORE PARISIENNE; RAMON LOPEZ

Load-Date: September 19, 2016


End of Document