Finding Lebanon Terrorism Roots in Iran
The New York Times
February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 323 words
Body


To the Editor:
In his Feb. 7 letter, Peter Belmont of Search for Justice and Equality in Palestine/Israel says the root causes of anti-American terrorism in Lebanon and of the terrorists' determination to eliminate the American presence in that country are the Israeli operation in Lebanon and U.S. support for Israel. Mr. Belmont is barking up the wrong tree.
As announced by the Administration and widely affirmed by area specialists, the bombing attacks on the U.S. installations in Lebanon were masterminded in Teheran.
Their occurrence after June 1982 was far less related to the Israeli operation than to a calamitous Syrian move.
In December 1979, Iranian Revolutionary Guards arrived in Syria as ''volunteers'' to help the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon. Vigorous protests by the Lebanese Government temporarily persuaded Damascus to keep them in Syria. In June 1982 the Syrians sent them into Lebanon, and they have since played a pivotal role in carrying out Iran's terrorist designs and in radicalizing Lebanon's large Shiite community.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's quarrel with the U.S. is not over Israel. The Iranian leader's original grievance was American support for the Shah, and his principal objective is eliminating U.S. influence in the entire Middle East. The bombings, assassinations and kidnappings of Americans in Lebanon, immeasurably facilitated by the presence there of the Revolutionary Guards, were merely the opening moves in implementing the Ayatollah's grand design against the ''Great Satan.''
Hence, Mr. Belmont's diagnosis and his prescription are fallacious. The terrorist attacks on American targets in Lebanon were not caused by American cooperation with Israel. And even if the U.S. were to end support for Israel as Mr. Belmont suggests, the attacks would doubtless continue.
 
RAPHAEL DANZIGER Policy Analyst Commission on International Affairs American Jewish Congress New York, Feb. 7, 1985


End of Document