Fine Print (Fall 2020)
The Dickinsonian: Dickinson College
November 6, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 368 words
Body


Clinical Psychiatry: A Handbook for Medical Students, Residents and Clinicians
By Ira Glick '57 and Charles DeBattista
Scion Publishing Ltd.
Nonfiction
Clinical Psychiatry provides all the essential information required for a successful psychiatry rotation. Written by two senior psychiatry professors, the book offers an exam-centered, reader-friendly style backed up with concise clinical guidance covering diagnosis and management based on the DSM-5 Criteria. Glick is professor emeritus of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Stanford University School of Medicine.
Lecture
By Mary Cappello '82
Transit Books
Nonfiction
Cappello is a professor of English and creative writing at the University of Rhode Island and the author of six books of literary nonfiction, including Awkward: A Detour (a Los Angeles Times bestseller). Her latest work is a song for the forgotten art of the lecture. Cappello draws on examples from Virginia Woolf to Mary Ruefle, Ralph Waldo Emerson to James Baldwin, blending rigorous cultural criticism with personal history to explore the lecture in its many forms and give new life to knowledge's dramatic form.
The Day the Hugs Went Away: Inspired by the Imagination and Real Life Hugs of the Drake Girls
By Gwyn Pohl Drake '06
Archway
Nonfiction
As a marketing professional, Drake is an expert in finding ways to creatively communicate. In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, she worked with her three young children to write and illustrate their experience of staying connected. She is donating 10% of the book's profits to UNICEF.
In Memory Of: Designing Contemporary Memorials
By Spencer Bailey '08
Phaidon Press
Nonfiction
Through a collection of thoughtful essays on hope, strength, grief, loss and fear, In Memory Of commemorates some of the most destructive events of the 20th and 21st centuries, including war, genocide, massacre, terrorism, famine and slavery. Bailey is a writer, editor and journalist who has written at length about architecture, art, culture, design and technology, among other subjects. Bailey is also the co-founder of the media company The Slowdown and co-host of the Time Sensitive podcast.
Read more from the fall 2020 issue of Dickinson Magazine.
TAKE THE NEXT STEPS

Load-Date: November 6, 2020


End of Document