Fire at air-traffic center disrupts 1,800 flights
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 27, 2014 Saturday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 614 words
Byline:  By JASON KEYSER Associated Press   
Body


CHICAGO • A contract employee who recently was told he was being transferred to Hawaii set a fire at a suburban Chicago air traffic control center where he worked, bringing two of the nation's busiest airports to a halt Friday, according to a criminal complaint filed Friday.
The complaint filed in U.S. District Court in Chicago charges Brian Howard, 36, of Naperville, Ill., with one count of destruction of aircraft or aircraft facilities, a felony offense.
The FBI said Friday that Howard remained hospitalized because of his injuries and that no court date for him had been scheduled.
A relative who saw a suicidal Facebook note posted on Howard's account early Friday alerted authorities, according to the complaint. Meanwhile, a 911 call from the control center brought a suburban fire department to the scene, where paramedics followed a trail of blood past a gas can, two knives and a lighter, the complaint said.
When they found Howard, he was trying to cut his own throat and told the paramedics to "leave me alone," the complaint said.
Delays and cancellations rippled through the air-travel network from coast to coast after the fire. The ground stoppage at O'Hare and Midway airports immediately raised questions about whether the Federal Aviation Administration has adequate backup plans to keep planes moving when a single facility has to shut down.
By late afternoon, about 1,950 flights in and out of Chicago had been canceled. A few flights resumed around midday, after a nearly five-hour gap. The planes were moving at a much-reduced pace, officials said, and no one could be sure when full service would be restored.
The early-morning fire forced the evacuation of the control center in Aurora, about 40 miles west of downtown Chicago. It was the second unexpected shutdown of a Chicago-area air traffic facility since May.
Howard worked for the FAA contractor that supplies and maintains communications systems at air traffic facilities, said Jessica Cigich, a spokeswoman for Professional Aviation Safety Specialists, the union that represents FAA technicians.
"We don't know what his state of mind was at the time," said Thomas Ahern, a spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, which was taking part in the investigation.
The man used gasoline as an accelerant, he said.
When the center was evacuated, management of the region's airspace was transferred to other facilities, FAA spokeswoman Elizabeth Cory said.
But hours after the ordeal began, the region's air traffic was still a mess. The Aurora facility - which had become a crime scene - remained shut down.
The flames badly damaged the center's fiber-optic equipment, leaving controllers unable to talk with pilots, Cigich said.
A control center in Indianapolis called in staff to patch together inbound and outbound routes for the Chicago area, said Douglas Church, a spokesman for the National Air Traffic Controllers Association labor union. But the process was slow and painstaking because there was no way for other Chicago-area controllers to send flight plans to computers in Indianapolis. That information normally gets routed through the Aurora facility.
That led some observers to call for better backup plans.
"This is a nightmare scenario when we thought systems were in place to prevent it," said aviation analyst Joseph Schwieterman of DePaul University in Chicago.
The disruption was also likely to deliver a financial hit to airlines, Schwieterman said.
The shutdown quickly spread travel misery around the country, with airports as close as St. Louis and as far as Dallas canceling flights. Online radar images showed a hole in the nation's air traffic map over the Midwest.

Graphic

 
 Dennis McCormack of Rockaway, N.J. checks the departure board only to find out that his flight to Newark, N.J. has been canceled at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  Dennis McCormack of Rockaway, N.J. checks the departure board only to find out that his flight to Newark, N.J. has been canceled at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  Breanne Eging checks on her flight to Greenville, South Carolina at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  This screen shot provided by FlightAware shows airline traffic at 10:20 a.m. EDT over the United States Friday, Sept. 26, 2014, after hundreds of flights were canceled at Chicago airports, at center, following a fire at a suburban Chicago air traffic control facility. The ground stop threatened to send delays and cancellations rippling throughout the nation's air travel network, as more than 500 flights had already been canceled in Chicago and more were expected. (AP Photo/Courtesy FlightAware)  Security stands in front of the air traffic control facility in Aurora, Ill., on Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at the suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Daily Herald, Scott Sanders) MANDATORY CREDIT; MAGS OUT  Security guards the front of the air traffic control facility in Aurora, Ill., on Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at the suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Daily Herald, Scott Sanders) MANDATORY CREDIT; MAGS OUT  Kanna Ortiz 4, waits in a line after her flight back home to New Jersey was delayed at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  Kanna Ortiz 4, waits in a line after her flight back home to New Jersey was delayed at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  Ann Walden checks her phone as 15 month-old daughter Delphine plays while waiting in-line after their flight to Baton Rouge was delayed at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty)  Ann Walden plays with her 15 month-old daughter Delphine while waiting in-line after their flight to Baton Rouge was delayed at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Friday, Sept. 26, 2014. All flights in and out of Chicago's two airports were halted Friday after a fire at a suburban air traffic control facility sent delays and cancellations rippling through the U.S. air travel network. Authorities said the blaze was intentionally set by a contract employee of the Federal Aviation Administration and had no ties to terrorism. (AP Photo/Paul Beaty) 

Load-Date: September 27, 2014


End of Document