FIREARMS INCREASE IN ISRAEL; RIGHTS GROUP SHARES PALESTINIANS' CONCERN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 17, 1994, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 538 words
Byline: Susan Sappir 1994, Reuters News Service
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Moshe Eliahu, 65, staggers on his cane to the firing line. A trainer puts an arm around his shoulder, leans over and shouts instructions so Eliahu, a retired Israeli policeman, can hear.
Helped by the trainer, Eliahu loads his pistol, fires six rounds at a target at Jerusalem's Krav ("Combat") shooting range and qualifies to have his gun license renewed.
"Maybe now somebody will give me a job as a guard," he says, beaming.
Weapons are everywhere in Israel, where most teen-agers learn to use a firearm during compulsory military service.
The weapons also may be abused. For years Palestinians and human rights groups have accused both soldiers and settlers of firing indiscriminately.
In February, a settler's massacre of 30 Arabs at a Hebron mosque prompted Palestinians to demand that Israel disarm settlers. It disarmed a handful of anti-Arab militants.
Avi Elimelech, head of the gun-licensing department at the Interior Ministry, says 300,000 civilians in a population of 5 million own firearms. That figure includes at least 50,000 who pack them for jobs such as security guards and drivers.
Virtually all civilians applying for personal weapons justify the request as a means of protection from terrorism, not crime, officials said.
"There is a rise in demand for guns and for shooting training around terrorist events," said Eyal Ben-Artzi, manager of Krav. "Sometimes women speak about crime. But the majority talk only about terrorism."
Israeli law permits licensed civilians to carry their weapons at all times, so the sight of guns sticking out of trouser waistbands is commonplace.
But Ben-Artzi, who trains both beginners and those who need their licenses renewed, said the level of arms proficiency left much to be desired. "Of 300,000 armed civilians, maybe 20 percent know how to use their guns properly - and that's being optimistic."
Elimelech of the Interior Ministry said acquisition of weapons was growing by about 10 percent each year.
No official figures were available on how many of the 100,000 Jewish settlers who live among 2 million Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip own arms. But besides private firearms, settlers have wide access to army-issue weapons in the heavily guarded settlements where they patrol with regular soldiers.
Elimelech said there were two criteria for granting a gun license:
For use on a job.
For use at a residence in what is defined as a "dangerous place" - "an isolated place or a place surrounded by a hostile population."
He said the law did not make special provisions for settlers. But an army spokesman said any settlers could receive guns from the army if they had no criminal record or history of mental health problems. Settlers say they need their guns for self-defense.
Settler spokesman Yehiel Leiter estimated that 30 percent of the Israeli population has firearms, while at least 50 percent of the settlers have firearms. He said Jews in the territories were attacked by Arabs daily with stones and firebombs.
"People have weapons to defend themselves," he said. "We show a great deal of restraint. With the large proliferation of arms, it is surprising there aren't far more clashes between Jews and Arabs. Despite all the attacks, we are very restrained."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo by AP - Boys play with unloaded weapons at an Israeli army weapons show in Kiryat Arba, a Jewish settlement in the West Bank, on Thursday. The man who massacred 30 Muslims Feb. 25 came from the settlement.

Load-Date: April 20, 1994


End of Document