Firms create tech to deter terrorism
Crain's Detroit Business
September 17, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 880 words
Byline: Laura Bailey
Body


Technology that may be used as a weapon in an escalating war against terrorism could have roots in metro Detroit.
Local companies are developing James Bondian technologies that could predict or even thwart terrorist attacks. At least one executive predicted that new government spending on counterterrorism will unleash a slew of new products.
Ann Arbor-based Ardesta L.L.C. is working on security applications for microsystems devices the size of a computer chip that can smell, taste, feel, hear and see their environment. Such devices, which can almost think on their own, have huge security applications, says David Williams, vice president and CEO of the Ardesta's Southwest region in New Mexico.
A micro-system can make rational decisions about what it's sensing and take action based on that communication, Williams said. Advanced microsystems can power themselves. For example, if terrorists or an aggressor nation used a brewery as a cover for a chemical weapons plant, a microsystem planted inside could detect that subversive use.
Ardesta has an intellectual-property agreement to develop security applications with Sandia National Laboratories, the national security laboratory within the U.S. Department of Energy.
Sandia is developing a separate technology, dubbed the micro-chem laboratory, which can be planted in lobbies or doorways to detect substances used in chemical or biological weapons. The technology is the smallest and fastest detector of such weapons ever tested by the U.S. government. Nanosystems - submicroscopic collections of atoms - could be used to trace explosives and help investigate crimes. For example, if a bomb exploded inside a briefcase, ''smart dust'' in the glue or on the leather could trace the explosives.
Venture capitalist Rick Snyder formed Ardesta to invest in companies that develop and use microsystems. The company calls itself an ''industry accelerator'' because it also holds microsystems trade shows and publishes an industry magazine on the Web and in print about the industry.
An Ardesta-funded company in Ann Arbor called Sensicore Inc. is using microsystems technology licensed from UM to test water and blood for different ions. Williams said that over time those sensors could detect biological agents or environmental contaminants used in chemical warfare.
Other security-related projects in metro Detroit include:
* Auburn Hills-based MSX International Inc. helped build the bullet-proof SmarTruck to carry and guard a high-level official, said account executive Chris Johnston. Its features could be used in airplanes to guard cockpits.
The vehicle has bullet-proof doors made of high strength composite material. A night-vision camera can peek through a sunroof-like opening so the car can drive ''darkened.'' Voice-activated windows are controlled by computer chips programmed to recognize certain voices.
It also uses simpler technologies, such as dropping oil slick or tacks on the pavement, Johnston said. A nozzle above each door squirts pepper spray, and there are electric-shock attachments on all door panels.
* Ann Arbor-based Veridian Systems Division of Virginia-based military contractor Veridian Corp. makes sensors that detect information from different sources. The division formerly was known as Erim, a defense contractor with roots in classified military research. Veridian bought the division in 1999. The division makes systems that accumulate bits of information that can be acted upon, said Ralph Mitchel, president of the sensor systems sector.
For example, a sensor collects news reports of political activity in Afghanistan, satellite imagery records weapons moving there, and a Web sensor collects information that a group of particular airline tickets has been purchased.
''The ultimate goal here is to have systems that can digest all this information and make predictions,'' said John Gilmore, director of the reasoning systems center in Ann Arbor. Such systems could detect and ''red-flag'' extraordinary events.
''The fact that a terrorist is in America taking commercial flight lessons is out of the ordinary,'' Gilmore said.
Veridian also develops advanced imaging systems that go beyond satellite imaging designed to monitor large-scale activity. The new systems can better monitor smaller pockets of terrorist activity, Gilmore said.
''The technology is out there, it can be adapted, but it takes dollars to make a change,'' Gilmore said. ''If you take $20 billion and apply that to the terrorism problem, there are going to be tons of products coming out.''
* Ann Arbor-based Soar Technology Inc.'s designs artificial intelligence software designed to behave like a human. The Soar computer language will be used shortly to fly a plane without a human pilot. The technology is intended to transfer cargo and equipment for the military, which wants to have 30 percent of its assets unmanned by 2015, said Alan Wallace, projects administrator at Soar.
''The whole point is to get the people out of harm's way,'' said Wallace.
He thinks people would be hesitant to travel on commercial planes without human pilots but adds that it's not outside the realm of possibility that such military technology eventually could transfer to commercial airlines.
Laura Bailey, (313) 446-0325, lbailey@crain.com  

Graphic

 
Williams

Load-Date: September 18, 2001


End of Document