FIRST SHOT OF NEW WAR FIRED IN ' 93;
 SEEDS OF BIN LADEN'S NEW GLOBAL TERRORISM BEAR FRUIT WITH LAST WEEK'S CARNAGE, DESTRUCTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 18, 2001 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 1439 words
Byline: KAREN DEYOUNG AND MICHAEL DOBBS, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


What President Bush last week called "the first war of the 21st century" began nearly a decade ago, when terrorists converged on New York City with a plan to blow up the World Trade Center.
 The February 1993 explosion in the center's parking garage, which killed six people, sketched the first rough outlines of a new kind of terrorism that emerged as a finished portrait last Tuesday with the annihilation of the New York landmark and the deaths of thousands.
 As the United States moves to retaliate for the horrific assault, and fight a war different from any in its history, it faces an enemy that over the past eight years has grown in confidence, experience and ability. Learning from mistakes and adapting to the West's incomplete successes against it, the new terrorism has evolved to match flexible means with uncompromising goals.
 A defining characteristic of the movement's development has been its success in combining two seemingly incompatible sources of strength: a conservative interpretation of Islam and a comfort with aspects of the modern world that have given birth to a highly mobile, popular, wealthy, technologically savvy transnational enterprise.
Today, these elements are focused on an overriding mission, expressed concisely in 1998 by Osama bin Laden, the Saudi expatriate who has come to personify the movement. "To kill Americans and their allies -- civilians and military -- is an individual duty for every Muslim who can do it in any country in which it is possible to do it," he said.
 Bin Laden, who U.S. officials have said is the prime suspect in last Tuesday's attacks, is widely considered the architect of the new terrorism. With followers around the world, he is believed to draw on what James B. Steinberg, who was deputy national security adviser to President Bill Clinton, called "a network of more or less affiliated organizations, some loosely, some very close."
 The groups that form this network allied with bin Laden's organization, known as al Qaeda ("the base"), are concentrated in the Middle East, but include members in the Balkans, Chechnya, Southeast and Central Asia, Africa and the United States. They share resources and expertise, lending operatives for particular operations. They have become, in a sense, models of globalization.
 One of the most striking innovations of bin Laden's brand of international terrorism has been a vision of a holy war, or jihad, that excludes any possibility of compromise. Its goal is not to negotiate with the West, as was the case for Palestinian extremists in the 1970s and ' 80s, but to destroy it.
 "These guys want to roll back 1,300 years of history," said Daniel Benjamin, director of the office of transnational threats in the Clinton White House. "They believe that their violence is divinely justified, and that great goals require dramatic means, and the dramatic means is mass bloodshed."
 Brian Jenkins, a terrorism expert for the Rand Corp., said that because the new terrorists do not respond to political constituencies in the traditional sense, they are "freed from ordinary constraints of morality. … There is less inhibition to kill in quantity, and a greater willingness to die in the process."
 While developing an absolutist view of the struggle with the West, bin Laden has tailored his message in recent years to reach a broader audience of disgruntled and dispossessed people across the Islamic world. No longer does he concentrate only on his founding aim of expelling U.S. forces from the Arabian peninsula, where he believes they defile holy sites of Islam. Instead, he reaches out to Muslims with grievances from Bosnia to Indonesia.
 Groups identified with al Qaeda now operate in about three dozen countries. Alleged participants in bin Laden-inspired plots -- from the bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 to plans to disrupt millennium celebrations in the United States in the first hours of 2000 -- have included citizens from dozens of countries, including Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Jordan, Pakistan, Malaysia and the United States.
 Even as al Qaeda has grown and come under increasing pressure from the United States and its allies, it has demonstrated resilience stemming from bin Laden's growing stature in the Islamic world, his inherited fortune -- estimated at as much as $300 million -- and a broad base of support.
 Wealthy individual sympathizers and clandestinely supportive governments channel money into what Stephen Phillip Cohen, a South Asia expert and former State Department official, described as an international fund for Islamic terrorists.
 "The money comes from a lot of countries," Cohen said, "often under pretext of helping freedom fighters in Palestine and Kashmir … and some of it goes to bin Laden. He's sort of the Ford Foundation of terrorists," providing support for projects he considers worthy.
 Some operations in recent years linked to bin Laden have appeared to need little outside financing, relying on credit card fraud and other criminal activities.
 Whatever the source, financing of important operations appears to have been plentiful. During the recently completed trials into the East Africa bombings in 1998, evidence emerged that al Qaeda was paying Egyptians between $1,200 and $1,500 a month to run various support operations in Sudan, a large sum by Egyptian standards.
 Several of the terrorist hijackers who U.S. officials say piloted the doomed commercial aircraft in Tuesday's attacks appear to have been well-funded, paying $10,000 each for flight school, living in middle-class neighborhoods, and spending significant amounts on apartment and automobile rentals, restaurants and clothes.
 For some terrorism experts, the high level of funding is even less notable than the accomplished profiles of the suicide bombers in last Tuesday's attacks. While classic suicide bombers have tended to be uneducated and inserted into a plot at the last moment by their handlers, the terrorists in the attacks were in some cases university-educated people who spoke English well and who had prepared for their mission for many months, even years.
 "The assumption [among Western terrorism experts] was that the average suicide bomber was a psychologically damaged 19-year-old with a limited education," said Jenkins, the Rand expert. "What is extraordinary about this episode is that these people were preparing for their mission for months, leading normal lives with wives, taking the garbage out, taking kids to McDonalds, taking flying lessons, living in comparatively pleasant places, all the while knowing that on some date they were going to kill themselves and thousands of people."
 During the early 1990s, bin Laden enjoyed the protection of the Islamic government of Sudan. Since his expulsion from Sudan in 1996, he has relied on support from the Taliban rulers of Afghanistan, where he lives. In return for sanctuary, bin Laden has given the Taliban funds and fighters to consolidate its hold over the country. He has also formally sworn allegiance to the Taliban leader, Mohammed Omar, whom he has described as "commander of the faithful."
 According to Jessica Stern, a Harvard University professor who focused on terrorism issues in the Clinton White House, bin Laden has also received indirect support from Pakistan, whose secret services have used the Taliban and Islamic jihadists as proxies for carrying out a guerrilla struggle against India in Kashmir. There are training camps for jihadists in Pakistan, as well as in Afghanistan, training students from places as far apart as Chechnya, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Kuwait and Bangladesh.
 More controversial are allegations of links between bin Laden and Middle Eastern states such as Iraq and Iran. The 1998 indictment of bin Laden by a federal grand jury in New York alleged that al Qaeda "reached an understanding" with the Baghdad government to work cooperatively on certain projects, such as weapons development, but this was never proved. The most that could be demonstrated was that at least one bin Laden sympathizer in the 1993 plot to blow up the World Trade Center had traveled on Kuwaiti passports that disappeared during the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait two years earlier.
 To some analysts, this suggests that the Iraqi secret services may have provided logistical support to al Qaeda, at least in the early 1990s. Bin Laden and Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein share one obvious goal: the expulsion of U.S. troops from the Middle East, particularly Saudi Arabia. But the trial evidence also revealed that some al Qaeda operatives were deeply mistrustful of Hussein, whom they considered "a bad Muslim."

Notes

THE ATTACK ON AMERICA

Graphic

 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Richard Furno and Dita Smith/The Washington Post; Jane's Intelligence Review, Congressional Research Service staff reports, research by Robert E. Thomason: (Bin Laden's long reach)

Load-Date: September 18, 2001


End of Document