First-person perspective; Algeria continues fight against terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 27, 2007, Friday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P5A
Length: 627 words
Byline: Amel Blidi
Body


ALGERIA is obviously known for its marvelous couscous and for its famous movie "The Battle of Algiers." But generally, the knowledge of Americans about this country stops there.
Americans don't know how beautiful Algeria is. They don't know how important it is in the African and in the Arab union, and they even don't know how much Algerian people suffered by terrorism.
It's only after the Sept. 11 events that the U.S. Department of State paid some attention to this country, which has been torn by Islamists' violence for more than a decade. Just a few days ago, John Clint Williamson, U.S. ambassador at large for war crimes, said during a visit in Algiers that few countries have suffered terrorism like Algeria did. He specified the importance of "an Algerian-American strategy within the framework of the anti-terrorist fight."
The Algerian tragedy began in the 1990s, after the cancellation of the 1992 parliamentary elections that were poised to bring Islamists to power. The anger of the Islamists did not have any limits. They burned schools, massacred whole villages and even killed babies.
More than 200,000 people have been killed and about 5,000 disappeared. However, at that time, international opinion refused to admit the existence of an Islamist danger. Europeans and Americans saw in the Algerian crisis only a military takeover. The attacks on the World Trade Center marked a turning point in the Algerian crisis. The world realized then the real danger of Islamic extremism.
Nowadays, the Algerian security situation is growing better. Most of the terrorists have deposited their weapons. But a general sense of impunity prevails still, while massacres, assassinations and car bombings have been committed by the armed groups. Until now, nothing has been done by the authorities to reveal what happened to the people who "disappeared" after arrest by the security and paramilitary militias between 1993 and 1999. The Algerian government just called on the mothers of the disappeared to turn the page.
In the name of what the Algerian government calls the "charter of peace and reconciliation," the terrorists who were in jail have been liberated. In the meantime, some of the essential freedoms of the civil society (press, union actions, rights for demonstrations...) move back.
But even after the peace process between government and the armed groups, the terror is still perniciously in the country. While people thought that they had finished with the bloody days, there were two bombings in Algiers on April 11. These large explosions in the Algerian capital killed up to 30 people and left scores wounded. The Algerians are now afraid of plunging again into the nightmare of what they describe as a "black decade."
Algerian observers realized that the bombings of Algiers on April 11 recall those of Madrid on March 11 and those of New York on Sept. 11. The fact is that the armed group who is still active, the GSPC (Salafist group for fight and preaching), announced a few months ago their rallying to the al-Qaida organization in Islamic Maghreb. The Algiers bombings sound like a will to seal in blood their new alliance with the group of Osama bin Laden.
Nevertheless, the White Algiers, as its inhabitants used to call their main city, is not stained by blood. Algeria doesn't square with either the traditional image of Africa or with the other Islamic countries or the usual Mediterranean atmosphere. Even in the bloodiest days, the people always kept their thirst for life. Algerian people continue to fight in order to extinguish the fire that changed their life into hell.
Blidi is a journalist from Algiers on a three-week internship at the Gazette through the Freedom House, an organization that promotes freedom around the world.

Load-Date: April 27, 2007


End of Document