Fishing with dynamite
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 27, 2007 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B8
Length: 602 words
Body


Edward Bennett Williams, the late Washington super-lawyer who once owned the National Football League's Washington Redskins, once said of his team's coach, George Allen, "We gave him an unlimited budget, and he exceeded it."
So, too, did Congress, in passing the 2001 Patriot Act, give the FBI almost unlimited authority to collect the telephone, e-mail and financial records of terrorism suspects. And the FBI exceeded it.
Congress finally has found an issue that truly has bipartisan support. Last Tuesday, lawmakers from the distant wings of both political parties agreed that the FBI illegally used so called "national security letters" to collect vast amounts of private information from Americans and foreign residents alike. Often the information was gathered on the slimmest of pretexts.
Over the objection of the White House, the FBI turned itself in. Earlier this month Glenn A. Fine, the bureau's inspector general, reported to Congress that in reviewing records from just four of the FBI's 56 field offices, he had found 48 violations of law or presidential directives governing the issuance of national security letters. The letters are, in effect, administrative subpoenas, compelling the production of evidence; unlike judicial subpoenas, they aren't approved by courts but rather by the Special Agent in Charge in each field office.
Congress authorized national security letters in 1986, but with the passage of the Patriot Act in 2001, agents no longer had to demonstrate that the records they sought belonged to someone under suspicion of involvement with terrorism or espionage. The new standard was "relevance to ongoing investigations." That caused the number of such letters to skyrocket to 56,000 in 2004 from 8,500 in 2000. In all, some 143,000 NSLs were issued between 2003 and 2005. In many instances, Mr. Fine said, the letters were sent without proper oversight or without proving "exigent" (life and death) necessity.
Last week, members of the House Judiciary Committee warned FBI officials to get their house in order. Lawmakers as disparate as Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., and Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y., condemned the violation of privacy rights. "From the attorney general on down, you should be ashamed of yourselves," Mr. Issa said.
FBI Director Robert Mueller has acknowledged the bureau's failures, and said steps are underway to address the problem. "I am to be held accountable," he said, thankfully avoiding the more familiar "mistakes were made" construction.
The Patriot Act, which was passed in a hurry in the heat of post-9/11 recriminations, always was a "fishing with dynamite" approach to terrorism investigations. It was reauthorized last year, but needs still more work, particularly in the area of Congressional oversight. It is overly broad and too easily subject to abuse. Congress should revisit its infamous Section 215, which keeps targets of investigation from knowing their records have been subpoenaed. It should eliminate the "relevance to ongoing investigation" standard and require "suspicion of involvement" before NSLs can be issued. And it should affirm that NSLs can be used in place of judicial subpoenas only in life-and-death emergencies.
Beyond that, the FBI's overworked field agents need moral leadership. Under pressure to make a case in the Boise or Bismarck field office, the agents look to Washington and see the attorney general playing politics with U.S. attorneys, the vice president defending torture and the president cavalierly claiming the right to bypass both the judiciary and legislative branches. No wonder they think the rules have changed.

Notes

 OUR VIEW  |  PATRIOT ACT OPINION 

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document