Five lives lost with little notice; Indifference grows with each mass shooting. Imagine if we treated these attacks as what they are: Terrorism.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 3, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C1
Length: 861 words
Byline: WILL BUNCH
Body


ABSTRACT
Indifference grows with each mass shooting. Imagine if we treated these attacks as what they are: Terrorism.
It was a quiet, normal Wednesday at the Sun-Trust Bank branch in Sebring, Fla., right up until about 12:30 p.m. or so. A teller, Marisol Lopez, was behind the counter dealing with any customers. She and the other women inside the nondescript brick low-rise had one thing in common: They had full and seemingly happy lives to return to once the more mundane business of banking was done.
SunTrust employee Jessica Montague, just 31 and raising not just her three kids but seven stepchildren, was getting ready to celebrate her husband's birthday that night. Her coworker Ana Pinon-Williams - with her own large blended family of seven children - was making plans for a family trip to Mexico. A bank customer, Cynthia Watson, had just been married days earlier.
Those all-too-brief happy lives came to an abrupt end at 12:36 p.m., on Jan. 23, 2019.
That's when a 21-year-old white man strolled into the SunTrust branch with the 9mm handgun and the bullets he'd purchased just a few days earlier.
Despite the weapon, the young man - whose name doesn't deserve to be glorified - wasn't there to rob the bank. He walked in with only one apparent purpose: to kill people. Specifically (or you could say not specifically), he was there to murder random total strangers. Perhaps not coincidentally, those strangers that he ordered on the floor and then shot, execution style, were all women.
If you watched TV news over the last week, it's all but guaranteed that you never heard the names of these female victims or even the despicable shooter, even as the name of another alleged Florida criminal, a huckster named Roger Stone, was uttered thousands of times. But not only that - you also probably saw next to nothing about another mass gun murder of five Americans that took place just three days later, when a different 21-year-old white male killed his girlfriend, her parents, and his own parents.
The way these shootings are all happening - the almost robotic similarity of these young and male and alienated and isolated killers, the recurring links to domestic violence or repressed sexuality and the large number of female victims, and the fact that these killings happen in everyday locales like a bank or a motel bar - scream out one word to me.
Terrorism.
That matters because the cluster of attacks that we have dubbed "terrorism" since 2001 prompted the largest national response of the last half-century, including the swift passage of new laws, the creation of an entire government department, and major changes in the way we travel. One remarkable outcome of all of that is that the most tangible goal - zero tolerance for hijacking aircraft - was achieved. Can you imagine setting a goal of zero tolerance for mass gun shootings, let alone making that happen? Me neither.
Our newfound national indifference to gun violence matters because - despite January's flurry of violence - 2019 has dawned with more hope on the political front to combat gun violence than any year in the last decade, if not longer. Indeed, last year's midterm elections saw more candidates - not just for Congress but for state legislatures in Pennsylvania and elsewhere - running against the National Rifle Association and for saner gun laws than any time since the assassinations of the 1960s. Many of them won.
When I spoke last week with CeaseFirePA's Goodman, she'd just returned from arally for gun-control measures in Harrisburg that had been attended by Gov. Tom Wolf and some of those new lawmakers. Some of the statewide momentum for gun measures comes from a tragedy that did make the news - the October shooting at Pittsburgh's Tree of Life synagogue that claimed 11 lives.
The elections - and the rare passage in 2018 in the state capitol of a measure backed by the gun-safety lobby that could more quickly lead to domestic-violence perpetrators surrendering their firearms - have created hope that even more bills could come to fruition this year.
Heading the 2019 list for activists is an "extreme risk" measure that could make it easier to round up guns from those deemed a threat to commit murder or suicide, as well as a new push for background checks at gun-show sales and tighter gun-storage laws for the home. These are the kind of bills that typically - with the NRA holding sway in Harrisburg for as long as anyone can remember - simply get buried by a committee chair and never even come up for a vote.
And if we've truly lost our capacity for outrage at moments like the slaughter of the innocents in Sebring, and if we don't treat our frequent acts of domestic terrorism with the same level of seriousness that we treated our very rare episodes of terrorism involving Muslims, it will be far too easy for the NRA's handmaidens to keep those bills bottled up again this year.
In 2019, let's remember what it's like to feel outrage and then let's put it to use. That's our responsibility as a society to those lost souls named Marisol Lopez, Jessica Montague, Ana Pinon-Williams, Cynthia Watson, and Debra Cook. bunchw@phillynews.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: February 3, 2019


End of Document