Five years after 9/11: Law enforcement and prevention of terrorism
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
September 11, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff
Body


The following remarks were given by U.S. Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales last week at the Manhattan Institute. As we approach the fifth anniversary of the attacks on Sept. 11, it is natural that Americans look back and take stock of where we are and what we have accomplished together as a nation. The president and others in his administration have spoken often, and will continue to speak, to the American people about the current threat of terrorism. I intend to talk about it today in the context of law enforcement cooperation.
I intend to continue to pursue more resources to help you, and I hope to be able to provide additional training, investigators and prosecutors to address traditional crimes. We must remember, however, that while there are more than 800,000 state and local law enforcement officials in this country, there are only 12,000 federal law enforcement officials. In a post 9/11 world, the number one priority of federal law enforcement agencies must be the prevention of another terrorist attack ... a mission that I know you understand we all share. No one can truly be free to pursue the American dream - even in neighborhoods free of drugs, gangs and violent crime - if they live in fear of a terrorist attack. All of us in government - in law enforcement, in intelligence and in the military - have accomplished a great deal to protect our neighborhoods over the past five years because we didn't wait to act. We began thinking through our response on the very day of the attacks.
This battle against terrorism is fought on a clock that never stops and our partnership is one that must never have gaps. You know this all too well. So I'm glad to have this chance to talk with all of you about what we are doing, together, to prevent terrorist attacks ... what our network is doing to stop and ultimately defeat their network. If there is one thing that all Americans will be thinking and saying when we mark a terrible anniversary on Monday, it will be the simple phrase "never again. " And the goal of "never again" cannot be achieved by the federal government alone, by any state government alone, or by any local police force alone. Our network of prevention is instead the key to protecting the American people. When Vice President [Dick] Cheney spoke to the Manhattan Institute in January, he pointed out that terrorists were at war with our country long before Sept. 11. They had killed American soldiers in Beirut in 1983 and in Mogadishu in 1993. They had bombed our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998. They had attacked the USS Cole in 2000. They had even struck our homeland once before, attempting to destroy the World Trade Center in 1993. But it was on Sept. 11, 2001, that the United States of America said "enough," "no more," and "never again. " Since then we have been on the offensive and we have made significant progress. We've taken away the "home base" for al Qaeda in Afghanistan. We've destroyed training camps, cut off funding channels, and disrupted means of communication. Architects of the Sept. 11 attacks have been captured and interrogated ... and we have learned vital information from them, which has enabled us to prevent further attacks.
We have disrupted plots and put homegrown radicals behind bars. As we all know, in early August British authorities disrupted what would have been a major terrorist attack with massive casualties. In that case, and in plot disruptions on our own soil involving homegrown radicals, we have seen the evolution of the threat since the destruction of al Qaeda's home base. Today, al Qaeda stays organized and active in cyberspace, where their ideology recruits, inspires and radicalizes others. Their virtual outreach - as you well know - is finding disaffected souls in neighborhoods, mosques, prisons and universities all over the world, including our own backyards. No two terror cells or plots are alike. Some are directly linked to al Qaeda, some are inspired by the ideology and seek actual ties with the group after they begin plotting, and some are simply inspired by the hatred without the ability to organize internationally. But there is a clear trend in al Qaeda's efforts to recruit terrorists who already live in the countries targeted for attack. Recently, we've seen would-be terrorists who were - at the very least - inspired by al Qaeda's ideology in London and Madrid, in Los Angeles, Toledo, Miami and Atlanta. Some homegrown terrorists have stronger ties to al Qaeda than others, but they all appear to be part of a well-organized and flexible global network of terror bound by fanaticism, by a terrible common cause of murder and destruction. It takes a network to defeat a network. Our network, bound by the common cause of stopping the terrorists, is a formidable force, one that will ultimately prevail in this war. A successful network must have three primary characteristics. First, outstanding coordination of partners and resources. Second, constant flexibility. And third, perhaps most important, an infinite passion to prevail. We take the terrorist threat so seriously because we recognize that their network possesses those characteristics. Fortunately, our network has them, too.
Coordination within our network is both national and international, aided by advanced technology as well. And since terrorists only have to succeed once and our efforts have to succeed every time, our coordination has to be even better than theirs. Last month's disruption of the [United Kingdom] bomb plot highlights the success of international cooperation. Our prosecutors train one another and share and protect one another's sensitive intelligence. The level of cooperation between the United States and our foreign counterparts is outstanding and is truly the untold story of the war on terror. At home, as you know, we have dramatically improved collaboration among federal, state and local intelligence and law enforcement agencies. The Patriot Act officially brought down the wall between intelligence and law enforcement investigations, but our respect for one another and our shared purpose of protecting American citizens has been just as important in bringing down the wall in practice - in establishing a new mentality of constant sharing and communicating.
Passion I want to conclude my remarks with a discussion of passion, theirs and ours. Because it is this element of our networks that will be a test of wills ... and our will to save lives and freedom simply must prevail over their will to destroy them. Their network is bound by ideological fanaticism ... by hate and a desire to destroy our way of life so that their beliefs can prevail over the world's people. Our network is bound by what may be more simply described as the love of justice and a desire to protect what we know is good. We are motivated by our love of freedom, our love for our children, and by a deeply-held belief that our beloved country is the beacon of hope for the world because of its embrace of liberty. We have an inherent sense that what our Founding Fathers established here is something very much worth protecting.
In our jobs, in our network, never giving in means we steadfastly pursue the goal, every day, of preventing terrorism, of protecting free and innocent souls. Our network will prevail. And I'm proud to serve in it, side-by-side with all of you. Thank you. May God bless you and may he continue to bless this great nation. Alberto R. Gonzales was sworn in as the nation's 80th Attorney General on Feb. 3, 2005.

Load-Date: September 11, 2006


End of Document