Five Stabbed at Hanukkah Celebration in New York Suburb
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 29, 2019 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 1
Length: 559 words
Byline: Sidney Guerrero
Body


A man attacked Hanukkah celebrants who had gathered at the home of a Hasidic rabbi in a New York City suburb on Saturday, stabbing and wounding five people before fleeing the scene.
The Rockland County town is about 35 miles (56 kilometers) north of New York City. The suspect fled but police said he was later taken into custody.
Authorities said two of the five victims are still hospitalized. It did not provide further details.
Yossi Gestetner, of the Orthodox Jewish Public Affairs Council , told The New York Times that one of the victims was a son of the rabbi.
The attack shook a county where nearly one-third of the population is Jewish and where the Orthodox community has grown to thousands of families in recent years, according to Jewish groups.
Around New York City, police have gotten at least six reports this week - and eight since December 13 - of attacks possibly propelled by anti-Jewish bias.
An ambulance worker was filmed running a stretcher down the road near the house.
New York City Bill de Blasio wrote Saturday night that the community must not "overstate the fear people are feeling" after the "horrific" attack.
As Cuomo called for government action in the wake of the stabbing, he drew a connection between the incident and other bigoted attacks against other communities America has seen in recent years.
Vancouver forecast calls for seven straight days of rain
After some isolated light showers throughout the day today , we're seeing a break this evening with some fog in place. Temperatures will rise throughout the night and are expected to be in the upper 40s to around 50 to start the day.
He later held a news briefing on the attack, calling it evidence of a "cancer in the body politic" and saying it was fueled by intolerance.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo described the machete attack during a Hanukkah celebration at a NY rabbi's home as an "act of terrorism". Cuomo said he arrived at that determination because "unless you're living on another planet, you're fully aware of what's going on in this country and the rash of hate crimes that has been going on". He was apprehended without incident after midnight on Sunday, officials said. The defendant entered the residence, seriously injuring five people, one with a skull fracture who is still critical.
"These are terrorists in our country perpetrating terrorism on other Americans, and that's how we should treat it and that's how I want the laws in this state to treat it", he said.
"This is terrorism, it is domestic terrorism", Cuomo told reporters. "We do not accept it, we will not allow it".
During a press conference, New York Gov.Andrew Cuomo declared the attack a "domestic act of terrorism". "We'll use every tool we have to stop these attacks once and for all". But then I want to pass along the state of NY that calls these acts what they are.
"I am deeply disturbed by the situation unfolding in Monsey, New York tonight", State Attorney General Letitia James posted on Twitter on Saturday night.
"At this point we are in an epidemic in New York City, of all places", Oren Segal, director of the ADL's Center on Extremism, said on CNN.
"I was praying for my life", witnessAron Kohn said, comparing the knife used by the attacker to "the size of a broomstick".
Teaneck's Police Chief Glenn O'Reilly says his department has increased police coverage around "houses of worship".

Load-Date: December 30, 2019


End of Document