Five years after it happened, Gander crash to be probed
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 4, 1990, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A
Length: 1843 words
Byline: DAVID BALLINGRUD
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG
Body


It happened five Decembers ago on foreign soil. And with the numbing succession of tragedies since, many Americans have all but forgotten the 256 lives lost in the wreckage just off the end of a runway in Gander, Newfoundland.
 
    The U.S. government did its part to make it easy to forget, discounting the possibility of terrorism even while investigators still were walking the smoldering crash site.
 
    A Canadian investigation, now widely discredited, was unable to determine the cause of the crash.
 
    But the families of the dead have kept asking questions. Finally today, eight days short of five years later, a congressional subcommittee is to begin taking testimony.
   Key questions:
 
    Did the U.S. government ignore the possibility that terrorists murdered the 248 soldiers and eight civilian members of the jet's crew?
 
    If so, why?
 
    "The hearings are important and sensitive," said William J.  Hughes, D-N.J., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on crime. "A lot of questions remain."
 
    The explosion of the space shuttle Challenger a month after the crash in Gander helped push the jet crash off the front pages of the nation's newspapers. The Canadian investigation dragged on and on, and the nation's attention turned elsewhere. But the passage of time has provided new perspective.
 
    In December of 1985, Americans didn't know of the Iran-Contra plan to free hostages held in the Middle East. It was in full swing.
 
    Now we know that just a few days before the Gander crash, then-Lt. Col. Oliver North warned in at least two memos obtained by government investigators that the Iranians had become so angry over a botched shipment of missiles that they were likely to consider reprisals against the United States.
 
    "The hostages would be our minimum losses," North wrote.
 
    Then, early on a cold, drizzly morning Dec. 12, 1985 a heavily laden DC-8 carrying 248 soldiers home from the Middle East lifted off from Gander. The soldiers of the U.S. 101st Airborne were heading home for the holidays. Some carried Christmas gifts for loved ones, just purchased inside the Gander airport a teddy bear, two tiny dresses.
 
    The DC-8 rose only a few hundred feet before banking to the right and falling from the sky.
 
    Witnesses traveling on the nearby Trans-Canada Highway fueled speculation about an explosion in the air when they later testified they saw a yellow glow emanating from the descending aircraft.
 
    Days later, providing some of the most moving images from his presidency, an emotional President Ronald Reagan embraced the families of the soldiers during a memorial service at Fort Campbell, Ky.
 
    Two terrorist organizations claimed responsibility for the crash.  First the Islamic Jihad told the U.S. consul general in Algeria that it was responsible. Later, the U.S. Embassy in Mauritius received a letter in which an extremist organization, the Sons of Zion, blamed the crash on a plot by Egyptian and Libyan mechanics.
 
    The U.S. and Canadian governments discounted both claims.
 
    Investigators for the subcommittee on crime said they found "no evidence of any investigation to follow up these allegations. All the government agencies deferred to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). The NTSB deferred the question of terrorism to the Canadians."
 
    After almost four years of investigation, the Canadian government concluded the cause could not be determined but was probably ice on the wings.
 
    But four of the nine members of the board ridiculed the majority conclusion. They accused the safety board staff of withholding information from them and concluded that an on-board fire brought the plane down. The fire, the minority said, probably was the work of terrorists.
 
    Crime subcommittee investigators say they found no evidence in the accident records that show terrorism caused the crash. "But we don't believe that concerned Americans can find any comfort in this fact," they wrote. "We say this because we found no evidence there was an investigation of possible terrorism."
 
    The investigators had harsh words for the NTSB, which monitored the investigation and had access to all the work performed by Canadian accident investigators. The NTSB accepted the Canadian's inconclusive finding with no hesitation and little comment.
 
    The subcommittee investigators called the NTSB "grossly negligent. . . . A layman, after reviewing the Canadian reports, could determine that there were obvious flaws in the investigation and conclusions . . . it appears that the NTSB was predisposed not to find fault.
 
    "The subcommittee is dismayed and troubled about the failure of the U.S. government to pursue an active and aggressive role in the investigation of the Gander disaster."
 
    American soldiers "lost their lives at a time when terrorism against Americans around the world was widespread," subcommittee investigators wrote. "In fact, from June 1985 through November 1985, there were 11 incidents of terrorism against Americans. . . .  Therefore the subcommittee believes the U.S. government should have been more assertive in knowing all the facts . . ."
 
    According to U.S. State Department records, 1985 is still the second worst year on record for international terrorism.
 
    Families who lost sons or daughters in the crash ask how their government could be so disinterested in a controversial and questionable Canadian investigation. Dr. J.D. and Zona Phillips of St. Petersburg lost James D. Phillips Jr. in the crash.
 
    They believe that U.S. officials might have discouraged a vigorous probe of the crash because an investigation could have exposed the Iran-Contra scheme to obtain the release of hostages in the Middle East.
 
    Besides North's memorandums warning that the Iranians might retaliate against the United States, it was an Arrow Air jet that went down at Gander. Arrow Air had been involved in Iran-Contra arms shipments.
 
    In early 1985, according to a former Arrow Air official and testimony obtained by government investigators, Arrow Air made at least two flights from Lisbon, Portugal, to Central America carrying weapons or explosives to the Contras.
 
    According to testimony, Arrow made the flights as a subcontractor to Southern Air Transport, an airline formerly under the control of the Central Intelligence Agency. Southern Air's owner testified that Arrow also flew weapons into Israel. Arrow denied it.
 
    Might certain U.S. officials have feared that a thorough investigation of the Gander crash would have turned up evidence of the Iran-Contra plan?
 
    "That possibility must be investigated," said U.S. Rep. Robin Tallon, D-S.C., who has pushed for a congressional investigation of the crash.
 
    "If this country isn't concerned enough to find out what caused the deaths of those 248 soldiers," asked Dr. Phillips, "what will our government do about the soldiers in the Middle East today? Are they going to be accountable for what happens to them?
 
  "Or do they consider today's soldiers expendable, too, drawn from some great, inexhaustible stockpile?"
 
    Phillips will address the committee today or Wednesday on behalf of Families For Truth About Gander, the organization he and his wife founded out of frustration two years ago.
 
    The last few years have been hard, said Phillips, an anatomic and clinical pathologist who directs the Edward White Hospital Laboratory. He struggles with "chronic depression," he said, "sometimes mild, sometimes severe. I am exhausted, emotionally and physically."
 
    Phones, fax machines and travel have cost the couple tens of thousands of dollars in the last two years, they said. Zona Phillips, who has done much of the organization's work, said she has nightmares, ulcers and a yearning "to regain control of my life."
 
    For two years, the two have pushed the governments of two nation's for information about the crash. Now that a congressional hearing is finally at hand, they hardly know what to make of it.
 
    "I sometimes think I've become paranoid," said Phillips. "I don't trust anybody in government anymore."
 
    "Life isn't the same," said Zona. "We never go anywhere anymore.  It's completely taken over our lives. It has become an obsession.  Maybe that's not the right word, but it certainly has become a full-time job. It follows us everywhere.
 
    "I want to go back to what I was doing before. I want to watch my kids have their babies. I want to help Doug at the office. I want to work in the yard."
 
    An Iran-Contra grand jury continues to meet, and the same hostages the U.S. was trying to get out five years ago are still being held. If those were reasons for secrecy then, they are still reasons today.
 
    The Phillipses know that they may never have the answers they desire. The trail of evidence is cold, and secrets if there are secrets in the Gander matter are sometimes kept forever.
 
    "I don't want to see the last door closed," Zona said, "but there needs to be an end to things sometime. I sometimes wonder now what life will be like without it. The religious side of me says that if God wants us to find out the truth, we will.
 
    "But then I wonder, if he doesn't want us to know, why has he brought us this far?"
 
 1985 A YEAR OF TERRORISM
 
         Many believe government officials were wrong to rule out terrorism as the cause of the 1985 crash of an Army plane in Gander, Newfoundland, in which 248 soldiers died. That year is the worst on record for the number of killings and kidnappings by terrorists, and the months before the Dec. 12 plane crash were filled with terrorist actions. A sampling of  some of the most notorious:
 
         MARCH 8
 
         Car bomb kills 85 in Shiite Moslem suburb of Beirut.  Lebanon counter-terrorism group suspected.
 
         MAY 25
      Ruler of Kuwait injured in car-bomb assassination attempt. Islamic Jihad claims responsibility.
 
         JUNE 14
 
         TWA Flight 847, flying between Athens and Rome, is hijacked by two Shiite Moslems who order plane flown to Beirut. Terrorists hold hostages for 17 days, killing one, before incident ends.
 
         SEPT. 25
 
         Three Israelis murdered when their yacht is boarded in Cyprus. Two Palestinians and Englishman arrested.
 
         OCT. 3
 
         U.S. diplomat William Buckley, one of six Americans held hostage in Lebanon, has been executed, Islamic Jihad announces.
 
         OCT. 7
 
         Italian luxury liner Achille Lauro seized by Palestinian gunmen off Egypt coast. One American killed. U.S.  warplanes force down in Siciliy a plane carrying fleeing hijackers.
 
         NOV. 6
 
         Leftist guerrillas seize Justice Palace in Bogota, Colombia. About 100 hostages and terrorists die when Army storms palace.
 
         NOV. 23
 
         Egyptian jetliner hijacked over Mediterranean, lands in Malta. Egyptian commandos attack plane, killing 60.  Palestinian group blamed.
 
         DEC. 27
 
         Passengers waiting at Rome and Vienna airports attacked by Palestinian terrorists. Twenty people are killed.
 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); BLACK AND WHITE CHART; Rep. C.W. Bill Young at a 1989 memorial service with Dr. J.D.  Phillips of St. Petersburg, whose son, James Jr., was killed in the crash in Gander, Newfoundland; TWA pilot John Testrake talks to reporters from the cockpit during seige; passengers take cover during the attack at the airport in Rome; list of terrorism attacks in 1985

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document