Five ways Egypt's Constitution stifles opposition; Among the demands of Egyptian protesters in Cairo's Tahrir Square, one of the most central is constitutional reform that will prevent a repeat of the concentration of power achieved under President Hosni Mubarak. Vice President Omar Suleiman announced Feb. 8 that a committee had been formed to discuss constitutional reforms necessary for free and fair elections, but many protesters are wary that the reforms will be only superficial.Below are a few of the constitutional provisions that have served to limit Egypt's opposition and cement the government's power.
The Christian Science Monitor
February 9, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society All Rights Reserved
Length: 602 words
Byline: Ariel Zirulnick Correspondent
Body


Among the demands of Egyptian protesters in Cairo's Tahrir Square, one of the most central is constitutional reform that will prevent a repeat of the concentration of power achieved under President Hosni Mubarak.
Vice President Omar Suleiman announced Feb. 8 that a committee had been formed to discuss constitutional reforms necessary for free and fair elections, but many protesters are wary that the reforms will be only superficial.
Below are a few of the constitutional provisions that have served to limit Egypt's opposition and cement the government's power.
#5 Emergency law
Perhaps most fundamental to Mr. Mubarak's grasp on power is the fact that Egypt has been under a state of emergency continuously since 1981, when Anwar Sadat was assassinated and Mubarak replaced him as president. The emergency laws allow the regime to break up public demonstrations, conduct searches without approval, detain suspects indefinitely, arrest them without trial, and try civilians in a military court.
The Egyptian government says that the emergency law is crucial in its fight against terrorism and drug-trafficking, but it has often been used against journalists, activists, and political opponents. In Feb. 2010, Mubarak pledged to replace it with a more narrow anti-terrorism law. But several months later he instead eased the emergency law and said it applies only in the case of terrorism and drug cases - a move that did little to quiet criticism.
#4 Restrictions on political parties
Many of the restrictions on political parties in Egypt are laid out in legislation, not the Constitution. But the grounds for banning the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's largest and best organized opposition group, are found in a constitutional ban on parties based on religion. There is also potential for some of the legislative obstacles facing political parties to be eliminated through constitutional changes.
#3 Presidential candidacy
The right to run for president is severely limited. A candidate must belong to a legal party that won at least 3 percent of parliamentary seats in the previous election - a hurdle that few political parties other than Mubarak's National Democratic Party (NDP) can clear. The Muslim Brotherhood - Egypt's most organized opposition group - is banned and therefore its candidates have to run in elections as independents, making them ineligible for the presidency.
There are some ways around that requirement. According to Reuters, if an independent candidate can get endorsement from 250 elected officials, he or she can stand in a presidential election. But that's a hard standard to meet in Egypt.
#2 Elections
The opposition is calling for the reinstatement of judicial supervision of elections, a constitutional provision that was eliminated in 2007. Without such monitoring, elections such as the Nov. 2010 parliamentary vote have been badly marred by claims of fraud.
The Constitution only allows the Parliament, which has an overwhelming NDP majority, to rule on the eligibility of its members for office. The NDP, which won 97 percent of the vote in November's election, has used this power to invalidate election results in the past.
#1 Presidential term limits
Another demand of the protesters is a constitutional limit on how many terms a president can serve. Presently, there is no limit on the number of six-year terms a president can serve. (Mubarak is now finishing up his fifth term). Protesters want a two-term limit, similar to many other democratic countries.
Editor's note: Monitor staff photographer Ann Hermes shot video of a large protest in Cairo's Tahrir Square on Tuesday, Feb. 8.
       

Load-Date: February 10, 2011


End of Document