Five stabbed during Hanukkah celebration Suspect arrested in New York City
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 30, 2019 Monday
Main Edition


Copyright 2019 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 006
Length: 862 words
Byline: Ryan Tarinelli, Michael R. Sisak and Michael Balsamo Associated Press
Body


MONSEY, N.Y. - A knife-wielding man stormed into a rabbi's home and stabbed five people as they celebrated Hanukkah in an Orthodox Jewish community north of New York City, an ambush the governor said Sunday was an act of domestic terrorism fueled by intolerance and a "cancer" of growing hatred in America.
 Police tracked a fleeing suspect to Manhattan and made an arrest within two hours of the attack Saturday night in Monsey. Grafton E. Thomas had blood all over his clothing, smelled of bleach but said "almost nothing" when officers stopped him, officials said.
 An automated license plate reader alerted officers that the suspect's car had crossed over the George Washington Bridge into New York City about an hour after the attack. Thomas was stopped and taken into custody about 20-30 minutes later, NYPD Commissioner Dermot Shea said.
 President Donald Trump condemned the "horrific" attack, saying in a tweet Sunday, "We must all come together to fight, confront, and eradicate the evil scourge of anti-Semitism."
 Thomas, 37, was arraigned Sunday and pleaded not guilty to five counts of attempted murder and one count of burglary. Bail was set at $5 million and he remains jailed.
 Thomas' criminal history includes an arrest for assaulting a police horse, according to an official briefed on the investigation who was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly and spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity. A lawyer representing Thomas at the arraignment said he had no convictions.
 The family's pastor, the Rev. Wendy Paige, said Thomas has been suffering from mental illness and that his family believes that condition was the cause of the alleged stabbings - not hatred toward Jewish people. She said his family is sorry for the pain he has caused.
 The stabbings on the seventh night of Hanukkah left one person critically wounded, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said. The rabbi's son was also injured, he said. Authorities have not provided a motive and Shea said investigators do not believe, at this point, that any other people were involved.
 The attack was the latest in a string of violence targeting Jews in the region, including a Dec. 10 massacre at a kosher grocery store in New Jersey. Last month in Monsey, a man was stabbed while walking to a synagogue.
 Cuomo said Saturday's savagery was the 13th anti-Semitic attack in New York since Dec. 8 and endemic of "an American cancer on the body politic."
 "This is violence spurred by hate, it is mass violence and I consider this an act of domestic terrorism," Cuomo said. "Let's call it what it is."
 Ramapo police Chief Brad Weidel said it was unclear why the rabbi's house was targeted or if a specific ideology motivated the suspect. According to the official briefed on the investigation, authorities do not believe Thomas is connected to recent anti-Semitic incidents in New York City.
 The stabbings happened around 10 p.m. Saturday at the home of Rabbi Chaim Rottenberg, located next door to his Congregation Netzach Yisroel synagogue. The large house on Forshay Road remained cordoned off with yellow crime-scene tape early Sunday. By evening, the tape was gone and a fully lit menorah shone from a window.
 "The guy came in wielding a big knife, sword, machete - I don't know what it was," said Josef Gluck, who hit the assailant with a coffee table during the attack.
 "He took it out of his holder, started swinging," Gluck said.
 The dining room, he said, emptied in split seconds. While inside the home, the assailant didn't say a word as he carried out the attack, he said.
 Levy Kraus, 15, said he was near the rabbi's home when he saw a tall man enter with an object.
 "He had something in his hand. It looked like an umbrella. It was covered," Kraus said.
 Later, he said he saw the man rushing out of the house and scream at someone, "I'll get you."
 Weidel said a witness saw the suspect fleeing in a car and alerted police to the license plate number. Police entered that information into a database and used plate reader technology to track the vehicle to Manhattan, where Thomas was arrested.
 "It was critical to the case," Weidel said.
 Jewish communities in the New York City metropolitan area have been left shaken following the deadly Dec. 10 shooting rampage at a Jersey City kosher market.
 Six people - three people who had been inside the store, a police officer and the two killers - died in the gunbattle and standoff that New Jersey Attorney General Gurbir Grewal has said was "fueled" by hatred of Jews and law enforcement.
 And this past week in New York City itself, police have received at least six reports - eight since Dec. 13 - of attacks possibly motivated by anti-Jewish bias. Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday that police presence would increase in Brooklyn neighborhoods home to large Jewish populations.
 Additional New York City police officers were being be sent to areas of Brooklyn with high Jewish populations, along with lighting towers and additional security cameras, de Blasio said.
 The mayor also announced the formation of multiethnic, interfaith safety coalitions that would meet to strategize about disrupting potential hate crimes before they happen.

Load-Date: December 30, 2019


End of Document