Florence woman pleads guilty in terrorism plot
Arizona Capitol Times
June 2, 2017 Friday


Copyright 2017 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 440 words
Byline: Katie Campbell
Body


A Florence woman charged with helping her incarcerated husband orchestrate a terrorist plot has pleaded guilty.
The Arizona Attorney General‘s Office announced Friday that Michelle Bastian entered the plea on charges of terrorism and conspiracy to commit misconduct involving weapons after she sent her husband instructions on how to make a homemade explosive device and terrorism propaganda. The materials were disguised as legal mail, and, according to court documents, searches of Bastian‘s Florence home and Chandler workplace turned up letters from her husband specifically requesting the items.
Thomas Bastian was already serving a life sentence for a 2007 murder at the Arizona State Prison Complex-Lewis in Buckeye when an unnamed source told the Arizona Department of Corrections that he became a radicalized member of the Islamic faith, according to a probable cause report.
The source later revealed to the FBI that Thomas Bastian was planning to create an explosive device intended to kill the warden or be planted in a vending machine within the prison‘s visitor area. A search of his cell confirmed what the source said, according to the report.
Officials found copies of Al-Qaeda‘s Inspire and ISIS‘ Dabiq, publications that contained detailed instructions on how to commit acts of terrorism and to praise those that have successfully carried out attacks. Several pages from an issue of Inspire went so far as to provide instructions on how to construct a bomb from materials found in your mother‘s kitchen, according to court documents.
Thomas Bastian has pleaded not guilty to the four charges against him, including terrorism, conspiracy to commit terrorism, conspiracy to commit misconduct involving weapons and conspiracy to promote prison contraband.
The unnamed source also implicated Michelle Bastian in her husband‘s alleged scheme.
She now faces up to  years in prison and a lifetime on probation. She will be sentenced on July 14 in Maricopa County Superior Court.
Bastian is the second defendant convicted on state terrorism charges by the Arizona Attorney General‘s Office, according to the office‘s statement.
The AG‘s investigation was joined by the Arizona Department of Corrections, as well as the FBI‘s Phoenix Field Office. Despite the FBI‘s involvement, the case has proceeded through the state system.
Following Michelle Bastian‘s arrest in October, AGO spokeswoman Mia Garcia explained that the state has strict statutes regarding terrorism-related charges, so cases are able to move more quickly in state court as opposed to proceedings at the federal level.
Copyright © 2018 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: April 4, 2018


End of Document