Florida agency supports extending anti-terrorism powers
University Wire
October 2, 2001


Copyright 2001 Independent Florida Alligator via U-Wire
Length: 512 words
Byline: By Joe Black, Independent Florida Alligator
Dateline: Tallahassee, Fla.
Body


State lawmakers in Florida could give top law enforcement officials expanded powers as early as the end of this month, including the ability to hold suspected terrorists longer and required background checks for people who work in transportation, officials said Monday.
Other possible changes could include exemptions in public record laws concerning arrest booking information, creating a statewide database to track suspected terrorists and further re-examining the process of receiving licenses.
These were among the 26 recommendations made public by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement concerning how it would improve the state's ability to deal with terrorism in light of the Sept. 11 attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center.
U. Florida
Gov. Jeb Bush said "there's no re-invention of any wheels here," but rather a refocus of emergency efforts.
"This is a recognition that we need to intensify our efforts to prevent attacks, focus on how we respond to attacks and how we coordinate our efforts," said Bush, who ordered the review. The plans, which largely would need legislative action to happen, deal mainly with additional training for emergency personnel. They also take into account several of the findings that came from the continuing investigations, such as the ease of obtaining Florida driver and pilot licenses, following the attacks.
FBI agents have linked several of those flying the planes involved in the attacks to flight schools in South Florida. Several other names of people involved with the attacks also have shown ties to the state. The full Legislature could meet as early as Oct. 22 for a primarily budget-driven special session that Bush calls "inevitable." No definitive date or charge has been set. Special sessions can be called jointly by the House speaker and the Senate president or by Bush.
Until then, newly established committees set up in both the House and Senate will be meeting to review security measures.
The Senate's committee will meet for the first time on Oct. 10 in Tallahassee and the House's committee will meet in Orlando on Friday. Both meetings will be open to the public despite earlier comments by House Speaker Tom Feeney, who said they may be closed due to the nature of the discussion.
"We're going to be looking at all aspects of public security and our goal is to make sure every Floridian out there has a sense of security knowing that systems are in place to prevent a similar situation," said Sen. Ginny Brown-Waite, R-Brooksville, chairwoman of the Senate committee.
Response plans have been ongoing since a terrorism summit was held in Orlando in 1999, the governor's office said. But these talks were sped up in the wake of an executive order declaring a state of emergency in Florida following the recent attacks.
The order loosened some state rules and gave the FDLE broader power to detain people and seize property. It also allows the National Guard to be called, as Bush has done. No time limit has been set on the order.
(C) 2001 Independent Florida Alligator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document