Flow of terror funds being choked, U.S. says; Intelligence analysts track smuggled cash
USA TODAY
June 19, 2006 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 673 words
Byline: John Diamond
Body


WASHINGTON -- The relatively low cost of mounting terrorist attacks makes even cash-strapped militant organizations dangerous, but a five-year effort to staunch terrorist money is having an effect, U.S. officials and terrorism experts say.
In October, U.S. intelligence obtained a letter from Ayman al-Zawahri, al-Qaeda's second-in-command, to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the group's leader in Iraq, asking for more money.
"Many of the lines (of support) have been cut off," Zawahri wrote in an English-language translation released by the U.S. government. He requested $100,000.
A U.S. air raid killed Zarqawi on June 7 at a hide-out in Iraq.
The reduced flow of terrorism money is the result of a "relentless grinding away at other essential components of the terrorist networks -- the couriers, the facilitators, the fundraisers, the safe- house keepers, the technicians," John McLaughlin, deputy CIA director from 2000 to 2004, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last week.
There's new evidence that "al-Qaeda's core leadership no longer has effective global command and control of its network," said Ambassador Henry Crumpton, the State Department's counterterrorism chief.
Post-9/11 financial restrictions haven't stopped terrorism. To cope, terrorist groups increasingly use cash couriers to haul money across borders.
The trend began shortly after the 9/11 attacks. Al-Qaeda financed bombings in Indonesia in 2002 and 2003 by smuggling $30,000 in cash for each attack to allied terrorists in Asia, said Stuart Levey, the Treasury Department's undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence. It is a trend that has accelerated lately, Levey said.
Terrorist financing, including cash smuggling, is being tracked by a team of 53 intelligence analysts at Treasury, up from none two years ago, according to Janice Gardner, head of Treasury's Office of Intelligence Analysis.
Treasury has been pressing foreign governments to establish similar units. From 1995 to 2005, the number of these "financial intelligence units" has increased to 101 from 14, according to the Government Accountability Office.
Treasury analysts comb through financial and banking records to spot terrorist financing. They can designate individuals, groups or financial institutions as money-laundering or terrorist-financing entities. That move can trigger sanctions aimed at blocking the flow of illicit money.
A suicide bomber is difficult to deter, Levey said. A wealthy individual or an Islamic charity, however, might be deterred by the threat of sanctions, loss of access to financial markets or criminal charges, he said.
Treasury cuts off sources of money
The U.S. Treasury Department has shut off sources of terrorist funding by designating groups as terrorist supporters or blocking the flow of money through various banks. The targets include:
*KindHearts, Feb. 19, 2006: Treasury froze the assets of KindHearts, based in Toledo, Ohio, on suspicion the group raised money for Hamas, a designated terrorist organization. The action froze KindHearts' assets in the USA and prohibited anyone from engaging in financial transactions with the group.
*Elehssan Society, May 4, 2005: Treasury designated the Gaza City-based fundraising group a front for Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Assets in the U.S. financial system were blocked, as were transactions between the group and any U.S. party.
*Adel Abdul Jalil Batterjee, Dec.21, 2004: Treasury named Batterjee a top financial supporter of al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden and sought a worldwide asset freeze through the United Nations. Two days later, the U.N. Security Council added Batterjee's name to the asset-freeze list.
*Commercial Bank of Syria, May11, 2004: Treasury designated the Damascus-based bank a "primary money-laundering concern." Treasury cited intelligence indicating the bank served as a money-laundering clearinghouse for terrorist groups and their sympathizers. Saddam Hussein's regime used the bank to divert more than $1billion from Iraq's oil-for-food program.
Source: U.S. Treasury Department

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Reuters

Load-Date: June 19, 2006


End of Document