Fly the flag in pride, defiance on 9/11; Patriotism alone will not defeat terrorism, but it will go a long way toward strengthening our resolve to defeat terrorism.
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
September 9, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 310 words
Byline: Editorials
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Nearly five years ago, after the violent terrorist attacks of 9/11, Americans responded in varied ways.
Some courageously helped put out the fires, search for survivors and bury the dead in New York City and Washington and western Pennsylvania.
Some examined new ways to guard their own towns and homes from another attack.
Many prayed.
And many proudly displayed the American flag.
As we prepare to memorialize that horrible day in 2001, one thing everyone can do is display the flag again.
Millions of flags waved boldly five years ago, but many faded and were not replaced. Now is a good time to renew them.
No, make that, now is the best time to renew them.
What would flying the flag mean on the five-year anniversary of 9/11?
It would mean we tenderly remember the unsuspecting dead, and recognize their families and friends who go on living with the pain of sudden loss.
It would mean we honor U.S. soldiers currently fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as all the security personnel guarding crucial facilities at home.
It would indicate that we understand that life never returned to "normal'' after 9/11 and would remind us to watch our backs because the enemy remains.
It would be a symbolic act of defiance against the forces that seek to undermine our society.
Perhaps most important, it would signal unity in a time of continued peril.
Patriotism alone will not defeat terrorism, but it will strengthen our resolve to defeat terrorism.
If you don't have a flag, find one this weekend. If you don't have a flag holder, plant your flag in the crotch of a tree or on the roof of your house. The important thing is to put it out there where everyone can see it.
That goes for more than homes. Schools, hospitals, convenience stores, gasoline stations - all buildings should fly flags on Monday.
So that all are reminded that we're in this together for the duration.

Load-Date: September 10, 2006


End of Document