FOCUS ON TERRORISM: THE LEGISLATION;
Dispute on Marking Explosives Stalls Effort to Reach Accord
The New York Times
July 31, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 6;  Column 5;  National Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 459 words
Byline: By JERRY GRAY 

By JERRY GRAY 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 30
Body


An effort by the White House and Congress to draw up new counterterrorism legislation hit a snag today over the Administration's desire to add chemical markers to explosives to make them easier to trace.
"These are very controversial provisions that the White House wants," Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Utah Republican who heads the Senate Judiciary Committee, said as he left a meeting with Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff. "Some they're not going to get."
Spurred by the July 17 crash of Trans World Airlines Flight 800 and the bombing at an Olympics site in Atlanta early Saturday, President Clinton met with Congressional leaders at the White House on Monday to discuss the rapid passage of a tougher counterterrorism bill.
Mr. Clinton proposed that the Federal Bureau of Investigation be allowed to gather information on suspected terrorists from hotel and telephone records and from storage sites, that suspected terrorists be prosecuted under Federal racketeering laws and that law-enforcement officials be given expanded wiretapping authority.
Despite the differences that arose today between Mr. Clinton and some other Republicans, both sides were eager to press the positive side of their effort.
"There were far more areas of agreement than disagreement yesterday in our private meeting," Mr. Clinton said today. "What we really got to do now is move, as quickly as we can, on what we can agree on."
Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republican leaders in the House appeared to line up behind that idea, too. Mr. Gingrich, whose Georgia district includes areas north of Atlanta, said that the House might act as early as this week on some "immediate short-term steps" and that a "second wave" of legislation could follow in September before political leaders decided on a long-term approach to dealing with terrorism.
The issue of adding chemical tracing elements, known as taggants, to smokeless gunpowder and black powder is hardly new. The Clinton Administration first suggested studying the idea as part of a counterterrorism measure that the President proposed just after the World Trade Center bombing in 1993.
In June of last year, seven weeks after the Oklahoma City bombing, Congress passed the Comprehensive Terrorism Prevention Act of 1995. But under pressure from the National Rifle Association and other gun lobbyists, the lawmakers refused to provide the money to pay for a study on taggants, effectively killing the proposal on the ground that it interfered with the constitutional right to bear arms.
Mr. Clinton revived the idea on Monday and pressed the issued further today. "I presume that they may have a floor vote on the taggants issue," he said. "And people can decide, one way or the other, where they stand."      

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document