Following Bombing in Eilat, No Military Operation Seen in Gaza
The Forward
February 2, 2007


Copyright 2007 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A6
Length: 781 words
Byline: 
Additional reporting by Forward stafffirst.
Body


The suicide bombing in Eilat last  Monday, January 29, will not  lead to a major military operation
in Gaza, security sources  say. The suicide bomber came  from Gaza via Sinai, but current  events in Gaza are so complex  that Israel will think twice before  putting itself into the mix.  Put differently, the internecine
Palestinian conflict is now  Gaza's best bulwark against any  Israeli operation. When Fatah  and Hamas are so good at killing  each other, Israeli commanders  ask, why should Israel intervene  and spur them to close ranks  against the common enemy? [Most Israeli and Western policymakers
believe the Hamas- Fatah fighting, which has  claimed at least 36 lives in the  past month, is largely an ideological
battle over Palestinian  national goals. Fatah leaders  demand that Hamas, which won  power in elections a year ago,  formally recognize Israel and  swear off terror in order to end  international isolation. Hamas  leaders refuse; they also charge  that Fatah wants to win back  with bullets the power that it  lost at the ballot box.]
The organization responsible for  the Eilat attack, the tiny, Iranian- backed Islamic Jihad, was trying  to put the struggle against Israel  back at the top of the Palestinian  agenda, but with little success.  Six Palestinians were killed in  Gaza on Monday, double the  number of Israelis killed in the  suicide bombing that day.
The attack in Eilat, a Red Sea  resort town that had been spared  the horrors of the second intifada  until now, has raised Israeli fears  of renewed Palestinian terrorism.  Nine months had passed without
any suicide bombings within  the Green Line. In all of 2006,  there were only two bombings, in  which 11 Israelis were killed.
But this is not to say that  Palestinian terrorism has disappeared.
There are groups, like  Islamic Jihad and the rogue  Fatah cells in Nablus, that have  never stopped attempting to  send suicide bombers. They have  been stopped by a combination  of good intelligence, improved  coordination between the army  and Shin Bet, and the separation
fence.
In addition, beginning with the  tahadia, the informal cease-fire  adopted by Hamas in January  2005, the main Islamist party has  held off  albeit temporarily, it  appears  from sending suicide  bombers into Israel, removing  the most dangerous source of  terrorism from the arena.
Monday's attack demonstrated  something else: the unbearable  ease of crossing the Egyptian  border. Drug and arms smugglers  and traffickers in women cross  it without hindrance. Why not  suicide bombers?
Officers of Israel's Southern  Command spoke after the Eilat  bombing about plans to build  a fence and deploy observation
devices along the border.  But they know that this latest  bombing will result at most in  improved protection for Eilat.  In Israel, financial investment  is directly proportional to the  number of fatalities. In response  to three fatalities, the state will  not spend $700 million to build a  fence on the Egyptian border.
In addition to the porous  boundary with Egypt, Israel  suffers from a weakening of its  intelligence in Gaza. Relatives  of the suicide bomber, who  was from the Gaza village of  Beit Lahia, said he had spoken  openly last week of his plan for  a suicide bombing. This could  not have happened in Nablus,  where Israel still maintains military
control. No suicide bomber  in the West Bank would have  risked blabbing, knowing that  the Shin Bet would be on to him  immediately.
The terrorists in Gaza, by contrast,  feel relatively safe. So do  the kidnappers of Corporal Gilad  Shalit, who have been evading  Israeli intelligence for more than  six months, since they snatched  him from a border post last June.  Without a military presence,  Gaza is slipping from the scrutiny  of Israeli intelligence.
Monday's bombing also shows  how eager Islamic Jihad is to  take advantage of the Palestinian  political vacuum. Quite a few  Palestinians see Islamic Jihad's  terrorism as a saner option than  the mutual killing between Fatah  and Hamas.
At present, though, there are no  signs that the internecine fighting  is abating. Indeed, it has  recently overflowed from the  Jebalya refugee camp to central  neighborhoods in Gaza City.  The mediation efforts of Egypt  and Saudi Arabia seem pathetic.  While leaders of both Fatah and  Hamas responded to Egypt's call  for a cease-fire and a joint summit  in Mecca, the militants continued  fighting in the streets.
Any agreement on a Palestinian  unity regime now looks remote,  and with it, the prospect of a  renewed Israeli-Palestinian  diplomatic process. Of more  immediate concern to Israelis,  so does any deal for the return  of Shalit.

Load-Date: February 1, 2007


End of Document