Follow India's embrace of peace
USA TODAY
December 12, 2008 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 572 words
Body


Our hearts go out to everyone affected by the terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India, that left nearly 200 people dead. At the same time, my hat goes off to the citizens of India for showing the rest of the world how  people should react to a national disaster, particularly to terrorism ("Indians 'refuse to be provoked' " News, Monday).
According to USA TODAY's article, 80.5% of India's population is Hindu,  13.4% Muslim and 6.1% Christian, Sikh or other.
The Muslim population in India is the world's third largest.  Contrary to India's past, these groups have united to condemn the terrorist attack. A peace march last week included tens of thousands of people, including many Muslims.  One Muslim marcher quoted in the article said, "We are Indians first and then Hindus or Muslims."
Muslims  are taking a public stance against terrorists, at least in India. I can only hope that Muslims  throughout the world react similarly and take an overt stand for world peace.  I thank the people of India for showing the rest of the world that all can stand together to fight the insane terrorism that is engulfing our world.
John Popovich
Knoxville, Tenn.
No excuse for terrorism
While seeming to condemn the terror attacks in India,  USA TODAY reader Rachelle Marshall suggested that  we appease those responsible for the  terrorism by an "examination of the policies and conditions that give rise to it" and that "we recognize and deal with the injustices that lead to such acts" ("Examine policies that lead to terrorist attacks," Letters, Dec. 2).
Suggesting "discrimination and mistreatment by the Hindu majority" and blaming "India's refusal to relinquish the predominantly Muslim Kashmir" don't seem to hold water, given that India has had three Muslim presidents and that the current vice president is a Muslim.
Going on to blame the United States for "the shame of Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison and the detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba" is absurd.
Until this is viewed as exactly what it is, terrorism for the sake of terrorism,   this issue will never be effectively dealt with.
Mike Kovach
St. Louis
Funding would  fix doctor fatigue
Although I agree that prolonged resident work hours pose risks to patient safety, I think USA TODAY's characterization of the practice as one bred out of a "culture of expectation" that "young physicians need to toil around the clock to 'toughen up' " is a gross misrepresentation ("Sleep-deprived residents still pose risks for patients," Our view, Medical care debate, Tuesday).
As an attending physician in a teaching hospital, and a recent medical resident, I have experienced the foggy mind that accompanies working beyond 24 hours. It isn't a "long-standing but wrongheaded tradition" that keeps this practice going -- it's lack of funding.
Teaching institutions provide exceptional care to a number of underserved patients and   often rely heavily on federal funding. Medicare pays for much of the costs of graduate medical education. But in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,  Congress imposed a limit on the number of residency positions that Medicare would finance.
As technology evolves and we are able to keep patients alive longer, medical institutions are left with a finite number of residents  to cover more patients. Recommendations to limit resident hours and increase days off would improve patient safety. In this recession, however, who will pay for it?
Jennifer C. Kerns, M.D.
Arlington, Va. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Arko Datta, Reuters

Load-Date: December 12, 2008


End of Document