FOOT-AND-MOUTH IS A WAKE-UP CALL ON THREAT OF BIO-TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 12, 2001, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: HEALTH & SCIENCE,; ANIMAL HEALTH
Length: 583 words
Byline: Rich Harden; Dr. Rich Harden is a Mechanicsville veterinarian. Contact him at; Rharden@Compuserve.com and look for his pet-care column on the second; Thursday of each month.  
Body


Since Feb. 20, veterinarians in England have diagnosed foot-and-mouth disease on some 1,000 farms. In an attempt to contain the disease, British authorities are destroying every animal of the susceptible breeds within a two-mile radius of each infected farm. More than a million farm animals have been exterminated.
The outbreak is far from ending, but the rate of new cases appears to be slowing. Hopefully, the end is near and many of England's 63 million farm animals will be spared.
In the United States, an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease could produce livestock and wildlife losses far greater than England's. To prevent the introduction of the virus, agents from the Department of Agriculture, as well as customs and immigration officials, are cooperating with agents of Canada and Mexico to guard our borders. With luck, we might succeed.
But a greater threat is the possibility of a terrorist smuggling some disease agent into the United States. Bio-terrorism by foot-and-mouth disease could devastate the American livestock industry. But the use of other germs, such as anthrax, plague, tularemia, cholera or Ebola, could cause the deaths of millions of Americans. The Oklahoma City disaster would be insignificant by comparison.
Terrorism is growing worldwide from rogue nations, extremist groups and sociopathic individuals. As a result, many public health officials in the United States fear that biological agents could become weapons of choice for terrorists because of the relatively low cost of production of an infectious agent, the ease of introducing an effective dose into a susceptible population, the potential for massive destruction of human and animal lives, the subsequent enormous economic losses and the prolonged duration of the resulting epidemic.
Public health officials recognize from other parts of the world some 40 animal diseases and 26 parasites that are nonexistent in the United States. Of the diseases, 18 are zoonotic, meaning they can spread from animals to humans. At least four are considered by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as potential biological weapons that pose significant risks to national security.
The nationwide commerce of pets, horses, livestock, poultry and animal products would almost ensure the wide dissemination of infectious agents once inside our borders. At that point, our only defense is the network of public health officials in communication with private veterinarians and physicians who provide direct care to the affected animals and humans. We rely on their expertise to detect zoonotic diseases and report back to the proper public health agency.
Initially, bio-terrorism could resemble a natural disease outbreak, such as the West Nile virus that erupted in New York nearly two years ago. The disease remained a mystery for a month after the first horses and people became sick, until the USDA finally sleuthed out the cause.
A month is a good response time to diagnose such an exotic disease. Recognition of a deliberate infection by a virulent bio-terrorist weapon should take no longer, but may or may not be detected any sooner. About 60 percent of the states, including Virginia, are in various stages of planning for potential bio-terrorism.
 
Although tragic, the recent foot-and-mouth outbreak has heightened our awareness to the threat of foreign diseases. Awareness to disease threats and increased training of our medical professionals, public and private, remain our best defense against bio-terrorism.

Load-Date: April 14, 2001


End of Document