FOR FAMILIES OF ABDUCTED ITALIANS, A LAST HOPE
The New York Times
September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 543 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: MILAN, Italy, Sept. 12
Body


Anguished relatives of kidnapping victims are turning to newspaper advertisements as a last resort to obtain their release - or at least get their bodies back.
 
The father of 30-year-old Augusto Rancilio, kidnapped two years ago, appealed in an advertisement for the kidnappers to return ''at least the bon es of my son so we can bury him and cry for him.''
The appeals are seldom answered, and for many families the advertisements mark an end of hope. They also serve as a first step toward court action to declare the victim ''presumed dead'' so the family can gain access to money and property.
Relatives of kidnapping victims in Italy resort to newspaper advertisements in effort to locate abducted family members
Since 1972 at least 380 people have been abducted by ransomseeking kidnappers in Italy. Many are released after payment of ransom, but 17 bodies have been recovered, at least 21 other victims are presumed dead and 7 persons are still being held, according to police sources.
 
Not Linked to Political Terrorism
The wave of kidnappings for ransom is not connected to the political terrorism in Italy or cases such as the kidnapping and murder of former Prime Minister Aldo Moro by the Red Brigades in 1978. Most kidnapping victims are set free after a few weeks or months, as soon as the bandits get the money.
The family of Mario Ceschina, a 68-year-old industrialist abducted in Milan in October 1976, recently ran a newspaper advertisement begging for ''any information'' about his fate.
Shortly after Mr. Ceschina was seized his family paid a ransom reported to total several hundred thousand dollars. But the kidnappers did not release him and severed contact with the family.
''Why can't they say at least he's dead, and we should stop hoping for his return,'' said a member of the Ceschina family. ''This way, we can sort things out and resume a normal life.''
 
Assets Often Frozen
Italian authorities, in an effort to combat kidnappings by preventing ransom payments, often freeze the assets of an abducted person. Italian law also forbids access by relatives to the assets of any missing person until he is declared ''presumed dead.'' A petition for such a declaration can be filed two years after a person disappears.
''You resort to all possible channels to find out the fate of your loved one, and ads sometimes work,'' Lorenzina Crosetto, wife of a kidnapped Turin industrialist, said in a recent interview. She said she had used newspaper advertisements to try to communicate with the kidnappers.
Lorenzo Crosetto, one of the 23 persons abducted in Italy this year, was kidnapped two months ago. His family lost contact with bandits after delivering a ransom of $520,000.
 
A Cryptic Newspaper Message
 
''We are just hoping that they will resume answering our newspaper messages,'' she said.  The family of a kidnapped businesswoman pri nted an advertisement inCorriere della Sera, Italy's largest daily, s aying, ''We will deliverthe Fiat car at the agreed price.'' The messa ge was interpreted by the police as meaning the family had gathered ransom money and was ready to hand it over.
A Milan police official said that when a kidnapping victim is not heard from for more than a year or two, ''you really can't expect to have him back alive.''


End of Document