For Post-9/11 Material Witness, It Is a Terror of a Different Kind
The New York Times
August 19, 2004 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DETAINEES
Length: 2520 words
Byline: By ADAM LIPTAK
Dateline: LAS VEGAS 
Body


Abdullah al Kidd was on his way to Saudi Arabia to work on his doctorate in Islamic studies in March 2003 when he was arrested as a material witness in a terrorism investigation. An F.B.I. agent marched him across Dulles Airport in Washington in handcuffs.
 ''It was the most horrible, disgraceful, degrading moment in my life,'' said Mr. Kidd, an American citizen who was known as Lavoni T. Kidd when he led his college football team, the Vandals of the University of Idaho, in rushing in 1995.
 The two weeks that followed his arrest, he said, were a terrifying and humiliating ordeal. 
 ''I was made to sit in a small cell for hours and hours and hours buck naked,'' he said. ''I was treated worse than murderers.'' 
 After that, a federal judge ordered him to move in with his in-laws in Las Vegas, where his wife was planning to stay until she joined him in Saudi Arabia. 
 Mr. Kidd, who described himself as ''anti-bin Laden, anti-Taliban, anti-suicide bombing, anti-terrorism,'' was never charged with a crime and never asked to testify as a witness. In June, 16 months after his arrest, the court said he was free to resume his life. 
 But at the kitchen table of his dumpy little bachelor flat here, with a television on the floor and incense in the air, Mr. Kidd said the experience had cost him dearly. He lost his scholarship, he now moves furniture for a living, and his marriage has fallen apart. About 60 other men have been held in terrorism investigations under the federal material witness law since the Sept. 11 attacks, according to a coming report by Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union. Such laws, meant to ensure that people with important information do not disappear before testifying, have been used to hold people briefly since the early days of the republic.
 But scholars and critics say the government has radically reinterpreted what it means to be a material witness in recent years. These days, people held as material witnesses in terrorism investigations are often not called to testify against others; instead, frequently they are charged with crimes themselves. They lack constitutional protections like the requirement that criminal suspects in custody be informed of their Miranda rights. Moreover, they are often held for long periods in the same harsh conditions as those suspected of very serious crimes. 
 Mary Jo White, who supervised several major terrorism investigations as the United States attorney in Manhattan until she resigned in 2002, said the frequent and aggressive use of the material witness law in terrorism investigations was a recent development.
 ''It was really my idea to use the material witness warrant statute in appropriate cases to detain for reasonable periods of time people who might not appear for a grand jury with information related to the 9/11 attacks,'' she said. The law is, she said, an important tool, but one that must be used judiciously. 
 ''Some of the criticism that has been leveled at it is not wholly unjustified,'' said Ms. White, who was appointed by President Bill Clinton in 1993. ''Was enough done to clear the status of the person? Did you hold the person longer than you needed to? Does it really sort out to being in one sense preventive detention? Yes, it does, but with safeguards.''
 Ronald L. Carlson, a law professor at the University of Georgia and an expert on the material witness law, said Ms. White's account understates the magnitude of the change. 
 ''The law was designed to hold Mr. A, the material witness, to testify about a crime committed by Mr. B, the suspect,'' he said. ''Now they are locking up Mr. A as a material witness to the crime of Mr. A. The notion is, 'We'll hold him until we develop probable cause to arrest him for a crime.'''
 A senior Justice Department official who declined to be quoted by name, citing the sensitivity of terrorism investigations, dismissed that analysis. ''You would be really hard pressed,'' he said, ''if you were able to lift the veil of secrecy on this -- and you can't -- to find that we've used a material witness warrant to get a solo actor for something he's done on his own.''
 The official acknowledged, though, that witnesses are frequently charged with crimes.
 ''If someone has material information who will not come testify, it tends not to be a nun who walks out of a monastery who happens to see a crime from afar,'' he said. 
 Defense lawyers said that many people willing to testify voluntarily have nonetheless been detained.
 ''Now everyone who has any conceivable Middle Eastern tie is considered to be a flight risk,'' said Randall Hamud, a lawyer who has represented three material witnesses. ''That's never been the case before. It's become a very popular device for rounding people up. It's a systemic weapon used against an ethnically identifiable group. It's a holding device.''
 Though the law requires that material witnesses be held ''for a reasonable period of time until the deposition of the witness can be taken,'' such sworn interviews are seldom used in terrorism investigations.

Blurring the Lines
 The distinction between criminal charges and material witness detentions have blurred, critics say. Sometimes they disappear entirely.
 Two weeks after Mr. Kidd's arrest, Robert S. Mueller III, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, briefed Congress on the government's recent counterterrorism successes.
 ''Let me give you a few recent examples,'' he said. The first was the capture of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed in Pakistan. Mr. Mueller called him ''the mastermind of the September 11th attack.''
 The second was the arrest of Mr. Kidd. Mr. Mueller did not mention that Mr. Kidd had not been charged with a crime. 
 ''My reputation is destroyed,'' Mr. Kidd said recently. ''I keep getting nos from jobs as if I'm an ex-felon. And I'm not an ex-felon.''
 In defending the use of material witness warrants in a letter to a Congressional committee last year, Jamie E. Brown, acting assistant attorney general in the Justice Department, described the safeguards in place to prevent injustices. 
 ''Every single person detained as a material witness as part of the September 11 investigation,'' Ms. Brown wrote, ''has been represented by counsel'' and ''was found by a federal judge to have information material to the grand jury's investigation.'' 
 Though grand jury secrecy laws prohibit most people with information about material witness detentions from talking about the cases, Ms. Brown continued, the witnesses themselves are free to speak.
 ''The fact that few have elected to do so,'' Ms. Brown wrote, ''suggests they wish their detentions to remain nonpublic.''
 Jamie Fellner, the director of the United States programs for Human Rights Watch, said some detainees faced the worst of two worlds. 
 ''Material witnesses have, ironically, fewer protections than people charged with a crime,'' Ms. Fellner said. For instance, she said, people arrested as material witnesses are not given Miranda warnings and do not always have prompt access to lawyers. 
 As a consequence, she said, investigators are able to set so-called perjury traps for detainees. Several people arrested as material witnesses have been charged with lying to investigators or grand juries while in custody.
 Abdallah Higazy, for instance, was held for a month before being charged with making a false statement to government investigators about whether he owned an air-to-ground transceiver found in a hotel across the street from where the World Trade Center had stood. A pilot ultimately claimed the transceiver, and Mr. Higazy was released.
 Other men arrested as material witnesses were later charged with terrorism-related crimes, including Zacarias Moussaoui, James Ujaama and Maher Hawash. Mr. Moussaoui is charged with conspiring in the Sept. 11 attacks. Mr. Ujaama and Mr. Hawash pleaded guilty to conspiring to aid the Taliban.
 Two men, Jose Padilla and Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri, were later designated unlawful enemy combatants.
 And some were simply released, men like Mr. Kidd and Brandon Mayfield, the lawyer from Portland, Ore., who was wrongly detained in connection with an investigation of the terrorist bombings in Madrid based on faulty fingerprint analysis. 
 About half of all former material witnesses in terrorism investigations have since left the country, sometimes voluntarily, often not. 
 Material witness arrests outside the context of terrorism are historically quite common. In 2001, the most recent year for which the Justice Department has released data, there were 3,679 people arrested as material witnesses. Many of them were caught seeking illegal entry into the United States and were held long enough to testify against the people paid to smuggle them in. The Immigration and Naturalization Service was responsible for 3,371 of the arrests, or more than 90 percent. American citizens accounted for about 3 percent of those arrested.
 In the terrorism context, the Justice Department told Congress in May 2003, fewer than 50 people had been detained as material witnesses ''in the course of the September 11 investigation'' as of January 2003. Such detainees are typically held for relatively brief periods, the department said. Half were detained for 30 days or fewer. Ninety percent, the department said, were detained for less than three months.
 A Justice Department official declined to provide more recent figures or explain whether the numbers supplied to Congress would be larger if the Sept. 11 limitation were replaced by terrorism investigations generally. According to tentative figures compiled by Human Rights Watch and the A.C.L.U., at least 57 people, a handful of them American citizens, have been detained as material witnesses in connection with terrorism investigations.
 ''All but one of the material witness arrests were of Muslims,'' said Anjana Malhotra, a fellow with Human Rights Watch and the A.C.L.U. and the principal author of the coming report, which does not yet have a release date.

Changed Their Minds
 Mr. Kidd, the former football star, was held in the case of Sami Omar al-Hussayen, who was tried in June in federal court in Idaho on charges of using his computer skills to support terrorists. 
 The jury found Mr. Hussayen not guilty of the more serious charges and deadlocked on others. Not long after, the restrictions on Mr. Kidd's travel were lifted and his passport was returned.
 Norm Brown, an F.B.I. supervisor in charge of the joint terrorism task force in Spokane, Wash., said Mr. Kidd had information relevant to a minor charge -- that Mr. Hussayen had violated the terms of his student visa. Prosecutors decided not to call Mr. Kidd to testify, Mr. Brown said, because they considered him an angry man who was likely to be a hostile witness.
 ''We fully intended to put Mr. Kidd on the stand in Boise,'' Mr. Brown said. ''For strategic reasons, near the end of the trial, it was decided it would not be beneficial.''
 Mr. Kidd, who converted to Islam in college and became a student of its doctrines and factions, was held for three days at a detention center in Alexandria, Va., in a cell known as the fishbowl. Its previous occupants included, he was told, Mr. Moussaoui and John Walker Lindh, who is serving a 20-year sentence for aiding the Taliban.
 He was then flown to Idaho, by way of Oklahoma, Arizona and Wyoming. He was surrounded by people accused and convicted of serious felonies, his hands shackled to his waist and his feet shackled together. ''Con Air,'' he said, ''just like the movie.''
 In Idaho, a judge eventually released him, but with a significant condition. He was not allowed to travel outside of four states -- Idaho, California, Nevada and Washington -- and he was required to move in with his in-laws, with whom his wife was briefly living, having planned to join him in Saudi Arabia in a month.
 He took a job moving furniture, and the living arrangement helped break up his marriage, he said.
 ''This ordeal has dissolved our relationship,'' he said. ''I lost a good wife. I'm not with my daughter anymore. How painful is that?''
 His dream of pursuing his interest in Islamic studies is shattered, too. He has lost a scholarship to study in Saudi Arabia.
 ''Here I am now, 31, and that dream is shrinking and shrinking,'' he said.
 Mr. Brown of the F.B.I. defended the decision to detain Mr. Kidd, citing what he called three red flags. Mr. Kidd had listed ''jihad'' among his interests on a Web site, which the F.B.I. interpreted, Mr. Brown said, as a reference not to ''a personal struggle so much as a holy war.'' 
 Second, Mr. Brown said, Mr. Kidd ''sold tapes and books containing the teachings of radical sheiks'' when he lived in Idaho. Third, Mr. Kidd's possessions when he was arrested included a video of concern, Mr. Brown said. ''It had to do with the hijacking and terrorist events on Sept. 11, 2001. At this point, I'll leave it at that.''
 Mr. Kidd responded that ''jihad'' has ''a vast array of meanings''; that he never knowingly distributed radical works; and that the video documented terrorism, rather than promoting it.

Not an Unusual Case
 Mr. Kidd's experience as a material witness is not unusual, other witnesses and their lawyers said.
 In a pending civil lawsuit, Osama Awadallah, a college student in San Diego, says he was badly mistreated while held as a material witness in New York. He has since been charged with perjury, which he denies. 
 In court papers, Mr. Awadallah described handcuffs so tight that his hands bled, a cell so cold his body turned blue, a series of humiliating strip searches and extreme hunger for lack of food that his faith allowed him to eat. He was, his lawsuit says, beaten by guards at the New York Metropolitan Correctional Center.
 ''He was so scared his chains were rattling,'' Mr. Hamud said of meeting his client in court. ''He had bruises on his upper arms, torso, upper biceps. I saw them myself.''
 The United States attorney's office in New York did not respond for a request for comment on that suit. The office has not yet filed legal papers responding to the suit. The Justice Department official declined to comment on specific cases.
 Mr. Hamud said the use of material witness law has discouraged people from sharing information with the authorities. At least two men who approached the police with information were then detained as material witnesses.
 ''It's very difficult for this community to cooperate in 9/11 investigations and search for terrorists,'' Mr. Hamud said, ''when it's been terrorized by the Department of Justice.''
 Professor Carlson said material witness detentions should always be brief.
 ''Bring the witness in,'' he said. ''Bring in his defense attorney. Let's take a videotaped deposition, and then send him on his way.''
 If preventive detention is needed in the post-9/11 world, he said, legislators should address that question directly.
 ''The Justice Department should ask Congress to confront whether it wants to enact some sort of terrorism detention statute,'' Professor Carlson said. ''They should not be using this law for a purpose it was never intended.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: ''It was the most horrible, disgraceful, degrading moment in my life,'' Abdullah al Kidd said of his detention. (Photo by John Locher for The New York Times)(pg. A20)Chart: ''Material Witnesses''Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union have identified 57 cases to date in which people were detained as material witnesses in a terrorism investigation.CASES TO DATE: 57Men: 57Muslim: 56OUTCOMECharged with a crime unrelated to terrorism: 18Charged with a terrorism-related crime: 7Designated enemy combatant: 2Faced no criminal charges: 30WHERE THEY ARE NOWDeported: 15Left United States voluntarily: 13Still in United States: 29(Source by Human Rights Watch
 A.C.L.U.)(pg. A20)      

Load-Date: August 19, 2004


End of Document