For a Day, Terrorism Transcends Politics as Commission Examines Failures
The New York Times
March 24, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1; THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1098 words
Byline: By TODD S. PURDUM
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 23 
Body


The setting was a nondescript Senate hearing room, but the scene was as singular as democracy itself: successive secretaries of state and defense with more than 14 years' combined service across Democratic and Republican presidencies being questioned by a bipartisan citizens' commission of familiar faces.
 Yes, election-year politics crackled in the air. Yes, Republican panel members prodded and scolded Bill Clinton's cabinet members, and Democrats did the same to President Bush's. But the secretaries themselves often agreed with one other, regardless of party, and their public presence was a powerful sign that terrorism transcends politics -- and that blame abounds for failing to fully face the threat in time.
 Madeleine K. Albright and Donald H. Rumsfeld cannot often be accused of seeing eye to eye. But the former secretary of state and the current secretary of defense agreed that there was limited public or international support for large-scale military action against Al Qaeda and the Taliban before Sept. 11.
 Dr. Albright dryly noted that Mr. Clinton faced criticism as moving too rashly to bomb Qaeda training camps after the bombing of American embassies in East Africa in 1998, days after he confessed to lying about his affair with an intern.
 Former Defense Secretary William S. Cohen testified that his greatest concern on taking office in 1997 was ''that we're able to persuade the American people to having a viable, sustainable national security policy even when there is no clearly identifiable enemy on the horizon,'' while Secretary of State Colin L. Powell surmised that even the capture or killing of Osama bin Laden would not have prevented the Sept. 11 attacks, because the hijackers were already at work on American shores.
 All the elaborate rituals of courtesy could not disguise the gravity of the occasion. One commission member, former Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, greeted Dr. Albright by saying, ''It's very nice to see you again,'' but did not spare his fellow Democrat from a painful and pointed line of questioning.
 ''I keep hearing the excuse, 'We didn't have actionable intelligence,' '' Mr. Kerrey said, describing the Clinton administration's frustrated failures to eliminate Mr. bin Laden in the years after the embassy bombings and the first World Trade Center attack, in 1993. ''Well, what the hell does that say to Al Qaeda? Basically, they knew, at the beginning of 1993, it seems to me, that there was going to be limited, if any, use of military, and that they were also free to do whatever they wanted.''
 Dr. Albright responded that the Clinton administration had moved to freeze assets, apply diplomatic pressure and order airstrikes. Then she added: ''You, Senator, I know, were the only person that I know of who suggested declaring war. You were, you know, in retrospect, you were probably right.''
 From the sinking of the Titanic to the bombing of Pearl Harbor to the presidential commission set up to study urban unrest in the 1960's and the 1970's Senate inquiry into intelligence abuses by the C.I.A. and F.B.I., public and Congressional panels have delved into some of the most calamitous events in American history. But usually after the fact. Tuesday's hearing made it clear that the threat of terrorism remains ever present.
 For the Clinton administration officials, this week's hearings were a chance to defend actions -- or lapses -- that have already passed into history. For the Bush appointees, the stakes were a good deal higher: They hope to keep making history for another four years. A year to the day after the capture of Pfc. Jessica Lynch in Iraq, cable television screens were filled not so much with images of combat as with recrimination and regret -- a blend that poses delicate challenges for Mr. Bush. 
 ''These things are very unusual, and only come after great national disasters,'' said Richard N. Goodwin, the former speechwriter for President John F. Kennedy who as a young lawyer served on the staff of the Congressional inquiry into the rigging of television quiz shows. ''Especially in an election year, the political stakes are high. There's an enormous amount of tension and pent-up passions and political rivalry. But, thank God, we have these ritual forms. In the 1850's, half the guys in Congress were carrying revolvers on the floor.''
 For relatives of the Sept. 11 victims, the hearing was a chance, finally, to get the public attention that they believe the commission's work has long lacked. They came with still-broken hearts and photographs of the dead, seeking answers they did not quite expect to receive.
 ''I want the truth,'' said Bob McIlvaine, whose son, Bobby, died in the attacks. He wore a green jacket and a pained look, and carried a copy of Craig Unger's book, ''House of Bush, House of Saud: The Secret Relationship Between the World's Two Most Powerful Dynasties'' (Scribner, 2004). ''I don't think this commission is going to be asking the questions that need to be asked.''
 Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, who was seated next to Mr. Rumsfeld, also wore a pained expression for much of the afternoon. He rejected any suggestion that the Bush administration had taken too long -- until September 2001 -- to devise a plan for dealing with Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
 ''A plan is not a military option,'' Mr. Wolfowitz told the panel. ''A military option is to a plan what a single play in football is to a whole game plan, and this notion that there's a single thing that if we had only done it, it would work, is like a Hail Mary pass in football, which is what a desperate, losing team does in a hope that maybe they can pull things off at the end. A plan has got to anticipate what the enemy will do next.''
 The commission was created by Congress with Mr. Bush's reluctant assent and is scheduled to conclude its business this summer. But Tuesday's hearing was a sign that Mr. Bush ought to be anticipating what comes next. He already has his hands full with the continued fighting in Iraq, and the threat of more attacks at home, and the history of past panels might give him pause.
 ''The Kerner Commission on inner-city riots was appointed by Lyndon Johnson as a way of defusing the issue,'' the presidential historian Robert Dallek recalled. ''But its report became a very public document, and in the end Johnson was very unhappy with it, because he feared it would lead to greater demands for spending on antipoverty programs. And he was trying to get a tax increase to finance the Vietnam War.''                                                     

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 24, 2004


End of Document