For Italians, Some Horrors Will Not Die
The New York Times
August 3, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 926 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Aug. 2
Body


This has always been a country with a cultivated eye for intrigue and conspiracy, where truth is rarely so careless as to lie on the surface and even the rain does not fall by chance.
The Italians have invented a single word for it: dietrologia, which, somewhat clumsily, may be translated as the study of what lurks behind it all.
These days, practitioners of this imprecise science are working overtime as the ghosts of long-ago acts of terrorism and unsolved disasters stalk the country, causing many Italians to despair that they may never outrun their past. The more distraught go so far as to say that postwar Italian democracy, still seen by some here as a delicate experiment, is being sorely tested.
Three specific episodes have brought them to this pass. All stem from horrors going back a decade or more, when Italy was racked by violence from both the right and the left, a tortured period concentrated in the 1970's and known here as the ''years of lead.''
 
Convictions Are Overturned
Two weeks ago an appeals court overturned the convictions of 13 people who had been found guilty in Italy's worst terrorist outrage, a bombing 10 years ago today that killed 85 people in Bologna's railway station.
The defendants included neo-Fascists, former military intelligence officers and Licio Gelli, head of a now-outlawed secret Masonic lodge known as P-2. In the 1970's, the P-2 included many top politicians and businessmen and was widely viewed as a shadowy government within a government.
It was the fourth prominent case involving accused right-wing terrorists over the last 15 years in which guilty verdicts were set aside. So for many Italians, especially those on the left, it was a short leap toward a conclusion of official cover-up and continued manipulation by dark forces even in these tranquil days when Italian terrorism seems safely tucked away.
''The Bologna ruling confirms that massacres can be carried out with impunity,'' Achille Occhetto, the Communist Party leader, said in late July as he demanded that secret service files be opened. ''An impunity of that kind,'' Mr. Occhetto added, ''can only be explained by the involvement of part of the state apparatus.''
 
Dismay in the Vatican
Non-leftists, including the Vatican through its newspaper, L'Osservatore Romano, expressed dismay over the verdict and the fact that four terrorist bombings, responsible for 122 deaths from 1969 to 1980, now remain unresolved. Today, on the 10th anniversary of its disaster, Bologna shut down for three hours, with some 40,000 people filling the square in front of the rebuilt railway station to demand justice.
Frustration has also been voiced by President Francesco Cossiga, who was Prime Minister in 1980 and who implied last week that culprits must be rooted out wherever they are found, on the left or the right. Italy, he said, needed ''the truth, not a truth.''
But dietrologists were not mollified, especially after a second event refueled conspiracy theories.
Several weeks ago, Channel One of the state television network broadcast allegations that the United States Central Intelligence Agency had supported the P-2 in terrorist acts in Italy and in assassinating Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden in 1986. This week, a magazine suggested Mr. Cossiga himself was linked to the P-2.
Although much of the supporting evidence seemed at first blush to be thin, the accusations have become the summer's journalistic sensation. They also have produced denials about knowledge of any conspiracy - from the C.I.A., from Mr. Cossiga and from Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti.
 
The Mystery of Ustica
Still, when combined with the Bologna verdict, the charges were enough to persuade a few Italians that something unholy is afoot. They were doubly convinced when they also contemplated the 10th anniversary of a mysterious air crash that haunts Italy more than any other disaster.
On June 27, 1980, a DC-9 on a flight from Bologna to Palermo crashed into the Tyrrhenian Sea near the tiny island of Ustica, just north of Sicily. All 81 people on board were killed.
Ustica, as the incident is called here, has led to at least six formal investigations. Experts have studied the plane's wreckage, but they are divided over whether the crash was caused by a terrorist bomb or a missile.
If it was a missile, whose? There have been countless theories pointing variously to the United States, Britain, France, Libya and Italy itself, all of which deny they know anything. Rarely does a week pass without a news article offering yet another slant.
In the meantime, pertinent Italian radar records have managed to disappear. Senator Libero Gualtieri, head of a parliamentary commission on terrorism and massacres, says that ''for 10 years organs of the state have deliberately created obstacles to prevent anyone from finding out the truth.''
When their integrity or competence has been questioned, senior military officers have reacted huffily at times, and that simply has stoked the dietrologia fire and produced fresh demands for the truth from victims' relatives.
But Giuliano Amato, a Socialist Party leader who has followed the Ustica affair closely, cautions that more may be at stake, including Italians' sense of themselves.
''In our system, you find a feature of young democracies, in which putting in doubt the loyalty of a general is equated with putting in doubt the loyalty of the army itself and therefore all government institutions,'' Mr. Amato said. ''This reaction gives you the impression that Italians consider their democracy more fragile than it is.''


End of Document