FOR MANY, TRADE CENTER BOMBING JUST A HAZY MEMORY HEADLINE:
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 20, 1994, Sunday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 1117 words
Body


By Rick Hampson NEW YORK (AP) _ A year later, the lunch bag left
on the park bench is not a "suspicious package."
Motorists need not pop the trunk before entering the Rockefeller
Center parking garage, and tourists don't have to line up at metal
detectors in the Empire State Building.  The Plaza's lobby no longer
looks like a Secret Service convention.
The World Trade Center bombing, once regarded as a sign that
terrorism had finally crossed the oceans to America, now seems more
like a truck backfiring on the Fourth of July _ a momentary
distraction, soon forgotten amid the general cacophony.
"I don't think very much about it anymore," said Patricia
Renton, a paralegal who works at the Trade Center.  "There are other
things to worry about."
On the afternoon of Feb. 26, 1993, however, there was only the
bomb.  It shook the nation's two largest office towers, killed six
people, injured another 1,000 and closed the complex for weeks.
Eventually there would be arrests of a group of Islamic
fundamentalists, followers of a storefront preacher with a seething
contempt for Western modernity; revelations of the suspects' anger
over U.S. policy in the Middle East; a long and largely uneventful
trial.
But what the nation remembers are the images of Feb. 26 _ tens
of thousands of office workers streaming into the street, bewildered
and exhausted, their faces streaked with smoke, sweat and tears.
"We all have that feeling of being violated," said Gov. Mario Cuomo
Experts warned of more of the same.  FBI chief William Sessions
said the bombing "could be the harbinger of a new era," and Rand
Corp.  analyst Bruce Hoffman called it "a watershed.  We are
incredibly vulnerable.  Everyone is going to be looking at us."
Our borders were porous.  Our policies were unpopular.  "We are
in very deep trouble," said Robert Kupperman, another terrorism
expert.
The attack's success was said to have offered encouragement to
almost anyone with a grudge and a bomb.  If the center's bombers were
amateurs, that showed anyone could do it; if they were pros, that
meant foreign terrorists were ready to strike the home front.
For years, of course, Americans had been installing metal
detectors, closed circuit televisions and car barricades.  Now there
were calls for even more security, an unappealing prospect to those
already living behind triple-locked doors and window bars.
But a funny thing happened:
Nothing.
The alleged perpetrators were quickly arrested, and four months
later a related cell also was rounded up _ before, authorities said,
it could blow up the Lincoln Tunnel, the United Nations and other
targets.
The FBI increased surveillance of other suspected terrorists,
and reportedly told them, in so many words, "Don't even think about
it." The State Department started a computerized program to make
sure suspected terrorists overseas don't get entry visas.  The
Nuclear Regulatory Commission tightened security requirements for
nuclear power plants.
And, mostly without realizing it, Americans declared the Trade
Center episode a victory.
Three days after the blast, the president of the United States
outlined the rules.  The terrorists win half the battle, said Bill
Clinton, "if they can get us to change the way we live and what
we do."
So the windows were replaced, the soot was washed off and the
holes were patched.  The nation moved on; the terrorists lost.
"I was extremely pessimistic a year ago," says Robert
Kupperman.  "Now I'm much less so."
The Trade Center itself still bears many signs of the bombing,
including its shuttered underground garage and rooftop restaurant.
But elsewhere, "very little has changed," says Philip Stern, a
former prosecutor who manages the Fairfax Group, a security service
"There's no additional security at bridges or tunnels.  You can
walk into most office building lobbies and get onto an elevator
without identification.  Very few companies have taken serious
security steps."
Terrorism continues to be a problem, but largely a foreign
problem.  The weekend of the Trade Center blast there were bombings
in Cairo, London and Lima.  On two separate days in 1993, Kurdish
terrorists attacked about 75 separate Turkish targets around Europe
The number of global terrorist incidents logged by the State
Department increased from 361 in 1992 to 427 last year.  But '93
compared favorably to '91, when there were 557 incidents.  More than
half of those involved U.S. citizens or property, compared to only
about 20 percent last year.
Besides time and benign neglect, there was another reason the
bombing faded from consciousness: It was an act of violence in what
Cuomo, speaking Feb. 28, called "the most violent place in the world
_ not because they do it to us but because we do it to
ourselves."
A year later the bombing seems nefarious but not remarkable, not
in a nation where gunshots kill more than 100 people a day; not in
a state where more people die from gunshots than auto accidents; not
in a city where gun deaths are so common that one newspaper lists
them, like movie starting times, in a standing column entitled "The
Toll."
The Trade Center blast was spectacular, but it was also just one
of 30,000 cases of workplace violence last year, just one of 2,200
bombings.
In the weeks and months after Feb. 26, there were plenty of
other violent diversions: The catastrophe at the Branch Davidian
compound in Texas; the arrest of a Long Island man who allegedly
murdered a string of prostitutes; the murder of six people by a
gunman who opened fire on a Long Island commuter train at rush hour
Will what the government calls "the single most devastating
terror attack ever committed on American soil" eventually fade from
memory?  High school students still learn of the "Palmer raid"
roundups of suspected subversives in 1920, but not the bomb that
killed 30 people on Wall Street in the same year.
"It was like throwing a rock in a pond," says Brian Jenkins of
Kroll, the security consulting firm.  "A big splash, but the ripples
dissipate."
Some, however, still think the Trade Center blast marked a turn
for the worse.
"The fact there haven't been any more attacks doesn't mean
we're out of the woods," says Bruce Hoffman.  "Terrorism doesn't
work in a predictable fashion.  It may be another year before a new
one in the U.S."
The attack, he says, remains a landmark of "the amateurization
of terrorism;" it showed that amateurs using ordinary materials
could have an extraordinary impact in the United States.
Any terrorism forecast based on the Trade Center is undercut by
the fact that, after a four-month trial with 207 prosecution
witnesses and 1,003 exhibits, "we still don't know the big
picture," says Hoffman.  "Was a foreign government behind it? If
so, why?"
Good questions.  But in the meantime, there is so much else to
worry about.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document