FOR PARIS, TOUGHER LINE ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
April 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1012 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, April 10
Body


In its first few weeks in office, France's new conservative Government has been mapping out what officials here call a new approach to terrorism, an issue that preoccupied this country in the recent election campaign.
The new approach is described by conservative officials as a departure from that of the preceding Socialist Government. It is aimed at increasing police powers to check identity papers at random, extending the time a terrorist suspect can be held for questioning without charges to four days from one, and passing what is called a ''penitents' law,'' giving police the right to exchange lenient treatment of some suspects for information leading to further arrests.
These measures, some of which were outlined by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac in a speech to Parliament on Wednesday, seem aimed at toughening the French response to terrorist acts inside this country. The most serious have been a series of bombing attacks in crowded commercial districts of Paris, carried out, the police believe, by Middle East extremists.
Officials here say the new Government will also bring a different philosophy to the problem of terrorism against French targets abroad. Specifically, they say, the new policy will be guided by a greater emphasis on police work and on covert action to strike back at terrorists, rather than on negotiations with terrorist groups.
 
Trying to Improve Iran Ties
Until now, however, the only visible initiative of the new Government has been a diplomatic effort in the last few days to improve relations with Iran. Most analysts of the situation here assume that Iran exercises decisive influence over the groups holding at least seven French hostages in Lebanon.
The issue of security against terrorism was a major theme of the conservatives in the election campaign. Their candidates accused the Socialist Government of having weakened the police by an undue emphasis on liberalizing the judicial system.
The general feeling among officials of the new Government is that the effort to devise new approaches to security and terrorism is crucial to its ability to portray itself as more effective than its Socialist predecessor.
 
'Completely Different' Doctrine
''Our doctrine on terrorism will be completely different,'' Jacques Godfrain, a member of Parliament who drew up a conservative program on security, said in an interview.
Mr. Godfrain contended that the Socialists' approach was guided by the belief that ''if there are terrorists it is because people are suffering and you have to satisfy some of their demands to eliminate the terrorism.''
''Our approach will be to suppress the terrorists without talking to them,'' Mr. Godfrain said. He said France's secret services would be expected to play a greater role than in the past.
The Government's emerging anti-terrorist program comes against the background of the worst spate of terrorism against France and its citizens abroad in many years.
Of the seven French hostages being held by extremist Moslem groups in Lebanon, two of them have been captive for more than a year.
Another Frenchman, Michel Brian, a 42-year-old teacher, was kidnapped Wednesday. Today, two claims of responsibility for the kidnapping were made in Lebanon, one by the previously unknown Siffine Islamic Organization and the other by ''the kidnapping group.''
 
Support for Iraq Cited
The assumption here is that the actions, carried out by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon, have two goals. The first is to force France to stop supporting Iraq, which buys most of its arms in this country, in the war with Iran. The second is to secure the release of terrorists imprisoned in this country.
Among these are the five members of a commando group that unsuccessfully tried to assassinate the former Iranian Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar, in Paris in 1980, killing a French policeman and a bystander. Also imprisoned here is Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, the presumed leader of the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Faction, which claimed responsibility for the killing of an Israeli diplomat and an American military attache, Charles Ray, in Paris in 1982.
Up to now, the French approach has been to maintain indirect contact with the terrorists, generally through Arab intermediaries, and to show a willingness to make some concessions, particularly in the case of the hostages in Lebanon.
In January, for instance, the Government held indirect talks, through intermediaries in Damascus, with the pro-Iranian groups holding four French citizens in Beirut. According to French press reports, largely confirmed by officials and foreign diplomats, the French refused the main terrorist demand, which was to exchange the hostages for at least four of those jailed for the attack on Mr. Bakhtiar.
 
Deal Fell Through
But newspapers here reported that President Francois Mitterrand, trying to steer a middle course among senior officials who were sharply divided, agreed to release the head of the commando group, Anis Naccache, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment.
The arrangement fell through, according to a Foreign Ministry official, when ''the terrorists raised the ante,'' presumably by stepping up their demands at the last minute.
Officials close to the conservative Government say privately that the approach of the Socialists failed in at least two respects. First, it focused public attention on the hostage crisis and on the demands of the kidnappers. Second, after the failed effort to secure the hostages' release, the situation has clearly worsened.
''The effort now will be to calm things down,'' a Foreign Ministry official said. ''It will be to remove the ability of those who are holding the hostages to focus public attention on the issue, while we return to secret diplomacy.''
In the last few days, the new Government has embarked on a diplomatic effort to improve relations with Iran, sending two senior Foreign Ministry officials to Teheran for talks aimed, in the words of a Foreign Ministry statement, at ''examining together the possibility of bringing about a solution to the problems present in our relations.''


End of Document