Force alone will not defeat ISIL; 14 years after the 9/11 attacks, we still haven't learned that lesson
USA TODAY
November 19, 2015 Thursday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 804 words
Byline: Thomas Kean, and Lee Hamilton
Body


Speaking to a nation grief stricken after the deadliest terrorist attack on U.S. soil, President George W. Bush declared that "our war on terror ... will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped and defeated." Fourteen years later, France has been shaken by an all too familiar horror, and President Francois Hollande has similarly vowed to be "unforgiving with the barbarians (with) all the necessary means, and on all terrains, inside and outside."
The parallels should simultaneously reassure and give us pause. Absolute condemnation is the only possible reaction to these abominable attacks by those who embrace the universal values of life and liberty. But faced once again with innocent lives taken by a murderous, radical foe, we must re-examine and re-energize our response.
No longer are we unprepared or unaware -- as we were on the morning of 9/11. Yet terrorism continues to plague us.
The Islamic State terrorist organization's combination of territory, resources and global appeal makes it more dangerous than previously acknowledged and more of a threat than al-Qaeda. We must gird ourselves for the possibility of more attacks.
We have been largely successful in protecting the United States, and those efforts should be intensified. This means increasing surveillance, sharpening intelligence, cutting off illicit financial flows and enhancing intelligence sharing with our allies. And we must marshal a "coalition of the willing" to take the military fight to the enemy with a much more robust effort to deny ISIL a haven in Syria and Iraq, and lead a diplomatic offensive to bring an end to the Syrian civil war.
But Americans must also reflect on why -- after a decade and a half -- the threat of Islamist terrorism remains not just undiminished but enhanced.
The 9/11 Commission we chaired argued that in addition to "dismantling the al-Qaeda network," we must also prevail "over the ideology that gives rise to Islamist terrorism." Yet the second element of this strategy has been largely ignored. Predominantly military solutions have been emphasized to what is at its core an ideological challenge. Force can and must be used to degrade ISIL, more than we have done to date, but it cannot destroy the ideas that animate it.
Military might must be combined with all the other elements of U.S. power -- political, diplomatic, economic and informational -- in a sustained strategy to target terrorism's ideological foundations. There are concrete steps we can take  to lay the foundation for this approach:
Begin with Congress passing an authorization for the use of military force (AUMF) against ISIL to give the president full license to wage that war. We are fighting a group with which al-Qaeda has publicly broken, with legal authorities from the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks. They must be updated. Debating a new AUMF will inform the American people about what the threat is, how it is evolving and what must be done to meet it. Adopting one will signal our resolve to face it.
Better understand and define our enemy. It is not terrorism that threatens us. That is merely the tactic chosen by our foe. The adversary is a minuscule number of religious zealots among the world's 1.6 billion Muslims. Recognizing this does not in any way impugn an entire religion or the overwhelming majority of its peaceful adherents. It does openly and honestly identify a particular, virulent set of ideas that we must first understand, including why they drive some to commit repeated atrocious acts, if we are to stop their transmission.
Embrace and propagate, not reject, the  values that are the foundation of our political systems and the targets of  terrorists. Calls to close our borders to refugees is but the latest manifestation of the impulse to see the openness of our societies as a vulnerability. Sowing such fear is our enemy's objective.
Welcoming -- after thorough screening -- those seeking safety from  our enemies is the surest way to demonstrate the superiority of our beliefs and prevent a new generation from being infected by the nihilistic creeds that fester amid desperation and misery. That will demonstrate our support for the vast majority of Muslims, after all they too have suffered at the hands of the same terrorists.
Fourteen years after 9/11, the dangers that  became apparent on that terrible day persist. The latest attacks on Paris must be a catalyst for a united effort to move beyond the predominantly military approach to this problem, to confront the ideological roots of this challenge and recommit ourselves to a long struggle ahead.
Former New Jersey governorThomas Kean and former representative Lee Hamilton were 9/11 Commission chair and vice chair. They are now co-chairs of the Bipartisan Policy Center's National Security Program. 

Graphic

 
photo Etienne Laurent, epa

Load-Date: November 19, 2015


End of Document