Forces in bloody Uzbek crackdown were U.S.-trained International groups are pushing America to reconsider involvement
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 29, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 655 words
Byline: BY BURT HERMAN The Associated Press
Dateline: ANDIJAN, Uzbekistan -- 
Body


The armed, masked guard behind the gate at police headquarters projected sheer force, but his eyes brightened as he fondly remembered his time training in the United States.
The U.S. government has trained and equipped Uzbek troops and police -- the same forces who opened fire without warning on some 2,000 demonstrators this month in this eastern city. Now international groups are urging Washington to reconsider its aid and involvement.
President Islam Karimov has rejected calls for an independent inquiry into the crackdown. The government claims 173 were killed, including 36 troops. But human rights groups allege that hundreds died when on May 13 Uzbek forces fired on demonstrators who seized government buildings and freed jail inmates. The protest was set off by the prosecution of 23 businessmen for alleged Islamic extremism.
Under U.S. law, no unit of a foreign military can receive training if it is found to have committed a gross violation of human rights.
Uzbek officials won't name the exact units involved in the Andijan events for security reasons. But one police official said all the country's elite forces had been mobilized here. "There were regular army and special forces of all sorts, both Interior Ministry and National Security Service," the official said on condition of anonymity. "Everyone was there."
At the Andijan police headquarters, the masked guard wearing blue-and-gray urban camouflage said he was an intelligence officer with the Kalkon unit, meaning "Shield."
Seeing a foreign reporter, he briefly reminisced about training in the United States.
Uzbekistan has been a key ally in the war on terrorism, providing a base for American troops for operations in neighboring Afghanistan. But even before the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, the U.S. government provided training and equipment to Uzbek troops and police.
Under a 2002 strategic partnership agreement between Washington and Tashkent, Uzbekistan's capital, the United States pledged to help equip Uzbek military units and train them in combating terrorism, drug trafficking, money laundering and other threats.
Karimov has used the language of anti-terrorism in explaining authorities' actions in Andijan, claiming the instigators were extremists bent on creating a Muslim state -- and refusing to acknowledge any peaceful protesters were present as seen by reporters.
U.S. and Uzbek soldiers have held regular training exercises since the 1990s, with American special forces troops heading to the mountains with their Uzbek counterparts.
Uzbek troops have also traveled to American bases, including Fort Benning in Georgia and Fort Bragg in North Carolina, for special forces, airborne and English-language programs.
Uzbekistan's human rights abuses have caused it to lose aid before. Last July, the U.S. State Department withdrew most of its aid after failing to certify Tashkent had made progress to rectify its abuses. 
But later that month, Gen. John Abizaid, the top U.S. commander in the region, flew to Tashkent to reassure the Uzbeks that the American military would maintain and even boost its cooperation -- aid that is separate from State Department assistance.
After the Andijan violence, Abizaid said the U.S. military was scaling back operations at the Karshi-Khanabad base in southern Uzbekistan. But officers at the base told a visiting Associated Press reporter that they hadn't noticed any reduction in movement there.
U.S.-based Human Rights Watch expressed concern last week that Defense Department cooperation with the country continues, and that the European Union also gives some $20.1 million in indirect assistance.
It's not clear whether any immediate reconsideration of assistance is in the works. On Wednesday, U.S. State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said Washington continues to press for reforms and an open investigation into the Andijan violence, but that anti-terrorism cooperation with Uzbekistan would continue.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO BY THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Uzbek special forces soldiers stand at a checkpoint in Andijan, Uzbekistan, on May 18, amid security tightened for a visit of United Nations officials, diplomats and journalists five days after the city exploded in unrest. 

Load-Date: May 29, 2005


End of Document