FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE WAGES OF HATRERD
The New York Times
August 5, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 799 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 4
Body


The recent upsurge of Armenian terrorism raises some complex problems. Despite intermittent clucks of revulsion, there hasn't been a strong enough international stand on terrorism to provide a clear answer.
Too many have succumbed to the temptation to denounce the deed and sympathize with its purpose. Obviously some young Armenians have been impressed with the apparent success of other terrorists in putting their causes on the world agenda.
The Palestinians are an example, although no one can point to a single improvement in the lot of either the Arabs in territories occupied by Israel or of the Palestinian diaspora as a result of terrorism. West German and Italian murderers terrified their societies but failed to achieve anything else except their own destruction.
Now come the Armenians. Their goal is even more quixotic than that of the Palestinians in search of a state or of the Europeans trying to provoke revolution. They want the world, and especially Turkey, to recognize formally that the massacre of Armenians in 1915 was the 20th century's first example of genocide.
It's important to specify the 20th century, because of course history is replete with examples of genocide, from the earliest times to the massacres of Indian tribes in the U.S., Argentina and other parts of the New World.
The difference is that now, at a stage in human development where war has yet to be generally seen as an intolerable abomination, genocide has at least been recognized. That is an advance, perhaps a hope for the future, though modern weaponry has also advanced to the point where war and genocide can be synonymous.
But is that a reason for more killing to force attention to the past? How far back should it go? Which societies should do penance for their ancestors and which are so blameless as to have the right to judge?
Perhaps the Armenian terrorists are acting in collusion with others who have their own, more immediate reasons to sow new distress abroad.
The Palestine Liberation Organization enabled the Armenians to establish headquarters in Beirut when it was the world's terrorist capital. Since then some have found refuge in Syria and Iran, apparently moving from there to Europe. It is curious, at the least, that the published grievances never seem to complain about the lot of Armenians in the Soviet Union.
These are side issues. The central point is terrorism. There has been a tendency in France, particularly, to distinguish between ''selective'' terrorism, such as the murder of Turkish diplomats, and indiscriminate attacks such as the bomb at Orly airport.  There has been a tendency among some U.S. as well as French commentators to say that even though their methods are reprehensible, the Armenian terrorists do have a point. There has been more than a tendency among peaceable, decent Armenians to welcome the attention. A mass was celebrated in Paris to the memory of the five Armenians who blew themselves up along with the wife and son of the Turkish envoy in Lisbon.  In fact, all this serves the terrorists' aim. To make a point now, as the French Government has done, of previous efforts to have the United Nations condemn the 1915 genocide is to accept the terrorists' argument and plead for a truce.  Two legal Armenian groups in France have acknowledged this diplomatic effort, going on to say it must be successfully concluded ''or terrorism won't be avoidable and world equilibrium could be disturbed.'' What group will be next to demand ''understanding'' and political support in return for restraint from wanton killing? The world is full of people who are suffering, let alone whose forebears suffered.  A firm line must be drawn. Terrorism cannot work as moral any more than as political blackmail. Condemnation must be unqualified. Understanding should be reserved for victims. Civilized countries can't waffle.  History cannot be undone nor avenged. Tragedy has always been an element of the human condition. The requirement of justice is to reduce and alleviate it among the living and in future generations. That will require all our humble efforts.  The Armenian terrorists are more important than their cause in one way. They are a reminder of how long the burden of gross injustice weighs, how hard it is to wipe away the stain of conscienceless evil.  They deserve no indulgence. There lies the way of spreading horror and cynical loss of moral sense. But they are to be heard as decisions are pondered in current conflicts, as the search for power and domination is pursued at the cost of lives. Victory can be an illusion.  This is not pacifism. It is a reflection on the unforeseeable consequences of trying to impose a national will by force. Hatred can have a terribly long life, well beyond the span of those who practice and provoke it.


End of Document