FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Now Swastikas In French
The New York Times
October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 811 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 6
Body


Most of France is reeling now after the latest strike by right-wing European terrorists. Four people were killed and 7 seriously injured by a bomb placed near a synagogue here.
It was a heavy charge, about 25 pounds of explosive. Police said it would probably have killed 200 had the Friday night services not lasted a bit longer than usual. As it was, all of those hurt were passers-by, including an Israeli woman tourist. An anonymous call to the French press agency claimed responsibility for a group called European National Fasces (F.N.E.) but the perpetrators have not been traced.
AN-A
For years, the French watched terrorism in Italy, Germany and Britain and considered themselves more or less immune, except for the occasional destructive but seldom murderous attacks by separatist groups such as Bretons and Corsicans. The French left is vociferous but hasn't produced indiscriminate assassins, and political murders among foreigners - Latin Americans, Arabs, Turks, Iranians -seemed to most people more the concern of foreigners than of their own society.
But now the reality of deliberate, wanton terrorism has hit home.  After Bologna, Munich, there has been Paris. Evidence has accumulated that whether or not there is actual cooperation in crime, right-wing groups throughout Western Europe have international ties.
During the weekend in Antwerp, where bombers killed a number of French Jewish children on an excursion last summer, black-shirted Flemish militants demonstrated against immigrants. Their leader, Bert Erikson, who keeps swastikas and Nazi paraphernalia at home, told an interviewer, ''If necessary, blood will flow.''
Italian, French, Spanish, British, German and other extreme rightists have held joint conferences, without open incitement to violence but with undertones of nostalgia for fascism. A French police inspector, member of the F.N.E.'s outlawed predecessor, was reported by Italian police to have visited people suspected of involvement in the Bologna railway massacre shortly before the attack.
In the last three months, there have been 40 attacks in France by groups whom the police consider neo-Nazis. They follow a mounting campaign of graffiti with swastikas and anti-Jewish slogans, anti-Semitic tracts, and threatening letters sent to Jews. Although there has long been official insistence, shared by a number of leading Jews in France, that anti-Zionism cannot be equated with anti-Semitism, the extreme right's old habit of focusing grievances on Jews generally is being reasserted.
The standard explanations are also flowing freely. Rightists blame it all on Soviet K.G.B. plots. The left blames dark forces within the establishment and the police. Sociologists mumble about frustrations caused by recession and unemployment.
Nobody really knows why, after left-wing terrorism seemed to be receding, the extreme right is now bent on murder. But the toll is mounting and the targets are more frequently Jewish.
Israeli officials say it is impossible to condemn Israel and proclaim the justice of the Palestine Liberation Organization's cause, as France does regularly, without creating a climate that endangers Jews everywhere.
Many who oppose violence nonetheless say things which give it intellectual justification. Alain de Benoist, a leading ideologist of France's ''New Right,'' wrote that ''an intelligent racism, which has a sense of ethnicity, is less harmful than an intemperate, leveling, assimilating anti-racism,'' and the phrase became a slogan of violence-prone extremists.
It was in 1967, shortly after the Six-Day War, that President de Gaulle called Jews ''an elite people, sure of itself and domineering,'' signaling the pro-Arab and essentially anti-Israel policy which France has pursued ever since. The words still resound here.
They are still few in Europe, the human beings who practice terrorism to intimidate societies in the direction of their sick dreams, just as the renascent Ku Klux Klan in the United States comprises few. And there is a dilemma for democracies which guarantee free speech and recognize only crimes of deed, not of thought.
But there is a moral responsibility for opinions which incite to murder. There is the proof of more than 20 million dead, the victims of the Nazi holocaust and of World War II, that a civilization which tolerates first a little evil talk, then shrugs off a few evil deeds, is launching itself toward a tragedy that spares no one. There is a strange, historic role of Jews as the bellwether victims of impending doom.
This is not just a matter for the police, just a matter for governments, just a matter for Europeans. It is the obligation of all who profess any love for life and freedom to reject with utmost resolution both the deeds and the thoughts which lead to them, wherever they appear. It is an obligation not only of decency but of survival itself.


End of Document