FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
DEFINITION OF TERRORISM
The New York Times
March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 722 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Everybody is talking about terrorism, but not everybody means the same thing. For some time, readers have been writing to ask: ''What about American aid to the Nicaraguan contras?'' ''What about Angola's Savimbi?'' ''What about the Israelis in southern Lebanon?'' ''What about Afghanistan,'' both sides?
There are many forms of violence in the world. I consider all of them deplorable, whether a car bomb in Beirut, a plane or ship hijacking, an enforced psychiatric treatment in the Soviet Union, blowing up a Nicaraguan village, the war between Iran and Iraq.
But different systems of violence require different defenses and countermeasures. A major reason for the feeble international response on dealing with terrorism is the failure to reach a specific definition of what is meant. If the term is blurred to mean political violence from opponents, while violence against opponents constitutes ''wars of liberation'' or ''freedom fighters,'' then there will never be an effective cooperation front against terrorists.
But it should be possible to be clearer, and so to avoid the distasteful alibis for condoning random murder of uninvolved civilians for political reasons. The issue isn't whether war, civil war, assassination or shooting up tourists at an airport is more or less disgusting. It is what can be done about these excuses for blind killing.
Terrorism is a specific form of political violence and requires a specific response, but that cannot be organized without a specific definition. Obviously international cooperation is necessary. There is evidence enough that terrorist groups with quite different causes do cooperate -Libyan, Irish, Iranian, German, Palestinian, and so on - and cannot be foiled by any nation alone.
Cooperation of authorities to prevent terrorism, however, has stumbled on disagreement about just what is involved. There has been a tendency to approach the problem in terms of what is considered a just or an unjust cause. This becomes an insuperable obstacle, dragging officials who profess to be the toughest opponents of terrorists into the quagmire.
Thus, when Secretary of State George Shultz advocates ''moderate use of force'' to capture suspects anywhere in the world to bring to trial in the United States, he is suggesting that America go into the kidnapping business to get even with kidnappers.
Any useful definition of terrorism is necessarily arbitrary, making a distinction not on the basis of how heinous the crime or wanton the violence, but on the basis of how it is organized. To call one act warfare, another revolution or counterrevolution, and another terrorism should not establish an order of justification but an order of how to organize a response.
If categories could be established more clearly, there would be a much better chance that governments could agree at least on trying to suppress one mindless plague.
An appropriate definition for terrorism might be the use of force against parties who are not involved in a conflict, who don't even engage themselves or know they are entering a danger zone, in order to make a political statement. Practically all use of force is intended to frighten and intimidate. The question is how directly or indirectly it is applied. Certainly, it is not how admirable or repellent the cause.
The importance of arriving at such a non-polemical definition is that it could bring a big advance toward the kind of international action that might be more effective.
However much they may plan and indulge in violent acts, most governments oppose the uncontrolled use of force for special purposes. Here is a ground for a general approach against terrorists, providing that a precise, nonpolitical definition can be developed.
This may seem cynical in a world that risks much more destructive violence from the organized forces of government, but the facts of a balance of power and political relations impose a restraint that does not now exist on violence without avowed state responsibility.
There have been hints that the Russians, and maybe even the Syrians, who have been targets of domestic terrorism from Arab enemies, would not be averse to cutting off the international opportunities for gangs they may once have aided but who have become self-propelled. Defining terrorism is the first step to organizing an international defense.


End of Document