FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Talking of Terror
The New York Times
November 30, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 771 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body


Bassam Abu Sharif was a terrorist and he was a victim of terrorism. Now, as chief spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organization, he says ''I don't think there's a future for either one if there's no cooperation'' between Israelis and Palestinians.
He served as Yasir Arafat's point man for peace last summer, calling for direct talks because ''no one can build his own future on the ruins of another's.'' Mr. Arafat, mindful of weaving contradictory strands into his own words, has never gone so far. He neither echoes nor repudiates Mr. Sharif.
Bassam, as he's called, comes out of an extremist faction, George Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. His own story, the strands of his own thought, shows how a man's mind can encompass attitudes that don't seem to fit together but evolve with experience into a new approach.
He comes from the village of Kafr Aqab, near Jerusalem, where he was born in 1946. He went to Beirut to study at the American University and was there when the 1967 war stopped him going home again. He studied economics, business administration, chemistry and history and he says he was offered lots of good jobs.
''But I decided to join the resistance to the occupation,'' he says. ''My family was inside; it was a human reaction. We started in the resistance with the idea of going back, but then it was a reaction to the iron fist. We found that political talk was useless, it fell on deaf ears, so we were forced to use arms.''
He went to a camp in the Jordanian desert with a group from the university. With a Jordanian passport, he traveled to Europe and the U.S. three times between 1967 and 1970, delivering lectures on the Palestinian cause. ''Numbers of my family, hundreds, live in the U.S.,'' he said.
Bassam says: ''I never shot a bullet. I was not a fighter, I was a political cadre.'' He doesn't say whether he actually helped plan terrorist deeds, but he accepted them as a member of his organization. ''I was enthusiastic in the beginning for sensational operations, without casualties, to draw attention to our cause.'' Of course, the threat is still terrorism.
In 1970 he took part in the hijacking of three airliners that were kept in the Jordanian desert for a week and then blown up. He notes that there were no casualties, and says his role was to explain the cause to the passengers. Bassam says a New York rabbi told him very seriously, ''If I were in your place, I'd probably do the same.''
That dramatic incident provoked world headlines and led to open fighting between P.L.O. and Jordanian forces in ''black September.'' The P.L.O. fighters were driven out and established themselves in Lebanon, where again they did what they could to build a ''state within the state.'' It was an important factor in bringing on the Lebanese civil war.
Bassam was in his Beirut office in 1972 when a big envelope came containing a book, ''the size of Webster's, with Che Guevara on the cover. It was a nice, cultural, explosive book.'' The bomb, evidently sent by Israelis, ripped several fingers off his hands, disfigured his face and nearly left him deaf and blind. A friend says he had been ''very handsome, like a movie star.'' Now he is scarred and has eye trouble, a dark, stubby but surprisingly relaxed man.
He was in a hospital for a month. ''I had a lot of time to think. I decided I would continue working for the cause in whatever way possible, but contrary to expectations, it didn't turn me into a man who wants revenge. I refused to fall into the vicious circle.''
After what he calls ''a lot of discussion'' in the P.F.L.P. that year, he says the Habash group decided to quit international terrorism because it was counterproductive. But gradually he moved toward the less radical Arafat line, chafing under Syrian influence when his group moved to Damascus, where I first met him. In 1979 he was expelled for shaking hands with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, and openly joined Mr. Arafat.
''My view is if there is a chance for self-determination and a state, we should do it,'' he says. He is an example of thoughts catching up with realities, and he criticizes colleagues who cling to ambiguities. ''They speak in Arabic though the words are in English. But the opportunity is clear for people who are serious about peace.''
Denial of a visa to Mr. Arafat to speak at the United Nations was on grounds of the U.S. right to ''safeguard its own security'' because of ''Mr. Arafat's associations with terrorism.'' Nobody thinks he plans to throw a bomb in New York. The question is whether his view, too, has really evolved. He should have a chance to prove it.


End of Document