Foreign Affairs;
Cuddling Saddam
The New York Times
July 9, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Op-Ed
Length: 702 words
Byline: By LESLIE H. GELB

By LESLIE H. GELB
Body


Did President Bush's policy toward Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait involve law-breaking? Maybe. And maybe some official cover-up afterward. In any event, it would take far too long for an independent counsel to get to the bottom of the matter, and the results would be problematic.
Was the policy merely a "mistake," as Bush officials are wont to say? This remarkably generous description would be laughed off by Republicans if Democrats had committed even remotely similar sins.
Was it a blunder? Yes. And of such proportions that Bill Clinton and Ross Perot would be crazy not to drag the issue into the Presidential campaign.
This much is already clear from the previously secret documents put on display by Representatives Henry Gonzalez and Sam Gejdenson: The Bush Administration knew or had good reason to believe that Saddam Hussein was involved with nuclear weapons, terrorism, genocide with chemical weapons against the Kurds, illegal diversion of loans to buy arms -- and that he was a very bad guy with boundless ambition.
Yet in the face of all this, Bush & Co. consistently protected him from an increasingly suspicious Congress.
Protect Saddam to what end? To "moderate" his behavior, the officials say and said. To glimpse how zany this was, to see what they saw as acceptable behavior, look at what they knew or suspected about Saddam from 1988 on:
They had good reason to believe Saddam had a secret nuclear weapons program. True, international inspectors were giving Iraq a clean bill of health. But they knew of its longstanding effort to acquire weapons-grade uranium, and that in 1990 it tried to smuggle in U.S.-made nuclear capacitors. They also knew that from 1985 to 1990 the U.S. had approved 771 items of dual-use technology, of which 162 had possible nuclear applications.
On June 15, 1990, less than two months before the Kuwait invasion, a senior State Department official told Congress that Iraq was not a "near-term" nuclear threat. But he went on to note Saddam's "great lengths to develop non-conventional weapons," including nukes.
Bush aides also had definite information about an Iraqi missile program with capabilities well beyond Scuds. Many officials argued that these missiles, given their potential accuracy, made sense only as carriers of a nuclear payload. Some officials further maintained that Iraq had been diverting loans from the Banco Lavoro to finance this effort.
Administration officials knew that Saddam was still engaged in terrorism. In a secret memo in late 1988, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy wrote that the Iraqis had "curbed their support for Palestinian terrorism, while remaining willing to use international terrorism themselves against their opponents." Though officials had even harder information later, they continued to reaffirm their decision to remove Iraq from the list of terrorist countries.
Officials also knew that Saddam was trying to exterminate Kurds and had used chemical weapons to do so. A State Department memo of November 1988 referred to "reliable reports" of chemical weapons use and went on to say that "upward of 500 Kurdish villages have been depopulated. . . ."
Officials also believed Saddam was evil. A typical State Department memo from 1988 said, "His worldview is that of a conspirator who believes that power comes from the barrel of a gun." Another from that year called his state "totalitarian," and added: "The brutality visited on portions of Iraq's Kurdish population fits into the general framework of repression. . . ."
Knowing or at least worrying about all this, Mr. Bush nonetheless approved new farm credits and dual-use technology sales for Iraq and opposed Congressionally imposed economic sanctions. And in July 1990, as Saddam's forces were poised to attack Kuwait, he opposed a Senate move to bar further loans to Iraq. As bizarre, on Nov. 16, 1990, with 500,000 U.S. troops already in the Persian Gulf, he vetoed a bill that would have forced him to impose sanctions on states that use chemical weapons.
Just imagine what George Bush, Ronald Reagan and other hard-nosed Republicans would be saying today if "President Dukakis" or soft-headed Democrats had made any such simple "mistake." Just imagine.

Load-Date: July 9, 1992


End of Document