Foreign Mercenaries Behind Drug Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 22, 1989, Friday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 4
Length: 370 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
Body


BRITISH and Israeli mercenaries smuggled weapons through Panama to train hit squads for cocaine cartels, according to the head of Colombia's criminal investigation office.
Gen. Miguel Maza Marquez, chief of the Department of Administrative Security in charge of a month-long crackdown on drug gangs, offered the testimony Sept. 21 before the Colombian Senate, which is investigating reports that foreign mercenaries have been working for the drug cartels since 1987.
Gen. Maza said mercenaries ''can't escape responsibility'' for recent bank bombings and political assassinations, including the slaying Aug. 18 of Sen. Luis Carlos Galan.
The general's testimony comes amid mounting allegations Colombia is losing the war on drugs because traffickers have paid informants in the government, army, national police, and congress.
The Senate on Wednesday passed a resolution urging the government to make public other lists with names of politicians and government leaders alleged to have links with the cartels. President Virgilio Barco has said he's not aware of any such lists.
The senators also asked for a list allegedly drawn up by the United States Embassy with names of Colombian politicians denied visas because of suspected drug connections.
Maza said mercenaries trained paramilitary groups in the Magdalena Medio region of central Colombia, a mountainous niche for death squads and cocaine laboratories. He also said foreign military trainers smuggled weapons from neighboring Panama to train four paramilitary groups. Squads of 50 to 80 men each received up to four months of training, Maza said.
He said at least nine Israelis trained the squads. It's unknown how many British mercenaries were involved, but the British Embassy has acknowledged trainers were in Colombia.
Maza said his information was based in ''intelligence investigations,'' but he charged that many in the military and government, in an attempt to discredit him, and have been slow to act on his reports.
Maza, victim of at least four recent attempts on his life, headed the investigation that led to the government issuing an arrest warrant Monday for Yair Klein, a former Israeli army colonel accused of training paramilitary squads for drug cartels.


End of Document