FOREIGN AFFAIRS
The New York Times
December 18, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-ed
Length: 766 words
Byline: Middle East Challenge for BushBy Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The decision to open official U.S. talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization lets President-elect George Bush off the hook. It opens the way for a new phase of American diplomacy in the Middle East, and a badly needed overall review of U.S. policy and concerns.
Despite Washington's fumbling explanations, it was an obvious flip-flop after Secretary of State George Shultz barred Yasir Arafat from New York because he was a terrorist. There must have been a tremendous fight last Wednesday before Mr. Shultz finally conceded.
By then, it was after midnight in Geneva, where the U.N. Assembly went just to hear the P.L.O. leader. The carefully crafted statement, which Mr. Arafat read in English at a press conference, delayed over nine hours, had been under tense negotiation all day long. There was great pressure from America's European allies, from friendly Arab states, and within the Reagan Administration to end the haggling. They felt Washington had reneged more than Mr. Arafat.
Indeed, the differences in his Geneva press conference statement from what he had said before were minor enough to be little more than face-saving for the U.S. Certainly, Jerusalem didn't take them as any impressive change. The key words were that Mr. Arafat replaced his ''rejection and condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, including state terrorism'' with I ''totally and absolutely renounce all forms of terrorism, including individual, group and state terrorism.''
No matter, the Reagan team is on its way out, the verbal acrobatics can be set aside, and a beginning made on addressing the real and immense policy problems. Terrorism will remain one of them. P.L.O. representatives claim it was their tip that enabled West Germany to arrest a group about a month ago that was plotting a synagogue massacre when Mr. Arafat appeared at the U.N. Other extremists, not necessarily excluding Israelis, may try such tactics again to destroy any chance for compromise.
There has been a palpable evolution among many Palestinians, particularly in the occupied territories, in favor of seeking compromise. People who speak for the intifada believe they were responsible for pushing the P.L.O. toward moderation and a willingness for peace between Israel and a Palestinian state with security guarantees.
The uprising, now in its second year, has changed Palestinian society. There is a new sense of solidarity, a pride of identity and of sacrifice, which has brought new confidence. ''When you feel confident, you can make concessions,'' a professor from Jericho said.
The committees formed to support the uprising are considered the embryo of self-government. Israeli authorities seem to think so too, for they try to destroy this infrastructure. They know how it can work; it is the way the Jews in Palestine prepared for their state when they were fighting the British.
And there is a new realism. Palestinian intellectuals volunteer that they have learned from Israel, even under occupation, what a democracy is, what a free press means. That is why, they say, they could not submit again to Jordan's autocratic monarchy. They admit that ''we and the Israelis have demonized each other, we have to learn to see each other as people and that will take a long time.''
So the Middle East problem the Bush administration will face is becoming different, though certainly no easier. The Soviets want to be involved and claim a new role as peacemakers. Senior American diplomats worry they could replace the U.S. as pre-eminent power in the region if Washington fails to move with events.
There has been a qualitative change in U.S.-Israeli relations in the Reagan years, not fully noticed because it came incrementally. It started with former Secretary of State Haig's notion of ''strategic consensus,'' underpinned with joint military planning, exercises and pre-positioning of U.S. equipment. It was furthered with a free-trade agreement, an intensification of intelligence exchanges, and establishment of three high-level joint groups on political-military issues, military assistance and economic development.
The Department of Defense subsidizes Israeli military research, for example on a tactical anti-ballistic missile, which has a low priority in planning for American defense needs.
It is time to assess all this in the larger context of American interests, refocusing on the moral and ethical principles at the heart of the relation. Israel faces hard decisions, and for this it needs reassurance and warm support but not automatic acquiescence from Washington. That is the challenge for Bush diplomacy.


End of Document