FOREST WORKERS BLAME FIRES ON VENGEFUL HUNTERS;
ARSONS ARE 'OZARKS TERRORISM,' OFFICIAL SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 6, 1998, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO, Pg. C1
Length: 1125 words
Byline: Deborah Peterson; Of The Post-Dispatch
Dateline: DONIPHAN, MO.
Body


On Nov. 19, Missouri conservation agent Randy Doman issued citations to two men in the Mark Twain National Forest for deer-dogging, illegally hunting deer with dogs.
Four days later - the day before deer hunting season ended - arsonists set the first of 31 fires that blackened 2,165 acres of forest land.
 
A coincidence?
 
Probably not.
 
A payback?
 
Probably.
"It's Ozarks terrorism," says Ben Wyatt, fire management officer with the U.S. Forest Service. "In the Ozarks, the arson-caused fires are very traditional. And very common."
More than 90 percent of the fires in the 330,000 acres of national forest that make up the Doniphan-Eleven Point ranger district are set intentionally, Wyatt says. So far this year, the district has had 85 fires, including the 31 set between Nov. 23 and Nov. 26, Thanksgiving Day. Doniphan is about 200 miles south of St. Louis.
District ranger Terry Miller said last week that he and other Forest Service firefighters were about 10 minutes behind the arsonists as they were setting the recent rash of fires.
"It's real cat and mouse stuff," Miller says. "It's a form of recreation for them (the arsonists) to go back home, turn on their scanners and listen to us."
A similar situation occurred inMarch, when Doman chased two men who were illegally hunting turkeys. Doman didn't catch the men. Three days later, a historic log cabin that the Forest Service and the Ripley County Chamber of Commerce had painstakingly restored was burned to the ground.
Doman says he recognized one of the hunters and believes he's linked to the people who set the recent fires.
 
Miller and Al Stevens, a fire service law enforcement officer, agree.
 
But all acknowledge they may never be able to prove it.
Proving arson is tough. The arsonist must be caught in the act, which is difficult to do because it's easy to drop a lighted match or a flickering cigarette lighter and quickly walk away.
Or authorities have to find an eyewitness willing to testify, and even then it's uncertain whether that would be enough for a conviction.
Authorities say the fires are set for several reasons, most of them having to do with retribution directed at the state game wardens for enforcing state hunting laws.
The most common infractions are deer-dogging, spotlighting, baiting deer, exceeding the legal limit of deer and hunting out of season, also known as poaching.
Spotlighting is when hunters use a bright light at night to "freeze" the game. Spotlighting, deer-dogging and baiting are designed to give hunters an unfair advantage over their prey.
Miller says the practices are so ingrained in the cultural tradition of the Ozarks that hunters resent even being told not to practice them, let alone being cited for doing so.
Also, it is legal to deer-dog in nearby parts of Arkansas, which makes it more difficult to enforce the law in Missouri.
The group operating in Ripley County is so brazen that one of the men visited Miller in his office three years ago and threatened him.
"He asked me what I knew about a 'bunch of game wardens running around in monkey suits' on the national forest," Miller wrote in a memo to Forest Service and Conservation Department authorities about the visit.
The man told Miller that the wardens were "getting the people all riled up," and that when people in the area get riled up, setting fires in the forest is "just one of the ways they get it out of their system."
 
Fear of reprisals
Along with the cultural norms, there are financial reasons for ignoring the law.
Doman says there are reports of individuals who bag from 50 to 100 deer a year, when the legal limit is one.
He says there is a large market for deer antlers, which are ground down and sold to foreign firms for making herbal and natural products. There is also a substantial black market for deer hooves and meat.
To prove his point, Doman says illegal hunting practices have thinned the deer herd so much in Ripley County that people don't hunt there much anymore during the legal season.
The capture this year was 1,071 deer. In neighboring Oregon County, about the same size as Ripley, 3,340 deer were bagged and licensed this year.
Authorities have offered $ 4,000 in reward money for information leading to the arrest and conviction of people in either the burning of the historic cabin or the recent fires. So far, it has gone begging.
Residents of nearby communities - such as Pine, Bardley and Briar - are afraid to report the villains, officials say. People who have stood up to the group have had their cats killed, barns burned and cattle shot.
One man's sawmill business was axed to ruins after he refused to stop calling authorities with complaints about the group.
In 1995, the conservation agent who preceded Doman was assaulted by two brothers.
Federal charges of forcible assault were filed against the brothers, who pleaded guilty to lesser charges.
Sheriff Mike Cochran acknowledges a serious crime problem in Ripley County, which has a population of 12,303. Along with illegal hunting, the area is plagued by marijuana farming and methamphetamine manufacturing.
 
"We're doing what we can, but I have a small staff," Cochran says.
 
'We know who they are'
In an effort to fight the problems, Cochran says the county belongs to two drug task forces, Southeast Missouri and South Central Missouri.
The task forces are cooperative efforts involving the Missouri Highway Patrol, county sheriffs and municipal police.
Regarding the grudge fires, Miller and about a dozen Forest Service workers, along with firefighters from Poplar Bluff, Potosi and the Shawnee forest, fought the blazes last month.
It ruined Thanksgiving for most Forest Service employees and forced them to scramble for firefighters from outside the district.
Despite that, there were no injuries, no damage to private property or public buildings. Some of the fires were extinguished within minutes. Others took longer to find, and the largest covered 340 acres before it was contained.
On average, the district feels the heat from between 50 and 70 fires a year, says Jody Eberly, a wildlife biologist and spokeswoman for the Forest Service.
"We probably have more fires on the average per year than any other district on the Mark Twain National Forest," Eberly says.
 
There are nine districts in the forest, all in Missouri.
One of the reasons for the high fire rate is that the Doniphan-Eleven Point district is about 70 percent public land. The remaining 30 percent is privately owned land scattered in small parcels throughout the district.
Another reason for the fires is the many service roads that criss-cross the district make it easy to set the fires and escape.
"They know we know who they are," says Stevens, the law enforcement officer. "I think some of them think it's kind of a game."    

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo by LARRY DODD - Jody Eberly, a wildlife biologist with the U.S. Forest Service, contains a small fire in the Doniphan-Eleven Point area of the Ozarks. Officials say intentionally set fires are common in parts of the Ozarks. Thirty-one fires were set in the Doniphan-Eleven Point area during a four-day period around Thanksgiving.

Load-Date: December 6, 1998


End of Document