Foreign policy becoming key Clinton, Dole play to fears of terrorism
USA TODAY
June 28, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 455 words
Byline: Susan Page
Dateline: PEROUGES, France
Body


PEROUGES, France -- Harold Ickes, the deputy White House chief
of staff who is overseeing President Clinton's re-election campaign,
watched from the sidelines as Clinton waded into the crowd in
this village's cobblestone square.
Do occasions such as this help the president?
"Always," Ickes said. On foreign policy, he declared, "the
president has jurisdiction."
Actually, Clinton and GOP presidential candidate Bob Dole each
now regards himself to have a powerful advantage in the issue
of foreign policy. And often their approaches seem poles apart.
In a scathing speech this week, Dole attacked Clinton as "a weak,
passive, indecisive, vacillating, misguided dreamer who doesn't
understand how dangerous the world is." He pledged "restoration
of American leadership" in remarks that focused on containing
Moscow and expanding NATO.
But after the bombing in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 Americans,
Clinton is portraying himself as the sort of flexible thinker
needed to negotiate a world where terrorism, ethnic rivalries
and rogue regimes replace the Soviet threat.
While steadiness and strength were critical during the Cold War,
administration political aides argue, a post-Cold War world demands
other skills. Among them are adaptability and an ability to utilize
not only military might but also economic sanctions and the bully
pulpit of high office.
The theme permeated Clinton's speech to villagers, who encircled
a linden tree in the center of town planted just after the French
Revolution.
"Today's threats to the liberty your tree symbolizes are very
different from those of 200 years ago, different from the threats
of World War II or the Cold War," Clinton said.
Clinton campaign spokesman Joe Lockhart was more blunt in assessing
Dole's remarks. "Good speech," he said. "Wrong decade."
The tragedy in Dhahran seemed to point up Clinton's case on the
need for flexibility. For months, preparations for the economic
summit focused on how to create jobs, settle trade disputes and
ease Third World debt. But when the leaders convened Thursday,
terrorism dominated the agenda.
Still, for all Clinton's ability on the international stage, neither
candidate seems to have an edge: A March USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup
Poll gave Clinton approval-disapproval ratings of 49%-45% on foreign
policy. Dole rated 42%-30%.
Polls also show terrorism has become a prime concern since the
World Trade Center bombing in 1993 and the Oklahoma City bombing
last year.
"The Oklahoma bombing had a very, very sobering effect on Americans,"
Ickes said.
So TV pictures of the devastation in Saudi Arabia resonate with
voters. And on Sunday, Clinton will fill what analyst Stephen
Hess calls the president's role as "preacher-in-chief," leading
the mourning at memorials for those killed in Dhahran.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Jerome Delay, AP; Opening event: President Clinton (back to camera) joins G-7 Summit leaders Thursday at the Hotel de Ville in Lyon, France, before their opening session. Containing terrorism was on the top of the agenda.

Load-Date: June 28, 1996


End of Document