FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
WORDS AND TERROR
The New York Times
August 13, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 851 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 12
Body


The accelerating series of attacks here have led the French to ask whether their capital has become the new home of international terrorism, and if so why?
Even the question shows what an emotional, messy explosion of policy, politics and prejudice the murderers have set off. There is nothing simple about the issues involved. And if there is a key lesson, it is that in the tortured modern world words can wound and evasions boomerang.
PARIS, Aug. 12 - The accelerating series of attacks here have led the French to ask whether their capital has become the new home of international terrorism, and if so why?
The midday attack on Monday at Paris's best-known kosher delicatessen, Goldenberg's on the Rue des Rosiers, was neither the first nor the last of its kind this year. In the few days since, offices of an Israeli trading company were bombed and a car bomb wounded six passers-by in front of the Iraqi Consulate.
There is general agreement that the machine-gunning of Goldenberg's, in which 6 were killed and 22 injured, was anti-Semitic because the only purpose could have been to hurt Jews.
It is symptomatic of the complexes triggered by the crime that nobody has made a point of noting that one of the dead was an Arab who worked in the restaurant and another an American tourist who probably wasn't Jewish. The obvious reason was that Raymond Barre, two years ago when he was Prime Minister, betrayed too much when he condemned the explosion outside a synogogue on the Rue de Copernic, saying that some of the dead ''weren't even Jewish.''
Members of France's Jewish community, the world's fourth largest after the U.S., the Soviet Union and Israel, have spoken of deep, latent anti-Semitism in this country. Perhaps it is true. France yields to none in nationalistic reflex. It is a self-consciously Catholic country, though highly skeptic and scarcely pious. Despite frequent invocation of its historic role as a refuge, which it often does provide, it gives due respect to xenophobia.
The difference from other xenophobes, I suppose, is that the French feel they really are superior, so disdain for those who are different is sufficient. They don't need to hate. Certainly, anti-Semitism isn't tangible or a part of everyday talk and thought.  And certainly President Mitterrand, at whom young Jewish demonstrators chanted ''Mitterrand assassin'' and ''Mitterrand accomplice,'' is sincere in saying that he is and always has been a friend of the Jews.
Whatever may be the truth of charges that the ''climate'' of official French sympathy for the Palestine Liberation Organization and the tone of press coverage of the war in Lebanon have encouraged terrorists, the polemics have made things worse.
Prime Minister Menachem Begin reacted fiercely, demanding an apology, when Mr. Mitterrand allowed himself to be trapped by a Palestinian at a press conference in Budapest last June into comparing the bombing of Beirut with the atrocity of Oradour.
The village of Oradour-sur-Glane was razed during the Nazi occupation after its people were locked in the church and burned to death in reprisal for an attack by the French Resistance. It wasn't a battle, it was cold-blooded massacre. The words ''genocide,'' ''liquida-tion,'' ''Fascists,'' ''Nazi-like,'' even ''holocaust'' have been used extravagantly in the French press denouncing the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the battle of Beirut. It is inexcusable, although it might be added that the press has blamed the U.S. even more than Israel for allowing the war to continue.
Mr. Begin's reply to the Rue des Rosiers, however, has been as offensive to the French, Jews and non-Jews alike. ''I am proud to be the Prime Minister of Israel,'' he said, ''but first of all I am a Jew. If the French authorities don't put a stop to murderous attacks by neo-Nazis against Jews, I will not hesitate to call on the young Jews of France to defend their people and their human dignity.''
It was taken as an attempt to revive the painful old question of double allegiance, or even single allegiance, of the citizens of a democracy to a foreign power. Even before the state of Israel existed, and the insidious charge was put to American Jews, American Catholics faced the same slander. French Jewish leaders made clear they were opposed to any private militia and they resent Mr. Begin's claim of a right to interfere in their country.
But the question of terrorism in France isn't only about attacks on Jews. It is true that there has been a steady increase in incidents, nourishing the view that France is lax. Given steamy French politics, the opposition is making the most of it, though the ugly record of tacit indulgence stretches well back over its own years in power.
Under guise of political asylum, France has allowed Basque, German and Armenian as well as Arab terrorists to operate from here, hoping they won't operate on French soil. It is only beginning to learn no spoon is long enough to sup with such devils.
There needs to be a cease-fire on violent, aggressive language and a cold, effective police war on terrorism. Poison spreads. Good will withers.


End of Document