FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
WHAT IS AN ALLY?
The New York Times
April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 763 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


There has been a maximum of short-term politicking and a minimum of strategic political thought in the matter of opposing Libyan-backed terrorism. This has been the case in Europe, except for Britain's Margaret Thatcher, as well as in Washington.
The French are deeply upset now by the reaction of Americans to their refusal to allow overflights for the U.S. raid on Libya. Many claim that France has been unjustly singled out for anger and what amounts to a spontaneous popular boycott. To the question ''What are allies for?'' the indignantly defensive answer is another question. Do you expect us to knuckle under to the U.S. on everything?
As they reconsider, a number of eminent French commentators have attacked their Government for its pusillanimity, its craven shortsightedness, and for risking the danger of a breach in the alliance. The claim that France would have supported a bigger, more decisive American attack on Libya seems to be a deliberate effort in Washington and Paris to muddy the tracks and help leaders on both sides escape a disagreeable confrontation.
Critical articles in the two main French news weeklies brush the sophistry aside with headlines reading ''The French Rejection,'' ''A Friendship Betrayed,'' ''The Ostrich,'' ''The Europe of Impotence,'' and argue that the Atlantic rift outweighs whatever illusory advantages Europe thought to gain. They call for supporting the U.S. without quibbles.
But the polls are not so clear on public opinion. Gallup showed a majority (59 percent) approving the American raid but a larger majority (63 percent) approving French refusal of overflight. Louis Harris, taken a few days later, showed a majority (56 percent) disapproving the raid and an overwhelming majority (79 percent) approving the Government's decision. Yet most people seem to be hurt and surprised that Americans take it badly.
The attitude gap is enormous. It is necessary now to separate the issues of the raid itself and the meaning of alliance.
I think the raid was unwise because it could not advance the goal of stopping terrorism. In fact, the high-decibel crusade against terrorism advances its objectives. It is certainly a brutish evil, but not the only one in the world. In terms of injury and death to individuals, corruption and degradation of society, erosion of political institutions and the rule of law, the drug traffic is much worse.
The terrorists have been awarded the limelight, to a degree far beyond their own capacity of achievement. I suspect that is because it is easier to single out and dramatize the role of Libya's Colonel Qaddafi with his Soviet weapons than that of drug dealers, as an old western embodies the struggle of forces of good and evil, identifying them with a white or black hat.
International problems may bring high adventure but they are not an entertainment. It isn't difficult to figure out what the Russians must be calculating in their shrill but prudent handling of the Libyan case. They are not giving Colonel Qaddafi enough support to protect him from America's ire, which they have given Syria's President Hafez al-Assad.
They don't like Mr. Qaddafi because he is unpredictable, uncontrollable, a worrisome rogue. But they are giving Libya enough support so that if the U.S. should manage to topple the colonel, Moscow will be in a good position to have even better relations with a successor regime and perhaps convert it into a reliable Soviet ally like South Yemen or Ethiopia.
There is no sign that Washington has given much thought to what might come after Mr. Qaddafi. It is as if the story of terrorism and the nuisance value of Libya end when he ends. Dealing seriously with the trouble doesn't require such a loss of perspective, but that is no excuse for allied apathy.
The importance of the U.S. attack on Libya, the campaign against terrorism, and the troubled alliance including French-American relations are on quite different levels of magnitude.
If the raid did anything useful at all, it may have been to stimulate the Europeans out of their cringing lethargy at the call for sanctions against Libya. They are edging up to a recognition that they have far greater interests elsewhere. But fighting terrorism is a bigger question, and it will take many more concerted international measures.
Far beyond that is the need to reaffirm Western solidarity and lead people on both sides of the Atlantic back to an understanding of their reasons for friendship and mutual support. That is the task for the Tokyo summit, and European leaders must realize that this time the onus is on them.


End of Document