FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Time Organize
The New York Times
January 3, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 765 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel has said ''the time has come to organize an international effort'' against terrorism. Certainly it has.
Israelis don't see why they alone should be ''the world's anti-terrorism mercenary,'' The New York Times's Thomas Friedman reports from Jerusalem, and they point out that they are by no means the only target of Middle-East-sponsored terrorists.
Further, it is an illusion to think it possible to sort out different kinds of terrorism - Palestinian, Sikh, Basque, Irish, Belgian, whatever -and consider them in separate compartments. Not only are there indications that many groups are linked, even without specific ties; the dramatic actions of one fire the imagina=&tion of others.
The sense of frustration in dealing with terrorists is heightened in an overarmed world where countries bristle with heavy weapons and atomic bombs but do not seem to have the power to put down these organized murderers. It helps little for the U.N. to denounce the idea, and for its member states to turn a blind eye when they are not directly victims of attack.
Retaliation is a difficult issue. States have a right and duty to protect their citizens, but there is nothing to cheer about when governments descend to the level of assassins and particularly when ''reprisals,'' not the same as punishment, hit yet more people not involved in any crimes.
The issue is even more complicated by the increasing trend to suicide missions. It is impossible to kill a dead terrorist. The rage to kill, at the risk or even the certainty of losing one's own life, seems to have become a dominant motive. The perpetrators no longer seem to have demands that could conceivably be achieved by force, except to call attention to themselves and to claim martyrdom.
Secretary of State George Shultz was right to pound the table in Belgrade when he was asked to consider the ''cause'' that led Abu Abbas to mastermind the Achille Lauro hijacking. More worthy of consideration is the ''cause'' that led Italy and then Yugoslavia to let him go.
That is the heart of the matter, and in the first instance it raises the question of Libya, though also of any country or organization that harbors or comforts terrorists.
There is nothing new in Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's congratulating the teams that wreaked carnage at the Rome and Vienna airports for their ''heroic operations,'' and then feigning to deplore acts of terrorism. He has been saying one and the other for years, depending on the day.
Now, presumably in hopes of warding off a counterattack on the well-heeled base he offers terrorists, he has gone on to make the ultimate terrorist threat: ''We hope the United States and Israel will make the mistake of attacking us because that will bring a war which will set fire to the Middle East, the Mediterranean and probably the whole world.''
Nothing different is to be expected from Mr. Qaddafi. If anything is surprising, it is that countries that have been subjected to his cruel wiles still imagine they can get on with him, do business with him, appease him.
In the last year he has met with the Prime Minister of Spain and then the President of France, a meeting arranged by the Prime Minister of Greece that took place on Crete after Mr. Qaddafi broke his pledge to President Mitterrand to withdraw Libyan troops from Chad.
He has been to Vienna several times and has ostensibly good relations with Rome. No wonder he acts with impunity. The U.S. has broken relations and banned imports of Libyan oil, but there are still several thousand American citizens in Libya helping to produce the oil. Colonel Qaddafi may be called a pariah, but he has not been treated as one.
Still, the threat of war is not to be brushed aside lightly. Libya is a bursting warehouse of Soviet arms, including the recently delivered SAM-5 advanced antiaircraft missile. Worse, tensions are building between Israel and Syria again. It must be presumed that the purpose of the latest terrorist attacks was to prevent possible peace negotiations between Israel and Jordan, and that purpose should not be served.
The need is for the countries of Europe to join America in banning Colonel Qaddafi from the international community, and then to cooperate against other terrorist bans. If the Soviet Union, whose citizens were also victimized in Lebanon, wants to improve its image in the West, it can stop arming Mr. Qaddafi and warn him of the consequences of his violence. The victim countries aren't powerless, they just don't want to use their real power - which isn't arms but their political and economic weight.


End of Document