FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
ISRAEL'S VITAL CHOICE
The New York Times
July 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 832 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS, July 11
Body


The televised debate between Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, and his challenger, Shimon Peres, was reportedly ho-hum. The campaign for elections on July 23 is coming to an end without directly addressing Israel's most severe and immediate problems.
 These are inflation, now 400 percent, and the search for peace. Apparently they are just too painful for the politicians to face with candor.
Flora Lewis column, noting recent televised debate between Israeli Prime Min Yitzhak Shamir and challenger Shimon Peres, holds election campaign is closing without directly addressing country's most severe problems: inflation, now at 400%, and search for peace in Middle East (M)
Dealing with inflation inevitably means an austerity program that will hurt terribly. Seeking peace means reopening the issue of territorial compromise and West Bank settlements. Despite the vigor of Israel's democracy, its society has gotten itself into a paralyzing impasse to avoid urgent questions.
For a long time, basic issues have been pushed aside on grounds that the Arabs aren't ready for a serious attempt at accord. Therefore, the argument went, why should Israelis divide themselves over hypotheses? Yasir Arafat made clear again only Tuesday in an appearance in Geneva that the Palestine Liberation Organization still isn't about to recognize Israel.
But it is becoming evident that the waiting game has had the same effect on Israel as it has had on the Arabs, increasing internal division and making it harder to cope with fundamentals of national purpose. Concluding a five-year assignment to Jerusalem, The New York Times's David Shipler wrote a perceptive summary of where the country has arrived after its 36th birthday.
It cannot resolve the underlying question of what kind of society it wants to be, Mr. Shipler reported, ''religious or secular, nationalistic or humanistic, Western or Middle Eastern, absolutist or pluralistic.'' He suggests this may be unresolvable.
If so, it is a sorry contrast to the clear-minded determination of the state's Zionist founders and may well be a greater danger to its flourishing survival than is Arab enmity. Above all, Israel is an idea: not a historical relic or accident but a creation of human decision. If it loses its sense of why it exists, it will lose its capacity.
There were always quarrels among Zionists. The most poignant moral issue for Israelis now is Jewish terrorism. It isn't as new as it seems. The state came into being through war, an underground army and immigration made illegal by the British mandate.
Menachem Begin's Irgun Zvai Leumi and the Stern Gang used terrorist tactics that David Ben-Gurion, who became the first Prime Minister, opposed to the point of a shootout to prevent a shipment of arms to Mr. Begin. Ben-Gurion felt then and later that terrorism was a bad heritage.  But there was an exultant sense of common values and common destiny in the early days, a humanistic vision of a modern nation that would rejuvenate the spirit of an ancient people bent with suffering. It vibrates through the biography of Jerusalem's Mayor Teddy Kollek, written by his son. Mr. Kollek, who was an aide to Ben-Gurion, brings back to life the high hopes and the miraculous energy that the vision inspired.  Now, as Mr. Shipler's report showed, Israel's mood is ''confused, corrosive,'' fearsome of pulling itself apart in a bitter conflict of its aspirations. He quotes Rabbi David Hartman as saying: ''This country requires a totally new channeling for its romantic passion. We're not here to reclaim the land. We're here to reclaim Judaism. What's at stake is the soul of a people. . . .'' Whether acknowledged or not, the underlying issue of the election is whether the country is going to try to regain its moral assurance and vitality by facing its real problems, or allow its arteries and its heart to harden.  King Hussein of Jordan told the visiting French President, Francois Mitterrand: ''We are rapidly approaching a moment of total despair for peace in the region. The risk is letting the last chance go by.'' That is an Arab view, but for different reasons it may be just as true of Israel. Arab impotence and Arab frustration stem from the inability to coalesce, modernize and infuse sick old societies with healthy energy. Israel risks sliding into a similar Middle Eastern pit if it allows its meaning to be narrowed into the sheer struggle for holding and wielding power, in the region or within the nation.  American sympathizers of Likud and its obsession with force and territory should weigh the stakes in the longer term. Many more years of intransigent refusal to make the effort for a renewed moral consensus may leave Isael unable to make the effort for peace. Religious fanaticism is gaining among both Arabs and Jews, and fanatics can't talk.  That doesn't mean Mr. Peres and a Labor-led government would assure a better, more rewarding course. But at least there's a chance. The Israeli voters' choice is vital.


End of Document