FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Terror in Many Stripes
The New York Times
July 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 709 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Terrorist attacks have broken out again in Europe. As Washington notes with a hint of smugness, there hasn't been evidence of Middle East-inspired terrorism since the April 15 American raid on Libya, but the idea of terror as a political weapon has proven itself alive with a series of new deaths.
Basques in Spain, left-wing extremists in France, West Germany and Portugal, Irish nationalists and Protestant loyalists in Northern Ireland have all struck in the last week.
Meanwhile, two Lebanese Shiites sentenced to 23 years in prison for attempted murder of a Libyan Embassy official have been released and deported by Madrid, apparently in return for Spanish hostages sent home from Lebanon. France is receiving the Syrian Vice President, Abdel Halim Khaddam, in hopes of speeding the return of French hostages in Lebanon.
A French court in Lyons sentenced George Ibrahim Abdallah, alleged chief of a Lebanese terrorist group in Europe, to four years on relatively minor charges. He has already been in jail for two years, during which time his group staged several attacks to demand his release. He is still to be tried in Paris with complicity in the murder of an American deputy military attache and an Israeli diplomat in 1982.
There have been widespread reports that the Paris court may dismiss the case for ''lack of evidence,'' although the police found the Czech-made pistol used in both killings in Mr. Abdallah's Paris apartment. The United States Government and the American's widow have asked to enter the case as civilian plaintiffs in an effort to forestall such a judgment.
And the American Embassy complained about the light sentence in Lyons, which could lead to Mr. Abdallah's early release. The complaint provoked a sharp rebuke from the French Foreign Ministry for ''unacceptable interference'' in French justice.
In the middle of all this, American officials predicted that Middle East terrorists, apparently lying low just now, are likely to switch tactics and launch large-scale random attacks in European capitals to exploit and prolong American fears of foreign travel. The tourist industry has been seriously hurt.
This certainly doesn't look like the great increase in cooperation among governments to block terrorism, which has been claimed. It looks like continuing national narrow-mindedness, each country trying to look out for its own and forget the consequences for others.
The anguish of negotiations for the return of hostages is understandable. The primary duty of each state to protect its citizens is undeniable. Legal systems and court procedures remain a national affair.
But it is clear that despite all the public posturing, there is still really no agreed Western stand on how to deal with terrorism, and whether or not to make concessions in an attempt to head it off.
The media have been criticized for helping the terrorists, who need publicity to spread their message of menace. It is true that they succumb, not only in the obligation of reporting the news but in magnifying the sensation.
Politicians too are tempted by the rewards of both talking tough and trying to deliver hostages. Spectacular measures, such as the American raid on Libya, did not succeed in demonstrating that terrorism doesn't pay, just that it is not a good idea to boast about it as openly as Libya's Colonel Qaddafi liked to do.
After the raid, he told an interviewer that he was ''very surprised, because I could not imagine how they could attack a head of state in his house with his family. It has not happened before in modern history.'' His history is bad - many heads of state have been attacked and even killed -but he seems to think attacks should be reserved for those of lesser status.
The effective proof that terrorism doesn't pay is that it has achieved no modern cause beyond grabbing public attention and, occasionally, winning the release of prisoners so they can strike again. This fact needs to be proclaimed, loud and often. It is a mistake to suggest that the motives of political terrorists should be sympathetically examined. They are sick minds who dishonor any cause.
It is also a mistake to be concerned about which terrorists are which, except in terms of catching them. They are everybody's enemy, whomever they hit.


End of Document