Foreign Affairs;
'UNJUST, USELESS AND SHAMEFUL'
The New York Times
August 7, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 814 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 6
Body


The lull in Middle East fighting and some delicate political shifts have created a moment when an act of will could bring a new breakthrough.
First, it is necessary to shed some old illusions. The history of the Arab-Israeli dispute has shown that it takes a combination of political and military struggle to establish a homeland, Jewish or Palestinian. Terrorism doesn't succeed.
Foreign Affairs discusses Middle East fighting and Israeli-Arab relations
Prime Minister Begin says he will never deal with the P.L.O.  because its members are terrorists. The P.L.O. answers that before he could become a politician, Mr. Begin was himself a terrorist, the leader of the Irgun Zvai Leumi.
The area has a long history of use of terror, as distinct from organized military operations with specific targets. Before Israel was created, several Jewish groups acting separately and sometimes against each other fought for a state, just as there are rival groups within the P.L.O.
The main Jewish force was the Haganah, organized as a disciplined army. The Stern Gang and the Irgun were the terrorists. The Irgun had a lot to do with creating the vast problem of Palestinian refugees, with its attack on the Arab village of Deir Yassein. It deliberately provoked fears of widespread massacre so Arabs would flee.
Over the years the Israelis managed to get along more or less decently with those who remained within the state's borders. But the Palestinian Arabs who fled abroad, and now their children and grandchildren, were never really absorbed into other countries, with some exceptions in Jordan. Many still live in camps, and many who work and live well in the gulf kingdoms are fervent Palestinian nationalists.
What was considered a temporary refugee problem at the time, a question of resettlement, remained and festered. After the occupation of the West
Bank and Gaza, it swelled the militant movement of the P.L.O. to plague Israel today.  In 1971, when many young Americans on the rampage were citing Israel as a prime example of the supposedly liberating effectiveness of terrorist violence, I asked David Ben-Gurion for his hindsight.
Israel's first Prime Minister was retired then, a sage elder statesman. After our talk, he sent me a handwritten note with his judgment.
It said, ''I will limit my answer to your question on terror only to Israel. The (Jewish) acts of terror in Eretz Israel were unjust, useless and shameful.''
By then, the argument in the Government on dealing with people in the territories occupied in the 1967 war had been settled. At first, Prime Minister Golda Meir insisted on maintaining an economic line separating Israel from the occupied areas.
Her reason was based on the Zionist philosophy of a Jewish state with all functions performed by Jews, from the highest positions to the lowliest ditch-diggers. She feared that permitting Arabs from the West Bank and Gaza to work in Israel and encouraging Israeli commerce with them would deform the state's social and moral structure, creating a bitter sub-class and sapping Israeli idealism. Her Defense Minister, Moshe Dayan, disagreed. He said people in the occupied territories must have a chance at economic improvement and trade since they were largely cut off from neighboring Arab countries.
Time tilted the decision to Mr. Dayan's view, as a solution to occupation and the border issue receded. In the circumstances, he was right economically. But his hopes that Arabs and Jews would get used to living together peacefully in this way and prepare a larger reconciliation have so far proved wrong.
Camp David was another attempt to face the issue, with a five-year transition period of Palestinian autonomy. But autonomy is far from beginning, and next spring the return of Sinai will be completed.
So far, nothing has worked to ease the central question of Israeli-Palestinian relations: not terrorism, not expulsion, not absorption, not fraternization, not autonomy. The only remaining possibility is a political way out.
While it still harbors avowed terrorists, as the Zionist movement did before 1948, the P.L.O. has now evolved a political structure and capacity. After the recent cease-fire, Yasir Arafat has a new political strength.
He should feel able now to do what he has never yet dared, to proclaim a provisional government-in-exile. The P.L.O. always avoided that because a government would have to state its policy toward Israel, and the factions couldn't agree on whether to recognize its right to exist.
By forming a government and accepting the fact of Israel, Mr.  Arafat would dramatically transform his claim to international recognition of the P.L.O.
There would still be a maze of problems, but it would be another crucial breakthrough. It is time to acknowledge, as Ben-Gurion did long ago, that terrorism brings publicity but not practical results.  That takes political wisdom and courage.


End of Document