FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
The Concern Is Results
The New York Times
April 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 737 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: BLOOMINGTON, Ind.
Body


There are many more doubts about the wisdom of the U.S. attack on Libya here at Indiana University than TV reports indicate among the public at large. A college climate encourages thinking about motives and consequences.
Both President Reagan and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi have obviously been influenced more by their own rhetoric. Having pledged that the American superpower ''will not sit still'' for indiscriminate attacks on its citizens, Mr. Reagan evidently felt the need to demonstrate with the overwhelming force at his command that he meant it.
Having proclaimed himself the champion of the Arab cause and at war with America, Colonel Qaddafi is driven to use the meager but insidious force in his grasp - terrorism - to pursue his goal. In the abstract, his defiance has invited retribution.
But that isn't what matters now. This is a lawless world. Prosecutors and defendants can each set themselves up as judges in their own eyes, but that promises neither justice nor the protection of innocence. Americans shouldn't be surprised that people in other countries have a different perspective, and that allies do not automatically endorse American methods even if they share the goal of putting down terrorism.
House Speaker Tip O'Neill said with obvious conviction, ''All this started because of the evil heart of a bad man.''
Denis Healey, of Britain's Labor Party, didn't dispute the moral outrage, but he called U.S. action ''a comic-strip approach, Rambo out to zap the baddies.''
Vernon Walters, the U.S. delegate to the United Nations, sarcastically derided what he saw as the ''Europeans' claim to know better'' than we ''ingenuous, stupid Americans'' about how to confront terrorism. As he pointed out, the record does show that Europe has been victimized far more often than the U.S.
In that light, it is hard to swallow European reluctance to take the political and economic measures that the U.S. seeks to isolate Libya, although it is true that Syria and Iran have just as bad a record. Nobody suggests reprisals against those countries because it implies too great a danger.
But it ought not to be hard to see why Europeans, whose safety depends on clear and sober U.S. judgment, worry more about results than principles.
Mr. Reagan himself said he had ''no illusion'' that the American raids on Tripoli and Benghazi would stop Libyan-backed terrorism. This assessment has been supported by official warnings to Americans to ''be alert'' when they travel and by the intensive, cumbersome and expensive but doubtless necessary increase in defensive security measures.
In other words, the Administration acknowledges that it has entered a battle, not scored a victory. Reports from Washington cite an anonymous official saying that ''a tit-for-tat strategy could not work,'' and that future moves will be decided ''case by case.''
The overriding purpose of the American President has to be to protect the lives of American citizens. The ''success'' of the attack has to be measured in those terms, not by the amount of damage wreaked. To be sure, impassive tolerance of aggression, even in the infuriating but limited form of terrorism, would not advance that cause. But neither does the blunt use of so much force.
The extremes are not the only possibilities. While I fully share indignation against Colonel Qaddafi's sinister use of murder to make himself important, I oppose the U.S. attack because it cannot serve the longer-term objective, and it imposes further costs of many deplorable kinds. Mr. Qaddafi often lies about his actions. We risk fooling ourselves about the effect of ours.
Still, wise or unwise, the deed is done and cannot be undone. The problem now is to try to bring the consequences of the U.S. attack into line with the goal. Certainly that cannot be achieved by using more and more force in response to the likelihood of more and more terrorist incidents.
Greater efforts than ever are needed to mobilize allies and others to demonstrate hostility to Mr. Qaddafi's methods, rather than provoking them to take stands against America's display of anger and frustration. That means a renewed search for joint political and economic sanctions.
America has shown that there are limits to its patience. Now it must show it also means what it says about promoting civilized behavior, accepting international rules in concert with friends, eschewing force and preferring diplomacy even when it stings.


End of Document