Foreign officials decry U.S. terrorism report Panel suggests monitoring of students and sanctions against Greece, Pakistan
USA TODAY
June 6, 2000, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 654 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- A congressional advisory panel was drawing fire
Monday after recommending increased monitoring of foreign students
and proposing possible sanctions against Greece and Pakistan to
guard against terrorism directed at the United States.
Both proposals were contained in a 44-page report from the National
Commission on Terrorism that concluded that international sources
of terrorism pose "an increasingly serious and lethal threat
to the American people."
"We must take steps before it costs American lives," said commission
chairman Paul Bremer, a former U.S. ambassador-at-large.
Greek officials responded angrily to the commission's suggestion
that the country be considered for designation as "not cooperating
fully" with U.S. anti-terrorism efforts.
Federal law provides for possible sanctions against governments
that repeatedly fail to act against terrorists or allow terrorists
safe havens.
"To question our political will to combat terrorism is totally
unacceptable," Greek embassy spokesman Achilles Paparsenos said.
"What this report portrays is that Greece is under the influence
of terrorists. The tone and substance of this report disappoints
us."
Support for the commission's proposal, Bremer said, was taken
from Greece's track record in dealing with terrorist acts. Pakistan's
record has not been consistent, the commission found.
Since 1975, the commission said, American interests have suffered
146 terrorist attacks in Greece.
"Only one case has been solved, and there is no indication of
any meaningful investigation into the remaining cases," the commission
found.
"Before we even started this study," Bremer said, "we said
we would follow the facts wherever they led us. We have no agenda."
State Department spokesman Phil Reeker said the report deserves
"careful study." But Reeker echoed earlier comments by Secretary
of State Madeleine Albright indicating that the Clinton administration
is not considering sanctions against Greece or Pakistan.
The State Department did not directly respond to the issue of
monitoring foreign students. Reeker said the department's position
has been "to encourage more international students to attend
U.S. schools."
Nearly 500,000 international students now study in the USA, contributing
$ 9 billion to the economy each year, Reeker said.
"The goodwill that these students bear, I think, will in the
future constitute one of our greatest foreign policy assets, and
we've supported that," Reeker said.
Bremer described the student tracking proposal as "rather insignificant."
He said it was no different from what is required under a pilot
program involving 21 universities in the South required by the
1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act.
Compliance with the program is mixed. It requires participating
universities, among them Auburn, Duke, Clemson and Alabama, to
provide the Immigration and Naturalization Service with the names,
addresses and academic status of their international students.
"The commission believes that (the pilot program) could become
a model for a nationwide program monitoring the status of foreign
students," the report said.
But Vincent Cannistraro, the CIA's former counterterrorism chief,
said the commission was "ill-advised" to include student tracking
in its report.
"The thing is too intrusive," Cannistraro said. "And there
is no evidence that students are posing a big risk."
The commission noted, however, that one of the terrorists involved
in the World Trade Center bombing in 1992 had entered the USA
on a student visa. Investigators found that the student dropped
out of school but remained in the country illegally.
"Today, there is still no mechanism for ensuring the same thing
won't happen again," the report said.
The report was the product of six months of work by a 10-member
panel created by Congress to evaluate U.S. policy related to terrorist
events, counterterrorism activities and intelligence-gathering
practices.
Contributing: Bill Nichols

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Dennis Cook, AP; National Commission on Terrorism: Paul Bremer discusses the panel's report Monday on Capitol Hill.

Load-Date: June 6, 2000


End of Document