FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
No Winners In Lebanon
The New York Times
July 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 25, Column 6; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 799 words
Byline: By Flora Lewis
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The crisis of the T.W.A. hostages has given the American public a glimpse of the hopeless, shifting imbroglio that has gripped Lebanon for a decade. The argument about who has won this round reflects intricacies of the murderous fight in the area and distortions of the limelight's glare.
Nobody wins in Lebanon. Nor does anyone trying to use its passions and greeds for outside purposes impose an order for long - not the Palestine Liberation Organization, not Israel, not the United States, not Iran, not Syria. Advantages tilt. But there is no settlement because there are too many rival factions backed by too many competing interests.
Op-Ed column by Flora Lewis holds TWA hostage critis has given American public glimpse of hopepess, shifting imbroglio that has gripped Lebanon for decade; holds terrorism is cause, not byproduct, of situation in Middle East (M)
The focus now is on terrorism, but that's a byproduct, not a cause. The region's growing problem, it has been said, is not the rise of extremes but the rise of an extremist center whose sympathies are engaged by violence.
The lack of effective authority, the convenient location and cosmopolitan flavor, easy access to arms and money have made Beirut the hub of international terrorism for years. It's not the source, but it cannot escape degradation for harboring such a commerce.
Attempting to cut off the airport makes sense as a temporary preventive measure that will complicate the plans of hijackers. They have had it too easy. But the underpinnings are too amorphous, too pervasive to be liquidated with precise blows at a commanding nerve center to destroy the ''infrastructure,'' as Washington suggests.
The effort must be to isolate and frustrate them. There are some signs that a sense of the world's revulsion is spreading even among those who sponsored terrorism in the past.
Even Iran denounced the hijacking. That may have been only a gesture, since Iran has done nothing to meet its pledge to prosecute hijackers of a Kuwaiti plane.
But it may also be a new recognition that governments must accept some international rules if they expect the international privileges of statehood. It is time to draft a convention, like the Geneva convention on prisoners of war. States that refuse to sign and apply it will name themselves accomplices of terrorism.
The fact is that no political cause has been won by using terrorism. Terrorists were involved in the fight for Israeli and Algerian independence, but the wars were won because of broad popular support. The same was true of the Iranian revolution.
The recent spread of Moslem terrorism based on fanaticism has no such clearly-defined goal. Robin Wright wrote in her forthcoming book, ''Sacred Rage - The Crusade of Militant Islam,'' that the militants' ''revolution is against foreign domination and encroachment in every aspect of their lives - symbolized most often and most recently by the United States.''
Their stand is a shriek of frustration against the pains and human cost of joining the modern world and the inability to share in its benefits. It is a mistake to conclude from the latest outrage that Shiism has a particular affinity for terror, or that terrorism is especially Shiite.
There are several forces of violent fanaticism in the world. Islam now is vulnerable because this happens to be a period of impatient awakening, sparked by Iran. Several factors have converged: the spread of education and broadcasting; the mirage that oil power could restore ancient glory; the yearning for equal standing; the sense of failure, which the orthodox can attribute to divergence from the path of pious righteousness.
Understanding this background is necessary to be aware of the pitfalls. There is no more a simple way to deal with it than there is a simple way for the afflicted people to overcome their furies. Neither retribution nor appeasement will work. But it is possible to strengthen the appeal of reason and peace, avoiding illusions.
Sometimes this takes subtlety. The American statement on ''the preservation of Lebanon, its government, its stability and security'' that broke the last obstacle to the hostages' return was indeed a concession, though to Syria, not to Lebanese militants. It abandoned the standard phrasing of policy on Lebanon's ''sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,'' which had been aimed against Syria. The change was realistic.  Israel also needs a realistic change: end attempts to create a frontier buffer zone with its puppet South Lebanese Army in return for Shiite pledges to do what they are determined to do anyway - keep Palestinians from the area. Lebanon is so ensnarled that it is possible to find common interests among erstwhile enemies. That is better than finding more enemies on the tricky road ahead.


End of Document