Foreign tie is seen in India blasts;
The premier hinted at extremists in Pakistan. The leader there vowed to help with a probe.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
November 1, 2005 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 432 words
Byline: By Matthew Rosenberg; Associated Press
Dateline: NEW DELHI
Body


Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said yesterday that there was a foreign link to bombings that bloodied two New Delhi markets, a veiled reference to Pakistan-based extremists. But both nations sought to preserve the fragile detente that grew out of the recent quake disaster.
Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, condemned terrorism and pledged full cooperation in the investigation of Saturday's bombing, which came three weeks after an earthquake ravaged the disputed Himalayan region and helped draw the two nuclear rivals closer.
During a phone call yesterday, Singh reminded Musharraf of "Pakistan's commitment to ending cross-border terrorism, and said that he continued to be disturbed and dismayed at indications of external linkages" to the attack, said Sanjaya Baru, a spokesman for the Indian leader.
But Baru declined to provide any details about the purported foreign links to the bombs that killed 59 people and wounded 210, or to single out Pakistan by name.
Accusations of Pakistani involvement in a previous attack in New Delhi, the 2001 assault on India's Parliament, put the neighbors on the brink of their fourth war in 60 years.
But they pulled back then, and the two sides appear intent on maintaining momentum toward peace gained in their cooperation since the Oct. 8 quake, which killed an estimated 80,000 people. Most of the deaths were in Pakistan's portion of Kashmir, but India's part also suffered.
Pakistani officials were quick to condemn the bombings over the weekend, and yesterday Musharraf called the bloodshed in New Delhi "a dastardly terrorist attack." He told reporters his country would fully cooperate in any investigation.
"Pakistan stands with India on this act of terrorism which has been perpetrated in New Delhi," he said.
A little-known Kashmiri group, Islamic Inquilab Mahaz, claimed Sunday that it was behind the New Delhi bombings, and Indian police said the group was linked to Kashmiri extremists based in Pakistan.
Yesterday, a major Kashmiri group seemed to be following Musharraf's lead, denying that it or other extremists had any role in the attacks.
"It is a big crime to carry out any operation in civilian areas," said Syed Salahuddin, chief of Hezb-ul Mujahedeen, a large extremist group in Kashmir. He spoke from Pakistan.
Still, the bombings seemed to confirm many Indians' suspicions about Pakistan.
A former Indian ambassador to Pakistan, G. Parthasarthy, said that "there is more than an element of hypocrisy" in Musharraf's comments.
"Messages of condolence don't impress me while terror infrastructure remains in place," he said.

Load-Date: November 1, 2005


End of Document