Foreign policy beyond scope of panel review
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)
December 30, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 The Pantagraph
Section: OPINION; Pg. A5
Length: 484 words
Body


The legislative panel that had a hearing on the possible sale of Thomson prison to the federal government should focus on the economic impact of the sale on Illinois and its impact on other state prison facilities - not on broader foreign policy issues. 
The issue of whether the federal detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, should be closed and suspected terrorists moved to U.S. soil - in Illinois or elsewhere - is beyond the responsibility of the state’s Commission on Government Forecasting and Accountability. 
Under the State Facilities Closure Act, the executive branch is required to provide information to the commission regarding the impact a proposed closure would have on state employees, state services, operational costs and the economies of the affected communities.  
Although the required information is "not limited to" what’s set out in the act, it’s clear that the law’s purpose is to have the panel make recommendations related to the impact a closing will have on the state and the communities directly involved. 
The impact the sale would have on the security of the state as a whole is a legitimate part of the inquiry - even if this situation wasn’t anticipated when the closure act was enacted. 
Will having former Gitmo detainees in Thomson increase the risk of Illinois becoming a terrorism target, as claimed by state Sen. Bill Brady, R-Bloomington? To some degree, it might.  
But Illinois is already a potential terrorism target as a hub for transportation and business, the site of several nuclear plants and the home of one of the nation’s bigger metropolitan areas. In other words, with or without the prison sale, security should be a priority. 
Brady, a member of the commission and also a candidate for governor, said, "We’re talking about bringing terrorists to Illinois." But terrorists are already in Illinois, serving sentences in the federal prison in downstate Marion.  
The head of the Federal Bureau of Prisons testified at the commission’s hearing this month in Sterling that this facility would be "the most secure of all federal prisons in the country." 
And the positive impact on the community - in an economically depressed area in an economically distressed state - is clear. 
While it can be argued that Thomson could be used to ease crowding at other state facilities, the reality is that wouldn’t happen any time soon. The only time opening Thomson has entered into serious discussions has been in the context of closing other state prisons. 
Many of the protesters at the hearing came from out of state and were against closing Guantanamo - a decision that’s already a done deal.  
The Commission on Government Forecasting and Accountability should focus on Illinois. 

Load-Date: December 31, 2009


End of Document