Foreign Affairs;
A Victory for Terrorists
The New York Times
October 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 749 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Despite an endless series of mutual pledges against terrorism, Europe has now openly displayed its split.
Britain broke relations with Syria after hard evidence of Damascus's involvement. This was a personal decision by Prime Minister Thatcher, against the advice of senior Foreign Office staff members who would have preferred a mushier reaction.
European Community ministers are to meet again on Nov. 10, and British officials are saying that they expect more support by then from their partners. But that is a combination of wish, excuse and attempted persuasion.
The British public is growing understandably angry. Top-level British-French cooperation against President Reagan's Reykjavik proposals is weakened by the emotional issue. And it is recognized here that the Europeans can't put up much of an argument about Washington's failure to take their views into account when they have just blatantly demonstrated they can't get together in their own defense against such an immediate and direct threat as terrorism.
Now the French have come along and confirmed the position they basically took all along - that they prefer trying to negotiate immunity from terrorism on their own rather than cooperate with allies. That was why France refused a sharp common stand on terrorism at the seven-nation Tokyo summit meeting last spring.
The new deal was made, and revealed by Le Monde, after the dramatic wave of Paris bombings in September. Although there are evident links between Syria and the Lebanese group deemed responsible, France carefully avoided implicating the Damascus Government.
Instead it obtained what it called a ''truce'' from Damascus, promising not to let the Lebanese group operate in France anymore. This has ostensibly been guaranteed by a promise from the pro-Syrian Lebanese Christian leader Elie Hobeika to take ''reprisals'' on the perpetrators if the truce is broken. It's like asking the Mafia to guarantee your padlocks.
Le Monde itself commented that ''French Middle East policy has definitely become illegible and incomprehensible for ordinary mortals.'' It quoted ''an eminent member of the Government'' describing the policy with blunt scatology that the paper would otherwise never print.
That is the least to be said. Little has been mentioned about what France has promised in return. The first bit, however, seems to be an interview by Interior Minister Charles Pasqua in a Saudi newspaper last week sympathizing with Syrian leaders' ''distress'' at being publicly linked to terrorists and praising their willingness ''to help us.''
The second promise seems to be clemency for the jailed Lebanese Georges Abdallah, whose brothers mounted the bombings in an attempt to free him. Mr. Abdallah faces trial not only for minor charges of possession of explosives but also for participation in the murder of an American and an Israeli diplomat in Paris. Foreseeing a deal, the U.S. joined the suit as a civil complainant months ago, so that hanky-panky with the French judiciary won't be so easy if the French Government attempts it.
Even more important to friends and neighbors is a possible third, unspoken arrangement that Paris has made quietly in the past. That was not to act against terrorists who use France as a base or a passageway for attacks in other countries. But this is what ''bilateralism'' implies. It is cooperation, all right, but with perpetrators and their mentors and not with victims. It would be a flagrant violation of France's international commitments.
There are many quibbles about how clearly Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, and his Government aides can be pinpointed legally as responsible for many incidents in many countries. What is accepted as certain by Western states, including France and the U.S., however, is that he could stop much of the terrorism if he wanted to. He is a hard man. He is not squeamish about who gets squashed when he chooses to put his foot down.
Syria can emerge from the shadow of world reprehension if it wishes to behave as a responsible state instead of a protector of terrorists, and so can its Soviet apologists. Certainly, the deal with France and the French illusion that safety can be bought this way should put paid to the misty arguments that terrorism must be addressed by resolving its so-called political cause of Palestinian grievances.
Meanwhile, the ugly bargain has to be seen as a political victory for terrorists, perhaps their first. France should reconsider whom it really wants for friends.


End of Document