FORGING NEW TIES WITH IRAN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 24, 1998, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B7, COMMENTARY COLUMN
Length: 634 words
Byline: Mohamed El-Bendary
Body


Secretary of State Madeleine Albright took a surprising foreign policy step last week. In a speech to the Asia Society, Albright offered to explore new confidence-building steps with Iran.
Her move is a good step toward dismantling the current distrust between Washington and Tehran. Our post-Gulf War Iran policy of containment and sanctions didn't reverse the Iranian regime from being a pariah to an open and responsible government.
It is true that the election of Mohammad Khatami as president, in a surprising landslide last year, may not necessarily signal a dramatic change on the part of the hard-line Islamic regime of the mullahs. Khatami remains an heir of Ayatollah Khomeini. But it is also true that, by refusing to talk to Iran's most reform-minded leader since the ouster of the shah, the Clinton administration is letting a chance for dialogue with the ayatollahs slip by.
The behavior of the Iranian government in the past - sponsoring terrorism, pursuing nuclear weapons and undermining the Arab-Israeli peace process - posed a formidable threat to American interests. To many Americans, Iran is the perfect example of a totalitarian regime. Indeed, American-Iranian mistrust is so deep that, In 1995, the Clinton administration cut off all dealings with Tehran.
The 1996 Iran-Libya Sanctions Act, which attempted to force Tehran and Tripoli to stop sponsoring terrorism, has yet to bring positive results. The "dual containment" policy (toward Iran and Iraq) made very little headway in curbing Iran's opportunity for subversion. China and North Korea - uninhibited by the prying eyes of American inspectors - have been helping the ayatollahs develop their long-range missile program.
On the other hand, the Europeans continue to maintain economic ties wi th the nation of the mullahs. Almost all of the 15-member states of the European Union returned their ambassadors to Tehran in late November as a sign of good will to a moderate, reformist Khatami.
On numerous occasions, the shiite Muslim cleric stated that his country would like to have peace with all nations and proposed to seek accommodation with the United States. This relatively permissive attitude of Khatami is facing tough opposition from the hard-line politics of Iran's ruling clerics. By shutting off Khatami, we are rewarding the fundamentalist lawmakers in the Iranian majlis (parliament).
If these dramatic and unpredictable changes should have signaled anything to the Clinton administration it is that Tehran, which in the past spread terrorism and fought Mideast peace, might now be open to change. Iran has to change because unemployment is high, corruption is widespread and people live in fear of government-sponsored terrorism.
Women and youth (the majority of whom voted for Khatami) are un der-represented in Iranian politics and bear the burden of the country's declining economic figures. Denying Iranians Western technology and maintaining our current confrontation with Tehran are not going to solve these problems. They will increase them.
In initiating a dialogue with Khatami, while still calling on Tehran to end political repression, human rights violations and support for terrorism, we are not legitimizing an oppressive regime, but rather helping the younger generation of Iranians join the New World Order.
When Iranians voted for Khatami last May, they voted not just for a new regime but for new ideas. The new Iranian president, unlike his predecessors, is not a megalomaniac but a down-to-earth pragmatist.
"As the wall of mistrust comes down," Albright said in her speech, picking up a phrase used by Khatami, "we can develop with the Islamic Republic, when it is ready, a roadmap leading to normal relations."
Developing that roadmap for good ties between Washington and Tehran is what matters now.

Load-Date: June 24, 1998


End of Document