Forget terrorism, fight AIDS
University Wire
December 4, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Arbiter via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 656 words
Byline: By Taylor Newbold, The Arbiter
Dateline: Boise, Idaho
Body


Last Saturday was World AIDS Day, a special day to remember those who have died of complications of the disease and a day to celebrate those living with it.
I found it upsetting that I never saw anyone else but myself wearing a red ribbon all last week except those helping as part of the activities of HIV/AIDS awareness week.
After seeing several news networks do their two-minute segment on the scourge twenty years of AIDS has left us with and then turning back once again to the news on this war on terrorism, I was disappointed.
Why does it seem that AIDS, even during the twenty-year anniversary, is no longer in the spotlight? Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome is one of the worst pandemics the world has ever known. It is responsible for the deaths of 21.8 million people that we know of according to the World Health Organization (WHO).
Boise State U.
Is it possible that the world's governments no longer think of AIDS as a threat?
To understand the havoc that AIDS has on the world one must understand the high mortality rate of people who are infected. There are three million people living in the city of Chicago, which is the same number of people who died worldwide of AIDS in the year 2000, meaning a population the size of the third most populated city in the U.S. are perishing annually.
That same year, 5.3 million new HIV infections occurred -- about 16,000 new cases per day. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that 800,000 to 900,000 people in the United States are currently infected with HIV with each year bringing 40,000 new cases.
With all those alarming statistics why should this insidious disease be ignored? Since a large percent of those infected worldwide live in Africa it becomes easy to say that it is Africa's problem; however, according to David Bloom, professor of economics and demography at Harvard University's School of Public Health, "In a global economy, none of us are insulated. The African AIDS crisis previews what potentially awaits the businesses and other economics that are more significant in the global economy like India, Brazil, China and Russia."
"The U.S. government now believes that HIV is a security threat," says Mark Feinberg, a professor at Emory University School of Medicine and an AIDS researcher since 1984. "What happens to one people will eventually affect all those around them."
HIV infection numbers are now on the rise in Asian and European countries according to the CDC. Our country has the power to completely annihilate another country's entire government -- shouldn't that power also be used to eradicate the most influential disease of our time?
It took the lives of thousands for the government to take a bite out of terrorism even after hundreds had already died at the U.S. Embassy bombings and other acts of terrorism. What will it take for our nation and its allies to set a powerful onslaught toward a cure and/or vaccine for AIDS?
Will it take the infection of one congressman, powerful bureaucrat, or Supreme Court justice to take the necessary steps? I suppose that is why they call it politics.
Yes, we need to sweep up terrorist scum in the world and it is easier to do that because there is now a need and international desire to do it. It is more difficult to stop a disease that is known for its insidiousness. It is an enigma, a secret plague that continues to affect so many people -- one of the most stigmatizing diseases in history. Is it any wonder why the families and friends of AIDS victims create blankets for their loved one -- for a disease whose very name envelopes our emotions and conjures up feelings of despair, loss, and grief.
Until our nation and nations like it unite to put on a cleverly devised attack against AIDS, much like they did for the cause in Afghanistan, then the band will continue to play on and the world will lose another Chicago.
(C) 2001 The Arbiter via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 4, 2001


End of Document