Former aide's attack on Bush's terror response seems credible
USA TODAY
March 24, 2004, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 406 words
Body

The comments on CBS' 60 Minutes by Richard Clarke, the White House's former top anti-terrorism adviser and aide to three other presidents, merely confirm what others already have pointed out. During the lead-in to 9/11, when, I believe, that horrible tragedy might have been averted, the new Bush administration failed to heed urgent anti-terrorism warnings ("Ex-aide: Bush ignored terror threat," News, Monday).
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice argues that President Bush's team merely continued aspects of the Clinton administration's anti-terrorism policy before replacing it with one of its own. As I see it, the Bush team didn't continue President Clinton's policy on terrorism at all.
I remember that Bush ran on a platform of scaling back U.S. involvement in foreign affairs. Terrorism seemed far off the Bush radar, as new Attorney General John Ashcroft prodded the Department of Justice back into its old law-and-order focus on violent crime, drugs and child porn. According to Clarke, Bush did not pay much attention to counterterrorism.
It is time for the buck once again to stop at the White House. If Bush wants to claim that he never will allow another terrorist attack on his watch, he first must accept responsibility for failing to make anti-terrorism a priority before the first one.
Jeffrey A. Coryell
Cleveland Heights, Ohio
Blame Bush game
Just months before the presidential election, we have another former White House official blasting the Bush administration.
This time, Richard Clarke, a career anti-terrorism expert for four administrations, tells 60 Minutes that President Bush was preoccupied with Iraq and ignored warnings about al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden.
What is not fully explained is how Clarke can imply that Bush could have prevented 9/11 after he was in office for only eight months, when for eight years the Clinton administration and Clarke failed to capture bin Laden or stop al-Qaeda.
Now, amid his accusations, Clarke has published a book that details the supposed failure of the Bush administration to combat terrorism, Against All Enemies.
How convenient.
John Jacobs
Memphis
President is greatest threat
After my review of the recent comments by former White House anti-terrorism adviser Richard Clarke on the current administration's response to the threat of terrorism, it has become clear to me who poses the greatest threat to U.S. national security: President Bush.
Ira Walters
Vancouver, Wash.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AFP/Getty Images; Serious charges: In the book Against All Enemies, released in stores Monday, Richard Clarke, the White House's former top anti-terrorism adviser, levels a strongly negative critique of President Bush's response to terrorism.

Load-Date: March 24, 2004


End of Document