Former journalist shares views on issues of terrorism; 'Kill them first': He says Americans try to see an illogical world as logical
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 19, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a8
Length: 615 words
Byline: mailto:mbragg@wcinet.comMARY RAE BRAGG  
Body


As someone who spent much of his career reporting the news from Southeast Asia, Sol Sanders' has a matter-of-fact view of terrorism and America's problems in dealing with it.
"The problem is, (Americans) are always dogged by scientism, the belief that the world is a logical place," Sanders said Wednesday during an interview with the Telegraph Herald. "One and one don't always make two."
Sanders was in Dubuque to speak to the Dubuque Area Committee on Foreign Relations, which met Wednesday night at the Dubuque Golf and Country Club.
Sanders said he agrees with President Bush and leaders of the Catholic Church when they say there is such a thing as evil.
"There have always been psychopaths, and there will always be psychopaths," he said.
While some say hatred that breeds terrorists is a result of the United States "throwing its weight around," Sanders said he thinks a symptom of the problem is the decline in the number of students taking regional studies.
"The distance between us and the Third World is growing all the time," he said.
Americans need to know the details of "why East Java is different from West Java," because knowing the peculiarities about groups is essential to understanding the larger picture, he said.
"The essence of any insurgency is always a very local condition," he said.
Sanders said it is "idiotic" to draw comparisons in trying to identify sources that create terrorists and "nonsense" to look for origins of the problem. For instance, the terrorists identified in the attacks upon the United States did not come from deprived backgrounds, although some would blame terrorism on poverty.
Nor is terrorism such as the attacks upon Washington and New York anything new, Sanders said, noting that in 1981, Philippine police uncovered and thwarted a plot to ram an airliner into a building during the Pope's visit.
Sanders said there is no perfect solution to stopping terrorist activity, and since the United States wasn't built for security, there is no way to protect ourselves.
"The logic of our situation is if those guys say they're going to come kill us, we have to go kill them first," he said.
Sanders said part of the nation's difficulty in dealing with terrorism is a misunderstanding of ourselves.
"America's problem is that we're not what we think we are," he said. "We think we're good with ideas. We're lousy on ideas. We think we're pragmatic. We're not pragmatic.
"Pragmatism means you have to get down to the details, it's not to make some generalization and then beat it to death."
The difficulty in obtaining accurate information is that while the Internet created an information explosion, it also led to a misinformation explosion, Sanders said.
The only way to get correct answers is to work at it, he said, and there is "a need to reject out-of-hand what's passing for conventional wisdom."
As a young man during World War II, Sanders dropped out of the University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. and joined the American Field Service's volunteer ambulance corps. A few days before the war ended, he was transferred to India, giving him his first exposure to Asian culture.
Returning to Missouri, Sanders completed his education and set upon a journalism career that has taken him to numerous publications, businesses and ports of call, many located in Southeast Asia.
These days, Sanders said he can easily spend six to eight hours a day at his computer, reading stories and opinion pieces from favorite newspapers around the world and exchanging e-mails with knowledgeable friends and acquaintances.
"If you've got the patience, I don't believe there's anything you can't find on the Web," Sanders said. "The wealth of information is just incredible."

Graphic

 
Mug - Sol Sanders

Load-Date: September 24, 2002


End of Document