Former Canadian prime minister discusses trading, terrorism in speech
University Wire
November 5, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Egyptian via U-Wire
Length: 532 words
Byline: By Codell Rodriguez, Daily Egyptian
Dateline: Carbondale, Ill.
Body


Former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney spoke about trading and terrorism at the Lesar Law School Auditorium at Southern Illinois University on Thursday but kept the evening light with occasional anecdotes.
Mulroney, who served as prime minister from 1984 to 1993, spoke as part of the Public Policy Institute's Lecture Series. Paul Simon, former U.S. Senator and director of the Public Policy Institute, introduced Mulroney.
Southern Illinois U.
"I told Prime Minister Mulroney that SIU is not in session and we might not have a good crowd," Simon said jokingly to the packed auditorium.
Simon told the crowd of Mulroney's accomplishments which include being named by the Political Scientists of Canada as the most outstanding Canadian Prime Minister since World War II. He was also awarded the Order of Canada, the government's highest civilian medal.
Mulroney came to the podium accompanied by a roaring applause and thanked Simon for the kind introduction.
"I am here tonight because of one man, Paul Simon," Mulroney said. "It was irritating when he was more popular than me."
That was the first of many jokes and anecdotes Mulroney told to keep the crowd's attention. One of the stories was about changing planes in Detroit on his way to Orlando, Fla.
He was getting ready to board a cart that would take him to the next gate when a woman objected and wanted the cart for herself. The airport official told her she could not use the cart because it was reserved for the dictator of Canada.
"What can you do in politics?" Mulroney asked. "The durability of affection is not enormous."
All jokes aside, Mulroney concentrated his speech on trade between the United States and Canada. Mulroney signed the North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States and Mexico in 1992.
Mulroney credits the agreement, as well as trade in general, with more jobs and making Mexico and Canada the largest trading partners with the United States. He said that by 2010, the United States will be exporting more to Latin America than to Europe and Asia combined.
In addition to talking about how to change the world for the better, Mulroney spoke about how terrorists have affected it since Sept. 11.
"The appalling atrocities of Sept. 11 were actually crueler and more shocking than what happened in Pearl Harbor," Mulroney said.
Mulroney said the United States is in good hands with President George W. Bush's leadership.
"American's are reassured and the world is impressed," Mulroney said. "The world needs strong leadership to deal with an enemy as diabolical as the world has ever known."
Those in attendance thanked Mulroney for the speech with a long-lasting ovation. Jackie Kim, a senior from Carbondale Community High School, attended the event for her government class.
"I thought he had a great sense of humor," Kim said. "I just thought he was good overall."
Mulroney told the crowd that anybody can make a difference in the world.
"In my judgment, the right man or woman at the right time can change the course of history," Mulroney said. "History has little time for the harpers and complainers and less time for their opinions."
(C) 2001 Daily Egyptian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document