FORMER SOVIET OFFICER GUILTY OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 9, 2015 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-8
Length: 551 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


RICHMOND, Va. - A former Soviet army officer accused of being a Taliban fighter was found guilty on all counts Friday by a federal jury in Richmond, Va., a court official said.
Irek Hamidullin, 55, a former Soviet tank commander who converted to Islam, faced 15 counts ranging from supporting terrorists to firearms charges stemming from his orchestration of a 2009 attack on an Afghan Border Police base. He was the first military prisoner from Afghanistan to be tried in U.S. federal court. The jury of seven men and five women deliberated more than eight hours before reaching their verdict.
Mr. Hamidullin faces a maximum penalty of life in prison when he is sentenced Nov. 6.
Pope's special podium
PHILADELPHIA - When Pope Francis addresses a crowd of thousands at Philadelphia's Independence Hall next month, he will speak from the same lectern that President Abraham Lincoln used to deliver the Gettysburg Address, officials said on Friday.
The pope's address will come on the second-to-last day of his first trip as pontiff to the United States, after he will have spoken to the U.S. Congress and United Nations and before an open-air Sunday Mass that is expected to draw up to 2 million attendees.
Twitter shakes up board
Twitter Inc.'s board is considering a shakeup that may involve the departure of former Chief Executive Officer Dick Costolo, people with knowledge of the matter said.
The changes, which could be announced when the company names a permanent CEO, are aimed at making the group of directors more diverse, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the deliberations aren't public. The board may expand or be shuffled to include directors from different backgrounds, such as minorities and those with experience in adjacent industries, including advertising and e-commerce, the people said.
3 women dead in Vt.
MONTPELIER, Vt. - Three women were found dead in their northern Vermont home Saturday morning, state police said, in an attack that appeared to be linked to a Friday incident in which a woman who had recently lost custody of her child shot dead a state employee.
The three people whose remains were found in the town of Berlin, not far from the state capital Montpelier, were related to Jody Herring, who was arrested on Friday after allegedly fatally shooting an employee of state Department of Children and Families in an ambush-style attack outside the department offices in Barre, Vt.
At least two of the bodies found in the Berlin home had gunshot wounds and shell casings were found at the low-slung white building within sight of the state's Green Mountains.
Also in the nation
Two American Indian tribes asked the U.S. government to increase flows from dams to prevent the spread of a deadly fish disease that flourishes in warm water as trout and salmon suffer along the drought-parched West Coast. Starting in about three weeks, a fall run of some 120,000 Chinook salmon is expected to swim up the Klamath River, which runs along the Oregon-California border, to their spawning beds, according to the Hoopa Valley Tribe and Yurok Tribe. . A missing hiker was found dead in Yellowstone National Park on Friday, prompting authorities to close the area around a popular trail while they investigate the cause, officials said. A cause of death was not determined.

Load-Date: August 11, 2015


End of Document