Former hostage Anderson to sue for $100 million million
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
March 22, 1999, Monday monday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A
Length: 634 words
Byline: Arlene Levinson levinson
Body


ATHENS, Ohio (AP) - Terry Anderson is set to sue Iran for $ 100 million
over the more than six years the former Associated Press correspondent
was held hostage, shackled and blindfolded, in Leb-anon. The lawsuit
accuses Iran of having sponsored his captors.
The lawsuit to be filed today is also likely to become a challenge to
the U.S. government. The Clinton administration has thwarted
plaintiffs in similar lawsuits from collecting millions of dollars
awarded by U.S. courts, even though the damage claims are against
countries the State Department labels as sponsors of terrorism.  terrorism.
In October, the president issued a blanket waiver of a requirement
that federal agencies help obtain that money.
"Much of our argument is likely to be with the U.S. government, rather
than the Iranian government," Anderson said in an interview at his
home about 10 miles outside Athens, where he teaches journalism at
Ohio University.
"The law says that the U.S. government is supposed to help us in
pressing our claim," said Anderson, 51. Confident of winning a
judgment against Iran, he said, "the biggest obstacle to us receiving
any money is the White House."
The lawsuit, to be filed in U.S. District Court in Washington, also
names as plaintiffs Anderson's wife, Madeleine Bassil, 49, and their
daughter, Sulome, who seek redress for emotional distress and their
long separation from Anderson. Sulome, 13, was born three months after
her father, then AP chief Middle East correspondent, was taken captive
in Beirut on March 16, 1985, as he returned from a morning tennis
game.
Held longer than any other American in Lebanon, he was freed 2,454
days later, on Dec. 4, 1991. The family is seeking $ 100 million in
compensatory damages and unspecified punitive damages.
Named as defendants are the Islamic Republic of Iran and its Ministry
of Information and Security.
The lawsuit says Anderson's captors were members of Hezbollah, or
Party of God, "a politico-paramilitary terrorist organization
operating in Lebanon." It says Iran is the party's sponsor, "providing
it with funding, direction and training for its terrorist activities
in Lebanon."
It says that as a hostage Anderson was fed a poor diet of bread,
cheese and rice; was beaten, taunted and humiliated; was regularly
threatened with death and falsely promised release; heard his fellow
captives beaten and one die; and grew so depressed he beat his head
against a wall until he bled.
Iran's U.N. ambassador, Seyed Mohammad Hadi Nejad Hosseinian, denied
Friday that Iran had supported the hostage-takers and said U.S. courts
have no jurisdiction over foreign countries.
In a faxed reply to questions, Nejad Hosseinian said through a
spokesman that Iran condemns international terrorism and that there is
"no shred of credible evidence" that it finances Hezbollah.
Iran as well as Cuba, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria are
listed by the State Department as state sponsors of terrorism.
Foreign countries used to be largely immune from lawsuits in U.S.
courts. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
allows legal action against countries alleged to sponsor acts of
terrorism that kill or injure U.S. citizens.
Such lawsuits seemed to get a boost last October when Congress
required the Treasury and State departments to help recover damages.
But an escape clause empowered the president to bar such help "in the
interest of national security."
One way of collecting is to go after assets frozen in the United
States. But the administration is trying to block this avenue.
U.S. government lawyers are fighting the family of Alisa Flatow, a
college student from New Jersey killed in a 1995 bus bombing in
Israel, who won a $ 247.5 million judgment against Iran.
The same goes for three of Anderson's fellow hostages, who last August
won a $ 65 million judgment against
Iran.  iran.

Load-Date: March 23, 1999


End of Document