Former Sailor Faces Charges In Terror Case
The New York Times
March 8, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 453 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 7  
Body


A former enlisted man in the Navy was arrested on Wednesday on charges of releasing classified information that ended up in the hands of a man suspected of being a financier of terrorism.
  The former sailor, Hassan Abujihaad, 31, of Phoenix, is accused in a case that followed a suspected terrorist network across the country and into Europe and the Middle East. Mr. Abujihaad was arrested in Phoenix on charges of supporting terrorism with an intent to kill Americans and transmitting classified information to unauthorized people.
Mr. Abujihaad, also known as Paul R. Hall, is charged in a case with Babar Ahmad, a British computer specialist arrested in 2004 and accused of running Web sites to raise money for terrorism. Mr. Ahmad is set to be extradited to the United States.
  In a search of Mr. Ahmad's computers, investigators found files containing classified information about the positions of Navy ships and discussing their susceptibility to attack.
  Mr. Abujihaad exchanged e-mail messages with Mr. Ahmad while on active duty on the guided-missile destroyer Benfold in 2000 and 2001, according to an affidavit released on Wednesday. He is accused of buying videos promoting holy war.
  In the messages, he also discussed military briefings and praised those who attacked the destroyer Cole in 2000, according to the affidavit by an F.B.I. agent, David Dillon.
  The documents on Mr. Ahmad's computers show drawings of Navy battle groups and discuss future missions. They also say the groups could be attacked with small weapons like rocket-propelled grenades. 
  The authorities found Mr. Abujihaad's military e-mail address among the computer files, and he had a secret security clearance that would have given him access to that material, according to the affidavit.
  Mr. Abujihaad received an honorable discharge from the Navy in 2002, according to the affidavit.Indictments for Islamic Charity
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., March 7 (Reuters) -- A federal grand jury has indicted an Islamic charity and five of its officers and associates on charges of illegally transferring money to Iraq before the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.
  The 33-count indictment, unsealed Wednesday, accuses the defendants of a variety of crimes related to the transfers, including the theft of United States government grant money.
  The charity, the Islamic American Relief Agency, based in Columbia, Mo., and now defunct, was formed in 1985 and was shut down in October 2004 after the Treasury Department designated it a global terrorist organization. The group, formerly the Islamic African Relief Agency-U.S.A., is charged with sending more than $1.4 million to Iraq from March 1991 to May 2003, in violation of sanctions on that country. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 8, 2007


End of Document