Former Pakistani president talks terror at Stanford
University Wire
January 20, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Stanford Daily via U-Wire
Length: 1581 words
Byline: By Joanna Xu, The Stanford Daily; SOURCE: Stanford
Dateline: STANFORD, Calif. 
Body


Former Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf called for a holistic and "multi-pronged approach" to win the struggle against terrorism to a capacity audience in Memorial Auditorium at Stanford University on Friday.
In a wide-ranging talk, the former head of state from 1999 to 2008 spoke candidly on the fight against terrorism, India-Pakistan relations and development in Pakistan. Following Musharraf's talk, Political science professor Scott Sagan moderated a question-and-answer session, which was periodically interrupted by vocal expressions from the audience.
Causes of Terrorism
While Musharraf explained that terrorism may be caused by both poverty and illiteracy, he acknowledged that many of the terrorists involved in the Sept. 11 attacks, as well as the London and Madrid bombings, were neither illiterate nor poor. Instead, he cited an environment of political alienation, injustice and deprivation that arose from "unresolved political disputes."
"The anger and frustration among Muslim youth is exploited by groups with perverse ideologies of their own, following misrepresented views of Islam," Musharraf said. "These are the people who pick on frustrated youth and indoctrinate them to be terrorists and suicide bombers."
The former president argued for a holistic approach to extremism, likening global terrorism to a tree whose leaves are individual terrorists and whose branches are terrorist organizations.
"We always talk of clearing the leaves and branches, but we never talk of the root," Musharraf said. "We must address the root causes with sincerity and a lot of vigor, which one doesn't see."
Pakistan "Abandoned"
Musharraf offered an insightful and often biting analysis of the history of terrorism in Pakistan, noting that Pakistan had recently played a significant role in the fight against al-Qaeda and the Taliban. He pointed to the early rise of the Taliban in 1979, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. Cheered on by the United States, Pakistan supported the Taliban and armed up to 30,000 Mujahideen for the next decade to fight and overthrow the Soviets.
"Pakistan was the leader," he said. "You expected us to be a part of [it]."
Musharraf rebuked the role of the United States once the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan, arguing that Pakistan was left stranded.
"We got nothing," he said. "Everyone left us, abandoned us and said, 'You're on your own.'"
He then explained that in the 12 years that followed - 1989 to 2001 - Pakistan was left to deal with increasing poverty and Islamic extremists while eastern Europeans enjoyed the spoils of the collapse of the Soviet Union. Musharraf ran the country at this time, coming to power in 1999 following a military coup that expelled Nawaz Sharif, the elected prime minister. In 2001, he appointed himself president.
"In these 12 years, where did the 20,000 to 30,000 Mujahideen go?" he asked. "There was no resettlement plan. They were armed to the teeth, trained fighters. Who was handling them? We were all alone. These very Mujahideen coalesced into al-Qaeda. They changed their focus to getting U.S. influence out of the Middle East. Yet Pakistan was all alone."
Message to the West
Musharraf corrected a student who inquired about the billions of dollars that had been poured into Pakistan by the U.S.
"Do you know what the total amount given to Pakistan over the last six or seven years was? Ten billion dollars," Musharraf said.
According to the former president, five billion of those 10 billion dollars were reimbursement for services and facilities provided by Pakistan to the United States. Out of the remaining five billion, half was for military use and support and half was for social development.
"Now when we're talking of 10 billion dollars over seven years, if you compare it with $143 billion that has been spent in Afghanistan, and maybe over one trillion dollars spent in Iraq, we are worried about $10 billion, and so many aspersions are cast on Pakistan" Musharraf claimed.
When asked how to reach a possible solution to terrorism, Musharraf urged the use of multilateral forces, including the European Union and the United Nations, as they were more credible than unilateral action.
He also cautioned against slandering Pakistanis directly.
The majority of Pakistanis are moderate," he said. "I say this with all conviction and knowledge. Identifying terrorism with Islam, what I call 'Islamophobia,' is extremely dangerous and very harmful in the fight against terrorism."
Musharraf insisted that the international community offer more financial and political support to help Pakistan fight the global battle against terrorism.
"The people of Pakistan are fed up with these suicide bombers and these extremists," Musharraf said. "They demand their elimination. Pakistan's success in fighting terrorism is vital for the whole world."
India-Pakistan Relations
The former president was quick to point out that anyone involved in November's terrorist attacks in Mumbai must be punished, but warned against disrupting regional stability.
"If there is proof, there must be action," he said. "[But] let us not get hyper about it and whip up hysteria in the country so that the process of peace gets totally disrupted."
Musharraf explained that the disputed region of Kashmir was a source of turmoil for many Pakistanis. He urged both the Indian and Pakistani governments to find an acceptable solution to the problem, while interacting with the Kashmiri people themselves.
"Certainly there ought to be a solution which ought to be acceptable to India and Pakistan, through a give-and-take," he said. "Both India and Pakistan must give and not just expect to take."
Musharraf also championed a shift in the mindsets of people in India and Pakistan, referring to traditional animosity between the two countries.
"If we don't change our attitudes toward each other, we will never reach peace," he said. "We need to move forward on the track of peace."
Mixed Reception
The former leader's power dwindled in November 2007, and with the Pakistani supreme court ready to invalidate his re-election as president, Musharraf declared a "state of emergency." He jailed a number of the top justices, suspended the constitution and arrested political dissidents. Facing impeachment from the coalition government in August 2008, he announced his resignation.
Musharraf's appearance was organized by Stanford in Government (SIG) and the Associated Students of Stanford University Speakers Bureau. Prior to Musharraf's appearance, a number of students handed out flyers describing Musharraf as "Pakistan's Pinochet" and condemned SIG's choice in inviting the former head of state to Stanford. Eric Showen '09, chair of SIG, defended the choice.
"We had always been cognizant of the controversial nature of the speaker," Showen said. "But we think that productive disagreement can really be a valuable learning experience for everyone."
He added that by inviting Musharraf to speak, SIG was not honoring him.
"In reality, nothing could be further from the truth," Showen said. "We do not expect students to be partial to the chosen speaker, but we do think Musharraf's presence creates a truly unique opportunity for students to learn what it is like to govern a country of huge strategic importance."
Amandeep Gill, a visiting fellow for the Center for International Security and Cooperation, a member of the Indian Foreign Service and a former director of international security in the Indian state department, was not impressed by Musharraf's lecture.
"I was disappointed mainly by the lack of any introspection in the remarks of the General - nothing to indicate a mea culpa or even shared responsibility for the problems of Pakistan," Gill said. "[The image of a tree] conveniently leaves out those who water the roots of the tree, who nourish the soil in which it takes root and who then claim that they are not responsible if the tree's poisonous leaves blow across neighboring backyards and beyond."
Gill added that Musharraf steered the country through geopolitical turbulence and kept the economy growing at the cost of Pakistani democracy and regional peace.
"Liberal democracy in Pakistan and peace in the region has a future provided the army and its political allies stop usurping the country for their own narrow agendas," Gill said.
Pakistani student Sohail Razzaq '09 thought SIG had made a good selection.
"[The] speaker has had a significant influence in a region that is a strategic interest not just to the U.S. but also the [European Union] and all developing countries," he said.
Razzaq added that he was glad students asked Musharraf the difficult questions.
"[We saw] both perspectives. There were people who disagreed with him, but in a way that was very polite and courteous but also direct and honest," he said. "At the same time, I was very impressed by the responses he gave."
On the other hand, Hiren Mulchandani, an Indian and first-year material science engineering graduate student, left unsatisfied.
"I think the talk was touching on the core basics," Mulchandani said. "I don't think he got to the crux of the problems."
Students not directly associated with the region also gained much from the lecture.
"We have our own assumptions of democratic values, but it was interesting to hear how his perception was completely different from ours," said Rebecca Ortiz '09. "Democracy really is shaped by circumstances, and I really appreciated hearing his perspective directly."
(C) 2008 The Stanford Daily via UWIRE

Load-Date: January 20, 2009


End of Document