Former Detainee's Right to Speedy Trial Wasn't Violated, U.S. Appeals Panel Rules
The New York Times
October 25, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 960 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


A federal appeals panel in Manhattan ruled on Thursday that the government's long detention of a valuable terrorist, first at a secret site run by the Central Intelligence Agency and then at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, did not deprive the suspect of his right to a speedy trial.
The defendant, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, the only former Guantánamo detainee to be tried in the civilian court system, had appealed his 2010 conviction on grounds that his detention amounted to an unconstitutional delay in bringing him to trial.
The panel acknowledged that the nearly five-year delay was substantial. But, it said, ''the Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the government may purposely delay trials for significant periods of time, so long as, on balance, the public and private interests render the delay reasonable.''
The unanimous decision by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit should make it easier for the government to hold and interrogate terrorism suspects for intelligence reasons, and then try them later, if it so chooses, in a civilian court.
Just this month, another terrorism defendant, Nazih Abdul-Hamed al-Ruqai, was brought to Manhattan for trial after being held for a week in military custody aboard a Navy vessel in the Mediterranean, where he was reportedly interrogated for intelligence purposes. He has pleaded not guilty.
The model for Mr. Ruqai's case, officials have said, was that of Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame, a former military commander with the Shabab in Somalia who was captured by the United States military in 2011 and interrogated aboard a ship for about two months before being brought to Manhattan for trial.
Karen J. Greenberg, director of the Center on National Security at Fordham University School of Law, said the Ghailani ruling meant that ''the speedy trial argument is not going to work in terrorism cases where the defendant is held, whether for two weeks on a boat or for two years, for purposes of intelligence collection.''
The Ghailani panel dismissed a claim, for example, that detaining him for national security reasons was an automatic violation of his speedy-trial rights, and should have precluded the government from trying him in civilian court.
''We observe no basis for, and reject in full, Ghailani's argument that, once having detained a defendant as a national security intelligence asset, the government can no longer bring the defendant to trial,'' Judge José A. Cabranes wrote for the panel.
Mr. Ghailani's lawyer, Peter E. Quijano, said his client would seek an appeal to the Supreme Court. ''The government did not act expeditiously to afford Ahmed Ghailani a trial after subjecting him to enhanced interrogation techniques and then forcing him to languish for years at Guantánamo Bay,'' Mr. Quijano said by e-mail.
He added: ''A claim of national security does not and cannot suspend and vitiate one's fundamental right to a speedy trial. Here, a delay of almost five years, during which the defendant was tortured to extract information, was constitutionally excessive.''
The panel rejected Mr. Ghailani's argument that the trial judge, Lewis A. Kaplan, should have considered the ''physical and psychological harm he endured while in C.I.A. custody as prejudice supporting his speedy trial claim.''
''The Speedy Trial Clause protects defendants against prejudice caused by delays in their trials, not against the harms of interrogation of enemy combatants,'' the panel said.
Mr. Ghailani had been charged with conspiring in Al Qaeda's 1998 bombings of two United States Embassies in East Africa, which killed 224 people. He was captured in Pakistan in 2004.
A prosecutor, Michael Farbiarz, told the appeals panel in May that Mr. Ghailani, while he was a fugitive, served ''at literally the highest level of Al Qaeda on operational matters,'' becoming a bodyguard to Osama bin Laden and a document forger.
He was held in C.I.A. custody from 2004 to 2006. ''He knows things that, for the sake of saving lives, the United States needs to know,'' Mr. Farbiarz told the court.
''This appeal,'' Judge Cabranes wrote, ''presents a question bound to arise from the government's efforts to obtain actionable and time-sensitive intelligence necessary to thwart acts of terror, while still bringing those charged with committing crimes of terrorism against Americans to justice in an orderly fashion under the laws of our country.''
At trial, Mr. Ghailani was convicted of just one count -- conspiracy to destroy government buildings and property -- of the more than 280 charges against him.
The panel said that although placing Mr. Ghailani in the C.I.A. program caused considerable delay, Judge Kaplan had determined correctly that the decision ''was made in the reasonable belief that he had valuable information essential to combating Al Qaeda and protecting national security,'' which the government could not have obtained ''if it had prosecuted him in federal court at the same time.''
''We are not concerned,'' Judge Cabranes added, ''that permitting a delay based on the weighty national security interests present in this case will somehow undo the Speedy Trial Clause for all future cases.''
The panel also found that, on balance, Mr. Ghailani's years at Guantánamo being prepared to be prosecuted before a military commission did not violate his speedy-trial rights. The Obama administration announced in 2009 that Mr. Ghailani would be tried in federal court.
The panel, which also included Judges Pierre N. Leval and Barrington D. Parker Jr., praised Judge Kaplan for presiding over a ''challenging and complex case with exemplary care and fairness.''
The panel also upheld Mr. Ghailani's life sentence, which he is serving at the so-called Supermax prison in Florence, Colo.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/25/nyregion/appeals-panel-upholds-conviction-of-ghailani-ex-detainee.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)       

Load-Date: October 25, 2013


End of Document