Former U.S. attorney lauds Patriot Act as part of 'new normal' at Syracuse
University Wire
April 27, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Orange via U-Wire
Length: 717 words
Byline: By Julie Andrews, Daily Orange; SOURCE: Syracuse
Dateline: SYRACUSE, N.Y. 
Body


Megan King was pleasantly surprised at the Syracuse University College of Law on Tuesday when she heard the Patriot Act praised by a university speaker -- not by the opinion itself, but by the exposure she had to a less-frequently aired view.
"On talk shows and at school it seems everyone is always complaining about our rights being taken away. Mary Jo White gave me a fresh perspective on how the Patriot Act can be good for our country," said King, a graduate student at the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications.
About 70 faculty members, students and local high school students heard former U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White's lecture, "The War on Terrorism and Civil Liberties," in the College of Law.
"The wall between intelligence and law needed to come down," White said. White's office was a direct source of recommendations for the Patriot Act.
"Terrorism affects all of us -- all students, especially as lawyers. This will continue to affect the entire length of their careers," said Thomas Maroney, professor of law who was once a colleague of White's.
The "new normal" American citizens have experienced since the attack on Sept. 11 causes them to ask whether the price they pay in civil liberties is too high, White said. She said that increased security and enforcement measures are a necessity.
"The changes are regrettable but largely necessary, and we will have to continue to pay a high price for our security," she said.
White is the first and only woman to serve as a U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, which is considered the premier national U.S. attorney's office. She served from 1993 to 2002, and has extensive courtroom experience with terrorists.
White prosecuted the terrorists responsible for the 1993 World Trade Center bombing; the plot to bomb the United Nations, the FBI Building in Manhattan and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels; the plan to blow up more than 10 jumbo jets; and the bombing in 1998 of the U.S. Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Tanzania. She also investigated the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11.
"Every accused defendant I mentioned who was a terrorist received fair due process," she said.
White, named one of the National Top 10 Women Litigators in 2002, presided over the prosecutions in the conspiracy case against Egyptian cleric Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.
"The Constitution is not a suicide pact. We must remember that," she said. "Law should not oppose necessary measured and justified action."
White pointed out two results from Sept. 11: First, the world shrank after the terrorist attack in the U.S., and second, terrorists must not be underestimated.
Before, terrorism was surreal to many Americans, White said.
"Terrorists came and will come again to the U.S. and other countries. This is the age of global terrorism," White said.
The terrorists involved in plots against America are highly educated and from well-to-do backgrounds, she said.
"We can't rely on their stupidity to catch them," she said.
She described watching a terrorist aptly perform in a courtroom as his own lawyer as alarming -- the terrorist wasn't a native English speaker and was unfamiliar with American law proceedings before his case.
White said she favors stringent restrictions on how long those who enter the U.S. can stay and a closer tracking mechanism to keep tabs on those who enter.
"The registering of young Arab males is a regrettable policy, but I support it," White said. "It's lawful and necessary, and the need for it is supported by the list of who it is that is attacking us."
King said: "(White) has seen the inside, dealing with al-Qaida and it is interesting that she feels so strongly that specifically targeting Arab people is an efficient way of dealing with terrorism. But, hearing it from her, I tend to agree."
Some fear these tendencies to stiffen immigration policies could lead to an unhealthy isolationist country.
White disagreed.
"Immigrants are a proven security risk and where our emphasis should be. We won't become isolationist -- that would be physically impossible. We need to target with measures what our weakness is."
Work remains to be done in the realm of national security, White said.
"We don't have a lot of time. We must survive first, or we'll be in a place where civil liberties won't matter."
(C) 2005 Daily Orange via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 27, 2005


End of Document