Former Navy captain teaches military course at U. Nebraska
University Wire
February 26, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 494 words
Byline: By Teresa Lostroh, Daily Nebraskan; SOURCE: U. Nebraska
Dateline: LINCOLN, Neb. 
Body


Three frames rest on Randy Bowdish's desk as mementos of his 27-year stint in the U.S. Military.
The largest holds a photo of a group at the nation's capitol taken during his yearlong shift in Congress. On the opposite corner of the desk rests a blue frame surrounding a picture of a commissioning an officer. Another photo is bordered by thick brown plastic of the ship he once commanded, the USS Simpson.
If it weren't for the keepsakes on his small, tidy desk, one might not know Bowdish was once a Navy captain who hunted down smugglers, weathered 75-foot waves or was involved in the obliteration of an Iraqi service fleet.
Many could see him as another Midwestern man, and he probably wouldn't mind.
The ex-officer now teaches Political Science 398 at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, a class he helped develop.
The first part of the course examines insurgency and guerilla warfare. The second part focuses on past and present terrorism.
His blue jeans, scruffy beard and relaxed posture are evidence of his laid-back nature­ -- not exactly the buzz cut and crisp attire expected from a retired military leader.
"It's my last defiance against winter," Bowdish said of his overgrown facial hair.
The self-proclaimed "action junkie" traded in his military suit for blue jeans in 2006 after realizing he wanted to learn more about the scientific methodologies of warfare and to inform students about terrorism.
"I love the teaching aspect," Bowdish said. "I love giving back ... by helping to educate this generation about insurgencies, guerilla warfare and terrorism."
The course is only in its second semester at UNL, but it's becoming more popular.
The course started with 34 students this semester, but Bowdish had a problem with telling people no.
"So now we have 42," he said. "And no drops. We must be doing something right."
Connor Horn, a junior political science major, enrolled in the course after enjoying another class taught by Bowdish.
"He's really interesting," said Horn. "He's done so much. He's been the captain of a warship, and he's got a master's degree. I wonder how he's had so much time to do all of it, and he doesn't look too stressed."
Horn appreciates Bowdish's sense of humor and his ability to relate to college students.
"He's really good at putting real world analogies into context," Horn said. "He'll use humor. Instead of saying something's difficult, he may say it's like 'pissing up a rope.'"
Bowdish's stories are intriguing because of their humor and outlandish nature, but his humility shines through when he talks about his former command.
"It's never about me," Bowdish says. "When I commanded, it was about my crew."
He suggests focusing on the young men and women serving our country today rather than talking about "old bearded men" like him.
"When you get 18-year-old kids out there, it's amazing what these kids can do," he said. "They do amazing things, and their responsibilities are incredible."
(C) 2008 Daily Nebraskan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 26, 2008


End of Document