Former CIA director notes security threats during talk at Stanford U.
University Wire
March 8, 1999


Copyright 1999 The Stanford Daily via U-Wire
Length: 413 words
Byline: By Vlada Teper, The Stanford Daily
Dateline: Stanford, Calif.
Body


John Deutch, former director of the CIA, spoke Sunday in Annenberg Auditorium on the "Terrorist Threat to American Security."
The 351 seat auditorium was quickly filled as the MIT chemistry professor was introduced. Deutch has held several other significant government posts, including deputy secretary of defense.
Stanford U.
Deutch identified terrorist threats and proposed preventative actions. Among the threats Deutch named were the production of VX nerve agents and the possibility of subnational groups developing anthrax.
To emphasize the reality of possible threats he cited the situation in Russia. "The Russian nuclear complex remains very, very insecure. The guards are poorly paid. The infrastructure is decaying," he said.
Deutch also discussed recent developments that have served to fuel terrorism. "There is now a potential for the use of mass destructive weapons," he said, citing biological agents and chemical agents as examples. "There is also the international character of subnational technological threats."
Deutch then proceeded to discuss issues that should be addressed by the U.S. government. "We ought to be doing even more on cooperative weapon reduction," he said.
He stated that technology required to deal with medical effects of terrorism was not in place yet. "We need to have some ability to manage consequences should the event occur," he said.
To prepare for those consequences, he said, the government must coordinate its anti-terrorist efforts, perhaps by forming a new agency. "If you can't measure it; you can't manage it," he said.
He went on to discuss the effect the fight against terrorism has on civil liberties. He cited the profiling of airplane passengers as an example. U.S. security agencies identify certain groups, such as those with Middle Eastern ancestry, as representing a greater risk for terrorist activity.
"Profiling really infringes on civil rights, because it says one group of people will suffer a greater burden than another."
Deutch listed possible causes of the rise in terrorism, including the emergence of the United States as the world's single most important power militarily and politically. "We are vulnerable because we are powerful," Deutch said.
Above all he stressed the need for being informed and knowledgeable. "It is very important that we understand how terrorist groups function." In that area, he said, "more collection and analysis is needed."
(C) 1999 The Stanford Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 8, 1999


End of Document