Former congresswoman worried about homeland security, War on Terrorism
University Wire
January 31, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Lantern via U-Wire
Length: 397 words
Byline: By Mark Christman, The Lantern
Dateline: Columbus, Ohio
Body


Former Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney expressed concern with the way the government is handling the War on Terrorism during a speech Thursday night that kicked off United Black World Month at Ohio State University.
"I voted against every bill dealing with homeland security because I disagree with how we deal with potential terrorists," she said.
Rep. Larry Price, D-Columbus, introduced McKinney by pointing out her accomplishments as Georgia's state representative, mainly the $ 365 million she brought to the state in funding and her unwavering stand to confront racism.
Ohio State U.
"She is a black woman from the South with the odds stacked against her," he said.
McKinney said she is concerned with how the United States defines potential terrorists because of the way it was handled in the past. She pointed out several black leaders in U.S. history that were once labeled terrorists.
"We must remember that Martin Luther King, Jr. was labeled a terrorist because he wanted black people to have the privilege to vote," she said.
She also pointed out that the government recently released 100 prisoners from death row because they were eventually found innocent of crimes related to terrorism.
"We've got political prisoners, some serving time for crimes they didn't commit," she said.
Another issue concerning McKinney was that young men and women are sent into battle not knowing what types of bioterrorism they may face.
"When our soldiers come back will we have homeland security or just more sick, ailing people," she said.
She said she strongly disagrees with the way President George W. Bush is handling this war and does not understand some of the thinking behind his views.
"When the president talks of homeland security, I can truly say it's Greek to me," she said.
Tamayra Constance, a junior in economics who attended the speech, said she was impressed with McKinney and said she agreed strongly with her views.
"She was right on with our past mistakes about who was a terrorist, and I am still concerned we might repeat those mistakes," she said.
McKinney said it is up to the voters to get what they deserve out of the political process and strongly encouraged those in attendance to make their thoughts heard.
"If there are people who are supposed to represent you and don't, it's up to you to change this," she said.
(C) 2002 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 31, 2003


End of Document