Former dean of Rutgers Law School dedicates time to fighting terrorism
Daily Targum: Rutgers University
January 31, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 285 words
Byline: Madison McGay
Body


Former dean of Rutgers Law School dedicates time to fighting terrorism
January 31, 2020 12:00am
|
By Madison McGay
Photo by The Daily Targum |
The Daily Targum
John Farmer, former dean of Rutgers Law School and current director of the Eagleton Institute of Politics, worked as senior counsel on the 9/11 commission.
John Farmer, former dean of Rutgers Law School and current director of the Eagleton Institute of Politics, has spent much of his life dedicated to the war on terror, according to an article on New Jersey Monthly.
Following the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, Farmer was appointed senior counsel of the 9/11 Commission, according to the article. He then wrote the book, "The Ground Truth: The Untold Story of America Under Attack on 9/11," based on both his and the commission's research.
"I believe the whole tragedy could have been averted," Farmer said, according to the article. "If the CIA was sharing information with the FBI, the two (lead) terrorists, (Khalid) al-Mihdhar and (Nawaf) al-Hazmi, would probably have been caught, and the mission would probably have been aborted. It's all about sharing information."
Farmer now leads the Miller Center for Community Protection and Resilience, which is a partnership between the Eagleton Institute of Politics and Rutgers Law School, according to the article. Their goal is to help increase the safety of communities that may be vulnerable to hate crimes and terror attacks.
The Miller Center has developed security plans in places such as Belgium, Denmark and Chicago, according to the article.
"It's about communication and having a plan, which is what I often bring to the table when we visit cities that need help," Farmer said, according to the article.

Load-Date: January 31, 2020


End of Document