Former terrorism adviser faults prez
 Philadelphia Daily News
MARCH 22, 2004 Monday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 18
Length: 456 words
Byline: TED BRIDIS Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, "looked skeptical" when she was warned early in 2001 about the threat from al Qaeda and appeared to never have heard of the terrorist organization, according to Bush's former counterterrorism coordinator.
"Her facial expression gave me the impression that she had never heard the term before," Richard A. Clarke says in a new book that is scathingly critical of Bush's response to the 2001 terror attacks against New York and Washington. He also notes that Rice effectively demoted him within the National Security Council.
Clarke, who appeared last night on CBS' "60 Minutes" and is expected to testify tomorrow before a federal panel investigating the attacks, recounted his meeting with Rice as support for his contention that the Bush administration failed to recognize the risk of an attack by al Qaeda in the months leading to Sept. 11, 2001. Clarke retired in March 2003 after three decades in the U.S. government.
The Associated Press obtained a copy of Clarke's book before its publication today.
Clarke said within one week of the Bush inauguration he "urgently" sought a meeting of senior Cabinet leaders to discuss "the imminent al Qaeda threat." Months later, in April, Clarke met with deputy secretaries. During that meeting, he wrote, the Defense Department's Paul Wolfowitz told Clarke, "You give bin Laden too much credit," and he said Wolfowitz sought to steer the discussion to Iraq.
The White House responded that it kept Clarke on its staff after the election because of its concerns over al Qaeda. "He makes the charge that we were not focused enough on efforts to root out terrorism," White House spokesman Dan Bartlett said yesterday. "That's just categorically false."
Bartlett also said the pre-election timing of Clarke's revelations was "questionable."
He said Clarke's memo to Rice in January 2001 discussed recommendations to improve security at U.S. sites overseas, not inside the country. "Each one of these, while important, wouldn't have impacted 9/11," Bartlett said.
Clarke harshly says Bush's decision to invade Iraq generated broad anti-American sentiment among Arabs. He says Bush asked him directly almost immediately after the Sept. 11 terror attacks to find whether Iraq was involved in the suicide hijackings.
"Nothing America could have done would have provided al Qaeda and its new generation of cloned groups a better recruitment device than our unprovoked invasion of an oil-rich Arab country," Clarke wrote.
Clarke added: "One shudders to think what additional errors (Bush) will make in the next four years to strengthen the al Qaeda follow-ons: attacking Syria or Iran, undermining the Saudi regime without a plan for a successor state?" *

Load-Date: August 23, 2005


End of Document