Fort Hood Suspect Given More Time to Prepare Defense, Most Likely Delaying Trial
The New York Times
June 6, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 807 words
Byline: By MANNY FERNANDEZ
Body


KILLEEN, Tex. -- The long-delayed court-martial of the Army psychiatrist accused in a shooting rampage at Fort Hood here will most likely be delayed again after a judge on Wednesday instructed prospective jurors from other posts to return home while the court clears up logistical and legal issues arising out of the defendant's decision to represent himself.
The psychiatrist, Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, appeared in a Fort Hood courtroom a day after he told the judge that he was protecting Taliban leaders in Afghanistan from American military personnel when he opened fire on the base in 2009. Major Hasan had asked the judge to delay the trial three months so he could prepare his ''defense of others'' claim, describing Taliban leaders as the others he was defending and Fort Hood military personnel being deployed to Afghanistan as the perpetrators. The trial is set to start July 1.
The judge, Col. Tara A. Osborn, had given Major Hasan 24 hours to submit a brief explaining the legal basis for his defense. On Wednesday, he filed his motion -- 90 minutes past the deadline -- but the judge gave him until Monday to resubmit it because she learned that he had not been given access to some of the tools and resources he needed to work on his case, including law journals. She scheduled another hearing for Tuesday to hear arguments from Major Hasan and Army prosecutors about the legality of his ''defense of others'' claim and his request for a delay.
Previously, the judge had delayed the start of jury selection to Monday at the earliest. On Wednesday, she said those prospective jurors who had already arrived -- high-ranking officers from several Army bases -- could return to their posts. She did not set a new date for jury selection.
It appeared unlikely that the trial would start on July 1 regardless of whether the judge granted Major Hasan's request for a delay. Jury selection in a military court-martial can take as long as four weeks, and the trial cannot begin until at least four days after it is complete, to give witnesses time to arrive.
A new trial date would be the latest in a string of delays in the Army's attempt to prosecute Major Hasan in one of the worst mass shootings on an American military base. He is accused of killing 13 people and wounding 32 at Fort Hood on Nov. 5, 2009, and could face the death penalty if convicted. More than three years after the attack and nearly two years after his formal arraignment, the case has remained in pretrial hearings.
Major Hasan's claim that he was protecting the Taliban angered relatives of the victims, nearly all of whom were military personnel, but it has had other effects. Pentagon officials have described the Fort Hood attack as an episode of workplace violence and not an act of terrorism, and numerous victims' relatives, survivors of the shooting and lawmakers have been pushing the Army to officially classify it as terrorism. The families and survivors say they have been denied combat-related medical benefits and Purple Hearts.
After Major Hasan made his claim in court, two lawyers who represent some of the victims and their relatives called on the Army to admit that the Fort Hood attack was terrorism and provide families with the necessary benefits and recognition.
''Now the government's 'workplace violence' lie has been fully exposed,'' the lawyers, Reed D. Rubinstein and Neal M. Sher, said in a statement. ''By his own admission, Hasan was a jihadist who killed innocent Americans to defend the Taliban.''
In the days since Major Hasan was allowed to release his court-appointed military lawyers and represent himself, those lawyers, prosecutors and other officials have had to contend with a number of logistical matters. Major Hasan was assigned Army paralegals to assist him, and he has at least two places to work on his case, a room at the jail where he is being held and a room in a trailer near the courthouse. The judge said on Wednesday that she wanted his former lawyers -- whom she ordered to remain as his standby counsel -- and Army prosecutors to confirm that the resources Major Hasan needs to file meaningful responses and motions were in place.
Major Hasan has access to a copier and printer, as well as a laptop computer with unclassified discovery material and other exhibits in the case. The judge said she did not want him to do Internet research either at the jail or in the trailer, but asked his standby counsel and paralegals to do it for him. She said she did not want him even looking over the shoulder of someone doing online research for him.
Major Hasan, in one of the few times he addressed the judge on Wednesday, asked if he could indeed look over someone's shoulder at a document online instead of having it printed out, stating that he was concerned that too many trees would be killed. The judge denied his request.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/us/judge-gives-fort-hood-suspect-more-time-to-prepare-defense.html

Load-Date: June 6, 2013


End of Document