Fort Hood and the Questions About Terrorism
The New York Times
November 27, 2009 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 38; LETTERS
Length: 423 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Robert Wright's Op-Ed article, ''Who Created Major Hasan?'' (Nov. 22), is right on target. I applaud his breakdown of the conservative news media's attempt to link Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan's shooting rampage at Fort Hood to his religion as opposed to homicidal lunacy. 
  Major Hasan's heinous act may have been inspired by his incorrect interpretation of Islam, but as Mr. Wright points out, ''Seeing the Fort Hood shooting as an act of Islamist terrorism is the first step toward seeing how misguided a hawkish approach to fighting terrorism has been.'' 
  There are millions of Muslim Americans in the United States and over a billion Muslims elsewhere, and I don't see the advantage of inflaming them with right-wing hateful rhetoric. 
  We Muslims allowed a mind-set (which may have influenced Major Hasan) by letting immoderate voices drown out more moderate ones. For us, and our fellow Americans of all persuasions, to do the same in response to fanaticism would be a disaster for all.
  Ayman Hakki
  Washington, Nov. 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  Robert Wright is right that every community includes people who are ''susceptible to the terrorist meme.'' But I think he is wrong to imply that ending the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan will clear the airwaves and Internet of imagery that plays to that vulnerability.
  Jihadists were able to persuade 19 young men to launch an attack on our soil before American soldiers set foot in Iraq or Afghanistan. The ''terrorist meme'' can be perpetuated by images of Western decadence and American power whether or not our forces are actively engaged in Muslim countries.
  Thus the United States will always have an interest in pursuing those, like Al Qaeda, who commit to violently jihadist politics. Andrew Meyer
  Middletown, N.J., Nov. 22, 2009
  The writer is an assistant professor of history at Brooklyn College.
  To the Editor:
  After nearly eight years of military action, we have created an entire generation of Maj. Nidal Malik Hasans around the globe, and those who reach what they feel is the end of their rope will lash out violently. The Obama administration understands this.
  The question now becomes how do we separate devout Muslims who pose no threat from those few who are on the verge of radicalization?
  We've done nothing to stave off the anger and desire for vengeance in many. What can we do to identify those potential terrorists before they strike, yet still make other Muslims feel like a key part of the American fabric?
  John Cork
  Los Angeles, Nov. 22, 2009

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 27, 2009


End of Document