Fort Dix informant's past is an issue
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 28, 2008 Tuesday
JERSEY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: SOUTH JERSEY; P-com News Local; Pg. B01
Length: 669 words
Byline: By George Anastasia

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The key government witness in the Fort Dix terrorism trial was described by a defense attorney yesterday as a "serial fraud artist" who tried to flee to Canada to avoid cooperating with the FBI and who has repeatedly lied to authorities. 
Mahmoud Omar, who is expected to take the stand today in federal court in Camden, was the focus of daylong testimony from one of the lead investigators in the case. 
John Stermel, a police officer with the Delaware River Port Authority and a member of the FBI's South Jersey Joint Terrorism Task Force, spent nearly five hours detailing Omar's criminal past and his role as an informant in the Fort Dix case. 
Among other things, jurors learned that Omar: 
Tried to flee to Canada in January 2005, hours after the FBI confronted him about a bank-fraud investigation in which he was the primary target. Omar, who was jailed on similar charges in 2002, had agreed to cooperate, then headed to Detroit and was stopped trying to cross the border.  
Boasted to a cooperating witness in the bank-fraud case that he could arrange for her to earn $10,000 by taking part in a sham marriage to help an illegal alien obtain resident status. 
Sold for $3,000 a phony Social Security card he had obtained illegally to help an associate carry out a credit-card scam and lied to the FBI, claiming he had thrown the card away.  
Was picked up on tape during the Fort Dix investigation complaining to an associate about a film-pirating operation they were involved in in Egypt and saying he would have someone shoot unnamed individuals who were trying to extort him.  
Will receive approximately $237,873 in payments and reimbursements for his work as a cooperating witness from January 2005 through December of this year. The payments will include a weekly salary of $1,500 that began in August 2006, as the Fort Dix investigation intensified. 
After his aborted attempt to flee to Canada, Omar, 38, became an FBI informant on terrorism-related cases, Stermel said. 
The investigator said he could not provide details about those investigations. 
Omar, an Egyptian-born used-car salesman who entered the United States illegally through Mexico in 1992 or 1995 - defense attorneys pointed out that he provided differing dates to the U.S. Probation Department and to the FBI - was asked to develop information about Mohamad Shnewer, one of the defendants in the Fort Dix case, early in 2006, Stermel said. 
Omar knew Shnewer and his family because he shopped at a food market the family ran in Pennsauken.  
Shnewer and his associates had become targets of an anti-terrorism probe after a video copied at a Circuit City store showed them firing rifles and shouting for "jihad" at a firing range in the Poconos. 
"We were trying to find out what their mindset was," Stermel said, "whether this was a threat or some guys shooting guns in the woods." 
Omar already was cooperating with the FBI at that point, Stermel said, and "had done some good work." 
Stermel, who is expected back on the stand this morning, was questioned at length yesterday, first by Assistant U.S. Attorney Michael Hammer and then by defense attorneys Rocco Cipparone Jr., the lawyer for Shnewer, 23, and by Michael Huff, who represents Dritan Duka, 29. 
The other defendants in the case are Duka's brothers Eljvir, 25, and Shain, 27; and Serdar Tatar, 25. The five are charged with plotting a jihad-inspired attack on Fort Dix. 
The defense has argued that Omar manipulated the defendants, creating a conspiracy where none existed. They allege that he was trying to curry favor with authorities in order to avoid prosecution for his fraudulent activities, to stave off a possible deportation, and to continue to collect cash from the FBI. 
Omar recorded more than 200 conversations during the investigation, Stermel said. Dozens are expected to be played for the jury during the trial, now in its second week before U.S. District Court Judge Robert Kugler. 
Contact staff writer George Anastasia at 856-779-3846 or ganastasia@phillynews.com. 

Load-Date: October 28, 2008


End of Document