FORTY SENT OVERSEAS IN TERRORISM FIGHT
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne, WY)
January 3, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. A1
Length: 466 words
Byline: Kelly Etzel
Body


CHEYENNE -- Only a few troops were left in a supply room at F.E. Warren Air Force Base on Wednesday afternoon, rechecking bags and finishing packing.
"At Christmastime I called my family. They asked, 'Are you going?' I said no," said Senior Master Sgt. Mike Konkel of the 90th Civil Engineer Squadron at the base.
On Wednesday Konkel was packing to go overseas that night with 39 other military personnel from the base. They will be joining Operation Enduring Freedom, the overseas war on terrorism.
All the troops deployed Wednesday were members of the 90th Civil Engineer Squadron. They specialize in building and maintaining bases.
"We can go over to a deployed location and build a base," said 2nd Lt. Jeremiah Hammill, electrical engineer.
Hammill, also packing to go, said he didn't know for sure he would be deployed until 72 hours before Wednesday.
"I had a good idea around Christmas," he added.
Hammill, who is going on his first deployment, is leaving behind a fiance.
Konkel has deployed before on routine assignments. He is leaving his wife behind.
"She is worried," Konkel said.
Lt. Col. Steven Ditmer, commander of the 90th Civil Engineer Squadron, said, "I wouldn't say that they are going into combat. But they will be maintaining and operating a base."
Ditmer said he could not tell where the troops were going or how long they would be gone.
The troops will be working at an existing military base, Ditmer said. It was built a few months ago by another civil engineering squadron, which those from F.E. Warren are relieving.
Going out Wednesday were troops trained as equipment operators, plumbers, heating and air conditioning specialists, carpenters, surveyors and other construction workers.
Once the personnel are overseas, they will be able to make short "morale calls" once a week.
Family Support at F.E. Warren provides a program called "Hearts Apart" by which spouses can call troops through local base operators. E-mail and video phones could be available on the overseas base too.
"If they're at a real bare base, no facilities available, it's going to be real tough," 1st Sgt. Chuck Woske said.
His job is to keep up the morale, welfare and discipline of troops in the 90th Civil Engineer Squadron.
Ditmer and Woske were not deployed with the troops Wednesday.
"We still have 300 and some people here who need leadership too," Ditmer said.
Maintenance on the base here may be a little slower because of the deployments, he added. About half of the maintenance workers on base are civilians, and they are still there.
The 40 troops who left Wednesday joined 38 others previously deployed from F.E. Warren to aid in Operations Enduring Freedom and Noble Eagle, the war on terrorism in the United States.
Twenty-six troops have been deployed from the base on routine missions since Sept. 11.

Graphic

 
Kelly Etzel / staff
Jeremiah Hammill, a 2nd lieutenant with the 90th Civil Engineer Squadronbased at F.E. Warren Air Force Base, checks his bags Wednesday before hisdeployment overseas in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.

Load-Date: January 10, 2002


End of Document