FORT HOOD SUSPECT AWAKENS Officials: He acted alone Authorities monitored exchanges with radical imam, saw no threat
Chicago Daily Herald
November 10, 2009 Tuesday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2009 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 526 words
Byline: By Devlin Barrett Associated Press Writer
Body


WASHINGTON — The Army psychiatrist accused of the Fort Hood massacre is believed to have acted alone despite repeated communications — monitored by authorities — with a radical imam overseas, U.S. officials said Monday. The FBI will conduct an internal review of its handling of the information, they said.
An investigative official and a Republican lawmaker said Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan was in contact with Anwar al-Awlaki, an imam released from a Yemeni jail last year, 10 to 20 times. Despite that, no formal investigation was opened, they said.
Investigative officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the case. Republican Rep. Pete Hoekstra of Michigan, the top Republican on the House Intelligence
Committee, said it was his understanding Hasan and the imam exchanged e-mails that counterterrorism officials picked up.
Hasan, awake and talking to doctors, met his lawyer Monday in the Texas hospital where he is recovering under guard from gunshot wounds in the rampage Thursday that left 13 people dead and 29 injured. Officials said he will be tried in a military court, not a civilian one.
Among those 13 is Pvt. Francheska Velez, 21, a Chicago soldier who was scheduled to return home because she was pregnant. Mourners gathered Monday outside Velez's Humboldt Park home.
Another Illinois soldier, Pfc. Michael Pearson of Bolingbrook, also died in the shooting.
FBI Director Robert Mueller has ordered an internal inquiry to see whether the bureau mishandled worrisome information gathered about Hasan beginning in December 2008 and continuing into early this year.
Based on all the investigations since the attack, including a review of that 2008 information, the investigators said they have no evidence that Hasan had help or outside orders in the shootings.
Even so, they revealed the major had once been under scrutiny from a joint terrorism task force because of the series of communications going back months. Al-Awlaki is a former imam at a Falls Church, Va., mosque where Hasan and his family occasionally worshipped, and runs a Web site denouncing U.S. policy — a site that praised Hasan as a hero as a result of the massacre.
Military officials were made aware of communications between the two, but because the messages did not advocate or threaten violence, law enforcement authorities could not take the matter further, the officials said. The terrorism task force concluded Hasan was not involved in terrorist planning.
Officials said the content of those messages was "consistent with the subject matter of his research," part of which involved post-traumatic stress disorder stemming from U.S. combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
A law enforcement official said the communications consisted primarily of Hasan posing questions to the imam as a spiritual leader or adviser.
They said the decision to bring military charges instead of civilian criminal charges against Hasan did not mean it wasn't a terrorism case. But it is likely authorities would have had more reason to take the case to federal court if they had found evidence Hasan acted with the support or training of a terrorist group.

Load-Date: November 11, 2009


End of Document