Forum brings Iraq, Pakistan leaders to Columbia U.
University Wire
September 19, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Columbia Daily Spectator via U-Wire
Length: 526 words
Byline: By Kira Goldenberg, Columbia Daily Spectator; SOURCE: Columbia U.
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body


Pakistan is "on the forward march" toward becoming a progressive Islamic republic, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf said Friday in Low Library.
His appearance was marked by a heightened security presence throughout the campus -- Low steps were off limits to pedestrians for hours prior to the lunchtime address.
Musharraf's speech, part of the World Leaders Forum that began last week, was by turns pragmatic, genial, and passionate. He emphasized what he characterized as his ongoing efforts at economic development and his determination to remain in the forefront of the war on terror.
Musharraf cited nuclear proliferation, human rights, democracy, and terrorism and extremism as the four big issues facing today's world. "Pakistan happens to be in the epicenter of all four of these," he said. "We are on the world map, and we never were in the past."
Musharraf began the talk by offering his historical perspective on Pakistan's victimization as a nation in which he traced the roots of terrorism's presence to the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afganistan. He said that the invasion caused the Islamic world to mobilize, ultimately leading to the formation of groups such as al Qaeda. Much of the resistance was based in neighboring Pakistan.
But, he said, since the Soviets pulled out of Afganistan in 1989, "Everyone has abandoned us."
After that, Musharraf continued, Pakistan remained a stronghold of terrorism and extremism, two concepts that he was careful about differentiating between according to their solutions.
Terrorism, he said, must be squashed, while controlling extremism happens by converting hearts and minds. He cited two turning points in the country's history: his ascendance as leader in 1999 and the aftermath of September 11, 2001.
The terrorist attacks in New York influenced Pakistan because the country was an integral hotbed of al Qaeda. Musharraf stressed his efforts since then to remain on the forefront of the global war on terror.
"We feel that our cities are almost clear of terrorists," he announced.
Musharraf said that, as leader of Pakistan, he has instituted a system of admittedly harsh economic controls aimed at giving citizens a greater measure of stability. Though poverty and unemployment declined as a result of the controls and urban phenomena such as cell phones and IT have grown exponentially, Musharraf's goals remain to provide all Pakistanis with access to electricity, safe drinking water, and a better education.
Musharraf also touched on his current goals of strengthening peaceful ties with India and his view that the creation of a Palestinian state is crucial to resolving extremism in the Middle East.
During the post-speech question and answer period, Musharraf was asked if the unprovoked incursion into Iraq complicated his efforts to extinguish extremism. He declined to give a direct response.
"Why talk about spilt milk?" he answered, adding that the world focus should not be on the past but on how to deal with the present best to influence the future. "Leadership involves changing courses of history. Leadership does not involve following the current."
(C) 2005 Columbia Daily Spectator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 19, 2005


End of Document