FOSTER CARE SOLUTION IS MORE MONEY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 25, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 582 words
Body


On May 21 the Post-Dispatch carried a rather blistering article by Martha Shirk on the policies of the Division of Family Services regarding guidelines for placing foster children. I was amused, concerned and appalled that a judge who had years of experience working with children failed to see the trauma that children experience in growing up in strangers' homes. The burden of coping with a racial identity would only compound those problems.  I have had 30-plus years of counseling with children in school settings.  Children can be cruel. The questions that they pose to a peer can be devastating, especially in these sensitive areas.  It would appear that the current policy allows for the use of good judgment by the Division of Family Services and does not bar the placement of children in homes of different races but only seeks other alternatives first.  I believe the real problem in finding homes is the meager funding to the foster parent. Many foster parents must reach into their own pockets to help support the wards of our state. Also, the support of the Division of Family Services is limited due to the overload of its social workers. Let's look at the real problem: money, money, money.  Hubert Welch Olivette HEADLINE: Skirted Republican Regarding a May 14 Associated Press article about Illinois Rep. Lynn Martin, who is running for the Senate, it comes as no surprise that feminists - both men and women - throughout the state are in no rush to support the opponent of Sen. Paul Simon.
Believers in equality of rights for all citizens remember well the treachery of Martin when she served in the Illinois House of Representatives.  This devious woman voted for the extraordinary requirement of a three-fifths majority for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment. Martin thus joined the ranks of those who desire denial of a guarantee of full constitutional rights to all American women, but are too dishonest to say so.  Martin was sent to Congress by a wealthy Republican constituency, and that is the constituency she represents. The same corporate interests that oppose equality of rights under the law for all U.S. citizens are also against the Act for Better Child Care, the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Civil Rights Act of 1990.  She may call Southern Illinoisans rednecks, but we are not dumb enough to let a non-feminist unseat one of the most honest, caring and intelligent senators in Washington, just because she wears a skirt.  Gene Shultz Elsah HEADLINE: Terrorism Response A May 18 editorial says the solution to handling terrorism like the Pan Am bombing is in international cooperation and law. Since there is such little international cooperation and since terrorists spit on international law, the editorial really offers nothing.  More than 100 innocent Americans and Scots were killed by a terrorist bomb on Dec. 21, 1988, and, overall, nothing has been done.  I guess there will be more commissions, debates and books, but I fear nothing will be done in response to terrorism. Americans who died on the plane are owed something by their government - protection or actions of caring.  We need to learn from the Israelis. Their solutions to terrorism are a strong, competent intelligence, an ultra-tight airport security and a strong, quick and accurate strike upon those terrorists who kill their citizens.  Right now, American citizens and, at times, American soldiers are easy prey for just about any terrorist group.  George Fuchs St. Louis

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document