Four, Fourteen, Fifty-Eight
The Forward
May 3, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 8
Length: 860 words
Body


One of the fundamental roles of a national government is to protect  its citizens. The Preamble of the U. S. Constitution reflects  this obligation when it describes power coming from we the  people to a central authority that would insure domestic tranquility,  provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and  secure the blessings of liberty...
For five awful days in April, that obligation was put to the test  in a way that highlights the unconscionable inconsistency in what  we expect government to do and what we allow government to do.  No government  certainly not the dysfunctional version we have in  Washington these days  can ever protect all its citizens from harm.  But Americans have grown particularly good at overemphasizing our  need for protection in one area, and dramatically ignoring it in others.
This isn't a theoretical exercise. Lives are at stake. Many of them.  In those five days, three people were killed by the bombs that
tore through the finish line of the Boston Marathon, and a campus  police officer was gunned down by the alleged terrorists; 170 were  injured. During that same week, at least 15 people were killed by a  fire and explosion at a fertilizer plant in West, Texas, and 200 injured.  And in those same five days, at least 58 people were shot and killed  by guns. That number comes from Joe Nocera's excellent blog feature,  The Gun Report, on The New York Times website, and relying as it  does on news reports from around the country, it's surely an under-count.  Slate's gun-death tracker, which is compiled by crowdsourcing,  shows 76 deaths during the same time period.
Four. Fourteen. Fifty-eight.
The murderers in Boston were swiftly labeled terrorists, and the  search for them commandeered one of the nation's oldest, proudest  cities, shutting residents in their homes and shuttering most activity.  If the aim of terrorism is social, political and economic disruption   well, Boston was terrorized. But we heard little grumbling, few accusations  of heavy-handedness. Citizens complied with the extreme  demands because they deemed them necessary to provide a common  defence against another attack, and to ensure a return to some sort of  domestic tranquility, whatever that means in a post-Marathon world.
Since the 2001 terrorist attacks, many Americans have grown  complacent about the encroachment of civil liberties, and ever-more  demanding that terrorism be prevented wherever possible and severely  punished when it happens.
But government's role in promoting the general welfare in  workplaces is a different matter. News reports suggest that the fertilizer  plant that blew up on April 17 and brought death and destruction  to West, Texas was operating without sufficient government  oversight and with little to no regard for its nearby residential neighbors.  Bloomberg reported that the plant was last inspected by the  Occupational Safety and Health Administration in 1985. According to  Reuters, the plant was storing 270 tons of highly volatile ammonium  nitrate fertilizer that should have been reported to the Department of  Homeland Security but was not. The Texas Department of State Health  Services was aware of the dangerous chemical but failed to alert DHS,  the news agency reported.
The unrelenting pressure to deregulate and to starve the federal  government of resources has resulted in fewer and fewer OSHA  inspectors for the country's workplaces. Union leaders and environmentalists  warn that the Obama administration, while taking some  steps in the right direction, has left thousands of high-risk plants  exempt from enhanced safety regulations, with  not surprisingly   no help from Congress.
Why is the government failure to protect workers and homeowners  any more acceptable than its failure to prevent potential terrorism?
And then there is the worst failure of all, the failure of Congress  to pass even a timid fascimile of gun safety legislation that is supported  by the vast majority of Americans. In blind fealty to the ruthless gun  lobby, backed by a disingenuous reading of the Second Amendment,  senators failed in their simple duty to secure the blessings of liberty.  Read Nocera's list of gun injuries and deaths. A few, just a handful,  were the consequence of a homeowner or businessman attacking an  intruder in self-defense. Far more were accidents, too many of which  resulted in the injury or death of a child.
Fifty-eight  or perhaps 76  deaths in five days; 3,628  Americans killed by guns since the Newtown massacre was supposed  to galvanize the nation to finally treat gun abuse as the public  health hazard it is. Why are the Tsarnaev brothers more dangerous  than Adam Lanza, James Eagan Holmes, Eric Harris, Dylan Klebold  and the other men whose names have become synonymous with a  different kind of terror?
Most of the people who lost their lives in Texas were first responders  racing into the inferno to rescue their neighbors. Would that federal  lawmakers employed a fraction of that courage to help protect their  fellow citizens as they are obliged to do in the Constitution that they  frequently cite and too often ignore.

Load-Date: May 5, 2013


End of Document