Fourteen guilty in 2015 Paris terror attacks trial - Charlie Hebdo
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 17, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 689 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Hundreds of people killed, horrendous acts of terrorism and a nation struggling to answer profound questions about society and religion - all of this seems to stem back to that January attack in 2015.
A French court has convicted 14 accomplices in connection with the January 2015 attacks on the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine and a Jewish supermarket in Paris.
The court president, handing down the verdict, noted that, for procedural reasons, some of the accused could not be tried for anti-Semitic crimes, but he stressed that it was clear that Coulibaly attacked that supermarket because it was Jewish.
Among those convicted wasHayat Boumeddiene, the former partner of Islamist militant Amedy Coulibaly, who was linked to the gunmen responsible for the Charlie Hebdo attack.
Authorities believeBoumeddiene, one of three suspects to be tried in absentia, is alive and avoiding arrest under an global warrant issued in Syria, where she joined IS. Prosecutors have demanded sentences of between five years and life for the alleged accomplices.
The main defendant in court,Ali Riza Polat, was found guilty of complicity in terrorist crime and also given a 30-year jail term.
Charlie Hebdo's lawyer Richard Malka talks to the press at the Paris' courthouse, December 16, 2020, after the sentencing hearing in the trial of 14 people suspected of being accomplices in the Charlie Hebdo and Hyper Cacher jihadist killings. They all denied the charges.
Polat, described as Coulibaly's right-hand man, had a pivotal role in preparing the attacks and a "precise knowledge of the terrorist plan", prosecutors said. The two men who spirited her out of France, who were also tried in absentia, are thought to be dead. He was accused of giving the killer the most significant operational support as well as acting as his religious mentor. The two brothers are believed to be dead. Alwatik was with Coulibaly in jail and his DNA was found on two pistols at his home, while Ramdani was accused of providing weapons.
These proceedings have been filmed for posterity, and the stories told by survivors and the bereaved will shape France's memory of these bad events.
Canada agrees deal with US to send astronaut around the moon
Officials say the Canadian astronaut won't actually land on the moon, however future trips are also in the works. According to the CSA, it will be similar to the Apollo missions that took place over 50 years ago.
On the cover of its new issue to mark the verdicts, Charlie Hebdo in typically provocative style published a picture of God being led away in a police van with the title "God put in his place". How did they get their weapons? Or the three absentees who fled to Syria just before the attacks?
Both ISIS and Al-Qaeda claimed responsibility for the 2015 attacks, which were the beginning of a wave of terrorism across France. The 11 men standing trial formed a loose circle of friends and criminal acquaintances who claimed any facilitating they may have done was unwitting.
Cathartic the trial may have been - especially for those who still suffer from the memory of these events - the fact remains that not much light has been shed.
Also testifying were the widows of Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, the brothers who stormed Charlie Hebdo's offices on January 7, 2015, decimating the newspaper's editorial staff in what they said was an act of vengeance for its publication of caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad years before.
On 8 January Coulibaly shot dead a woman police officer in the Paris suburb of Montrouge.
Coulibaly killed a policewoman the day after the attack but was killed later by security forces during a siege at a kosher supermarket.
The editor-in-chief, Stephane Charbonnier, lived with police protection for more than three years, but said that he would "rather die on my feet than live on my knees".
The magazine marked the start of the trial by reprinting controversial cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad that sparked protests in several Muslim countries.
The following month, teacher Samuel Paty was murdered near his school by a Chechen, days after the teacher showed some of the cartoons to a class on free speech.

Load-Date: December 17, 2020


End of Document