Fox News: callous reporting Editor, New Era:
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
July 13, 2005, Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A,
Length: 315 words
Byline: LETTERS
Body


In times of crisis, you can learn a lot about someones nature. Several journalists at Fox News should be embarrassed to have shown theirs. In reference to the G-8 summit focusing on global warming and foreign aid instead of terrorism, Brian Kilmeade said this: I think that works to our advantage, in the Western worlds advantage, for people to experience something like this together, just 500 miles from where the attacks have happened. Besides being callous, his comment shows a terrible lack of sense, knowledge and understanding. First, we can take up several issues at once. If we focus on foreign aid, we havent forgotten about terrorism. Second, London is well-acquainted with terror attacks. These new attacks didnt remind them of anything they forgot. (The entire exchange between Kilmeade and Stuart Varney is available at mediamatters.com.) When asked by Shepard Smith about the drop in the stock market, Brit Hume offered, I mean, my first thought when I heard just on a personal basis, when I heard there had been this attack and I saw the futures this morning, which were really in the tank, I thought, Hmmm, time to buy. Imagine a foreign reporter saying this after 9/11, or the Oklahoma City bombing. A day before the attacks John Gibson joked, By the way, just wanted to tell you people … the International Olympic Committee missed a golden opportunity today. If they had picked France … instead of London to hold the Olympics, it would have been the one time we could look forward to where we didnt worry about terrorism.
#710044.wrk#Theyd blow up Paris, and who cares? If I said that, I would run and hide but the next day he was back at it with remarkable resolve: The bombings in London: This is why I thought the Brits should let the French have the Olympics let somebody else be worried about guys with backpack bombs for a while. How does this pass for entertainment?

Load-Date: July 13, 2005


End of Document