Fragile factors behind pause in world terrorism - Correction Appended
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 1
Length: 868 words
Byline: George D. Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body


Nine months have passed since the last major episode of international terrorism was played out on an airport tarmac in Karachi, Pakistan.
Since that September hijacking of a Pan American airliner, which occurred simultaneously with an attack on an Istanbul synagogue which left 21 dead, a fragile combination of circumstances has provided a welcome respite from terrorist violence.
In particular, US officials and private analysts say, the principal state sponsors of terrorism like Syria and Libya have all had reasons to lie low. And the West Europeans have been much more successful in working together to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks.
''The political will is there (in Europe to fight terrorism), and for the first time the money is there as well,'' a State Department official says.
But these experts caution that the root causes of terrorism have not been cured. Hence, they say, the current lull could all too easily be shattered.
The experts are especially concerned about two current risks: one is the Reagan administration proposal for defending shipping in the Persian Gulf, a move that is perceived as provocative by Iran. The other is the pending West German trial of Muhammad Ali Hamadei, one of four Lebanese believed to have been behind the June 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847.
''Basically we're living on borrowed time,'' says Ernest Evans, author of a recent book on terrorism.
According to State Department figures, terrorist incidents worldwide declined slightly last year, following increases of 30 percent in 1984 and 45 percent in 1985.
Terrorism experts warn that such statistics can be misleading, not least since one dramatic incident involving Westerners can hugely outweigh many smaller ones in influencing Western public opinion. In fact, the number of incidents in the Middle East, already the worst area for this problem, has continued to grow rapidly.
The experts note, however, that the biggest decrease was recorded in Western Europe, where terrorist attacks declined by one-third in 1986 from 1985, and where ''spillover'' terrorism from the Middle East dropped by one-half. One reason for the decline is that countries that have been the main sponsors of terrorism have had other things to worry about.
Libya remains quiescent after last year's US bombing raid. Iraq is fighting for its life in the seven-year Iran-Iraq war. Experts say that Iran, unless provoked by what it regards as nonneutral US actions in the Gulf would prefer to concentrate on the war.
Meanwhile, Syria, which recently refused to give quarter to the notorious Abu Nidal, the nom de guerre of Sabri al-Banna, has pledged to find the captors of US journalist Charles Glass, kidnapped in Lebanon last week, and appears to be sending signals of moderation as a means of improving relations with the West.
Thus, the infrastructure needed to support terrorism has largely disappeared. ''The main problem terrorists are facing now is that the network of terrorist embassies and European terrorist groups willing to help has ceased to exist,'' says Avner Yaniv, a Middle East expert at Georgetown University.
Despite the pause in terrorist activity, analysts point to at least two circumstances that they say could trigger a new outbreak of terrorist activity.
One is the forthcoming trial of Mr. Hamadei, accused of air piracy and the killing of US Navy diver Robert Stethem, a passenger aboard the hijacked TWA Flight 847.
West German officials were expected to formally decline today to extradite Hamadei to the US for trial. Days after Hamadei's arrest last January, two West German businessmen were seized by kidnappers in Lebanon seeking Hamadei's release. West German authorities are bracing for more attacks as Hamadei's trial begins.
Analysts also worry about possible Iranian reprisals if the US makes good on plans to put Kuwaiti shipping in the Gulf under the protection of the American flag. They say it's unlikely Iran would respond to the planned reflagging of 11 Kuwaiti vessels with direct missile attacks on US shipping in the Gulf; but the reflagging or any preemptive strike by the US on Iranian shore batteries along the Gulf would almost certainly provoke a wave of Iranian-backed terrorism.
Last week's capture of Mr. Glass, believed to have been carried out by pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim groups in Lebanon, is taken to be a warning to the US, as is the recent report in the Lebanese weekly Al-Shiraa that the 10 US hostages now being held in Lebanon are being transferred to Iran.
Whether or not the latter report is true, US hostages and US facilities in the Middle East would be the most likely targets of Iranian anger at US actions in the Gulf, experts say.
''What the Iranians will turn to is … the kind of actions that will leave the United States helpless, on the assumption that the US has no staying power,'' says Mr. Yaniv. ''The Iranians believe that when the water gets too hot, the US will pull out (of the Gulf).''
State Department officials say a major reason for the declining number of incidents in Europe has been better prevention and enforcement. European Community nations have expelled, or restricted the movements of, Libyan diplomats, and kept tabs on Syrian diplomats.
Correction

A story on terrorism yesterday incorrectly quoted Mideast expert Avner Yaniv. It should have read: ''The main problem terrorists are facing now is that the network of Arab embassies and European terrorist groups willing to help has ceased to exist.''
Correction-Date: June 25, 1987, Thursday

Graphic

 
Chart 1, ''Reprieve in the West'' - number of international terrorist incidents in Western Europe and North America, 1981-1986; SOURCE: US DEPARTMENT OF STATE; Chart 2, ''Key trouble areas'' - number of international terrorist incidents in Latin America, Middle East and worldwide total, 1981-1986; SOURCE: US DEPARTMENT OF STATE, LISA REMILLARD - STAFF


End of Document