FRANCE, WORLD MOURN TOGETHER; 'France is going to have to live with terrorism,' French leader says.; BASTILLE DAY ATTACK
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 16, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 1093 words
Byline: AlissaJ. Rubin, Lilia Blaise, Adam Nossiter and Aurelien Breeden
Body


THE WORLD REACTS New York City Police counterterrorism officers increased security outside the French Consulate and throughout the city. The airport in Nice was closed abuptly Friday as soldiers performed a sweep of the facility afterThursday night's attack. At the border with France, Italy told all local prefects and police chiefs to reassess security measures and reinforce all"sensitive targets" Mourners gathered in Canada and Ireland, while Texas Gov. Greg Abbott announced the flying of the French flag in front of the Governor's Mansion in solidarity with the European nation.
Flowers and candles are left after the attacks in Nice outside the entrance to the French Consulate in San Francisco on Friday. Scores of people were killed Thursday night after a Tunisian man drove a truck through crowds in Nice, and leaders of nations around the world expressed sympathy and anger.
NICE, FRANCE - The toll of an attack on a Bastille Day fireworks celebration in the southern French city of Nice rose Friday to 84 dead and 202 injured, as the government identified the assailant as a 31-year-old native of Tunisia, extended a national state of emergency and absorbed the shock of a third major terrorist attack in 19 months.
"We will not give in to the terrorist threat," Prime Minister Manuel Valls said Friday morning after a Cabinet meeting led by President Francois Hollande. But Valls also offered a grim observation for his countrymen: "The times have changed, and France is going to have to live with terrorism."
As France announced three days of national mourning, starting today, world leaders - from Pope Francis and President Barack Obama to Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Britain's new prime minister, Theresa May - expressed sympathy and outrage.
It was a sadly familiar ritual for France, where 147 people were killed in terrorist attacks in and around Paris in January and November of last year, and it raised new questions throughout the world about the ability of extremists to sow terror.
The internet reverberated with calls for prayer for victims of attacks in Brussels; Istanbul; Orlando, Florida; Baghdad; and other cities struck by mass terrorism attributed to Islamist extremists this year.
Starting around 10:45 p.m. Thursday, the attacker mowed down scores of victims in Nice with a rented, 19-ton refrigerated truck before engaging in a gunfight with three police officers, who pursued him down a storied seaside promenade before finally killing him.
Paris prosecutor Francois Molins identified the man as Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, who was born on Jan. 3, 1985, and raised in Msaken, a town in northeastern Tunisia.
The police searched two locations in Nice on Friday, including a home with Bouhlel's name outside it, and workers in hazardous-materials suits searched a truck, one much smaller than the vehicle used in the attack. Bouhlel's ex-wife was held for questioning.
No organized group has claimed responsibility for the attack, although online accounts associated with the Islamic State and al-Qaida have cheered it.
Bouhlel had a history of petty crime, including theft, going back to 2010, and he received a six-month suspended sentence in March for assaulting a driver during an altercation in January.
"However, he is completely unknown by intelligence services, both at the national and local levels," Molins said. "He has never been in any database or been flagged for radicalization."
Bouhlel rented the truck Monday from a company in Saint-Laurent-du-Var, a town about six miles east of Nice, near the city's airport, and then parked it in the Auriol neighborhood of eastern Nice.
At 9:34 p.m. Thursday, according to surveillance footage, Bouhlel arrived by bicycle in Auriol and entered the truck. He then drove west, arriving at 10:30 in the Magnan neighborhood, north of the Promenade des Anglais, a famous seaside boulevard.
His deadly rampage began around 15 minutes later, when he drove the truck south and then turned onto the promenade, which was packed with spectators watching the end of the Bastille Day fireworks.
Bouhlel initially mowed down two people and then continued driving for 1.1 miles eastward, running over people left and right. Outside the Negresco Hotel, Bouhlel fired at three police officers; they returned fire and then pursued him for about a thousand feet. They shot and killed him outside a Hyatt hotel and casino.
Bouhlel was found dead in the passenger seat. In the truck's cabin, police found an automatic 7.65 mm pistol, a cartridge clip, and several cartridges. They also found a fake automatic pistol; two fake assault rifles, a Kalashnikov and an M-16; a non-functioning grenade; and a mobile phone and documents.
The 84 dead included 10 children and teenagers, Molins said. Among the victims were two German students and their teacher; two Americans; two Tunisians; and one Russian. Of the 202 people wounded, 52 had serious injuries and 25 were in intensive care, Molins said.
Officials canceled festivities in Nice, a city of 340,000, including a five-day jazz festival and a concert Friday night by Rihanna.
"There are many children, young children who had come to watch fireworks with their family, to have joy, to share happiness, delight, amazement, and who were struck, struck to death, merely to satisfy the cruelty of an individual - and maybe of a group," Hollande said, flanked by Valls and Health Minister Marisol Touraine, after meeting with victims and medical workers at the Pasteur Hospital in Nice.
Hollande said the victims were physically and psychologically scarred. "Many told me that they had no recollection of what might have caused their wounds," he said. "However, they remember the bodies that were torn to shreds right in front of their eyes."
Despite mounting criticism over France's efforts to prevent terrorism attacks, Hollande praised French security forces, saying they had "taken all necessary measures so that this fireworks show might be as protected as possible - as had been the case during the European Championship soccer tournament."
"Why Nice?" Hollande asked. "Because it is a city that is known worldwide, one of the most beautiful cities on the planet," he said. "Why on the 14th of July? Because it is a celebration of freedom. It was, therefore, indeed to affect France that the individual committed this terrorist attack."
Hours before the carnage in Nice, Hollande had said that a state of emergency put in place after the Nov. 13 attacks in and around Paris would end soon. The government will now seek to extend it for three months.

Load-Date: July 16, 2016


End of Document