FRANCE TAKES A FIRMER HAND WITH TERRORISM
The New York Times
August 22, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 927 words
Byline: By FLORA LEWIS
Dateline: PARIS
Body


After a long period of rather condescending clucks at the ravages of terrorism in neighboring states, France has suddenly found itself to be a prime target. The massacre of six persons in a Jewish restaurant, among other incidents, led President Francois Mitterrand to break his rule of not responding in the heat of events and to proclaim on television last week a ''war on terrorism.''
Everybody agreed that firm countermeasures were needed. But beyond that, there were raging arguments about why the scourge has reached France now, who is responsible and what it all means.
PARIS - After a long period of rather condescending clucks at the ravages of terrorism in neighboring states, France has suddenly found itself to be a prime target.
Many blamed the Middle East fighting one way or another. Mr.  Mitterrand did not discourage this view, saying that ''one act of the war out there is taking place in Paris'' and that ''all kinds of extremists want to hit France because it is the main factor for peace.''
Those who support the Palestine Liberation Organization, including the French Communist Party, said it was the Israeli invasion of Lebanon that provoked a reaction here. An extreme leftist, Jean-Marc Rouillan, said in a newspaper interview that his group, Direct Action, was responsible for three bombing attacks against ''Jewish targets.'' The next day Direct Action was declared illegal, making it possible to arrest members without proof that they personally participated in the violence. Yesterday the group claimed to have planted a car bomb in Paris that killed a police explosives expert.
People who sympathize with Israel, even though they may criticize the Begin Government, said French gestures toward the P.L.O. and especially steamy French press and television reports on the war, with references to ''genocide'' and ''neo-fascists,'' created a climate of indulgence toward anti-Semitism. Heat was added with harsh statements by Prime Minister Menachem Begin which offended Frenchmen who do not have such strong feelings either way.
Not all the sudden explosion of terrorist bombings and shootings here has involved Jews or Arabs. Armenians have been active, Corsicans keep erupting, and there is always an uneasy atmosphere surrounding Basques who operate in Spain and take refuge in France.  Some of the most serious incidents have never been signed. But it is pointed out that nowadays professional terrorist groups help each other and, regardless of their cause, many have received training from elements of the P.L.O.
Spain, Italy and, on occasion, West Germany have complained at lack of cooperation from the French in pursuing terrorists who cross the border. The new French decisions, including a new junior minister for public security, are intended to provide for better coordination both internally and internationally, without actually establishing special measures which French authorities have rejected as impinging on democracy.
A Domestic Issue
The charge of being lax in dealing with criminals has made terrorism a domestic political issue. At the start of Mr.  Mitterrand's term, an amnesty that included some extremists and sympathy for foreign radicals among some of his advisers were cited by his critics as a reason why terrorists, facing stern repression elsewhere, were drawn to France.
But supporters of the Government point out that there was long believed to be a tacit agreement that enabled Palestinians to establish a base in France so long as their hits were made in other countries. Even now, Spain believes that the Paris Government leaves Basque terrorists in safety in return for not stirring up trouble in the French Basque country.
There is no change in this policy, though Mr. Mitterrand has now announced a long-discussed measure of control which Paris always had refused - surveillance of foreign embassies that support terrorists and apparently ship arms for them under diplomatic immunity.
Underlying all this is the very different question of anti-Semitism in France and other European countries. That clearly comes from both the far right and far left. It is an inevitably murky question how much attacks on Israelis veil an essential anti-Semitism which has nothing to do with the Jewish State, and how much attacks on Jewish institutions are aimed at their supposed support for Israel. Clearly, the history of French-Israeli relations has influenced attitudes.  France was a warm backer and chief arms supplier to Israel until, at the start of the 1967 war, President Charles de Gaulle declared an embargo and abruptly shifted to a pro-Arab policy.
Mr. Mitterrand tried to restore some balance, forbidding French firms to observe the Arab boycott, supporting Camp David and joining the Sinai multinational force. He was the first French President to visit Israel, though he went to Saudi Arabia first to show his anger at Israel's bombing of the nuclear reactor being built by the French in Iraq.
Except for Austria, which has given status to the P.L.O. just short of state recognition, there has been a decline of terrorism involving Arabs and Jews outside France. Anti-Semitic incidents continue in Austria.
Given modern communications and mass travel, the only effective weapon against terrorism appears to be computerized intelligence and surveillance, a long painstaking job. Anti-Semitism is a greater mystery, much harder to uproot. France and its neighbors do not expect to win their ''war'' quickly, but at least they are likely to cooperate better against what they have come to see as a common enemy.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of waiter grieving over body of slain co-worker graph of Western Europe's Jewish population


End of Document