FRANCE RESISTS TALK ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
February 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 615 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Feb. 3
Body


France is blocking a proposal that the major industrial democracies discuss joint efforts to respond to future terrorist attacks, according to officials involved in planning a May summit meeting.
French representatives have objected to an American initiative, accepted by several countries, to put terrorism on the agenda of a meeting of leaders of the seven largest industrial countries, the officials said. The meeting is to be held in May in Tokyo.
Most of the participants have accepted the American idea, which was most recently discussed at an unpublicized meeting held in Hawaii last week to prepare the Tokyo agenda, the officials said.
But France has long resisted efforts to discuss noneconomic matters at the annual summit meeting, which brings together the leaders of the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan and West Germany.
 
'Political Departures' Opposed
''In general,'' a French official said, ''we have resisted and even been hostile to any political departures at these meetings that would create the impression'' that the seven countries were acting as an executive body.
An official involved in preparations for the summit meeting said the French position was ''etched in stone,'' adding that there had been no sign of a change at the Hawaii meeting.
Officials said the American proposal, made after the terrorist attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports in December in which 20 people were killed, was still being formulated. The main idea is that the seven countries would agree in advance on a response to any terrorist actions on their territory.
One possibility, for example, is that in the event of an airplane hijacking, the seized plane would be blocked from taking off for another destination and troops from the country whose plane was seized would be permitted to carry out a rescue attempt. #1978 Declaration Is Cited The American initiative to discuss terrorism builds on a declaration adopted at the 1978 summit meeting in Bonn committing the seven countries to suspend air traffic with any country that fails to extradite suspects in hijacking cases.
The French rejection of the proposal to discuss these measures at the Tokyo summit meeting underlines the differences between the United States and many European countries over measures to be taken against terrorism.
Most European countries rejected calls for an economic boycott of Libya after the Rome and Vienna attacks, which American officials have maintained were aided by the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
The members of the European Economic Community, including France, agreed in Brussels last week to ban arms sales to countries ''clearly implicated'' in terrorist actions. But they did not name countries, and in the American view they fell far short of a call for concrete action.
 
Several Reasons for Reluctance
France is believed to be reluctant to support the measures proposed by the United States for several reasons. Among them is a concern that Western actions against Libya, for example, would cause other Arab countries to come to Libya's aid.
At a meeting with foreign reporters last week, Prime Minister Laurent Fabius said an economic boycott of Libya would produce ''an Arab front'' unfriendly to the West.
Asked what measures France favored to deal with international terrorism, he mentioned closer cooperation among police forces in Europe to exchange information about suspects in terrorist attacks and to stop them from crossing borders.
In light of the French opposition to discussing terrorism at the Tokyo summit meeting, other industrialized countries, including the United States, have pressed France to name an alternative site for such talks. It has yet to do so.


End of Document