FRANCE PREPARES FOR MASS RALLY AGAINST TERRORISM Leaders from around the world expected to attend today
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
January 11, 2015 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2015 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 3
Length: 636 words
Byline: Sylvie Corbet and Angela Charlton Associated Press
Dateline: PARIS 
Body


France has vowed to combat terrorism with "a cry for freedom" in a giant rally for unity today after three days of bloodshed that horrified the world.
 The unity rally is also a huge security challenge for a nation on alert for more violence, after 17 people and three gunmen were killed over three days of attacks on a satirical newspaper, a kosher supermarket and police.
 Hundreds of thousands of people marched Saturday in cities from Toulouse in the south to Rennes in the west to honor the victims, and Paris expects hundreds of thousands more at today's rally. More than 2,000 police are being deployed, in addition to tens of thousands already guarding synagogues, mosques, schools and other sites around France.
 Unity against extremism is the overriding message for the rally. Among the expected attendees are the Israeli prime minister and the Palestinian president; the Ukrainian president, Russian foreign minister and the leaders of Britain, Germany, NATO, the Arab League and African nations; and the French masses, from across the political and religious spectrum.
 Top European and U.S. security officials are also holding a special emergency meeting in Paris about fighting terrorism.
 The rally "must show the power, the dignity of the French people who will be shouting out of love of freedom and tolerance," Prime Minister Manuel Valls said Saturday.
 "Journalists were killed because they defended freedom. Policemen were killed because they were protecting you. Jews were killed because they were Jewish," he said. "The indignation must be absolute and total - not for three days only, but permanently."
 Al-Qaida's branch in Yemen said it directed Wednesday's attack against the publication Charlie Hebdo to avenge the honor of the Prophet Muhammad, a frequent target of the weekly's satire.
 French radio RTL released audio Saturday of Amedy Coulibaly, speaking by phone from the kosher supermarket where he killed four hostages, in which he lashes out over Western military campaigns against extremists in Syria and Mali. He describes Osama bin Laden as an inspiration.
 The French president held an emergency security meeting Saturday and Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said the government is maintaining its terror alert for the Paris region at the highest level while investigators determine whether the attackers were part of a larger extremist network.
 Five people are in custody in connection with the attacks, and family members of the attackers have been given preliminary charges.
 In a sign of the tense atmosphere, a security perimeter was briefly imposed at Disneyland Paris on Saturday before being lifted, a spokeswoman said, without elaborating.
 The prime minister and Muslim and Christian supporters joined Jewish groups in a vigil after sundown Saturday to mourn the four people killed at the kosher market. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked France to maintain heightened security at Jewish institutions even after the return to routine.
 Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas condemned the attacks. Gaza's Islamic Hamas leaders condemned the attack on the satirical newspaper but pointedly refrained from mentioning the kosher supermarket.
 The attacks in France, as well as a hostage siege last month in Sydney and the October killing of a soldier near Canada's parliament, prompted the U.S. State Department to issue a global travel warning for Americans. It also cited an increased risk of reprisals against U.S. and Western targets for the U.S.-led intervention against Islamic State group militants in Syria and Iraq.
 Charlie Hebdo, which lampoons other religions and political figures as well as Islamic extremism, plans a special edition Wednesday. Media watchdog Reporters Without Borders launched a fund Saturday to raise money to allow it to continue publishing.

Load-Date: January 14, 2015


End of Document