France Releases 5 Terrorists And Sends Them to Teheran
The New York Times
July 28, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 911 words
Byline: By MARLISE SIMONS, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, July 27
Body


Five men convicted for acts of terrorism in France were released and sent to Iran today in what appeared to be a crucial step in a broader agreement between the French and Iranian Governments.
The most important figure freed was Anis Naccache, a Lebanese, who was known to be an important member of the pro-Iranian Party of God, which is regarded as the main force in Lebanese hostage-taking.
He was serving a sentence of life imprisonment for murder after he tried to kill the former Prime Minister of Iran, Shahpur Bakhtiar, in Paris in 1980. In the attempt, a French policeman and a bystander were killed.
Mr. Naccache's release had repeatedly been demanded by Iran, which has officially stated that it had reached a complex agreement with Paris that led to the release of all six French hostages held in Beirut in 1988.
 
France Denies Any Deal
A spokeswoman at the office of President Francois Mitterrand denied that there was any ''deal or exchange of any nature'' with Teheran.
Mr. Naccache and four of his accomplices, who were also freed, were taken to Orly Airport in Paris today and put on an Air Iran flight for Teheran.
In a terse communique, the French Ministry of Justice said the five men were granted a presidential pardon after serving 10 years of their sentences.
In Washington, the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency declined to comment on France's action. A State Department spokesman said the Administration did not know the details of France's decision, but added, ''United States policy is clear: we believe the rule of law should be brought to bear against terrorists.''
An Administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said no American reaction would be conveyed to the French until the reasons for Mr. Mitterrand's actions were clear.
 
Hope for Other Hostages
But some other Government experts were said to believe that the action might lead to the release of a so-called third tier of hostages, from Belgium, Italy, West Germany and Switzerland, whose captivity has not been as widely publicized as that of American and British hostages.
A leading private expert and former Government adviser on terrorism, Brian Jenkins, discounted the possibility of a hostage release. He agreed that France could be fulfilling the pledge that it is believed to have made in 1988 to free Mr. Naccache in return for the release of the French hostages.
After the release of the French hostages, Mr. Naccache remained in jail because rumors of a swap created a political sensation in France. French officials have denied all along that a deal was struck, but the denials have been widely disbelieved, Mr. Jenkins said.
He said ''there has been suspicion that France was looking for a decent interval'' before releasing Mr. Naccache and the others. ''This can either be seen as fulfilling an old agreement, avoiding the possibility of provoking new terrorist operations against French nationals, or as part of a larger diplomatic effort to insure good relations in the Middle East,'' he said.
 
Debate in Paris Revives
In Paris, too, the release of Mr. Naccache revived the longstanding debate over what concessions France had made to get its hostages back.
In the past, Iranian officials have said the accord with Paris included a commitment by Iran to refrain from sponsoring any acts of terrorism against France and a pledge by Paris to normalize diplomatic relations and resume economic and industrial ties. Then as now, the office of President Mitterrand denied that it was working out an exchange for the hostages or making any other secret deals.
But other French officials and press reports here predicted earlier this year that as part of a broader arrangement, Mr. Naccache would be released in July. The accord had been largely upheld, including the release of all French hostages held in Beirut.
Mr. Bahktiar, who lives in Paris, made several appearances on television tonight and seemed annoyed. He told an interviewer: ''I think that the West may have the illusion that by making concessions to the moderate clergy, or what is called the moderate clergy, they will benefit. This is an illusion.'' In another newscast he said, ''How can you exchange assassins for innocent people?'' By making one concession after another, he said, ''you end up capitulating.''
 
Orders From Teheran Seen
Although Mr. Naccache is a Lebanese, at his trial both the defense and the prosecution said he and his team were acting on orders from senior members of the Iranian Government. He had repeatedly called himself the spokesman in Europe for the Party of God. Others described him as friend of Ahmad Khomeini, the son of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the late Iranian spiritual leader.
Mr. Naccache became an important symbol for guerrilla groups in the Middle East that repeatedly demanded his freedom. Late last year he went on a long hunger strike because he insisted that France had failed to live up to its commitment to release him and others in exchange for the freed French hostages. Apparently it took an appeal from Iranian officials to persuade him to end his hunger strike in January.
France's far-right party, the National Front, criticized the release of the five prisoners, saying the Government had put the judicial system ''at the service of the state.''
The others freed with Mr. Naccache today were a Lebanese, Salaheddine al-Kaara; two Iranians, Mehdi Nejad Tabrizzi and Mohammed Jawat Jeneb, and a Palestinian, Fauozi Mohammed al-Satari.

Graphic

 
Photos: Five convicted terrorists have been freed by France and sent to Iran, but France has denied that a ''deal or exchange'' was made. From left are Anis Naccache, Salaheddine al-Kaara, Fauozi Mohammed al-Satari, Mehdi Nejad Tabrizzi and Mohammed Jawat Jeneb. (Photographs by Reuters)


End of Document