France boosts intel gathering, police; Better weapons, more agents to counter terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 22, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 26
Length: 290 words
Byline: SYLVIE CORBET and NICOLAS VAUX-MONTAGNY

The Associated Press
Dateline: PARIS 
Highlight: France to get better guns, more agents to fight terror; 4 men charged with links to attacker
Body


 - France announced sweeping new measures to counter homegrown terrorism Wednesday, including giving security forces better weapons and protection, going on an intelligence agent hiring spree and creating a better database of anyone suspected of extremist links.The measures detailed by Prime Minister Manuel Valls came as four men were handed preliminary charges of providing logistical support to one of the Paris terror attackers - the first charges issued for three days of mayhem that left 20 people dead, including three gunmen.
The new security measures include increased intelligence-gathering on jihadis and other radicals, in part by making it easier to tap phones. Valls said Internet providers and social networks have a legal responsibility under French law to comply with the new measures.
In all, France will spend $490 million over the next three years for all the counterterror efforts, he said.
Some 2,600 counterterrorism officers will be hired, 1,100 of them specifically for intelligence services. Anti-terror surveillance is needed for 3,000 people with ties to France, some at home, others abroad, the prime minister said.
Also Wednesday, President Francois Hollande's office announced that the government now plans to cut 7,500 fewer jobs from the military to better fight terrorism.
Authorities say more than 1,200 French residents are now linked to foreign jihad. The defense minister said about 10 of those who have gone to Syria or Iraq to fight with Islamic extremists are former French soldiers. Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian insisted the phenomenon is an extreme rarity.
Since three police were among those killed, the prime minister said improving officers' weapons and protective gear was among the top priorities. 

Load-Date: January 22, 2015


End of Document