France Aims to Curb Potential Jihadis From Leaving Country
The New York Times
July 10, 2014 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 555 words
Byline: By SCOTT SAYARE
Body


PARIS -- Amid international concern over the threat posed by Western jihadis returning from training or combat in Syria, the French government will soon propose legislation authorizing it to block suspected proponents of Islamic terrorism from leaving France, top officials announced Wednesday.
The Interior Ministry would be empowered to void or confiscate the passports of people deemed by French intelligence services to be potential threats, and to prohibit airlines from allowing them to board planes. Though such ''administration prohibitions'' would be temporary and open to challenge in court, they could be renewed indefinitely, Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said Wednesday.
''This is not something discretionary and arbitrary,'' Mr. Cazeneuve told France Info radio. ''There must be a body of evidence that shows that a person is decided and determined to go to areas of jihadist operations.''
The legislation would also create a new crime, the ''individual initiative'' to undertake terrorist activities, in order to allow the French authorities to more effectively monitor and pursue individuals suspected of planning ''lone wolf'' attacks or believed to be engaged in self-radicalization. Current antiterrorism legislation allows for conspiracy charges against those suspected of links to terrorist networks or involvement in group plots, but investigators and law enforcement officials have complained of legal limits to their capacity to pursue isolated actors.
The law would also authorize French officials to force Internet service providers to block websites promoting terrorism. The law would also allow investigators to access related data held on servers outside France, though how the French authorities intend to compel foreign companies to comply with French law is unclear.
Such measures are necessary ''to confront the rapid increase in the departures of young French for areas where training in armed combat is coupled with ideological indoctrination,'' the government said in a statement. A vote on the legislation is planned before the end of the year.
About 300 French citizens or residents are thought to be fighting in Syria, and 500 more are thought to be considering a departure or to have already returned, Mr. Cazeneuve said this week.
In May, the authorities in Marseille arrested Mehdi Nemmouche, a French citizen believed to be responsible for a recent shooting at the Jewish Museum in Brussels that left four people dead. Mr. Nemmouche, 29, had spent perhaps a year fighting in Syria, the French authorities said; the killings appeared to be the first committed in Europe by a European citizen returning from the Syrian battlefields.
In an address in Oslo on Tuesday, the American attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., called on European nations to be increasingly ''pre-emptive'' in fighting terrorism.
In France, the proposed legislation would be undermined, officials acknowledge, by the fact that France is a member of the Schengen Area, permitting residents to travel widely without passport checks. French citizens are additionally authorized to travel without passports to Turkey, the usual entry point for those seeking to join the fighting in neighboring Syria.
Under the proposed law, individuals who leave France despite a travel ban would be subject to large fines and prison sentences.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/10/world/europe/france-aims-to-curb-potential-jihadis-from-leaving-country.html

Load-Date: July 10, 2014


End of Document