FRANCOIS GENOUD, NAZI WHO BACKED TERRORISM
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 2, 1996 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. C15
Length: 380 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body


Francois Genoud - a Nazi sympathizer, banker to Arab militants and defender of terrorists - has committed suicide.
Genoud, 81, who made a fortune from publishing the diaries of Nazi propaganda chief Joseph Goebbels, poisoned himself Thursday. He was aided by the Swiss pro-euthanasia group Exit, his daughter said yesterday.
"He had decided to leave this earth on a date that he chose himself," Martine Genoud said. She did not say whether he had been ill.
He was born in Lausanne in 1915 and when he was 15 moved to Germany, where he acquired his National Socialist ideals. "I stayed a Nazi for the rest of my life. I never changed my colors," he said in a 1990 interview.
Adolf Hitler "was my hero and always will be."
After World War II, he won a long legal battle for the copyrights to the writings of leading Nazis, including Hitler's right-hand men, Goebbels and Martin Bormann.
Genoud helped set up the Arab commercial bank in Geneva in 1958. The bank was active in lending money to Arab nationalist groups and held the fighting fund of the Algerian independence movement.
In a biography published earlier this year, he admitted he had actively supported international terrorism. He said he had worked closely with the extremist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, which carried out a string of attacks against Israel and Jewish interests.
He was a friend of international terrorist Carlos the Jackal and helped finance his defense after his 1994 arrest. By his own count, Carlos killed 83 people in bombings, hijackings and assassinations.
Genoud also helped fund the defense of Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie, the German "Butcher of Lyon." Barbie died in a French prison after being convicted of crimes against humanity in 1987.
In a 1992 report on extremism, the Swiss government named Genoud the most important individual of the "Old Right," which preserved the memory of fascism.
Despite international notoriety, he lived a reclusive existence in Pully, a suburb just above Lausanne. His wife, Elisabeth, died in 1991.
He narrowly escaped injury when a bomb exploded in front of his apartment door in October 1993.
"I am not afraid of death," he told the Associated Press a few days later. "They should have gunned me down rather than putting the life of my neighbors at risk."

Notes

OBITUARIES

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document