France drugged, abducted Carlos, his lawyer asserts
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 17, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE WORLD; Pg. 2A
Length: 499 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Carlos the Jackal bantered with an anti-terrorism judge who charged him in a  bombing case Tuesday, as the terrorist suspect's lawyer alleged that Carlos  was betrayed, drugged and bound in a kidnap operation.
Carlos, born Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, was handed over to France on Monday by  Sudan, his last refuge in a chaotic life on the run.
The graying freelance terrorist was unruffled in court Tuesday, jesting  with France's renowned judge of terrorism cases, who charged him in a 1982  Paris bombing that killed a pregnant woman and injured 63 other people.
Compiled from Times WiresFRANCE-CARLO
Held in an isolation cell at La Sante prison in Paris, Carlos was "very  calm, very relaxed" at the closed hearing in the judge's chambers, and his  morale was good, attorney Mourad Oussedik said.
Police carrying assault rifles escorted Carlos, 44, up four flights of  stairs at the justice center in the heart of Paris to his two-hour meeting  with Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere. Chains stood out against his white pants,  beige sweater and brown slip-on shoes.
When the doors of Bruguiere's chambers opened, Carlos, a native of  Venezuela, said in French: "Ah, here's the judge, how's it going?"
"And you?" Bruguiere replied.
"Still alive, for a long time to come," answered Carlos, whose death had  been rumored numerous times. Then, to his escorts, he added, "This guy, he's  a star."
Bruguiere charged Carlos with "complicity in voluntary homicide and  injuries and destruction by explosives leading to death and permanent  injuries."
A panel of judges is expected to charge him later with the fatal shooting  of two counterintelligence agents in 1975. A French court convicted Carlos in  absentia in 1992 and sentenced him to life in prison for those slayings, but  he will have to be retried.
Carlos is likely to languish in custody while the lengthy judicial  procedures drag on.
Carlos' two attorneys are Oussedik and Jacques Verges, who has made a  career of defending notorious clients, including Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie  and Magdalena Kopp, a West German terrorist who married Carlos after a term in  French prison.
The 1982 bombing with which Carlos was charged was less bloody than other  crimes in which he is a suspect, including the 1975 attack on OPEC  headquarters and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France plane to Entebbe, Uganda.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua said Monday that Carlos was responsible  for at least 15 deaths in France and 83 worldwide.
Oussedik said his client's arrest was a "mafioso deal" between France and  Sudan. "He was overpowered, bound, drugged. They gave him a shot . . . put a  mask on him and he was put on a French plane" with French counterintelligence  agents.
Oussedik said he will sue the French government for kidnapping if his  client agrees.
The Justice Ministry said the conditions under which Carlos was brought to  France cannot be disclosed for national security reasons. Pasqua has insisted  that France promised Sudan nothing for handing over Carlos.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Reuters; A van carrying Carlos arrives at Paris court Tuesday.

Load-Date: August 18, 1994


End of Document