France train hero stabbed in fight near nightclub; Police say incident is 'not related to terrorism'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 9, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 26
Length: 364 words
Byline: Christine Mai-Duc and Chris Megerian

Los Angeles Times
Dateline: SACRAMENTO, Calif.  
Body


Spencer Stone, one of three Americans who stopped a suspected terror attack on a train in France in August, was stabbed early Thursday during an altercation in Sacramento and is in serious condition, officials said.Stone, 23, a U.S. airman from Carmichael, California, was the first American to tackle a gunman aboard the Paris-bound train over the summer. He and his two friends were hailed as heroes and celebrated by President Barack Obama and French President Francois Hollande.Thursday's stabbing, which took place around 12:46 a.m., was part of a very unfortunate altercation between two groups of folks who were enjoying the nightlife, Deputy Police Chief Ken Bernard said.
Stone was stabbed multiple times in the upper body but is expected to survive, according to police. Bernard said that the stabbing was not related to terrorism in any way and that there's no indication that whoever stabbed Stone knew who he was.The airman was out with four friends, one male and three female, and had a run-in with two or three men, Bernard said.
There was a dispute that led to the altercation, he said, although he did not say what the dispute was about. There were conversations, and then it continued down the block where the stabbing took place.
Police have not named any suspects, but they are seeking two men believed to have fled in a dark Toyota Camry.
An employee of the Badlands Sacramento nightclub said in an email that Stone left the club about 45 minutes before the attack.The part of Sacramento where Stone was stabbed is home to a number of nightclubs.Scott Kearns, 56, who runs a smoke shop on the same block during the day and manages a club on weekends, said the area is congested late at night and there are frequent altercations involving young people who have consumed too much alcohol.We don't get a lot of stabbings, but we get a lot of assaults, you know, drunk, stupid people, Kearns said. Stone is being treated at the University of California, Davis, Medical Center.The stabbing comes less than two months after Stone, along with his childhood friends Alek Skarlatos and Anthony Sadler, thwarted an attack aboard a high-speed train traveling from Amsterdam to Paris.

Load-Date: October 9, 2015


End of Document