France to rally in solidarity of beheaded teacher in Paris suburb
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 18, 2020 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 559 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Interior Minister Gerald Darmanin, on a visit to Morocco, is returning toParis immediately after talking with Prime Minister Jean Castex and President Emmanuel Macron, his office said.
The victim of the gruesome crime, in Conflans-Saint-Honorine, about 30 kilometers outside ofParis, was identified as Samuel Paty, a 47-year-old history and geography teacher at a middle school, who also taught a course in morality and civics.
"French Police Fatally Shoot Man Who Beheaded Teacher on the Street", is the headline that America's esteemed "paper of record" chose to go with for its article conveying this incident.
He was armed with a knife and an airsoft gun and was stopped about 600 metres from where the attack took place, AP said, citing a police official.
One who had been to school with him said he had become noticeably religious in recent years.
Last month, a young man from Pakistan was arrested after attacking two people with a meat cleaver outside the former offices of the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.
The issue of the cartoons was revived last month when Charlie Hebdo chose to republish them to coincide with the start of the trial of accomplices in the 2015 attack.
Four close relatives of the attacker as well as five more people, including the digruntled father behind the video, have reportedly been arrested in the wake of the incident. One posted a video online, releasing Paty's name, calling for his dismissal and filing a complaint against Paty at the police station for "disseminating pornographic images".
Shelby County reports 12 new cases of COVID-19
Globally, more than 39.1 million cases have been reported and more than 1.1 million people have died as of Friday, the data show. Region 1, which includes DeKalb, the Sauk Valley area and Rockford, reported a seven-day rolling test positivity rate of 10.3%.
Anti-terrorism prosecutor Jean-Francois Ricard said officials found a photograph of the teacher's body and a text claiming responsibility for carrying out the killing on the suspect's phone.
The attacker, of Chechen origin, had been living in the town of Evreux northwest ofParis, and was not previously known to the intelligence services, Ricard told a news conference. French prosecutors now consider the killing to be "a murder linked to a terrorist organization". He is said to have a low criminal record and was not known to the country's intelligence service.
The investigation will also look at a tweet from an account that has since been shut down that showed a picture of Paty's head and described Macron as "the leader of the infidels".
Some carried placards stating: "I am a teacher" and "I am Samuel" - echoing the "I am Charlie" cry that travelled around the world after the 2015 Charlie Hebdo killings.
His office said a national tribute would be held in Paty's honor.
On Saturday, hundreds of pupils, teachers and parents flooded to Paty's school to weep and lay white roses.
"It is a teacher that this terrorist killed because he wanted to destroy the Republic.destroy the possibility of making our children free citizens", he added.
"He didn't do this to create arguments or to disrespect", says Nordine Chaouadi, whose 13-year-old son enjoyed Paty's classes. The parents had complained about Paty's use of caricatures of the Prophet, which were shown in class as part of a discussion about freedom of expression.

Load-Date: October 18, 2020


End of Document