France must stand against terrorism, uphold democracy
University Wire
September 15, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 The Battalion via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 655 words
Byline: By Cindy Reynolds, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M U.
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


Since the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2002, critics have denounced the Bush doctrine, saying unilateral preemptive war is unnecessary and wrong that America's pursuit of a cowboy foreign policy is actually the root cause of terrorism. French President Jacques Chirac threatened to use every tactic, including a U.N. veto, to prevent an Iraqi invasion. Chirac hoped to protect his nation from Islamic terrorism by proving to the terrorists that his nation is sympathetic to their cause.
However, as negotiations for the release of two French journalists captured in Iraq drag on, one thing has become clear: The French policy of appeasement has not sheltered its citizens from the hatred of terrorism.
On Aug. 20, Christian Chesnot and Georges Malbrunot were kidnapped by members of the Islamic Army in Iraq, who demanded the repeal of a French law banning Islamic headscarves in schools. This tragic event is exactly what the French have been trying to avoid with their years of stagnant diplomacy, their avid opposition to the War on Terror and their generally pro-Arab policies. Therefore, French officials were shocked to learn that their best efforts had failed to secure the goodwill of the terrorists.
French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier said, "Their kidnapping is incomprehensible to all those who know that France ... is a land of tolerance and of respect for others." But his incredulity is misplaced, since tolerance and respect mean nothing to those who only understand brute force. In the words of Iraqi Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, "Neutrality doesn't exist, as the kidnapping of the French journalists has shown. The French are deluding themselves if they think they can remain outside of this. Today the extremists are targeting them, too."
Terrorists are not rational, reasonable people. Men who would kidnap and murder a non-combatant do not understand or accept compromise. They are not willing to live in peace with those who merely tolerate their extremism. As long as France continues to allow non-Muslims to worship freely, permits the existence of nude beaches and otherwise deviates from the terrorists' concept of piety, they should expect to be targeted.
Yet, the French continue to blame America for the actions of terrorists. The French-Iraqi Friendship Association accused U.S. forces of endangering the lives of French journalists by launching military operations south of Baghdad. And Mohamed Bechari, head of the National Federation of French Muslims, said "the U.S. and Iraqi forces don't want this release."
To claim that the United States wants to see the French hostages killed, whereas the terrorists are just looking for a safe place to let them go, is nothing short of ridiculous. Yet it shows how far the French are willing to go to excuse the atrocities of men who see human life as meaningless and freedom as the great Satan. 9/11 proved that a see-no-evil foreign policy provides only an illusion of peace and no real security.
Today, all nations, including France, have only two options. They must either succumb to the wishes of the terrorists by ultimately modeling themselves after Iran and Saudi Arabia, or they must be willing to take a definitive stand against terrorism. France acted on this principle when it correctly refused to repeal the headscarf ban. But it is inconsistent to stand up for a domestic law while allowing the terrorists to dictate foreign policy.
The goal of terrorism is not any single domestic or military achievement. They do not seek money or power in the traditional sense. They seek the annihilation of the Western way of life. Because of this, President Bush has argued that only by actively defending America against those who seek her destruction can any lasting peace be achieved.
If France truly stands for "Fraternite, Egalite and Liberte," it should join the United States by defending those principles at home and abroad.
(C) 2003 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 15, 2004


End of Document