FRANCE REJECTS ISRAELI COUNTERTERRORISM OFFER
The New York Times
October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 664 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 11
Body


Prime Minister Jacques Chirac has agreed to increase exchanges of intelligence information with Israel to combat terrorism, according to Israeli officials.
But Mr. Chirac has rejected a proposal by Prime Minister Shimon Peres for publicly acknowledged cooperation against terrorists because of France's longstanding ties with the Arab world, the Israeli officials said Thursday.
Mr. Peres resigned Friday as Prime Minister as part of his Labor Party's power-sharing arrangement with the Likud bloc led by Yitzhak Shamir.
In a meeting Wednesday in Paris, as he wrapped up his last trip abroad as Prime Minister, Mr. Peres proposed to Mr. Chirac that France and Israel increase their cooperation in the fight against terrorism, French and Israeli officials said.
Mr. Chirac's spokesman, Dennis Baudouin, said Mr. Chirac had rejected the proposed international cooperation. Mr. Baudouin said the plan was rejected because France believed that one-to-one cooperation was more ''effective'' than multilateral agreements.
 
Some Sharing of Information
The spokesman confirmed that Israel and France have exchanged intelligence information and other kinds of assessments regarding terrorism. But he stressed that this did not amount to cooperation similar to that between the United States and Israel. He denied that France had agreed to enhance exchanges of information with Israel.
Quoting Mr. Chirac about agreements to combat terrorism, Mr. Baudouin said, ''We have to be flexible, pragmatic, and not doctrinaire.''
The ''cohabitation,'' as the French power-sharing agreement is known, was badly strained Wednesday by a vehement attack by the Socialists on Mr. Chirac's handling of terrorism and his Government's policies towards the Middle East.
In a raucous debate in the National Assembly, Lionel Jospin, the Socialist Party's general secretary, effectively ended the national consensus that public attacks by political parties on the Government's antiterrorism policies would undermine France's ability to combat terrorism.
 
Criticism Is Increasing
Since early September, France has been the target of a series of terrorist bomb attacks in which 10 people have been killed and more than 160 wounded. Spokesmen have repeatedly denied that the Government is negotiating with the terrorists or yielding to their demands, but evidence of such contacts is mounting, as is criticism in the French press and from opposition politicians.
Israeli officials said Mr. Peres had proposed to Mr. Chirac that countries that have been targets of terrorist attacks routinely share intelligence on movements of terrorists, apply sanctions jointly to countries known to be harboring or aiding terrorists, and coordinate political or military responses. But Mr. Chirac said France could not engage in such a joint public effort in view of its traditional ties to the French-speaking nations of North Africa and to other Arab countries, Israeli officials said, recounting Mr. Chirac's conversation.
 
Disagreement on Lebanon
Sources present at the talks said there were other areas of disagreement between Mr. Peres and Mr. Chirac during their talk. Diplomats cited southern Lebanon, where France wants Israel to withdraw its remaining troops from the border ''security zone'' and allow the United Nations peacekeeping force, in which France has the largest contingent, to patrol the border. French officials said extremist Shiite Moslems had been firing at French forces in the United Nations contingent because they were not fulfilling their mission of supervising Israel's withdrawal.
Mr. Peres argued that the attacks would continue whether or not Israeli forces patrolled the ''security zone,'' sources said.
Israeli officials said they had the strong impression that if the vulnerability of French forces in Lebanon could not be reduced, France was prepared to withdraw from the United Nations force and would oppose an extension of its next week, when the matter is scheduled to come to a vote in the United Nations.


End of Document