France Convicts 5 Former Guantanamo Inmates
The New York Times
December 20, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 348 words
Dateline: PARIS 
Body


A court convicted five former inmates of the American detention center at Guantanamo Bay on Wednesday on terrorism-related charges, but did not send any of them back to prison in France. A sixth man was acquitted.
  The ruling capped proceedings that seemed at times like a trial of the American prison camp itself, with the prosecutor lashing out at the ''Guantanamo system'' and saying the prison violated international law. 
  Seven French citizens were captured by American forces in or near Afghanistan in late 2001. All were held for at least two years at Guantanamo and then handed over to the French authorities in 2004 and 2005. One was found to have no ties to terrorism and was freed immediately after his return to France.
  The others spent up to 17 months in prison in France. But by the time the verdict was announced Wednesday, all of them were out of prison pending rulings in their cases.
  Five men were convicted of ''criminal association with a terrorist enterprise,'' a  charge frequently used in France.
  All the men insisted during the trial that they were innocent.
  The court followed the recommendations of a prosecutor, Sonya Djemni-Wagner, who said on Dec. 11 that she could not condone the men's ''abnormal detention'' at Guantanamo.
  ''None of them should have been held on that base, in defiance of international law, and have had to go through what they went through,'' she said.
  However, she said, they should be convicted because they used false identity papers and visas to knowingly ''integrate into terrorist structures'' in Afghanistan.
  Five of the men -- Brahim Yadel, Khaled ben Mustafa, Nizar Sassi, Mourad Benchellali and Ridouane Khalid -- said that they had had some military training in Afghanistan but that  they had never put their combat skills to use.
  The sixth, Imad Kanouni, said he went to Afghanistan for spiritual reasons. He was acquitted, as the prosecutor had urged. 
  The formal sentences for those convicted ranged from four to five years, but in each case one year was counted as time served and the rest of the term was suspended.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 20, 2007


End of Document