France: Gateway to Terrorism
New York Sun (Archive)
January 21, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL & OPINION; Pg. 6
Length: 1108 words
Byline: By MATT HAYES
Body


The Associated Press has reported that the 13 would be prisoners arrested in London are Algerians. Tony Blair's government will not say so, as if its investigation depended on keeping their nationalities secret. The official word is that the accused are "North African," a deliberately vague term that refers to Algerian or Moroccan nationality. It is likely, given Britain's recent restriction of asylum and the relatively small number of asylum cases that originate in Algeria and Morocco, that Britain's choice of the term North African is really an attempt to avoid making a public connection that has nonetheless become clear in recent months: There is a growing number of Algerian and Moroccan terrorists, and they tend to enter countries legally using French passports.
While Great Britain contends with Islamist schemes to poison its citizens, America has finally joined Japan and most of Europe in requiring visiting foreign nationals to provide photographs, fingerprints, and itineraries when visiting. America's visitor registration system, called Nseers (National Security Entry/Exit Registration System) went into effect on September 11, 2002, and initially required nationals from Sudan, Iran, Iraq, Libya, and Syria to provide that information. Since then, almost every country in the Middle East has been added to the list, as well as Indonesia and North Korea, for a total of 25 nations.
The list makes clear that President Bush seeks to prevent Islamist terrorists from entering America, or at least seeks to track them if any happen to get through. Operating in tandem with Nseers is the Visa Waiver Program, which permits people traveling on a member country's passport to enter and remain in America without a visa for up to 90 days. Under the Visa Waiver Program's normal operation, a national of a member country has no contact with American authorities until he is in America. Even then, the only record of his entry is usually a card that he is trusted to complete before leaving the airport.
Almost every nation on the Nseers list is situated in the Middle East, or north or east Africa, places where the influence of militant Islam seems to grow each year. But if the Bush administration's aim is to prevent another act of terrorism from taking place on American soil, it might consider adding France to the Nseers list. The world's political climate has changed to the point that a person entering America on a French passport probably poses a greater terror threat than a person arriving from North Korea. And France is a member of the Visa Waiver Program.
It is regrettable that France's practice of extending French citizenship to the children of certain Algerians and Moroccans has invited Islamist terror. Morocco was a French colony until 1957, and Algeria until 1962, when each prevailed in its war of independence. After Algeria's independence, France passed a law that grants French citizenship to any person of Algerian parentage born in France after January 1963, provided one of the child's parents was born in Algeria before its independence from France. A similar rule exists for children of Moroccans that were born before independence. Aside from parentage, France extends legal status and citizenship to individuals when doing so would "reintegrate" families in France. That is why, in 1997 and 1998, the prime minister, Lionel Jospin, scrapped an employment requirement and legalized 20,500 Moroccans and 19,000 Algerians.
Over a period of several days in November, French police arrested 19 people in connection with Richard Reid's attempt to bring down an airliner full of people on their way from Paris to Miami last Christmas. One of those arrested was 27-year-old Slimane Khalfaoui, a French citizen of Algerian parentage, who is suspected of not only assisting Richard Reid but also of planning a gas attack on London's subway system. A 28-year-old French citizen is now being held by Dutch authorities for procuring a false passport to be used as part of the foiled plot to bomb the American embassy in Paris. This summer, Kamel Daoudi, a known supporter of the Armed Islamic Group, who had been granted French citizenship, saw that citizenship revoked when he was placed on a plane and flown back to Algeria by French authorities.
France came quite close to chemical attack on December 19, 2002, when police arrested Mirouane Ben Ahmed, a 29-year-old French and Algerian national and several of his peers in a bomb factory in the outskirts of Paris. The year ended with the arrest by French police of 27-year-old Abdelrazek Besseghir, also a French citizen of Algerian parents, as he went about his work as a baggage handler at Charles de Gaulle airport. The police had just found a finished bomb and several automatic weapons in the trunk of his car.
If the number of Algerian French arrested for involvement in terrorism is not convincing, at least one known Algerian terror group is open about the network it runs in France. On the eve of America's military action in Afghanistan, a press release appeared in the Algerian al-Youm daily, allegedly penned by the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC). It threatened that the GSPC would "strike hard" at "American and European interests in Algeria if they continue to harass [the] Islamist network in the U.S., U.K., France, and Belgium."
Algerian French terrorists have already attempted to carry out attacks in America. Zaccharias Moussaoui, who is still the only person in American custody for participation in the terror attacks in New York and Washington, was also born in France of Algerian parents. He entered America on a French passport under the Visa Waiver Program. Ahmed Ressam, holder of joint Algerian/French citizenship, entered Canada in 1994 on a French passport and was later arrested at the Washington border as he entered America to carry out the Millennium bombing plot. Arrested with him were fellow Algerians Abdelghani Meskini and Abdel Hakim Tizegha.
It has become a mantra that 15 of the 19 September 11 hijackers came from Saudi Arabia, and that fact is central to much publicized suspicions that Saudi Arabia is less than genuine in its efforts to fight Islamist terrorism. There is mounting evidence that substantial numbers of Algerians, or Algerians with French citizenship, are taking to Islamist terror. As the Department of Homeland Security tightens our border controls and refines information on those it believes will harm America, Islamist terrorists will look for the deficiency in our efforts. As long as France remains part of the Visa Waiver Program, they will have at least one unimpeded road into America.

Load-Date: April 23, 2004


End of Document