FRAUD IS TERRORISM, AND GETTING WORSE, WARNS CRIME BOOK
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
April 28, 2002 Sunday


Copyright 2002 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: OUTLOOK;BOOKS; Pg. F-2
Length: 534 words
Byline: Sunamita Lim
Body


THE ART OF THE STEAL
By Frank W. Abagnale
Broadway Books
256 pages; $24.95
The Art of the Steal: How to Protect Yourself and Your Business from Fraud -- America's No. 1 Crime hits readers with the fact that fraud has advanced onto a new level of attack -- terrorism on the financial front. Frank W. Abagnale estimates this dubious and escalating industry at a yearly $400 billion cost, twice the annual budget of the U.S. military; and with one third stemming from employee embezzlement. Worse, out of embarrassment, most of these employees are never reported and prosecuted, as many are long-term staff with the least reasons for suspicion. After being fired, they continue with their chicanery.
Crooks can easily figure on stealing from the safety of their own turf with computer crime. Ironically, technology that has been used to advance humanity's progress has spawned its own fastest-growing domain with cybercrime. Instead of risking injury and capture with armed robbery, smart cyber crooks are better off heisting at the click of a mouse. Thirty-five years ago check forgers had to be proficient printers and engravers, but nowadays creative teens counterfeit $20 bills with inkjet printers.
Abagnale cites a telling statistic from Who's Who Among American High School Students. Upon acceptance students fill out a form with five questions. He's studied question 3 for more than 20 years, which asks: "Did you steal, cheat, lie, copy or plagiarize?" More than 80 percent answered yes in 1999.
To begin with, teens get pittance from parents stretching to make ends meet. Many instead end up adding to unsuspecting parents' allowances with counterfeit bills. Abagnale asserts we must combat two big problems -- an erosion of ethics because parents are so busy working they do not spend time teaching basic decency to their kids and white-collar crime.
This book was written before 9/11, noting "the FBI believes the bombing of the World Trade Center (in 1993) was financed by the sale of counterfeit T-shirts and sportswear." It explains other scams -- pump and dump, rock in the box, mustard squirter, label lies and pyramid schemes, to name a few. Most insidiously, the scariest form of terrorism today is identity theft. Unlike Stephen King thrillers, which allow readers the luxury of fantasy endings, real-life victims in identity thefts are left with nothing, except terror and lost years in rebuilding their lives.
He further warns cybercrime will get worse because "every system has been designed by a man or a woman, and that means a man or a woman can defeat it. Sherlock Holmes said it best: 'What one invents, one will discover.' "
The author has written a masterful book based on his background. In his teens and early 20s, he made off with millions before being caught. He emphasizes crime does not pay and today makes more money using his ex-con's insights advising Fortune 500 companies on security issues. His memoir, Catch Me If You Can, is being filmed starring Leonard DiCaprio and Tom Hanks. But as Abagnale repeats throughout his book, an ounce of prevention matters hugely; especially when it begins early, at home.
Sunamita Lim
Lim writes on issues of social
responsibility and volunteerism.

Load-Date: July 16, 2002


End of Document