Freeing of latest hostage feeds speculation on others to follow
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 15, 1988, Thursday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 5
Length: 770 words
Byline: E.A. Wayne, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: But strained ties with Hizbullah may lessen Iran's influence in gaining further releases
Body


It's too early to say what this week's release of a West German businessman will mean for the 15 or more remaining Western hostages in Lebanon.
That is the assessment of informed United States specialists on terrorism and the Middle East. Nor do they predict a quick breakthrough for the nine American hostages.
One senior US official says current evidence suggests that Iran still controls the fate of the Western hostages held in Lebanon. But many leaders in Iran are still hesitant to step up to the issue of dealing directly with the ''Great Satan.''
Nevertheless, specialists say another foreign hostage or two could be released in the next few months. Speculation here is focused on the British and Irish hostages, but there is no information indicating imminent releases.
''It looks like Iran has changed its policy line on terrorism along with accepting a Gulf cease-fire,'' says a well-placed US official. ''They are still dangling hostages, but apparently now trying to use them in a way that makes Iran look good.''
''We might even see an American released to whet our appetite during the electoral period,'' says a US analyst. Other specialists are less certain Iran fundamentally altered its stance on terrorism.
This week's release and the negotiations preceding it demonstrate that Iran ''is still in the driver's seat'' on the hostages, says a counterterrorism specialist. Future steps, however, will depend on Iran's domestic politics and the state of the country's ties with its Lebanese Hizbullah allies, which are apparently under strain, he says.
The release of West German hostage Rudolf Cordes suggests those leaders trying to use Iran's control over the hostages for ''positive PR'' are in the ascendancy, says one regional specialist. But other factions in Iran and Lebanon are reportedly still fighting this approach.
Iran apparently went through with the release without consulting the Hamadei family, which had originally abducted Mr. Cordes. Cordes and another West German businessman, Alfred Schmidt, were reportedly abducted by family members to secure the release of two Hamadei brothers charged with terrorism in West Germany. .
According to information available to Washington, the Hamadei family was pressed to turn the two West Germans to the broader Hizbullah organization for safe-keeping. They were reportedly also forced to turn over three Americans and one Indian professor, all of whom the family is also believed to have kidnapped. The Hizbullah jailers are loyal allies of Iran, US officials say.
The Hamadeis were reportedly promised a veto over any eventual release. Reports from Lebanon, however, suggest they were not consulted before Cordes's release.
''The family was apparently given the fast shuffle by Iran,'' says one expert.
But, he adds, it is not clear how much of a precedent this is for the remaining hostages. In a sense, he says, Cordes is ''old business.'' The discussions between West Germany and Iran to secure his release had been under way for well over a year, and West German-Iranian relations were improving throughout that period.
Informed US officials say they have no evidence that the West German government promised any leniency toward Muhammad Ali Hamadei, who is currently on trial in West Germany for hijacking a TWA jet and killing a US passenger. Any quid pro quo by the German government, one notes, would have to come in the form of commuting any sentence given him.
But given the rapidly mounting evidence against the accused hijacker and the wide coverage of the trial in West Germany, any questionable clemency could be politically costly, US officials say.
US specialists suspect a ransom was paid by Cordes's company to grease the skids. Monetary ransoms, they say, may become more central to hostage negotiations as strains within Hizbullah and between it and Iran increase.
Information from Lebanon suggests Iran has cut its subsidies to Hizbullah and that Iran's prestige has dropped among its allies since it accepted a cease-fire in the Gulf war. Divisions within the always-fractious Hizbullah are reportedly sharpening as its foreign benefactor is seen to fade from the scene.
This may complicate future hostage releases. So far, specialists say, Iran has kept a grip on the foreign hostages by virtue of having them under the control of its closest local allies.
But even those allies, led by Imad Mugniyeh, have their own agenda - the release of family members held in Kuwait for terrorism in that country. Specialists believe they will be very hesitant to give up all the hostages, especially the Americans, without first freeing their relatives.


End of Document