FREE SPEECH
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 11, 1994, Sunday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P2B
Length: 623 words
Byline: PAUL NYDEN
Body


A soon-to-be-published article, co-authored by West
Virginia University College of Law Dean Terree Foster, may shed light
on a widely publicized flap over an as yet unpublished article by
Supreme Court Justice Richard Neely.
In September, Foster vetoed publication of an article Neely
wrote for the "West Virginia Law Review," a quarterly journal
edited by top law students.
Foster overruled the journal's student editors, apparently with
support from WVU President Neil Bucklew.  Neely's article was simply
too controversial.  Some of Neely's charges were too outrageous,
Foster said.
Foster's theoretical commitment to the free and open exchange of
ideas is apparently less than complete.
In the article to be published early next year in the "Boston
College International and Comparative Law Review," Foster and
co-author Viktor Mayer-Schonberger write, "We simply contend that
some ideas are too false, too outrageous, too damaging to merit First
Amendment protection."
In his article, Neely castigates federal prosecutors.  Neely
wrote that the conviction of former State Lottery Commission lawyer
Ed ReBrook for insider trading and wire fraud was unfair.
Neely charged the prosecutors from the U.S. Attorney's office in
Charleston were overzealous, seeking to make a name for themselves at
the expense of much weaker defendants.  At one point, Neely compared
the prosecutors to Nazis.
ReBrook is spending 27 months in prison for buying $ 1,500 worth
of stock in a Montana video lottery company that was bidding on a
state contract.
Foster wanted Neely's criticisms of federal prosecutors toned
down or expunged, particularly his reference to Nazis.
Neely accused Foster and Bucklew of censorship and withdrew his
article.
An editor, perhaps even an editor's dean, or an editor's dean's
president, has the right to suggest changes before publishing an
article.  An editor, and perhaps a dean, also has the right to reject
an article.  And maybe Neely was being obstinate.
But what about free speech and the free interchange of ideas?
In this article, a state Supreme Court justice was expressing views
on a major public issue.
During the height of the controversy, Neely wrote, "If the
president (Neil Bucklew) objects to my characterizations of what is
occurring in the federal criminal justice system, let him respond in
the marketplace of ideas."
In her forthcoming Boston College article, Foster challenges
that concept too. "It is no longer sufficient, or acceptable, to
rely upon the metaphorical marketplace of ideas to demonstrate
conclusively the spuriousness of notions as heinous as genocide,
terrorism, slavery or aggressive warfare.  The perambulations of the
marketplace are notoriously torpid," the article states.
Clearly, Neely's article did not advocate genocide or terrorism
.  And clearly, Dean Foster's article does not call for a widespread,
indiscriminate clampdown on free expression.
Foster argues certain specific forms of hateful speech, which
lead to harmful actions, are the only forms that should be regulated
and prohibited.
But one wonders why she censored Neely's article, over the
objections of the journal's student editors.  And why, when those
editors simply wanted to run two blank pages in place of Neely's
article, was that decision also overruled?
Maybe Neely is right on target to excoriate the recent
prosecution of ReBrook.  Maybe he is dead wrong.  Neely is
intentionally provocative _ in his writings, his legal opinions and
on the bench.
And don't forget _ those criticized by Neely are capable of
responding.  The pages of the West Virginia Law Review are presumably
open to them too.
Neely raised an important issue of public policy.  Do federal
prosecutors abuse their awesome power?  It's a shame university
officials chose to repress the discussion.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document