FREE ENTERPRISE, FREEDOM AND THE THREAT OF TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
July 18, 2004 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. D-2; POINT OF VIEW
Length: 836 words
Byline: Bob Rayner/ Any ideas? Staff writer Bob Rayner can be reached at (804) 649-6073 or brayner@timesdispatch.com  
Body


Pundits have spent much of the past few months arguing whether national security or the economy will be the most salient issue in the coming election.
I would argue, at the most fundamental level, that they are actually one issue.
I'll avoid any attempt to decide which party's approach is superior or who is better suited to lead the nation in the age of terror.
But I do think we all need to consider the nature of the threat posed by terrorism. It seems, as a nation, that we are rather reluctant to do so right now, for reasons I don't fully understand.
The terrorists have already proved that one of their primary goals is to slaughter thousands of innocent people, especially Americans. I think it's safe to assume that they will, if able, expand the objectives of their murderous intent to include tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands, of our citizens.
And yet, mass murder alone, no matter how horrendous, will not bring this country to its knees, nor will it weaken our nearly unanimous national devotion to freedom, democracy and individual rights. Indeed, quite the opposite.
As much as we may squabble among ourselves about the best means for protecting our liberty and advancing its march around the globe, we remain united in our understanding that freedom, constitutional law and individual dignity provide the foundation for our society.
Terrorists lack the means to change our fundamental national character, and even their most vicious attacks would serve, I am certain, only to strengthen our resolve to preserve the free and democratic society that we have worked so hard to build and improve for more than two centuries.
I do not know whether our enemies understand this or not. They do seem to understand that our greatest vulnerability is almost certainly our dynamic free-enterprise system. The Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center struck a symbolic and quite literal blow to the heart of our financial system.
Our economy staggered a bit but recovered with remarkable speed and resilience.
The vague intelligence reports we now hear from time to time suggest the terrorists continue to focus on inflicting economic damage, and the recent attacks on the Saudi Arabian oil industry seem to confirm that strategy.
The terrorists can never defeat this country through assaults aimed at purely political or military targets. But they seem to understand that our free and open economy, which has helped create both widespread wealth and political stability unmatched in world history, provides them with opportunities to inflict vast damage upon our society.
It's conceivable that a coordinated attack on the American homeland using weapons of mass destruction could create - in a day - conditions similar to those that led to the Great Depression in the 1930s.
Imagine a world where we fear every overseas shipping container, every international passenger flight as a vessel of destruction, a potential carrier of smallpox virus or nuclear weapons.
A stunned nation might demand security measures that would bring global trade to a virtual standstill. Within days that would lead to supply shortages, factory closings and layoffs, here and abroad.
Consumer demand might collapse, leading to further decreases in production and more layoffs. Investors and businesses, facing incalculable uncertainty and a rapidly deteriorating international economy, would rush to move their assets into the safest, but least productive, investment havens.
Equity and private debt markets almost certainly would plunge, eliminating trillions of dollars in wealth, perhaps placing unbearable pressures on the American and international banking system and other financial institutions. It's difficult to contemplate the effect on currency markets, other than the certainty of unhealthy chaos.
Policy-makers in the federal government and the Federal Reserve would face unprecedented challenges. The potential for mistakes would be extraordinarily high, no matter who was in charge.
Deflation. Or hyper inflation. Thirty percent unemployment. Banking failures and widespread bond defaults, perhaps even on instruments believed to enjoy the backing of the U.S. government. Soaring oil prices. Declining real income. A mortgage crisis. And so forth.
Three years ago, anyone proposing this scenario would have been judged an alarmist, perhaps slightly unhinged.
Today, I fear, the danger is real. And we are foolish not to ponder it more openly, not to ask the really serious questions about the best policies to combat this threat to our free-enterprise system, which has played such an indispensable role in allowing us to live in a society defined by individual liberty, democratic government and the rule of law.
We would, I suspect, survive such an attack and would eventually even prosper again. But we might find, in a world where the influence and economic power of China and India are rising, that our role in that world - and our vision of expanding global freedom and prosperity - will have been permanently diminished.

Load-Date: July 21, 2004


End of Document