Freeing terrorists for a song
University Wire
August 26, 1999


Copyright 1999 The Vanguard via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 516 words
Byline: By Josh Lenox, The Vanguard
Dateline: Mobile, Ala.
Body


Terrorism is a growing concern for citizens of the United States. It seems that every day you hear of some new horror from some remote part of the globe performed by so called "revolutionaries." Even though the Clinton administration has told the public they would not stand for terrorism, last week Clinton offered to commute the sentences of several people who were members of a terrorist organization here in the states. All these people have to do to get out of jail is to sign an agreement not to do it again.
U. South Alabama
These jailed miscreants were members of FALN, which is a terrorist organization devoted to Puerto Rican independence. FALN has been responsible for 130 bombings in the United States. Don't worry, though. According to administration officials, all the prisoners did was participate in armed robberies to fund the bombing operations.
Wait, it gets better. The reason why Clinton is offering to let these people go is that keeping them in jail is considered to be a human rights violation by the administration. Well, everyone in the administration might think so except the people at the FBI, who for some reason think that letting these people off the hook might blow up in the U.S.'s face.
Call me old-fashioned, but if John Smith down the road were to have committed an armed robbery of a bank to fund the Oklahoma City bombing, then he should go to jail and never again see the light of day, even if some fool thinks he is a revolutionary.
Remembering back to eighth grade American history class, the constitution only describes punishment for one crime; treason. The punishment of that crime is hanging. Did these "revolutionaries" not commit treason against the United States? Of course that would be too harsh for armed robbery, but life in prison wouldn't be.
The really sad thing about these terrorists is that they have virtually no popular support. A few years ago, Puerto Rico was allowed to vote on whether or not they wanted to be a state, commonwealth or independent nation. The independent nation choice received only 3 percent of the vote, but at last tally none of the possible parolees had agreed to Clinton's terms.
One could see calling these people revolutionaries if the United States were vehemently opposed to letting Puerto Rico out from under its thumb, but that is simply not the case. Because the government has offered Puerto Ricans a way out of U.S. control, then one would be hard-pressed to say there needed to be a revolution. Why then call them anything but what they are: terrorists?
The present administration cannot help but to be contradictory. Never in their years in power have they ever laid out a policy that did not oppose some previous stance. Clinton will bomb a Sudanese medical facility because it supposedly sponsors terrorism even though it does not, but at the same time will let people convicted of sponsoring terrorism on United States soil go free for nothing.
How can Clinton justify that? Well, he can't, but when did that ever matter to our present Commander in Chief?
(C) 1999 The Vanguard via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 26, 1999


End of Document