Freed cleric calls U.S. a 'state terrorist'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 15, 2006 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 457 words
Byline: By Robin McDowell THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SOLO, INDONESIA 
Body


A militant cleric who walked free from prison Wednesday called the United States a "state terrorist because it is waging war against Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan."
Abu Bakar Bashir spoke at a roadside mosque on the way to the central Javanese city of Solo. Bashir was surrounded by personal security guards as he left Jakarta's Cipinang prison. He served 26 months for conspiracy in the Bali bombings of 2002.
Bashir, 68, was found guilty of blessing the Bali attacks, in which 202 people were killed. But he was cleared of more serious terrorist charges, including heading the al-Qaida-linked militant group Jemaah Islamiyah. No evidence has ever been presented linking him to the execution, preparation or commission of terrorist attacks.
The United States and Australia have accused the firebrand cleric of being a key member of Jemaah Islamiyah. Both nations said they were disappointed at his release.
Bashir headed immediately to an Islamic school notorious for producing some of Southeast Asia's deadliest terrorists. There, he again received a hero's welcome. Bashir was quick to point his finger at the United States and Australia, calling their leaders "infidels."
Jemaah Islamiyah is accused of carrying out church bombings across Indonesia in 2000, the 2002 blasts on the resort island of Bali, attacks in the capital, Jakarta, in 2003 and 2004, and a triple suicide bombing on Bali last October. The attacks together killed more than 260 and put Indonesia on the front line of the war on terrorism.
Bashir's freedom has raised concern that he will energize Indonesia's small, Islamic radical fringe by making impassioned speeches at rallies and mosques. But few believe the cleric will play any direct role in terrorism.
Before the Bali blasts, Bashir was chiefly known for his vocal support of moves to make the secular country an Islamic state and his criticism of U.S. policy toward Muslim countries -- themes he pounded on again Wednesday.
Upon arriving in Solo, Bashir stopped briefly at a hospital for a checkup and then went to the al-Mukmin boarding school he founded in 1972. Nearly 500 students greeted him.
Several graduates are in prison for involvement in terrorism, and at least two others became suicide attackers. But Bashir -- who has long said he opposes violence -- told the youths that those who had carried out the bombings "were wrong."
He urged them to follow his lead and use words to fight for their faith.
"The more bombs there are in Indonesia, the happier the United States will be," he said. "They will clap their hands, because what they're afraid of are sermons, the preaching of Islam."
He vowed to continue campaigning for the introduction of strict Islamic law in Indonesia, which has 190 million Muslims.

Notes

 World 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Supporters greet Abu Bakar Bashir on Wednesday in Tegal, Indonesia. The cleric was released after serving 26 months for conspiracy in the Bali bombings of 2002.  The Associated Press 

Load-Date: June 15, 2006


End of Document