Freedom of Expression Endangered in Egypt
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 4, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION/ESSAYS; Pg. 23
Length: 962 words
Byline: Mamoun Fandy; Mamoun Fandy is assistant professor of political science at Mount Mercy College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Highlight: US must not ignore harassment of journalists abroad while
committed to their rights at home
Body


ONCE again the Egyptian government is harassing newspaper
editors and journalists for publishing news items it sees as
damaging to its public reputation. Most recently, the government
interrogated Mahmoud Al-Maraghi, the editor of the Nasserite
newspaper Al-Arabi, for publishing an interview with an Islamist
leader. Mr. Maraghi was deemed ''a promoter of terrorism'' for
publishing the interview. However, this charge rings hollow in
Egypt since it is common knowledge that the Islamists consider the
Nasserite their enemy and that Gamal Abdel Nasser executed many
Islamic Brotherhood leaders. Al-Maraghi apparently was establishing
a dialogue between two opposition groups that the government long
has played off one against the other.
Two months earlier, the Egyptian police arrested Helmi Murrad,
a 72-year-old columnist for the opposition newspaper Al-Shaab, for
writing a series of articles on government corruption. Dr. Murrad
was detained for two nights with street criminals in spite of his
age and poor health. He was later released on $ 5,000 bond, paid by
the Egyptian Association of Lawyers, since Murrad himself did not
have the funds. He and other Al-Shaab journalists, including the
newspaper editor-in-chief Magdi Hussein, are now facing trial for
defaming the gov- ernment. The sentence for this charge is three
years in prison.
These journalists are addressing vital issues that concern the
Egyptian public, unlike many of the writers of the
government-controlled newspapers. This is why Al-Shaab is sold out
an hour after it appears on the newsstands. And not only Islamists
read Al-Shaab; Egyptian Christians also are avid readers of this
supposedly Islamist newspaper because for the last six months
Al-Shaab has been covering the dissent within the Egyptian Coptic
church. Christian priests who are dissatisfied with the
''dictatorial'' style of Al-Anba Shinuda, the patriarch of the
Egyptian Coptic church, are now regular Al-Shaab columnists. In
addition to their critical views of the Pope of the Coptic Egyptian
church, dissident priests like Father Anistasi Shafeeq and Father
Ibrahim Abdelsayed have engaged the Islamists and Egyptian society
at large on vital issues such as the implications of an Islamic
state for the Coptic minority of Egypt. A lively dialogue is
currently taking place between Muslims who criticize the government
and priests who criticize the church.
The result is a convergence of views between leading Islamists
in Egypt and dissident priests that points to the complexity of the
Egyptian situation and casts doubt on the simplistic formula that
views the struggle in Egypt as between Islamists and President
Hosni Mubarak's government. The Islamists now seem to be forming an
alliance with dissident priests and their followers, which suggests
a revolt of the disenfranchised against old establishments, be they
the Egyptian Muslim ruling class or the privileged class in control
of the Coptic church.
Ironically, all the arrests and interrogation of journalists
have occured after a call by Egypt's president for a national
dialogue with the opposition concerning the ruling party's handling
of Egypt's internal strife. Yet when journalists and opposition
leaders voiced their criticism, they were harassed and imprisoned.
However different in the proportion of repression, Mr. Mubarak's
style is reminiscent of that of Mao Zedong's 1957 ''Hundred
Flowers'' campaign. Chairman Mao then asked Chinese intellectuals
to voice their criticism of the communst party for the good of
China; when intellectuals did so, he arrested them. The motive
behind Mao's campaign wasn't love of pluralism. In Mao's words, it
was to ''let the demons and hobgoblins come out in order to wipe
them out better, and let the seeds sprout to make it more
convenient to hoe them.''
There is a feeling in Egypt that Mubarak's call for national
dialogue is aimed at identifying his critics in order to jail them.
Accusations of promoting terrorism are leveled not only at
journalists who interview Islamists. Some 20 lawyers who have
defended Islamists have been imprisoned. The list of arrested
lawyers includes Hassan Ghirbawi, who has been arrested 30 times;
Muwad Yussef, 15 times; and Shabban Ibrahim, 10 times. Some of
these lawyers have been in jail for five years without trial. The
only crime they have committed is that they agreed to represent
Islamist clients in court.
Despite the lively dialogue between Islamists, Christian
intellectuals, and priests on the pages of Al-Shaab and between the
Islamists and the Nasserites on the pages of Al-Arabi, Egypt's
ruling party is unhappy about the critical tone of these debates
and thus calls them ''a promotion of terrorism.''
If writing about Islamists is a promotion of terrorism then, by
Mr. Mubarak's logic, the New York Times, CNN, and Time magazine
should be shut down because they all have interviewed Sheikh Omar
Abdul Rahman. Ironically, Mr. Hussein and Mr. Murrad were
responding to allegations of Egyptian government corruption that
had already appeared in the American press.
Egypt is in grave violation of human rights, and Western media
and Western governments should speak out against it. To uphold the
principles of freedom of expression for writers who attack
religions and regimes unpopular in the US but ignore these
principles when regimes allied with the US silence their writers is
hypocrisy. America must reassure an already cynical region that
freedom of expression is an American ethic, not a slogan
manipulated to serve US foreign policy.
 
The Opinion/Essay Page welcomes manuscripts. Authors of articles we
accept will be notified by telephone. Authors of articles not
accepted will be notified by postcard. Send manuscripts to
Opinions/Essays, One Norway Street, Boston, MA 02115, by fax to 617
-450-2317, or by Internet E-mail to OPED@RACHEL.CSPS.COM.  

Load-Date: February 5, 1994


End of Document