French investigator tackles terrorism's 'cancer'
USA TODAY
November 8, 2001, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 746 words
Byline: Vivienne Walt
Dateline: PARIS
Body

PARIS -- Killing or capturing Osama bin Laden will not lessen the threat of another terrorist attack on the USA, warns one of Europe's seasoned terrorism investigators.
"If bin Laden is arrested or killed or tried, there will be no significant change in the threat," says Jean-Louis Bruguiere, 58, head of the French government's anti-terrorism unit and a man who has spent 20 years tracking down hundreds of terrorists, including the infamous Carlos the Jackal. "Bin Laden is just head of al-Qa'eda. But you have many, many cells, groups, networks, which are not connected to each other." Terrorism, he warns in an interview, "is like cancer now. It is spreading very quickly, in an erratic pattern. We find a cell operating in Europe, with someone in America and someone in Asia. But 6 months later we find they are connected to something else completely."
A pipe-smoking judge whose desk is piled high with legal documents, Bruguiere hardly fits the image he's built in Europe of a bold, swashbuckling investigator.
Bruguiere first gained fame in 1994, when he tracked down the world's best-known fugitive terrorist at the time, Carlos the Jackal, in Sudan. He sent French secret-service agents to capture Carlos, who was brought back for trial by Bruguiere in Paris. Convicted of 83 murders, Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, is imprisoned in France.
Bruguiere gained attention recently when it came to light that last July he told U.S. investigators that a man arrested in Minnesota on immigration charges had ties to bin Laden. "We knew him very well," Bruguiere says of Zacarias Moussaoui, a French-Moroccan. "He was in our computer" because French investigators had for 5 years tracked hundreds of Arabic-speaking Europeans who traveled to Afghanistan to train in bin Laden's camps.
Moussaoui is jailed in New York as a material witness in the Sept. 11 attacks. U.S. investigators have discovered that Moussaoui tried to pay $ 8,000 for flying lessons, but he wanted to learn only how to handle an aircraft already in the air -- not to take off or land. And investigators say they have discovered he made several telephone calls to some of the hijackers before the attacks.
Bruguiere's job is unusual by U.S. legal standards. A creation of French penal law, it combines the roles of prosecutor and grand jury. He both investigates terrorist crimes and decides whether a suspect should be indicted. With no staff of investigators, Bruguiere and his three fellow judges handle hundreds of terrorism cases of Islamic extremists, as well as separatist groups from Corsica and France's Basque region.
Critics say Bruguiere's team holds suspects in custody for months without action because the judges are too busy to interrogate them. "Bruguiere's method is (to) rake first, sieve later," says Michael McColgan, a criminal attorney in Sheffield, England. He wrote a report about France's anti-terrorism laws for the International Federation of Human Rights in 1999. McColgan says the French process runs "completely against the American and British presumption of innocence."
But Bruguiere insists the system works. "We have very few people and it is all centralized with powerful rights," he says. "So we can react very quickly. What we have done in the past is the best proof."
In an interview this week, Bruguiere says it would be a mistake for those conducting the war on terrorism to focus too much on bin Laden. President Bush has said the war will be a long one, extending to terrorists, their networks and nations that support them around the world. Bruguiere agrees that today's terrorists operate in networks that rely less on identifiable leaders than in the past and more on formless webs of operatorswho do not know each other.
Bruguiere battles the networks with his job's extensive powers. He can order wiretaps and search warrants, arrest suspects, interrogate them and issue indictments. After arrest, suspects have no access to lawyers for up to 72 hours.
Bruguiere's notoriety has made him a prime terror target. His office is sealed behind a bulletproof-windowed area that is guarded continually by police. It's along an unmarked, dead-end corridor on the top floor of Paris' judicial headquarters, the Palais de Justice.
Bodyguards stand round-the-clock watch outside his Paris home. His wife and two children have "global security" too, he says. His car is watched "24 hours out of 24." But, he is "never anxious. I just have too much work to do."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP; Bruguiere: Judge tracks terrorists.

Load-Date: November 8, 2001


End of Document