French brace for new wave of terrorism;
Islamic revolutionaries may seek revenge for France's action on the hijacking of an Airbus.
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 28, 1994, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 459 words
Byline: BERNARD D. KAPLAN; of Hearst Newspapers
Dateline: PARIS
Body


France's handling of the Islamic hijackers' attack on a passenger jumbo jet has brought Algeria's murderous civil war to Europe, opening up the prospect of a deadly new wave of terrorism here.
Prime Minister Edouard Balludur was widely praised for his decision Monday to order paramilitary commandos to storm the Airbus with 171 persons aboard at Marseille airport. In the ensuing shootout, the four terrorists were killed.
Earlier, before the plane left Algiers airport for France, the hijackers - thought to be members of the Armed Islamic Group, the most fanatical wing of Algerian fundamentalism - had murdered three hostages.
The seriousness of the threat to Europe posed by Algeria's Islamic extremists was underscored when Balladur called an emergency session of the French cabinet Tuesday to consider the longer-term security implications.
French experts have little doubt the Islamic revolutionaries will seek revenge, attempting to bring to France their two-year war against the Algerian military-backed government.
Leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front (known as FIS, its acronym in French for Front Islamic de Salvation) accuse France of supplying arms and financial aid to the government. French residents in Algeria have been routinely attacked by terrorists in the struggle that has cost more than 11,000 lives.
The war broke out in January 1992 after Algeria's government called off parliamentary elections in which the FIS looked like the clear winner.
Last summer, authorities here ordered a crackdown on Algerians living in France who were suspected of actively supporting the FIS. The insurrectionary organization is reported to have created a network of sympathizers in Western Europe and the United States to furnish money, arms and safe havens for rebel leaders who have had to flee Algeria.
However, Gilles Kepel, a leading French specialist on Algeria, warned that the hijacking and its conclusion have transformed the crisis. In the eyes of the Islamic extremists, it has made France "an enemy on a par with the Algerian regime," he declared.
Kepel said the political turning point came when Balladur insisted the Algerian government allow the plane to fly to Marseille. Although the French prime minister had no real alternative, Kepel noted the step had "humiliated the Algerian authorities by showing they were incapable themselves of handling the situation. It simultaneously infuriated the extremists, confirming them in their belief that France is fully engaged against them."
Jean-Francois Deniau, former chairman of the French parliament's foreign affairs committee, and other experts acknowledge the 2.5 million Algerians living in France could present a massive security challenge even if only a limited number are FIS activists.

Notes

WORLD NEWS WATCH

Load-Date: December 30, 1994


End of Document