French Leader Visits Algiers To Shore Up Terrorism War 
 The New York Times
December 2, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 747 words
Byline:  By SUZANNE DALEY
Dateline: ALGIERS, Dec. 1  
Body


President Jacques Chirac of France swept into this port city for an eight-hour visit today, the first time a French president had been to Algeria in more than 12 years.
     With President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Mr. Chirac briefly toured of an area of the city where hundreds of people died last month when a violent storm caused huge mudslides. 
 Under a blazing sun, the French president broke away from his security guards to kiss babies and hug strangers, many of whom chanted, "Give us visas. Give us visas."
The hastily arranged trip is one more sign that the Sept. 11 terror attacks in New York have changed the political landscape around the world. The Algerian government, much like the Russian government, has found that by offering to cooperate with America's war on terrorism it is getting a far more sympathetic hearing than it had in the past. 
Western governments, including the French, are showing less inclination to listen to the complaints of international human rights groups and Algerian democracy activists who condemn Algeria for its handling of Islamic militants. Indeed, Mr. Chirac made no mention of such issues in a brief news conference before meeting Mr. Bouteflika for dinner at the presidential palace.
And asked if he had wrongly dismissed Algeria's claims in the past that Europe was being used as a base for Algerian terrorists, Mr. Chirac said, "Yes, yes. We were wrong."
Nevertheless, the visit was not quite a full embrace. Mr. Chirac sandwiched his brief stop here in the middle of visits to two other former North African colonies with close economic ties to France: Tunisia and Morocco.
The trip was not an official state visit, only a "tour." 
Mr. Chirac's entourage placed little emphasis on the visit to Algiers, saying that the trip was a matter of telling the leaders of all three countries that the American-led campaign against terrorism was not a campaign against Islam. 
"We have contact with many officials all the time by telephone," Mr. Chirac said just before taking off for Algeria. "But that is nothing like sitting down over a good cup of coffee, which is what we are doing here." 
There can be little doubt, however, that Mr. Chirac's visit was also a calculated political move designed to make him look good at home in the runup to a re-election campaign next spring. 
There are about five million Muslims leaving in France now, almost 10 percent of the population, and the majority are Algerian. But beyond impressing potential Muslim voters, the trip is keeping Mr. Chirac in the news and looking presidential while his likely rival, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, is at home struggling with such implacable problems as the growing unemployment rate. Mr. Chirac has been taking a lot trips lately, including visiting the United States twice since the terror attacks. 
But visiting Algeria is a tricky proposition. France's violent eight-year effort to suppress an independence movement here is often likened to the United States efforts in Vietnam, having caused violent protests at home and led to the fall of a government before the French withdrew in 1962. The Algerians would like an apology for French conduct during those years, but this is a delicate issue in France and an apology has not been forthcoming.
Moreover, recent history is problematic as well. Mr. Chirac's predecessor, Francois Mitterrand, visited Algeria three times. But visits stopped after what is known as "the coup" of 1992 -- when the military canceled elections the main Islamist party was poised to win. 
That led to a violent struggle between the government security forces and armed Islamic groups that has killed 100,000 people, many of them women and children slaughtered in their villages. 
With the backing of the generals, Mr. Bouteflika became president in 1999, promising to end the violence. He offered an amnesty to some of the militants and more than 5,000 laid down their arms. 
Abroad as well, Mr. Bouteflika has begun a charm offensive. He has visited the United States twice this year, meeting with Mr. Bush both times and pledging his support for the campaign against terrorism. 
But the French are not yet ready to be wholly favorable to Mr. Bouteflika's advances. When he visited France last year -- the first visit by an Algerian leader in 17 years -- the red carpet was rolled out. But the visit nevertheless drew criticism from editorial writers, who criticized the nation for what one called "serious and systematic human rights violations."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Jacques Chirac of France, center, met yesterday with President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria, left, to promote economic links. (Associated Press) 

Load-Date: December 2, 2001


End of Document