FRENCH COMMANDOS SAVE PARIS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 28, 1994, Wednesday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B; EDITORIAL
Length: 402 words
Body


In a strong show of resolve, French commandos stormed a hijacked Air France jet Monday and possibly saved the city of Paris from disaster. That kind of quick, steady reaction by trained troops is one way to avoid a prolonged stalemate that could end badly anyway and could only encourage more such acts by terrorist groups. Each terrorist incident has its own dynamic that makes second-guessing hard. In the case of the Air France hijacking, the four terrorists were killed while 13 passengers, three crew members and one commando were injured when French forces moved.
Such resolve should cause other would-be terrorists to consider the consequences of their actions. It could deter future similar operations. In this case, the raid on the parked jet surely prevented a great death toll in what could have been one of the worst terrorist acts ever, had it been carried out.
Islamic militants who commandeered the jet in Algiers and ordered it flown to Marseille in southern France had rigged the A300 jet to explode over Paris. The militants were using raw terrorism against 171 passengers and crew, innocent travelers and French citizens, to call attention to their anger at French support of the Algerian government. A civil war has raged in the former French colony for three years, spurred in no small part by the Algerian government's refusal to allow the completion of an election that probably would have put fundamentalist Muslims in power.
The fear, in part, was that the ballot box would help to legitimize an Islamic revolution with all the violence and repercussions of the Iranian revolution of 1979. Indeed, Iran is said by Western intelligence services to be funneling money to the Algerian extremists through Sudan, another state in the Middle East that supports terrorism to achieve a radical Islamic state.
France and other countries with ties to Algeria are being put into a difficult bind. As the terrorist war against the political order in Algeria grinds on, the eventual overthrow of the existing order seems likely. If that happens, France and other European and Mediterranean countries could be flooded by Algerian refugees. The presence of Algerians and other North Africans is Europe already is creating deep tensions with racist overtones. France must do what it can to block terrorism for the present, while Algeria's future remains a troubling question mark for the international community.

Load-Date: December 29, 1994


End of Document