French Suspects Held in Basque Terror
The New York Times
April 11, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 494 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, April 10
Body


A routine identity check on a highway near Seville has led to the arrest of a band of French terrorist suspects who reportedly carried out at least 33 killings over the last 12 years on behalf of the Spanish Basque separatist group E.T.A.
With 10 French citizens detained so far, one in Spain and nine in Bayonne in southwest France, the French and Spanish police have hailed the arrests as one of the most important strikes ever against E.T.A., which has been active since the late 1960's.
In the past, the Spanish authorities have often lamented that E.T.A. members were able to hide and obtain weapons and support in what is known as the Basque region of France. But they said this week that they never suspected that French Basques were taking part directly in terrorism in Spain.
Over the last two years, apparently worried by a surge of Basque nationalism inside its own territory, France has been cooperating more closely with Spain in arresting and occasionally extraditing E.T.A. fugitives. But the French police said that none of those now detained even had a police record.
 
Explosives Reported in Car
The lucky break came on April 2 when the police stopped a car heading for Seville. The driver, later identified as Henri Parot, reportedly opened fire, slightly wounding one policeman, but he was later subdued. In the trunk of his car, the police said, were 650 pounds of explosives.
After several days of interrogation, Mr. Parot reportedly confessed his involvement in the E.T.A. hit squad. In addition, he is said to have identified the two men who were in a car behind him and were accompanying him on a mission to set off a car bomb outside the Civil Guard headquarters in downtown Seville. The two men escaped but were later caught in France.
Even more unexpectedly, the 32-year-old detainee, who worked in Bayonne as a commercial salesman, is said to have not only provided details of at least 20 other terrorist actions dating back to 1978 but also named numerous other French Basques who had belonged to the E.T.A. squad, including some who have since abandoned terrorism.
The French police reacted quickly and made 16 arrests in and around Bayonne. This week, seven of the detainees were freed while the nine others, including the two men who escaped arrest near Seville, were flown to Paris for further investigation. So far they have not been charged, although Spain is expected to seek their extradition.
The crimes that Mr. Parot is said to have attributed to his group include a car bomb that exploded outside the Civil Guard headquarters in Zaragoza in 1987, killing 11 people, including 5 children. He is also said to have assumed personal responsibility for the killing in Madrid last year of a antiterrorist prosecutor, Carmen Tagle.
E.T.A., whose name stands for Basque Homeland and Freedom in the Basque language, began its war for independence in the final years of the Franco dictatorship. To date, it has been blamed for more than 600 deaths.

Graphic

 
maps of Spain


End of Document