French Premier, in London as 'Friend,' Works on Sour Relationship
The New York Times
July 26, 2005 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7; BOMBING IN LONDON: VISITOR
Length: 873 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO
Dateline: LONDON, July 25 
Body


Ten years ago today, a terrorist bomb exploded in a crowded commuter train near Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris during the afternoon rush hour, killing eight people and wounding 200 others. 
  France's new president, Jacques Chirac, rushed to the scene to offer condolences and support. With him was his chef de cabinet, Dominique de Villepin.
 In London on Monday, Mr. de Villepin, now France's prime minister, stood alongside another political leader, Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, to offer condolences and support -- as well as advice learned from France's own long and painful experience with terrorist attacks in its capital.
  ''I know firsthand that terrorism has a barbaric face,'' Mr. de Villepin recalled in an interview on Monday. ''And this is why I believe in cooperation in combating it.'' The brief visit, Mr. de Villepin's first foreign trip since becoming prime minister in May, had another purpose: to repair the always edgy relationship between Britain and France that became even edgier at the European Union summit meeting in Brussels last month. There, Mr. Chirac and Mr. Blair accused each other of greed -- and responsibility for the failure of the meeting.
  A few days later, Mr. de Villepin castigated the British government for demanding a generous $6 billion rebate from the European Union every year, calling it ''an obsolete legacy.'' 
  It did not help matters that, after the July 7 terrorist attacks in London, Christophe Chaboud, France's antiterrorism coordinator, speculated publicly, and incorrectly, as it turned out, that the explosives used in the July 7 attacks appeared to be ''military'' quality, and Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy suggested that part of the cell responsible for the July 7 terror attacks in London might have been arrested before and released. 
  But Mr. de Villepin said Monday that he was coming to London ''as a friend.'' Both Mr. Blair and Mr. de Villepin agree that France and Britain, which have the biggest and most efficient intelligence-gathering services in Europe, must stand together to fight terrorism. 
  Mr. de Villepin laid out specific areas where European countries could cooperate, including the sharing of information on suspects; the retention of years of suspects' telephone and other records; and a more comprehensive approach to protecting vulnerable targets like transportation networks. 
  ''The only way to be effective, the only way to deal with the mobility and the opportunism of the terrorists is to work together,'' Mr. de Villepin said.
  But Mr. de Villepin, who emerged as Europe's most articulate opponent of the American-led war in Iraq, did not back off his views that the war was a mistake and that the insurgency, which he was particularly vocal in predicting, would inevitably follow the invasion. 
  ''We saw in Bosnia, in Afghanistan, in Chechnya, and today in Iraq, we have seen the creation of chaotic environments that allow terrorism to flourish,'' Mr. de Villepin said.
  Iraq came up again, when Mr. de Villepin said that Britain, like France, was fighting an enemy within, including preachers of hate whose words could inflame susceptible youth to jihad and local organizers of terrorist plots who could get ''operational capability in zones of crisis: Afghanistan, or today, in Iraq.'' 
  Mr. Blair, by contrast, whose troops took part in the war and are involved in fighting the insurgency, has insisted that the crisis in Iraq is not the source of international terrorism and that international terrorism long predated the Iraq war.
  There are other areas of difference. In the working lunch with Mr. Blair, Mr. de Villepin repeated France's longstanding demand for the extradition of Rachid Ramda, an Algerian suspected of involvement in the attacks in the commuter train and against other sites in Paris in 1995, which were staged by Algeria's militant Armed Islamic Group.
  During a joint news conference, Mr. Blair said he was sorry for the length of time it had taken to extradite Mr. Ramda, ''because I entirely understand the concerns of people in France and their desire to see this resolved as speedily as possible.'' 
  Much to the irritation of the French, three years ago, the High Court in Britain blocked a Home Office order to hand him over, citing allegations that his co-defendants had given testimony under torture by the French. This month, Charles Clarke, the home secretary, approved the extradition order, but Mr. Ramda is appealing. 
  Mr. de Villepin also pointed out that France does not have a shoot-to-kill policy, although he did not criticize Britain for the policy that led to the killing last week of a Brazilian electrician whom police mistakenly believed was a terrorist. 
  In another gesture of conciliation during the news conference with Mr. Blair just before the interview, Mr. de Villepin praised his host for serving an ''excellent'' lunch. This month, Mr. Chirac was overheard joking to his German and Russian counterparts that, ''You can't trust people who have such lousy cooking'' as the British.
  ''Tony Blair was kind enough to serve a French wine,'' Mr. de Villepin told reporters, adding that he regretted that some of France's greatest chefs are now earning their livings in England.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin of France, left, and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain at a news conference yesterday at 10 Downing Street. The Frenchman emphasized cooperation with Britain on terrorism. (Photo by John D. McHugh/Agence France Presse -- Getty Images)

Load-Date: July 26, 2005


End of Document