French snare terrorist 'Jackal'
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 16, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 870 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


He is a master of disguise, so elusive that only a few outdated photographs  exist to help police in their search.
He allegedly took part in some of the world's most spectacular terrorist  attacks.
The 1972 massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics. The 1974  takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague. The 1976 hijacking of an Air  France jet to Entebbe, Uganda.
Compiled from Times WiresCARLOS
"Carlos" was said to have ties to all of them.
Now, the bloody odyssey has ended.
French agents captured the 44-year-old Venezuelan terrorist Sunday in the  Sudan. He was flown to France on Monday.
French Interior Minister Charles Pasqua said Carlos (real name: Ilyich  Ramirez Sanchez) claimed responsibility for 83 deaths worldwide.
But terrorism experts said Carlos had long since outlived his reputation.
They described him as a relic of a bygone era. A burned-out  Marxist-Leninist of no use to even the most radical of states that sponsor  terrorism.
Even in the 1970s, his halcyon days, they said, he did not do half the  things ascribed to him.
Carlos spent most of the last decade drinking whiskey in an apartment in  downtown Damascus.
"He's been a sad figure for the last several years, by all reports an  alcoholic, dreaming the dreams of his youth without a hope of support," said  Vincent Cannistraro, a former counterterrorism chief at the CIA. "A  whiskey-swilling Communist who doesn't believe in God isn't much use to any  Islamic government."
Some of Carlos' notoriety stemmed from his image as a flamboyant gunman  with a taste for the good life and his catchy nickname, which he earned from  British tabloids after the novel, Day of the Jackal, reportedly was found in  one of his hideouts. The Frederick Forsyth book concerns an assassin, "The  Jackal," sent to kill French President Charles de Gaulle.
France's former intelligence chief, Pierre Marion, said that during the  Cold War, Carlos moved between East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Syria with  extraordinary protection.
"To catch him then wasn't possible," said Marion.
Carlos' most daring action involved the kidnapping of 11 oil ministers  attending an OPEC meeting in Vienna in 1975. Three people died in the  incident, but Carlos and his group were flown to Algeria and released.
The oil ministers reportedly paid millions of dollars in return for their  lives.
Following such exploits, Carlos reportedly organized covert operations for  Syria aimed at overthrowing the Iraqi government. Some reports said he was the  leader of a Libyan hit squad sent to kill President Reagan in 1981.
Then he disappeared.
David Yallop, author of a 1993 book on Carlos called To the Ends of the  Earth, said he interviewed Carlos in Syria, where he was posing as a Mexican  businessman and living with his wife, German revolutionary Magdalena Kopp, and  their two children.
Yallop is among those who have questioned the Carlos myth, suggesting that  the terrorist was "a would-be revolutionary of gross incompetence" who often  killed in panic. The author said the myth of Carlos was created by Western  intelligence agents who wrongly identified him as a KGB agent.
"He was somewhat of a folk hero, because operations were ascribed to him  when no one knew who else to ascribe them to, due to a lack of knowledge,"  said Cannistraro. "Western intelligence had all kinds of erroneous  information about him all along. "He's here. He's there. He's in Mexico City,  he's in Yugoslavia, he's dead.' And for most of the last decade he's been dead  drunk in Damascus."
Said another terrorism expert: "This guy's been out of business since the  early 1980s. He's a terrorist emeritus."
In 1992, Carlos was sentenced in absentia to life in prison for killing two  French counter-intelligence agents in 1975. Pasqua said Carlos now will go on  trial for other killings.
He is expected to appear before a judge today.
In a magazine interview in 1979, Carlos admitted killing the French agents.
The United States said Sudan's involvement in the arrest was a welcome sign  from a nation Washington regards as fostering terrorism. By labeling Sudan a  sponsor of terrorism, Washington has cut off most aid and made it hard for the  impoverished African country to get loans from the World Bank.
However, a State Department spokesman said there was no thought now of  removing Sudan from the list of sponsors of international terrorism.
After the collapse of communism in East Germany and Hungary, extensive  information about Carlos came to light from the files of those countries'  former secret police, much of which was shared with France's security  services.
The plump, good-looking Carlos was born in Caracas on Oct. 12, 1949. His  father was a lawyer with strong communist leanings. After education in  Venezuela and in London, he went to Moscow. He received his terrorism training  in Lebanon.
"He was very much a man of the '50s and '60s," said Ronnie Payne, author  of The Carlos Complex. "He was born in the student revolutions, in the great  revolutions of Latin America - Castro, Guevara - that was what launched him on  his career." 
 
- Information from the New York Times, Los Angeles Times, Deutsche Presse  Agentur, Associated Press and Reuters was used in this report.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); BLACK AND WHITE GRAPH, Knight-Ridder Tribune; BLACK AND WHITE MAP; Carlos, real name Ilyich Ramirez Sanchez, a.k.a The Jackal in a photo taken last week; Carlos as a young man; Time line of the crimes Carlos is said to be responsible for; locates Khartoum, Sudan, where Carlos the Jackal was arrested

Load-Date: August 17, 1994


End of Document