French security armed and ready to combat terrorism, hooliganism
USA TODAY
June 5, 1998, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: SPORTS;
Length: 306 words
Byline: Fred Coleman
Dateline: PARIS
Body


PARIS -- Police sharpshooters stand on the running boards of red
low-flying helicopters, their automatic rifles and telescopic
sights scanning for snipers at windows along the routes where
heads of state are expected to pass.
Less than a week before the start of the World Cup soccer tournament,
these elite French anti-terrorist police dressed in black, with
a sleeve patch identifying them as the "Raid" force, are on
a war footing.
Raid -- which stands for the French words research, aid, intervention
and dissuasion -- is supposed to protect presidents, prime ministers,
kings and other dignitaries from 32 nations during the month-long
tournament of 64 matches June 10-July 12.
In addition to the Raid elite, more than 7,000 regular French
police mobilized to guard stadiums and nearly 2,000 soldiers,
including units of the famed French Foreign legion, are patrolling
key sites.
The twin threats of terrorism and hooliganism are perhaps the
toughest security challenges police face anywhere at the end of
the century.
No terrorists have ever attacked a World Cup tournament, but threats
have been made. French Interior Minister Jean-Pierre Chevenement
told a news conference this week that police intercepted phone
calls in France, Germany and Italy last month overhearing Islamic
terrorists discussing attacks during the World Cup.
One result of that was the arrest of 80 suspected terrorists in
five European countries May 26-27.
Of the two seurity challenges facing the World Cup, hooliganism
should be easier to control. "Drunkenness, carrying knives or
other forbidden weapons, or inciting racial hatred will all be
very severely punished," Chevenement says.
Police will be on the lookout for known troublemakers. Inside
Stade de France, where nine matches, including the final will
take place, zoom-video cameras will be used to spot fans with
criminal records.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, color, USA TODAY(Map)

Load-Date: June 5, 1998


End of Document