French Police Arrest 12 in Counterterrorism Raids
The New York Times
October 6, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 599 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Scott Sayare contributed reporting.
Body


PARIS -- The French police arrested 12 people in two separate raids in southern France on Tuesday in what the Interior Ministry said was part of a campaign against terrorism.
France is already on a state of high alert because of threats from Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a North African group that is linked to but operates separately from Al Qaeda.
French officials say they are also taking seriously American warnings about the possibility of attacks by small armed groups against targets in Europe, like tourist attractions and public transportation.
The United States has warned American citizens to be vigilant when traveling in Europe.
Three of the arrests Tuesday stemmed from the arrest of a man on Saturday near the central train station in Naples, Italy. The authorities said he was carrying materials for a bomb.
Two men in Marseille and one in Bordeaux were arrested after their telephone numbers were found in the cellphone of the man arrested in Naples, Ryan Hannouni, the authorities said. Mr. Hannouni, 28, is a French citizen of Algerian origin. France has requested his extradition.
The men were said to be involved with a group offering housing and false identity papers, presumably to foreigners seeking to enter France and to French citizens who want to train or fight in Afghanistan.
Agnes Labregere, a spokeswoman for the Paris prosecutor's office, which handles terrorism investigations, said Mr. Hannouni was suspected of ''participation in criminal networks aimed at supplying jihad in the Pakistani-Afghan zone.''
Part of the concern of Western intelligence agencies is that Al Qaeda and its associated groups are using local cells and sympathizers with Western citizenship to aid those seeking to carry out terrorist attacks in Western Europe. On Monday, there were reports that several Germans possibly undergoing weapons training in Pakistan were killed when an American missile strike hit a mosque in the region of North Waziristan.
An additional nine people were arrested on Tuesday in Marseille and nearby Avignon on suspicion of involvement in the trafficking of arms and explosives. Searches were continuing for weapons, the police said, and have produced at least one Kalashnikov automatic rifle, a pump-action shotgun, two knives and ammunition.
''We have detained people who are close to the Islamist movement,'' said a Marseille police official who refused to be identified by name. She said that they were accused of contacts with arms dealers, and that the arrests were a result of several months of investigation.
All those arrested were reported to be involved with radical Islamic groups, but there was no indication that the two sets of arrests were linked.
''This very morning, police operations were launched in Marseille and Bordeaux that led notably to three arrests directly linked to the fight against terrorism,'' Interior Minister Brice Hortefeux told legislators in the National Assembly. But he did not mention the other nine arrests.
An Interior Ministry spokesman, who would not be identified by name under French rules, confirmed the arrest of 12 people, three in what he called ''a first wave this morning,'' and nine in what he called a separate, later operation.
Last month, the French authorities said they had a tip that a female suicide bomber was preparing to attack the Paris subway. France has been on a higher alert since the kidnapping in Niger last month of seven employees of French companies. Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb took responsibility and warned France against taking military action. The hostages have been moved to Mali.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The police station in Marseille, where some of the suspects were arrested in raids on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNE-CHRISTINE POUJOULAT/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)                                                           

Load-Date: October 6, 2010


End of Document