FRENCH CONSULATE BOMBED IN BERLIN
The New York Times
August 26, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 340 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WEST BERLIN, Aug. 25
Body


A bomb shattered the French consulate building in West Berlin today, killing one person and injuring 23 others, the police said.
The bomb apparently detonated in the fifth floor of the six-story building, the police said, and caused extensive damage on the floor below, in which the consulate offices and a visitor's lounge were situated.
Bomb shatters French consulate building in West Berlin, killing one person and injuring 23 others; West Berlin office of Agence France-Presse receives call from man saying Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia was responsible; Armenian militants have been attacking French sites since arrest of some of theor cohorts by French in connection with acts of terrorism; photo (S)
A West Berlin official, Hermann Oxfort, said that a prosecutor's investigation's confirmed that a bomb had been the cause of the blast, which the police said killed a 26-year-old man.
The West Berlin office of Agence France-Presse said it had received a call from a man who said the Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia was responsible for the attack. The man hung up without identifying himself or giving other details.
 
Building in Danger of Collapse
The 11:20 A.M. explosion collapsed sections of the front facade and attic and catapulted parts of interior walls to the street below, authorities said. The building, which had been undergoing renovation at the time of the explosion, was in ''acute danger'' of collapsing, they said.
All the injured were in the building at the time of the blast, and rescue teams used cutting tools to free some of them.
The building, the Maison de France on the Kurf"urstendamm shopping mall, housed the consulate offices, a gourmet restaurant, a movie theater and book store.
Armenian underground groups have been striking at Turkish targets across Europe since the mid-1970's to avenge the massacre of Armenians in Turkey in the early part of the century. The French have arrested Armenian militants in connection with acts of terrorism, and the terrorists have begun attacking French sites.

Graphic

 
photo of French Consulate in Berlin


End of Document