FRIENDS AND FAMILIES MOURN TWO SLAIN AT LOS ANGELES AIRPORT;
 MANY SAY KILLINGS WERE ACT OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 8, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A2
Length: 388 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body


Friends and relatives gathered Sunday to mourn the two people killed in the shooting July 4 at the El Al ticket counter at Los Angeles International Airport.
The FBI says it still doesn't know why Hesham Mohamed Hadayet targeted the ticket area of Israel's national airline, where he shot Yaakov Aminov, a 46-year-old diamond jeweler, and Victoria Hen, 25, who worked behind the El Al counter.
Aminov, a father of eight with another child on the way, was remembered Sunday as a selfless man dedicated to family and faith.
"This morning we say our final shalom to Yaakov, a man who valued Jewish tradition beyond all else," Rabbi David Adatto told hundreds of mourners. They had gathered outside the storefront Orthodox synagogue that Aminov helped found in San Fernando Valley.
"He was my best friend, a true soul mate," said Michael Shabtai, the friend Aminov had taken to the airport on the Fourth of July.
After the service, Aminov's remains were taken to the airport, where they were to be flown to Israel for burial today.
Mourners gathered at a mortuary in the Mission Hills section of the San Fernando Valley to pay their respects to Hen.
"She was one big smile. A loving person. She loved children. All she wanted to do was settle down and have children," family friend Joe Knoller said.
Many who grieved for the victims said they considered the killings an act of terrorism, though U.S. authorities have said nothing from their investigation indicated that.
"Yaakov Aminov died because he was a Jew, because a culture of hatred has been fostered," said Rabbi Aaron Tendler, one of the speakers.
Outside the mortuary, a few people held signs reading "Stop terrorism now" and "Vicki's murder was an act of terrorism."
"It is a very tough moment for us, but we will survive. We will come through," Rabbi Samuel Ohana told mourners.
Hadayet was the fourth person in line at the El Al counter Thursday when he opened fire, killing Aminov and Hen and wounding three others, authorities said. He was killed by an El Al security guard.
FBI special agent Richard Garcia said Saturday that it still wasn't known if Hadayet harbored anti-Israel feelings, as a former employee claimed he did. Authorities had not ruled out terrorism as a motive but were considering the possibility that Hadayet was despondent over his personal or business affairs.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Members of Yaakov Aminov's family grieve at a memorial service Sunday outside Yad Avraham synagogue in San Fernando Valley in California. One speaker said Aminov died "because a culture of hatred has been fostered."

Load-Date: July 8, 2002


End of Document