FROM CONGRESS TO LAMBERT FIELD, AMERICANS BRACE FOR TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 16, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C
Length: 607 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - FROM THE DOME of the Capitol to the skyscrapers of Wall Street, Americans braced Tuesday for the unfamiliar threat of terrorism.  Iraqi officials have warned that a U.S. attack would unleash a wave of terrorism against Americans. Government officials say that although most of their information points to attacks on Americans abroad, they're not taking any chances.  ''There is increa sed security'' at the White House, said presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. He said the security included more uniformed officers and closer inspection of people entering the grounds. A chest-high fence was erected on Pennsylvania Avenue across from the White House, where anti-war protesters gathered.  The Pentagon canceled all unscheduled building tours. In Congress, where left-wing radicals exploded a bomb in 1983, security was tighter, although many people said they could come and go easily.  In the St. Louis area, Scott Air Force Base's 10,000 workers were confronted Tuesday with notices posted in almost every office window alerting them the base was at ''threat condition BRAVO'' - the second from the bottom of four levels of heightened security.  Meanwhile, Lambert Field, McDonnell Douglas Corp. and other security-conscious installations in the region took precautions against terrorists.  At Lambert, waiting passengers are being told to avoid leaving bags unattended in the terminals.  Unattended luggage is being sniffed by guard dogs for traces of explosives.  If nothing turns up, the luggage is taken to X-ray scanners and finally to storage.  In addition, Lambert stepped up police inspections of restrooms and other public areas.
Everyone at Scott, near Belleville, has been warned to be on the lookout for suspicious activity.  The BRAVO security level, in effect Tuesday, meant even closer checks at Scott entries, plus other, secret measures.  McDonnell officials declined to comment on what precautions are being taken. Trans World Airlines, with about 80 percent of Lambert's commercial flights, refused to issue any comment on security.  At Union Electric Co.'s Callaway County nuclear plant, spokesman Mike Cleary said there was ''a heightened sense of awareness'' but that the plant already had strict security procedures.  The New York Stock Exchange, whose vulnerability was demonstrated twice in recent weeks when a power failure and telephone outage interrupted trading, double-checked IDs and barred lunch-time food couriers.  Law enforcement officials have foiled more than five planned or potential terrorist actions since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2, said senior officials in the Justice Department.  One person was arrested, some investigations continue and ''some people left the country voluntarily when they became aware of our interest,'' said one official. FBI agents arrested Jamal Mohamed Warrayat, a Kuwaiti-born American, on Nov. 29 in New Jersey on charges of conspiring to kill President George Bush and other federal officials. The arrest was a result of an undercover operation.  The FBI is trying to find 3,000 Iraqis whose U.S. visas have expired to find out why they are still here.  Neil Gallagher, an FBI counter-terrorism expert, said that in the past, Iraqi agents have attacked Iraqi dissidents in the United States. He declined to elaborate.  (3* Edition text) To reduce the threat, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has begun photographing and fingerprinting travelers carrying Iraqi and Kuwaiti passports. The State Department ordered all but four Iraqi diplomats to leave the country by midnight Tuesday Jan. 15, to prevent them from ''orchestrating'' terror acts.

Graphic

 
Photo; Photo by AP (3* Edition) - Police checking cars going into the parking lot on Capitol Hill on Tuesday as security in the nation's capital was tightened.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document