From Advocacy to Terrorism, a Line Blurs
The New York Times
June 5, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 30
Length: 1428 words
Byline: By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: TAMPA, Fla., June 2 
Body


Three Israelis had just been killed in a suicide bombing in the Gaza Strip one November day in 1994 when Sami Al-Arian, then a computer engineering professor and Muslim leader here at the University of South Florida, faxed a note to an associate. 
 The Kuwaiti-born professor conveyed his pride in the attack, according to the federal authorities who were monitoring his communications, and he asked that God bless the Palestinian jihad movement and ''accept its martyrs.'' He closed by urging members of the resistance to ''be cautious and alert,'' the authorities said.
 An impassioned advocate for Palestinian independence, Mr. Al-Arian never made any secret of his disdain for the Israeli occupation. But whether his work crossed the line from outspoken advocacy to terrorism is now a central question as he and three co-defendants go on trial in federal court in Tampa on Monday on terrorism and racketeering charges. 
 The case, a decade in the making, represents one of the government's most significant prosecutions since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. And it has served as a flashpoint for debates over the limits of academic freedom, the role of American Muslims in supporting the Palestinian intifada, the government's expanded powers under the law known as the USA Patriot Act, and its strategy in terror investigations before and after the Sept. 11 attacks. 
 ''This case has drawn such intense scrutiny partly because Sami has been so outspoken,'' said David Cole, a Georgetown University law professor who represented Mr. Al-Arian's brother-in-law in an earlier deportation case that also gained wide exposure. ''The government has built a very broad conspiracy case, and the question is whether this will be a trial of Sami Al-Arian and what he actually did or didn't do over the years, or a trial of Palestinian Islamic Jihad itself and guilt by association.''
 Prosecutors charge that Mr. Al-Arian was, in fact, a terrorist. They maintain that he not only spoke out against the Israelis, but that he also helped coordinate attacks against them for many years and funneled money and strategic advice from central Florida as a clandestine American leader of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a group designated by the United States as a terrorist organization in 1995. 
 His many supporters, however, say they regard him as a political martyr who is being wrongly prosecuted for his strong beliefs and is the victim of a campaign of years of government harassment. 
 ''If, God forbid, he is convicted, I will never believe in the American justice system again -- go and bury it,'' said Ziad Taha, a friend of Mr. Al-Arian's who runs the mosque in Tampa where he was once a leader. ''It's all lies by the government.''
 Supporters question why, if Mr. Al-Arian is as dangerous as federal authorities make him out to be, they did not lock him up until 2003 after wiretapping him for years and watching him meet with senior Republicans and Democrats. Mr. Al-Arian campaigned for President Bush in 2000, was photographed with him at a campaign stop, and took part in a White House briefing with Karl Rove in 2001, one of many political contacts that his defense lawyers indicate they may raise as evidence of his solid credentials. 
 The case, which became a major issue in last year's Senate campaign in Florida, has left divided camps of friends and foes from Tampa to Washington, with even some one-time supporters of Mr. Al-Arian now questioning his activities. In February 2003, John Ashcroft, who was then attorney general, personally announced the indictment of Mr. Al-Arian, identifying him as the North American leader of Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Mr. Ashcroft said the group was responsible for the murders of many dozens of people, and he pointed to the prosecution of Mr. Al-Arian as a prime example of the government's efforts to ''choke off terrorist resources and financing.'' 
 Justice Department officials credit changes under the Patriot Act that allowed intelligence agents and criminal prosecutors to share information more easily for bringing the case to prosecution. Although the F.B.I. had been monitoring Mr. Al-Arian since the early 1990's as part of a foreign intelligence investigation, officials said the results were slow to reach prosecutors because of legal impediments and turf battles. 
 Unlike defendants in other prominent prosecutions since Sept. 11 who are accused of being low-level operatives, including Zacarias Moussaoui and John Walker Lindh, Mr. Al-Arian is accused of being a leading figure in financing and organizing terror attacks. Prosecutors say he played a major role in raising and funneling money for the survivors of those who killed themselves in suicide attacks and in making political and organizational decisions about the future of the militant group, before it was officially banned by the United States in 1995 and afterward. And they say he used his university position as cover to recruit like-minded militants from overseas.
 Preparations for the trial speak to its significance. The government has collected more than 20,000 hours of taped phone conversations through wiretaps. Its witness lists number in the hundreds, including many bombing victims and relatives being flown from Israel to testify. The trial is expected to last at least six months, and courthouse officials have stepped up security to head off possible disruptions in a case that has routinely drawn demonstrations from local Muslims over Mr. Al-Arian's treatment. 
 ''We're hopeful that if we get a fair shake, if a jury is willing to presume his innocence, then we have a very good chance,'' said William Moffitt, a prominent Washington lawyer who is defending Mr. Al-Arian and who sought unsuccessfully to have the case moved out of Tampa because of the extensive local publicity. ''The concern is whether or not we can in fact get a fair shake.''
 Indeed, Mr. Al-Arian has been such a fixture in the Florida news that ''more people in Tampa probably know Sami's name than the mayor's,'' said Ahmed Bedier, who runs the Tampa branch of the Council on American-Islamic Relations.
 ''Unfortunately,'' Mr. Bedier added, ''it's largely a very negative perception, and the whole case has brought a lot of unwanted scrutiny and unwanted labels on many Muslims in the area.''
 News coverage of Mr. Al-Arian and his associates, first in a PBS documentary in 1994 and then in The Tampa Tribune, helped make him a controversial figure in Florida and led some critics to label the University of South Florida as ''Jihad U.'' The deportation of his brother-in-law, Mazen Al-Najjar, a fellow University of South Florida instructor who was jailed for more than four years beginning in 1997 based on secret evidence linking him to terrorism, kept Mr. Al-Arian in the news. 
 And a 2001 appearance on Fox News just weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks, in which the host Bill O'Reilly confronted him with his past statements about ''Death to Israel,'' led to his suspension from the state-financed university, where he had taught since 1986. 
 But it was not until Mr. Al-Arian was indicted 15 months ago that the university fired him. A 157-page, superseding indictment last year did not link Mr. Al-Arian directly to the execution of suicide bombings against Israel, but it did provide substantial circumstantial evidence concerning discussions about attacks and financial payments. Prosecutors also accused him of making numerous incendiary statements about Israel, comparing Jews to ''monkeys and swine'' and saying they were ''damned'' by Allah.
 For critics of Mr. Al-Arian, the charges confirmed their long-held suspicions. ''This is a man who infiltrated the University of South Florida and the United States to serve his own terrorist agenda,'' said Rita Katz, who runs a terror research group called the SITE Institute and has tracked Mr. Al-Arian for years.
 Even among some university colleagues who supported Mr. Al-Arian as he fought to keep his job, the charges have prompted a re-assessment.
 Arthur L. Lowerie, who taught international studies at U.S.F. and worked with Mr. Al-Arian in promoting a dialogue on Middle Eastern issues, said he felt personally betrayed upon reading the detailed accusations against his former colleague.
 ''The courts will have to decide whether Sami Al-Arian did anything illegal,'' Mr. Lowerie said, ''but I'm convinced that he deceived me and my colleagues, he used the university, and he badly damaged its reputation. And my own credibility has been badly hurt, too, because I was among those publicly backing him.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Sami Al-Arian speaking to reporters in Tampa, Fla., in 2002, with family members: from left, daughters Laila and Leena
wife, Nahla
 and son Abdullah. Prosecutors say Mr. Al-Arian has ties to Palestinian terrorists. (Photo by Gary Bogdon for The New York Times)                                               

Load-Date: June 5, 2005


End of Document