FROM THE TERRORISM FILES: A PERSONAL HOLY WAR VS. U.S.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 9, 1998 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1357 words
Byline: Mark Bowden and Barbara Demick, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS
Body


There was no hard evidence linking any terrorist group to the deadly American embassy bombings Friday in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam.
But almost unanimously, U.S. intelligence experts topped their list of circumstantial suspects with a 41-year-old multimillionaire fundamentalist engineer from Saudi Arabia named Osama bin Laden.
Earlier this summer, the U.S. State Department issued an official travel advisory regarding bin Laden, saying that he had threatened to attack American interests in the Persian Gulf or South Asia. Security at American embassies and consulates was beefed up from Egypt to India.
The fugitive fundamentalist financier was interviewed in his Afghan mountain hideaway by ABC News correspondent John Miller in June. Bin Laden scoffed at American efforts to capture him, and vowed to continue killing Jews and Americans:
"We believe that the biggest thieves in the world and the terrorists are the Americans. The only way for us to fend off these assaults is to use similar means. We do not differentiate between those dressed in military uniforms and civilians; they are all targets."
One of 52 sons of a Saudi Arabian construction magnate, bin Laden is the most prominent example of a new kind of transnational terrorist. Beholden to no nation or ideology, self-financed and savvy about weapons, tactics and technology, he has been waging a personal holy war against the United States for more than five years.
One group that analysts believe has been funded lately by bin Laden is Islamic Jihad. The loosely organized group has made numerous threats against U.S. interests this year, most recently in a letter faxed to Agence France-Presse in Cairo on Thursday morning, just 24 hours before the African attacks.
In the letter, the Jihad threatened retaliation against the United States because of alleged U.S. involvement in the extradition of three of its members from Europe to stand trial in Egypt.
"We inform the Americans . . . of preparations for a response which we hope they read with care, because we will write it, with God's help, in a language they will understand," read the letter.
Hassan Mekki, an Agence France-Presse journalist in Cairo who has examined many such letters that the agency regularly receives, said this one bore the hallmarks of authenticity.
"It was in the usual style of the Jihad with a lot of verses from the Koran," said Mekki. "I would think the evidence points to them - they have a lot of funds, the Africa field is very easy for them, the security is lax, and they can go in and out easily."
"The doubt I have is that they like to take credit. . . . Usually after a Jihad attack, we get a communique in a few hours," said Mekki, citing a 1995 bombing of the Egyptian embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan.
The Jihad - Arabic for "struggle" and a popular name for various Islamic militant groups - is a reincarnation of the movement that assassinated Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in 1981. The Islamic Jihad was largely wiped out after the assassination, its members imprisoned or executed by Egyptian security. But analysts say it has resurrected itself in recent years, thanks to the patronage of bin Laden.
Hussein Amin, a former Egyptian ambassador to Algeria, and a Cairo-based expert in Islamic terrorism, cautioned against rushing to conclusions about who might be responsible for the bombings.
"Remember that everybody thought at first that Arabs did the Oklahoma City bombing, when it turned out to be Americans," he said.
But if it is an Arab group, he said, "I would say this is the handiwork of what we call the Afghanis."
Bin Laden's group is called the "Afghanis" because they are remnants of an army of Islamic volunteers who traveled to Afghanistan in 1979 to fight the Soviet Union.
According to one American counterterrorism expert, nations such as Saudi Arabia encouraged Islamic militants to join in the Afghan jihad. Few observers expected the rabble of Afghan mujaheddin to defeat the Soviet army. The mujaheddin's success - Afghanistan is now governed by a strict fundamentalist regime (the Taliban) and the Soviet Union is no more - is now seen by Islamic fundamentalists as a great sign from Allah.
"The Soviet Union entered in the last week of 1979, in December, and with Allah's help their flag was folded December 25th a few years later and thrown into the trash, and there was nothing left to call the Soviet Union," bin Laden said in his June interview.
He is a slender man whose long thin face is accentuated by a beard that reaches nearly to his chest. He wears the traditional robes of his Saudi ancestors, robes trimmed with gold. He was married to four women when he was interviewed by a British reporter in 1996.
Bin Laden was exiled from Saudi Arabia in 1991 to Sudan, but now lives in the mountains of Afghanistan, tolerated by the extremist Taliban. His fortune, earned in oil and construction, is now devoted to various Islamic causes, some innocuous charities and other allegedly deadly terrorist adventures.
From his base in Afghanistan, bin Laden is believed to have rallied Islamic mercenaries to fight alongside Bosnians and Chechens in their respective wars. He has also been linked to the Somalian clan that battled American troops in Somalia in 1993. He is alleged to have supplied rocket-propelled grenades and expert instruction to clan fighters who were able to shoot down two U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopters.
According to a report last year by the Emergency Response and Research Institute, based in Chicago, the State Department has strong evidence that bin Laden was involved in a 1995 bombing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in which five U.S. service personnel were killed. The report said there were also suspicions of his fingerprints in the more serious terrorist truck bombing in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, the following year, in which 19 American soldiers perished, and in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York.
Bin Laden has denied involvement, but makes no secret of his animus toward the United States. And he has a long history of threatening the United States - on his own and through other groups.
The latest such threat - received not only by Agence France-Presse, but also by the London-based Arabic newspaper, Al Hayat - concerned three Jihad members who had been working in Albania for Islamic causes.
The Washington Post reported Saturday that the three men sought to join forces with Albanian Muslim rebels in the Serbian province of Kosovo. American sources confirmed that U.S. operatives located the three in northern Albania and persuaded Albanian authorities to arrest them on June 28.
The three men were dispatched to Egypt, where one of them, Ahmed Ibrahim Najjar, faced a death sentence in connection with a previous attack on a tourist market in Cairo.
In its faxed letter to news organizations, Jihad charged that the men had been kidnapped and extradited from Albania with American help. Two others were extradited from another, unspecified European country, the letter said.
While the circumstantial evidence points to bin Laden and Islamic Jihad, experts say it generally does not point to other known Middle East terrorist groups.
Reuven Paz, the academic director of the International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism in Tel Aviv, said he was ruling out the Iranian-financed movement Hezbollah, the leading suspect in the 1996 Dhahran bombing, as an unlikely aggressor now.
"I can't see now any reason for the Iranians to get involved in such a big operation against the United States," said Paz.
The Gama'a Islamiya, Egypt's largest terrorist group, has been quiet since the November bombing in Luxor, in which 58 tourists were killed. Paz noted that the Muslim Brotherhood recently has made inroads in Kenya and especially Tanzania, which has a Muslim population of about 35 percent, but that the Brotherhood is not involved in terrorism.
Kenyan television reported shortly after the bombing in Nairobi that two men, Arab in appearance, were captured trying to flee the scene in a black Mercedes. Witnesses said one man was speaking Arabic, but police would not comment and his connection, if any, to the case was not clear.

Notes

Death at the Embassies

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
O. bin Laden
Osama bin Laden, seen in April looking at a map of Afghanistan, is an example of a new kind of transnational terrorist. The multimillionaire fundamentalist engineer is beholden to no nation or ideology. (Associated Press)
The State Department issued this advisory after Osama bin Laden threatened to attack U.S. interests.

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document