From Budget Cuts to Dirty Bombs
The New York Times
July 23, 2011 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS
Length: 814 words
Byline: By KENNETH N. LUONGO and KENNETH C. BRILL
Kenneth N. Luongo, president of the Partnership for Global Security, was senior adviser for nonproliferation policy to the secretary of energy from 1994 to 1997. Kenneth C. Brill, president of the Fund for Peace, was the ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency from 2001 to 2004.
Body


Washington
THE House of Representatives has decided that countering the threat of nuclear terrorism no longer deserves America's best efforts. Last week, it passed an energy and water budget bill that slashes the country's defenses against nuclear terrorism -- a threat both parties have long recognized as one of the most serious facing America. The Senate has the opportunity to reverse that mistake. If it does not, over a decade of nuclear security gains could evaporate.
This is the second time in six months that lawmakers have voted to cut funding for programs to prevent nuclear terrorism. Such programs have removed several tons of plutonium and highly enriched uranium from countries that might otherwise be unable to prevent those nuclear materials from falling into the hands of terrorists, made more than 1,000 buildings housing dangerous fissile and radioactive materials across the world more secure and strengthened security at many foreign ports and border crossings.
The House budget cuts come on top of the unprecedented 14 percent reductions made to those programs in the current federal budget. By comparison, from 2001 through 2010, Congress cut the budget by a cumulative total of slightly less than 1 percent.
The House eliminated a program that seeks to remove and secure 1,900 radioactive sources -- sealed containers holding radioactive material -- throughout the United States. Those radioactive sources are no longer in use, but they remain dangerous.
The most well-known example of death from a radioactive source occurred in Goiania, Brazil, in 1987. Scavengers there found a radiotherapy machine in an abandoned building, dismantled it and accidentally dispersed the highly radioactive material inside the sealed source. Four people died and more than 100,000 others had to be screened for radiation exposure. The incident led to a huge clean-up effort and created widespread panic. And last year, a scrap-metal worker in India died after being exposed to a highly radioactive source, from a university chemistry laboratory, that had been illegally discarded in a scrap yard.
Here in the United States, many radioactive sources are small and portable, and they could easily be used in a ''dirty bomb.'' Some, like those used in many hospital machines, are of an extremely high intensity. For example, a single cesium-137 source in a typical hospital blood irradiator contains over 1,000 curies of radioactivity. If a stolen cesium-137 source were dispersed through an explosion, it could make a surrounding area of several city blocks uninhabitable, with devastating economic consequences. Indeed, around Chernobyl, where a Soviet reactor melted down in 1986, no humans are allowed in areas where the cesium concentration is just 40 curies per square kilometer.
In addition to domestic cuts, the House slashed funds for efforts to convert nuclear reactors across the world that run on bomb-grade, highly enriched uranium so that they use a less dangerous type of fuel. It is generally believed that only 88 to 130 pounds of highly enriched uranium are needed to create a crude nuclear device, and authoritative studies show that a terrorist group could build a bomb if it obtained such an amount. Indeed, Al Qaeda has publicly expressed an interest in building and using a nuclear device against America. The latest cut would delay the conversion of 126 reactors worldwide, many at locations with a record of inadequate security. Two of those reactors are in the United States.
Finally, programs aimed at preventing nuclear smuggling were cut by nearly 30 percent, directly limiting America's ability to expand detection of nuclear materials at key overseas ports.
Some legislators supporting the reductions argue that they are not shortchanging key national security programs, but rather focusing resources on achieving President Obama's goal of securing all vulnerable nuclear materials globally within four years. Indeed, the bill fully finances a number of important security activities in Russia and former Soviet countries. But Mr. Obama's four-year goal is just one among several interrelated nuclear security issues that need sustained attention to prevent nuclear terrorism.
Beltway budget battles always produce a lot of game-playing. But protecting America's security is not a political game. The programs the House has cut are proven, effective and prudent national security investments to prevent nuclear terrorism and its devastating consequences. Slashing America's best defense against nuclear terror will not make us safer or richer. In fact, it could invite the opposite result.
Some House members recognize that cutting this funding risks eroding a 15-year bipartisan legacy of global nuclear security and they successfully opposed a portion of the reduction. The Senate must follow their example by fully financing the nuclear security budget.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 23, 2011


End of Document