From Yemen, U.S.-Born Cleric Justifies the Killing of Civilians
The New York Times
May 24, 2010 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 472 words
Byline: By ERIC LIPTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- In a newly released video, Anwar al-Awlaki, the Muslim cleric believed to be an inspiration for a series of recent terrorism plots, justifies the mass killing of American civilians and taunts the authorities to come find him in Yemen.
  Terrorism experts said on Sunday that the full video interview, excerpts of which had previously been released, shows an increasing radicalization by Mr. Awlaki, an American-born imam who this year became the first United States citizen to be placed on a Central Intelligence Agency list of terrorists approved as a target for killing.
  In his remarks, Mr. Awlaki praises the attempted Christmas Day bombing of a Northwest flight headed to Detroit.
  ''Those who could have been killed in that plane are a drop in the sea,'' Mr. Awlaki said, in a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors statements by jihadists. ''And we should treat them the same way they treat us and attack them the same way they attack us.''
  Mr. Awlaki has been on record defending attacks on American military targets, both overseas and within the United States. He has praised the Fort Hood, Tex., shootings, carried out in November by an Army psychiatrist with whom Mr. Awlaki had exchanged e-mail messages. But the new video shows that Mr. Awlaki is now urging his supporters not to distinguish between military and civilian targets, citing what he claims are ''no less than a million women and children'' who had been killed as a result of American military action in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
  Mr. Awlaki's sermons have drawn followers in spots around the world. A senior administration official said on Sunday that it had become clear that Mr. Awlaki ''is not just someone who seeks to inspire others to undertake murderous acts, but has been and continues to be operational in plans against our interests and against the homeland.''
  The interview also shows how tight the collaboration has become between Mr. Awlaki and the Yemen-based group known as Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, said Richard Wachtel, a spokesman for the Middle East Media Research Institute, which also translated the remarks, which were released by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. Qaeda leaders there recently released a statement defending Mr. Awlaki and offering him protection.
  In the video, Mr. Awlaki said he had cut off telephone communications to avoid being detected.
  ''If the Americans want me, let them search for me,'' he said. ''Allah is the best protector.''
  Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, made it clear on Sunday that the search for Mr. Awlaki was very much underway. ''We are actively trying to find him and many others throughout the world that seek to do our country and to do our interests great harm,'' Mr. Gibbs said on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 24, 2010


End of Document