FROM THE REDNECK TO THE DRUG PUSHER
Daily News (New York)
September 12, 2011 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 28
Length: 568 words
Byline: BY STANLEY CROUCH
Body


I was guest-hosting Charlie Rose's show one night some years ago and observed that while terrorism was then a fairly new subject to Americans at large, black Americans had been experiencing redneck terrorism at least since the end of Reconstruction in 1877.
The show's guests were highly placed men in law enforcement and national defense who were seemingly surprised to hear of black Americans listed as victims of terrorism. The truth tends to surprise many.
At the same time, I've taken flak from the left for questioning the status quo on race that came about in the civil rights movement and has been held in place by academic "revolutionaries" like Cornel West, whose most truly revolutionary achievement would be some actual academic work.
What makes me so despicable to those on the left, I think, is that I believe that the white redneck racist has been replaced by the vicious black criminal. There it is.
Since the emergence of violent street gangs from the ruins of the black power movement and the murderous havoc created by the crack cocaine wars, the biggest threat to life and limb in so-called "communities of color" comes from anarchic young men itching for excuses to wound, maim and kill each other. The body count backs that up.
Just look at what happened over Labor Day weekend, with nearly 50 people shot in the five boroughs - a few fatally, but all callously. They were, by and large, young black and Latino men, shot by those who, as they say, "looked like them." Those shootings were not the result of white men in white sheets.
Of course, leftist ideologues will blame such violence on social forces. They will point to inner city conditions that, supposedly, create cauldrons of depravity. They will always find a way to deflect the blame from those who are actually responsible.
I do not buy that, or any talk about the supposed behavioral improvements that can arise from the teaching of minority history or the passing on of substantial doses of self-esteem.
Lucky Luciano or Al Capone would not have been better men had they closely studied the grandeur of the Italian Renaissance. Studying great Latin American writers would not have made a more sensitive man of Pablo Escobar, perhaps the most murderous gangster of all time. Sometimes scum never rises to the top; it just congeals at the bottom and becomes increasingly toxic.
I think that is true of the kind of young men who make the quality of life insufferable in what can most simply be called the ghetto. Criminals do not represent any group other than those distinguished by their penchant for doing terrible things to other people. There is nothing more complex to it than that.
In other words, they are evil, low-down people. Rarely do the social programs of liberals save them. Just as often, those programs become meal tickets for hustlers.
That's why it's so silly to hear hip-hop "artists" and black politicians denounce the Rockefeller drug laws as onerous and racist. In fact, the onerous racism comes from elsewhere: The pages of Vibe and the airwaves of BET are rife with stereotypical rappers who promote drug dealing and gun violence.
It is now time to provide our minority communities with the kind of real education that can lift them out of poverty. To stand up for them the way the federal government did when the rednecks made the South a living hell. No more excuses, from either side.
crouch.stanley@gmail.com

Load-Date: September 12, 2011


End of Document