Full support appropriate for the war on terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
May 30, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A10
Length: 345 words
Body


After 9-11, politicians on both sides of the aisle pledged their full support for President Bush and his war on terrorism. We now see this pledge of patriotism being eroded.
A few days ago, Democrats complained about a photo of President Bush looking out the window of Air Force One, on the phone on 9-11 - we are told - to Vice President (Dick) Cheney. The GOP is giving three photos of President Bush to loyal campaign fund donors, this being one of the three.
Democrats are ballistic! How terrible to use a photo of Bush on 9-11!
This photo was taken by Reuters. Anyone can get it on the Internet.
Then there was a briefing given President Bush on Aug. 6 that some said should have alerted the White House to the possibility of a 9-11 attack.
Turns out the House and Senate Intelligence Committees - including (Sen. Tom) Daschle and (Rep. Richard) Gephardt - received the same report which did not forecast a terrorist attack like 9-11.
Next we have a September 1999 report that warned about the possibility that Osama bin Laden terrorists could hijack an airplane.
Former President Clinton - who was in office at the time and saw the report - remarked a few days ago playing down its intelligence value.
It does appear that communications between the CIA and the FBI need to be improved.
In this regard it should be noted that FBI Director Mueller took office only a few days before 9-11 and the Democrats should control their rhetoric before someone reminds them that President Clinton had eight years to improve CIA-FBI communications.
Cries go out that we must do what's necessary so that "it will never happen again."
But it is unrealistic to expect that our government can protect us against every terrorist attack. Our country is too big, too diversified and too dedicated to individual freedoms.
We only have to look at the suicide bombings in Israel to realize that if someone wants to hurt us they are almost impossible to stop.
Let's shut down the political rhetoric and give our full support to the armed services, CIA, FBI and President Bush.
Philip G. Buffinton
Bloomington

Load-Date: May 30, 2002


End of Document