Fund Lets Citizens Sponsor Terrorism Fight
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 19, 2001, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 442 words
Byline: NADIA GERGIS, ngergis@tampatrib.com; Reporter Nadia Gergis can be reached at (813) 754-3763.  
Body


IDEA MEANT TO PUMP CASH INTO U.S. REWARD PROGRAM
TAMPA - Americans have a relatively new way to fight terrorism: their checkbooks.
Two businessmen have launched a campaign to raise money for the U.S. State Department's Rewards for Justice Program. The rewards are offered to those who provide information on terrorism.
Former NBC marketing executive Joe Rutledge and a friend, Priceline co-founder Scott Case, came up with the idea for the nonprofit Rewards for Justice Fund after the Sept. 11 attacks. The money goes to the federal program.
"Everyone was providing aid to the families and victims of the terrorist attacks, no question, but people wanted to know what else could be done above and beyond that," said Rutledge, who owns an Internet company in Connecticut.
Case and Rutledge have promoted the effort on "Today" and other TV shows.
The push to bolster the U.S. reward program is welcomed by the State Department.
"The administration fully supports their effort, but we need to get the message out to America that this program that combats terrorism exists," said Susan Pittman, a State Department spokeswoman.
The Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles recently joined the effort. Florida motorists can order a "United We Stand" specialty vehicle license plate starting July 1. Those wishing to buy it can do so for $25 in addition to the conventional license plate fee. Half the proceeds from the plate will go to the Rewards for Justice Fund.
"I think we are the only state to do this thus far," said Robert Sanchez, spokesman for the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.
The Rewards for Justice Program was launched internationally by the State Department in 1984 but has used government funding until the effort started by Rutledge and Case.
Individuals providing information to the program might be eligible for a reward of up to $5 million, protection of identities and relocation with their families.
The highest-profile capture from a Rewards for Justice tip was the arrest of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, one of the terrorists convicted of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
"The program has a very high success rate," said Robert Padgett, spokesman for the Rewards for Justice Fund. "The State Department found Ramzi Yousef because of a tip they got from overseas, but there are many notable examples. The best way to end terrorism is to infiltrate their surroundings and get close to them and the people around them. This information is vital."
For more information on the Rewards for Justice Fund and program, call 1-800-437-6371, 1-877-392-7373, or e-mail@dssrewards.net  
The Web address is www.rewards- forjustice.org

Notes

AMERICA STRIKES BACK

Graphic

 
PHOTO 2
Scott Case
Priceline co-founder behind fund benefiting U.S. State Department's Rewards for Justice Program
Joe Rutledge
Ex-NBC exec wanted to help program that has had success with getting information on terrorists

Load-Date: November 21, 2001


End of Document