Funds to Close Guantanamo Denied
The New York Times
May 21, 2009 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 1467 words
Byline: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN; Sheryl Gay Stolberg and David Stout contributed reporting.
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The Senate voted overwhelmingly on Wednesday to cut from a war spending bill the $80 million requested by President Obama to close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and to bar the transfer of detainees to the United States and its territories. 
  The vote, which complicates Mr. Obama's efforts to shutter the prison by his deadline of Jan. 22, 2010, was 90 to 6. Republicans voted unanimously in favor of cutting the money.
  ''The American people don't want these men walking the streets of America's neighborhoods,'' said Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota. ''The American people don't want these detainees held at a military base or federal prison in their back yard, either.''
  The six Democrats who voted against the measure include some of their party's most prominent voices on military affairs and criminal justice issues. Among them were Senators Carl Levin of Michigan, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee; Jack Reed of Rhode Island, a West Point graduate and former Army Ranger, and Patrick Leahy of Vermont, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee. 
  Senators Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the majority whip; Tom Harkin of Iowa and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island were the others voting against the measure.  
  The vote was on an amendment to a $91.3 billion military spending bill that will finance the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as some other national security programs, including preparations for pandemic flu, through Sept. 30. 
  The abrupt decision by Senate Democratic leaders to strip out the money for closing the Guantanamo detention center amounted to a strong rebuke of the Obama White House, which lawmakers in both parties have criticized for not providing a more detailed plan for what will be done with the 240 detainees currently held in the prison. 
  Senate Democrats had initially hoped to preserve the financing for closing the prison. House Democrats, however, had already stripped the money from their version of the military spending bill, saying they could not authorize funds without first reviewing Mr. Obama's plans for the prisoners. 
  Mr. Obama is scheduled to outline some of those plans in a speech on Thursday in Washington. 
  Robert S. Mueller 3d, the director of the F.B.I., told a House panel on Wednesday that he is concerned that Guantanamo detainees could foment terrorism if they are sent to the United States. On Tuesday, a federal judge ruled that the United States could continue to hold some detainees at the base indefinitely without charges. 
  Even so, Mr. Obama has faced growing demands in recent days, from both parties but particularly from Republicans, to spell out in detail how he plans to close the Guantanamo detention center and to provide assurances that detainees would not end up on American soil, not even in maximum security prisons.
  The move by Senate Democrats to bar, for now, any transfer of detainees to the United States, raised the possibility that Mr. Obama's order to close the camp by Jan. 22, 2010, may have to be changed or delayed.
  ''Guantanamo makes us less safe,'' the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, said on Tuesday at a news conference where he laid out the party's rationale for its decision. ''However, this is neither the time nor the bill to deal with this. Democrats under no circumstances will move forward without a comprehensive, responsible plan from the president. We will never allow terrorists to be released into the United States.''
  Senate Democrats said they still backed Mr. Obama's decision to close the prison. But lawmakers have not exactly been eager to accept detainees in their home states. When the tiny town of Hardin, Mont., offered to put the terrorism suspects in its empty jail, Montana's senators, both Democrats, and its representative, a Republican, quickly voiced opposition.
  Administration officials have indicated that if the Guantanamo camp closes as scheduled more than 100 prisoners may need to be moved to the United States, including 50 to 100 who have been described as too dangerous to release.
  Of the 240 detainees, 30 have been cleared for release. Some are likely to be transferred to foreign countries, though other governments have been reluctant to take them. Britain and France have each accepted one former detainee. And while as many as 80 of the detainees will be prosecuted, it remains unclear what will happen to those who are convicted and sentenced to prison.
  At the White House on Tuesday, the press secretary, Robert Gibbs, said the administration expected that Congress would eventually release the money to close the camp, and he suggested that the concerns of lawmakers would start to be addressed on Thursday, when Mr. Obama will present a ''hefty part'' of his plan.
  At the Pentagon, a spokesman, Geoff Morrell, said Tuesday that he believed that the administration remained on track to meet the deadline for closing the prison. ''I see nothing to indicate that that date is at all in jeopardy,'' Mr. Morrell said.
  As the administration has struggled with the issue, it has come under assault from the right and the left.
  Conservatives have sought to portray the president as weak on national security. Liberals, including some human rights advocates, have criticized several of Mr. Obama's decisions, including his plan to revive the military commissions created by the Bush administration to prosecute terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo.
  Lawmakers, mindful of polls showing wide public opposition to bringing detainees to the United States, have expressed concerns about the safety of their constituents, and some have said that any location housing detainees, even the most secure prisons, would become a potential target for a terrorist attack.
  On Tuesday Republicans, including the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who has been warning for weeks about the dangers of closing the prison, applauded the Democrats' decision.
  At a news conference, Mr. McConnell said he hoped it was a prelude to keeping the camp open and dangerous terrorism suspects offshore, where he said they belong. He noted that no prisoner had escaped from Guantanamo since the Sept. 11 attacks.
  ''Guantanamo is the perfect place for these terrorists,'' Mr. McConnell said. ''However, if the president ends up sticking with this decision to close it next January, obviously they need a place to be. It ought not to be the United States of America.''
  Senate Democrats on Tuesday conceded that their decision to shift course in part reflected the success of Republicans in putting them on the defensive.
  But the Democrats said they had also acted to avert a partisan feud that would delay the military-spending measure, which is needed to finance the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and other national security programs through Sept. 30. The House last week overwhelmingly approved the $96.7 billion spending measure after stripping the money for closing Guantanamo and inserting language barring Mr. Obama from transferring any detainees to the United States without first presenting a detailed plan to Congress, and giving lawmakers a chance to review it.
  Later in the week, the White House announced that it would revive the military commissions to prosecute some of the terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo.
  The Obama administration said it would expand the legal rights of suspects, including a limit on the use of hearsay evidence and a ban on evidence gained from cruel treatment.
  Still, discomfort has only grown in Congress. Senate Democrats had initially included the $80 million for closing the prison in their version of the war-spending measure, but with tight restrictions requiring Mr. Obama to submit a plan before the money could be used.
  Jim Manley, a spokesman for Mr. Reid, said the majority leader had not intended to suggest that detainees could never be transferred to American prisons, but only to say that the Senate would not provide money for closing Guantanamo until a task force created by Mr. Obama presented a report on detainee policy in July.
  Mr. Reid in his comments, however, was unequivocal in insisting that the terrorism suspects never reach American shores.
  ''You can't put them in prison unless you release them,'' he said. ''We will never allow terrorists to be released in the United States.''
  Mr. Reid said he and other Senate Democrats had shifted course after seeing the version of the spending bill approved by the House last week, a rare gesture of deference by the upper chamber of Congress to the lower one.
  ''In looking at the position of the House, that was more logical,'' Mr. Reid said. ''We have clearly said all along that we wanted a plan. We don't have a plan. And based on that, this is not the bill to deal with this.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 21, 2009


End of Document