Fundraiser at Rutgers supports victims of terrorism
University Wire
March 11, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Length: 427 words
Byline: By Alicia Beale, Daily Targum
Dateline: New Brunswick, N.J.
Body


Rutgers University's Israel Public Affairs Committee held a fundraiser for the victims of suicide bombings in Israel and the Twin Towers Orphan Fund Saturday at the Rutgers Student Center on the College Avenue campus.
Petition signing, voter registration, letter writing to soldiers and music provided by a DJ were part of the event.
"[RIPAC's] main goal is to get people active in politics and make [on] campus strong US and Israel relations," said Brett Tanzman, a Rutgers College senior.
Rutgers U.
RIPAC is a non-partisan organization. The fundraiser was a secular event, Tanzman said.
A major goal of the evening was to get "more people politically interested" and to bring them together, said Tanzman, a RIPAC member.
"[The event is] diplomacy in action," said Rutgers College senior Sean Litz of RIPAC campus relations.
Representatives from student organizations, including Association of Indians at Rutgers, and representatives from organizations not affiliated within the University, including the Anti-Defamation League were in attendance.
"I'm here to show support for RIPAC," said AIR Political Director Shashi Dholandas. RIPAC and AIR are co-sponsoring a tentative event on April 14 to speak on the similarities between Jewish communities and Indian communities in America, Dholandas said.
Rutgers College freshman Shoshana Tutnauer said, "[I'm here to] promote U.S. and Israel relations, raise money for the suicide bombing victims and have fun while doing it," Tutnauer said.
The hot topic of the night was the banners hung up in the Douglass College Center and the Rutgers Student Center on the College Avenue campus by the Rutgers Association for Middle East Justice this past week. The banners read "From the River to the Sea, Palestine will be Free."
"There has been controversy over the banner," said Shai Goldstein, who runs the Anti-Defamation League's New Jersey office. Many people were upset because they felt the banner subtly calls for the destruction of Israel, Tanzman said.
According to RIPAC's Web site the organization is "made up of pro-Israel students interested in a variety of areas, from event planning to public relations, and we endeavor to use our skills and talents in a productive way to help get the truth out about Israel and the Middle East. But we also get involved in order to learn, through discussions, lectures and experiences, so that we are better equipped to make the case for Israel around campus and the community, and to influence American policy."
(C) 2002 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 11, 2003


End of Document