Funeral Is Held for Girl, 16, Killed in Italy School Bombing
The New York Times
May 22, 2012 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 558 words
Byline: By GAIA PIANIGIANI
Body


MESAGNE, Italy -- As an investigation continued on Monday into the bombing that killed a 16-year-old as she walked to school in southern Italy, more than 2,000 gathered in this small town to attend her funeral.
Prime Minister Mario Monti, along with the education, justice and interior ministers and other officials, were among the hundreds that crammed into the church for the funeral of Melissa Bassi, a student at the vocational school targeted by a bomb on Saturday that left five other girls hospitalized.
Melissa's flower-laden white coffin lay in the center of the apse, while her father looked on, holding a wedding-day photograph of his wife, who was too distraught to attend. More than a thousand others listened to the rite on loudspeakers set up in the square outside.
''I stand here and I am still scared,'' Dora Persano murmured in the crowded churchyard before the funeral began. ''She could have been my daughter. This is what all mothers here think now. We can no longer think that our kids are going to the safest place -- to school. We now know that they could die when they go to school.''
The bombing shocked Italy, raising specters of turbulent years past. Investigators said there were no formal suspects. They are looking at various hypotheses: the involvement of the Mafia, domestic terrorism and the act of a single individual, which has emerged as one of the most accredited theories.
On Monday, newspapers printed blurry images of a man suspected of having placed the bomb in a trash canister next to the school's main gate early Saturday, before classes began.
But speaking at a news conference after a high-level meeting of investigators, the justice minister, Paola Severino, said no hypothesis could be excluded. ''Nothing is certain,'' she said.
Interior Minister Annamaria Cancellieri asked the journalists present to reassure the public that the government was in control of the investigations and that Italy was not a country at risk of terrorist actions.
At the school site on Monday morning, however, groups of teenagers stood in an eerie silence looking at the wall blackened by the explosion. Beyond police fences, the blanket of multicolored flowers and plants lay on the sidewalk, broken up by a teddy bear, a blue scarf of the local soccer team, white balloons and many messages. ''You are only murderers,'' one read.
''We all feel very unsafe,'' said Annarita, 16, who declined to give her last name. ''I go to a different school, but I felt it was important to be here today rather than in my classroom.''
While men cleaned up the debris from the blast, adults held students and whispered in their ears.
''These kids need to win over this terrorism; this is why I convinced my daughter to come to school today,'' said Cristina Bataccia, whose daughter got to school later than usual on Saturday and avoided the blast. ''But my knees are shaking while I stand here. We won't feel safe until they catch the murderer.''
Closed-circuit security cameras recorded a man in a white shirt and dark trousers who was standing next to a kiosk less than 50 paces from the blast and apparently pushed a device that could have been a detonator.
''This inhuman gesture just leaves me speechless,'' the school's dean, Angelo Rampino, said with a broken voice on Monday morning at the school gate. ''I don't know what to tell them.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 22, 2012


End of Document