Funny, but Plotting Havoc Isn't Easy
The New York Times
October 19, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 1; THEATER REVIEW
Length: 1150 words
Byline: By CHARLES ISHERWOOD
Body


If all the would-be evildoers crawling the globe were as amusing and incompetent as the dizzy threesome from ''Modern Terrorism,'' a new play by Jon Kern that opened on Thursday at the Second Stage Theater, the world would be a pacific place indeed.
That's a mighty ''if,'' of course, as grisly headlines from Libya, Afghanistan, Pakistan and occasionally places much closer to home remind us daily. So let's give Mr. Kern a quick salute for his bravery in trying to engender laughter from the mishaps that befall three Muslim terrorists plotting to blow up the observation deck of the Empire State Building. Not often does a critic get to employ the words ''amusing'' and ''terrorists'' in the same sentence.
But I can't do much more cheerleading for Mr. Kern's play, aside from noting the excellence and commitment of its young cast and its reasonably ample array of well-turned zingers. (''I don't know why you're so obsessed with destroying America,'' wonders the genial slacker who stumbles upon the terrorists' lair, ''when America is taking care of that itself.'')
The play's full title is ''Modern Terrorism, or They Who Want to Kill Us and How We Learn to Love Them,'' presumably a homage to Stanley Kubrick's brilliant cold war satire ''Dr. Strangelove: Or How I Stopped Worrying and Learned to Love the Bomb.'' (It also recalls Christopher Durang's ''Why Torture Is Wrong, and the People Who Love Them,'' although that play was more a tantrum at the excesses of the ''war on terror'' than a comedy about the malefactors themselves.)
Unhappily, the tone of Mr. Kern's play more resembles that of a television sitcom about a carefully assorted gang of goofs thrown together by circumstance: ''The Big Bang Theory,'' only with the big bang a suicide bomb attack that will rain body parts across Fifth Avenue and 34th Street. (Mr. Kern recently joined the staff of ''The Simpsons.'')
That chunky subtitle is meant at least semi-seriously: Mr. Kern wants his characters to endear themselves to us with their wacky banter about the proper title of the movie ''Star Wars'' and the irritations of FedEx. There's even a B plot featuring a budding love story that plays in counterpoint to the gang's evolving plans to sow mayhem in New York City. This unusual combination evokes some startled laughter but is mostly rendered in such conventional strokes that, for all the dark daring of its conception, you're not likely to be as scandalized or as horrified as Mr. Kern perhaps hopes.
The play, directed with dispatch by Peter DuBois, opens with the shocking image of a young man, Qala (William Jackson Harper), rooting around in the periwinkle briefs of Rahim (Utkarsh Ambudkar), from which a tangle of wires protrude. No, this is not an unusually kinky Craigslist hookup: their discussion turns on the possibility of Rahim's genitals' giving off too much moisture, thus rendering the bomb stuffed inside the underwear ineffectual.
The Somali-born Qala is the stern ringleader of this small cell, sharing a grungy Brooklyn apartment, whose members met through a chat room on the Internet. His co-conspirators are the goofy, boyish Pakistani-American Rahim, he of the bulging underpants, and Yalda (Nitya Vidyasagar), a serious-minded young woman also of Pakistani-American descent, who has been radicalized by the accidental death of her husband, killed by an American drone during their wedding celebration.
As the intense Yalda, Ms. Vidyasagar radiates a dark fanaticism that is naturally tempered by the occasional one-liner. She is actually even funnier merely when staring into the distance in simmering disgust at the more jovial attitudes of Rahim. Portraying this genial youngster, who has not yet outgrown his obsession with collecting action figures -- one of the show's more funny-tasteless gags has a bloodied prisoner being held with his head covered by a ''Star Wars'' pillow -- Mr. Ambudkar delivers a warm performance that makes us see why Yalda might grow fond of him. (At the same time, the sunny amiability also renders Rahim's participation in this ugly plot hard to believe.)
Mr. Harper is also excellent as the determined Qala, who has left a family behind in Africa to pursue his murderous ends. His dedication stops, however, at the possibility of actually blowing himself up: he's too big a cog in the Muslim-terrorist wheel, in his eyes, for that.
''Every day I pray that Allah will grant my wish and make my life less important, so that I could throw it all away,'' he says wistfully.
But the juiciest comic role in the play belongs, perhaps not surprisingly, to the lone nonterrorist character in the cast, a friendly underachiever named Jerome who lives in the apartment upstairs (good running gag: Qala's continually referring to him as ''3A''), portrayed with impish zest by Steven Boyer (''Hand to God''). This clueless dude befriends Rahim when a package intended for the terrorists is accidentally delivered to his apartment. Killing time with his new pal downstairs, Jerome becomes a liability when he accidentally learns of the bomb plot.
It was when a handgun began being brandished, mostly at the head of the cowering Jerome, sometimes begging for his life, that my patience with the conceit of ''Modern Terrorism'' began to wear thin. Mr. Kern is probably an admirer of the Anglo-Irish bad-boy playwright (and now filmmaker) Martin McDonagh, whose own dark comedy about terrorism, ''The Lieutenant of Inishmore,'' was seen briefly on Broadway. I've never been a great fan of Mr. McDonagh's brash attempts to mine belly laughs from buckets of blood, but his plays are boldly imagined and peopled by distinctive and very loquacious characters.
While ''Modern Terrorism'' certainly has the courage of its convictions -- a brutal killing takes place onstage, spattering brain matter across the wall -- Mr. Kern's characters are too superficially conceived, and the strands of his plot too formulaic, to engender the combination of sucker-punch shock and bruising humor that Mr. McDonagh at his best manages to achieve. It's hard to truly discomfit the audience when your play is so richly stocked in primetime-ready wisecracks.
Modern Terrorism, or They Who Want to Kill Us and How We Learn to Love Them
By Jon Kern; directed by Peter DuBois; sets by Alexander Dodge; costumes by Mimi O'Donnell; lighting by Russell H. Champa; sound by M. L. Dogg; fight director, Thomas Schall; production stage manager, Lori Ann Zepp; associate artistic director, Christopher Burney; production manager, Peter J. Davis; general manager, Dean A. Carpenter. Presented by Second Stage Theater, Carole Rothman, artistic director; Casey Reitz, executive director. At Second Stage, 305 West 43rd Street, Clinton, (212) 246-4422, 2st.com. Through Nov. 4. Running time: 2 hours 5 minutes.
WITH: Utkarsh Ambudkar (Rahim), Steven Boyer (Jerome), William Jackson Harper (Qala) and Nitya Vidyasagar (Yalda).

http://theater.nytimes.com/2012/10/19/theater/reviews/modern-terrorism-by-jon-kern-at-the-second-stage-theater.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Modern Terrorism: From left, Nitya Vidyasagar, Utkarsh Ambudkar, Steven Boyer and William Jackson Harper in this Jon Kern play, which runs through Nov. 4 at the Second Stage Theater in Manhattan. (C1)
 Steven Boyer and Nitya Vidyasagar in Jon Kern's ''Modern Terrorism.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C14)       

Load-Date: October 19, 2012


End of Document