Fusion centers aid in war on terror
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
September 21, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 468 words
Byline: Ahmad Safi, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Sep. 21--Five years after Sept. 11, terrorists and how they can use information still are big threats.
Now the public awareness campaign, using the New York slogan "If you see something, say something," is spreading to Missouri, with hopes of a statewide clearinghouse of information gathered from law enforcement and citizens.
"This is not a big brother system," said Major Ron Replogle, commander of the Missouri Highway Patrol's Criminal Investigation Bureau.
Mr. Replogle oversees the Missouri Information Analysis Center -- a fusion center opened in December 2005 with a simple mission: to provide statewide information sharing among local, state and federal public safety agencies and the private sector in coordinating intelligence against criminal activity and terrorism.
Representatives from the Jefferson City based-MIAC were in St. Joseph Wednesday evening to promote the center.
The fusion centers were mentioned in President Bush's 2005 State of the Union address as new fronts on terrorism. About 30 states currently have such systems in operation, said Mr. Replogle, which function on Homeland Security and state funds.
Eventually, a national network of state-based fusion centers will filter to local levels to collect criminal intelligence if there is a reasonable suspicion of a crime.
"MIAC isn't a system set up to spy on people," said Capt. Christian Ricks, an MIAC Criminal Information Analyst. "Most of us know 2 percent of our population creates 98 percent of our problems."
And for the troublemakers, MIAC will be able to analyze criminal information already collected in the ordinary course of police business.
A local officer might approach the person, ask their name and a few background questions, note the person's mannerisms, and send the information to MIAC, said Mr. Ricks. Information would be added within minutes.
MIAC will make everything relating to the officer's time available for seven years in its searchable system.
The information is used not only in terrorism-related matters.
In the recent "Baby Abby" case in Union, Mo., MIAC analysts gleaned more than 800 tips that came in to help investigators find potential suspects.
Mr. Replogle said MIAC plans to be fully multi-disciplined system, and eventually information will trickle in from all first-responders, such as paramedics, firefighters and even tractor-trailer drivers reporting information to the 24-hour hotline.
Presently, about 175 Missouri agencies have signed up for exchanging information on the MIAC system.
Copyright (c) 2006, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: September 21, 2006


End of Document