Futile; War isn't answer
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 12, 2008, Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 402 words
Byline: Gzedit
Body


"There is no battlefield solution to terrorism," warns a new RAND Corp. study entitled How Terrorist Groups End. The report says:
"Military force usually has the opposite effect from what is intended: It is often overused, alienates the local population by its heavy-handed nature and provides a window of opportunity for terrorist-group recruitment."
Based in Santa Monica, Calif., RAND is a nonprofit global policy think tank founded in 1946 by the U.S. Army Air Force.
For the terrorism study, RAND researchers looked at 648 different armed groups between 1968 and 2006 and concluded: "The most common way that terrorist groups end - 43 percent - was via a transition to the political process."
The election of Nelson Mandela as South Africa's president and the settlement negotiated between the Irish Republican Army and the British government in 1998 were cited as two examples of political transitions to peace.
However, President Bush's strategy to use military invasions to quell suicidal Muslim militant groups such as al-Qaida was flawed from the outset, RAND concludes. The Iraq battle has already lasted longer than U.S. involvement in World War II, yet al-Qaida has expanded its operations throughout the world.
Military force proved effective in only 7 percent of the cases RAND examined because it is "too blunt an instrument to be successful against terrorist groups," the report says.
Groups like al-Qaida, which envisions a religious dynasty or "caliphate" throughout the Muslim world, are harder to eliminate than other terrorist groups, the study notes. And al-Qaida "does not enjoy the kind of mass support received by other organizations such as Hezbollah in Lebanon, largely because al-Qaida has not engaged in sponsoring any welfare services, medical clinics or hospitals."
RAND thinks the U.S. should begin to rely on police and intelligence operatives to root out al-Qaida leaders throughout the world and only use military forces - not necessarily U.S. forces - to counter local insurgencies. RAND urges the United States to quickly "move away from its mantra of fighting a war on terrorism."
President Bush's unnecessary plunge into the Iraq war didn't reduce terrorism or make Americans safer. Instead, it caused more suicidal fanatics to join the armed resistance. It's time for a wiser approach.
RAND analysts are top professional researchers. Their judgment should be heeded by U.S. leaders.

Load-Date: August 13, 2008


End of Document