Future of civilization discussed
Houstonian: Sam Houston State University
November 6, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 405 words
Byline: Evan Dierlam
Body


Professor Yonah Alexander spoke Monday on the history, methods and future of terrorism around the world.
Over 70 students and faculty members gathered in the Hazel B. Kerper Courtroom in the George J. Beto Criminal Justice Center to listen and ask questions.
The 40-year-scholar cited a quote from Georg Wilhelm Fredrich Hegel which states, "We learn from history that we do not learn from history."
Alexander discussed the history of terrorism in America, starting with the attempted assasination of President Harry S. Truman in 1950 by extremists.
"I think history is pretty critical," Alexander said.
He said that one of the issues with fighting terrorism is the absence of a clear definition.
"If we can't even identify the disease, then how can we provide the medicine?" he said.
According to Alexander, terrorism will continue to grow in frequency and intensity due to its intention, ideology and funding.
"[Terrorists] only have to be lucky once; we have to be lucky all the time."
He said that future speculation of terrorism attack scenerios include the explosion of trucks filled with chlorine, which is estimated to potentially kill 17,500 and injure more than 100,000. They also calculate that only 100 kg of anthrax would be needed to kill over three million people.
The new attacks would rely on many old techniques: propaganda and threats, assaults, bombings, kidnappings and hostage situations.
Alexander said that there are over a dozen major terrorist networks across America. These groups he said are moved by varying ideals and inspirations. Some are individuals seeking to be crusaders or martyrs for their causes; some are extremists focused on single political issues; some are ideological based groups.
He said he spoke to a terrorist from the Hezbula group involved in Beirut in 1993. The terrorist revealed to him that they had used such methods because their enemies had "all the ships in the world and all the capabilities...we cannot fight you in the battlefield." The terrorists refer to terrorism as the great equalizer.
Alexander said that "every country has a responsibility to protect its people." He added that this could only
be achieved through cooperation of the world's nations.
Alexander praised the SHSU criminal justice department.
He highlighted the use of data-mining and the importance of intelligence in combatting terrorism.
He predicted that we will have challenges with terrorism for the next 100 years.

Load-Date: November 6, 2017


End of Document