G-7 LEADERS RESOLVE TO DEAL WITH TERROR;
THE QUESTION NOW IS: WILL THEY FOLLOW THROUGH?
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
June 28, 1996, Friday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 366 words
Body


Ironically, the bombing attack on an American military housing complex in Saudi Arabia may have strengthened President Clinton's hand at the Group of Seven economic summit meeting in Lyon, France. Several members were prepared to excoriate the United States for the secondary boycotts entailed in legislation dealing with trade with outlaw regimes in Cuba, Iran and Libya. Then the bombing occurred, and terrorism - such as that practiced by outlaw regimes - rose to the top of the G-7 agenda.
Thursday's agreement to take stronger action against international terrorism was the result.
The propriety of the United States, with the Clinton administration's acquiescence, punishing foreign companies for doing business with whomever they like still will be taken up. French President Jacques Chirac, the summit host, already has pursued the matter with Clinton in a bilateral meeting.
For now, however, international terrorism and how to deal with it is at the forefront of the industrial democracies' - and the world's - concern. It is, said British Prime Minister John Major, ''the security challenge of the 21st century.'' Earlier, Clinton had made the salient point that free world economies cannot thrive as they should as long as terrorism's specter hangs over them.
Clinton's insistence on making terrorism the centerpiece of this year's economic summit points up, as well, the disparity between what European leaders say and what they do on the subject. While many of his counterparts have been willing to talk, Clinton has proposed substantive steps to combat the terror. These include tougher approaches to extradition, sharing of intelligence and cross-border vigilance.
Some of these may be put in motion as a result of Thursday's opening declaration by U.S., French, German, British, Italian, Canadian and Japanese leaders. The proof of any agreement's effectiveness, however, lies in its implementation. Whether the United States will remain ''just about the only nation willing to act,'' as Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin put it, won't be known until the anti-terrorism steps announced move from rhetoric to reality.
After what happened in Saudi Arabia, reality shouldn't be too much to ask.

Load-Date: June 29, 1996


End of Document