G-7 LEADERS TACKLE TERROR; BOMBING ATTACK IN SAUDI ARABIA BRINGS ISSUE TO FOREFRONT AT SUMMIT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 27, 1996, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 5B
Length: 534 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LYON, FRANCE
Body


PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON and leaders of the world's other industrial powers gathered Wednesday for their annual economic summit as attention suddenly focused on terrorism. Clinton said the bombing attack in Saudi Arabia made the fight against terrorists "our first order of business."
The attack against the U.S. military facility near Dhahran gave the leaders of the seven democracies a rallying point on which common ground could be reached with little difficulty.
"Terrorism cannot be justified for any reason," said Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, the first leader to arrive in the French industrial city. "And we strongly condemn any terrorist attack."
Speaking as he left the White House for his flight to Lyon, Clinton noted that although the Group of Seven industrial democracies generally have focused on economics, "I will say to my partners there what I say to my fellow Americans today: We cannot have economic security and a global economy unless we can stand against these forces of terror.
"The United States will lead the way, and we expect our allies to walk with us hand in hand. We will not tolerate this kind of conduct," he said.
The subject of international terrorism already was on the agenda for the annual meeting - as it had been at last year's session in Halifax, Canada.
But Clinton said Tuesday's bombing would help rivet more attention on the subject.
"Now, as I head to Lyon, our first order of business will be to focus the strength and the energy of the G-7 on the continuing fight against terrorism," he said. "We will not rest in our efforts to find who is responsible for this outrage, to pursue them and to punish them."
Clinton called on the Group of Seven - made up of the United States, France, Japan, Britain, Germany, Italy and Canada - to intensify its stand against terrorists.
The United States, both at last year's economic meeting and in the U.N. General Assembly, has "launched initiatives to fight international organized crime, drug trafficking, nuclear smuggling and terrorism," he said.
"Now, in Lyon, we expect to expand that work, and we expect to see very practical results, including a package of 40 specific recommendations to combat terrorism," Clinton said.
"Defeating these organized forces of destruction is one of the most important challenges our country faces at the end of this century and at the beginning of the next."
Britain, Germany and France echoed Clinton's denunciation.
British Prime Minister John Major called the bombing "an appalling act, an act of pure evil, for no reason."
Britain, which has been the target of renewed bombings by the Irish Republican Army, promised maximum assistance to identify the perpetrators.
More than 200 Royal Air Force personnel based at Dhahran, alongside U.S. and French forces, escaped injury.
The three-day summit begins with a dinner today; a full day of meetings will take place Friday.
(THE FOLLOWING APPEARED IN THE 3* EDITION)
Much of the drama of the session was lessened when Russian President Boris Yeltsin - who had been invited to attend the session, as he has earlier summit meetings, and to meet separately with Clinton - decided to skip the conference to campaign full time for re-election.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - President Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton walk toward the Marine One helicopter Wednesday as they leave on the first leg of their trip to the economic summit in Lyon, France. The Washington Monument is in the background.

Load-Date: June 27, 1996


End of Document