G-8 OKs aid to Africa, Palestinians
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 9, 2005, Saturday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 448 words
Byline: Tom Raum The Associated Press
Body


GLENEAGLES, Scotland - Vowing not to be sidetracked by the deadly London bombings, world leaders unveiled a $ 50 billion package Friday to help lift Africa from poverty and proposed up to $ 9 billion to help the Palestinians achieve peace with Israel.
"We offer today this contrast with the politics of terror," said British Prime Minister Tony Blair, wrapping an economic summit jolted by Thursday's bus and subway attacks.
Leaders also pledged new joint efforts against terrorism in response to the attacks.
The Group of Eight nations - the United States, Britain, Japan, Germany, France, Italy, Canada and Russia - adjourned early Friday so Blair could return to London to deal with the crisis.
Among leaders, however, President Bush was first to leave this secluded golf resort and was airborne half an hour before the start of Blair's closing news conference.
Upon arriving in Washington, Bush went directly to the British Embassy to sign a condolence book on behalf of the American people.
Among the new anti-terrorism commitments are a promise to work together to improve rail and subway safety, and seeking a wider U.N. role in discouraging terrorism.
"We assure the people of the United Kingdom of our solidarity in the continuing struggle against terrorism," G-8 members said in a statement pledging "to bring terrorists to justice wherever they are."
Separately, Russian President Vladimir Putin cautioned against going too far and putting more restrictions on democracy. In doing that, "We would be giving a great gift to the terrorists themselves because they are aiming exactly for that," Putin told reporters. "They want to use the instruments of democratic society to destroy democracy."
Leaders also endorsed new trade deals and pledged universal access to AIDS treatment.
Bush met for 20-30 minutes Friday morning with Blair to discuss the bombings, White House spokesman Scott McClellan told reporters on Air Force One as Bush flew home.
Bush also is devoting his radio address to the attacks.
With a last-minute pledge from Japan, Blair won a key victory - a promise to boost Africa aid to $ 50 billion annually by 2010, from the current $ 25 billion. The United States did not make any additional pledges. Bush announced last week that he would seek to double U.S. aid to Africa by 2010.
At Blair's behest, the G-8 nations also endorsed canceling the debt of 18 of the world's poorest nations and renewed their commitment to a peacekeeping force in Africa.
"All of this does not change the world tomorrow. It is a beginning, not an end," said Blair, the summit host, with summit leaders and the leaders of five African countries standing behind him on the steps of the Gleneagles Hotel.

Load-Date: July 11, 2005


End of Document