G-8 BACKGROUNDER: RUSSIA: Equal status is the goal;
Newest member will focus on terrorism, WTO, debt relief
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 2, 2004 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;; Series
Length: 1091 words
Byline: REBECCA SANTANA
Series: G-8 BACKGROUNDER
Body


Moscow --- When Russian President Vladimir Putin attends the Group of Eight summit at Sea Island in Georgia next month, he's expected to emphasize the war against terrorism, Russia's entry into the World Trade Organization and debt relief to developing countries.
He will be pushing this agenda despite lingering questions about the state of democracy in his own country and doubts among the other G-8 nations about Russia's participation.
"Russia wants recognition that it's a full, full partner," said John Kirton, director of the G-8 Research Group at the University of Toronto.
Russia's push for equal footing partly stems from the fact that it is the most recent addition to the prestigious group.
For the Journal-Constitution
Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin campaigned hard for Moscow to join the organization so as to keep Russia involved in the global decision-making processes after the fall of the Soviet Union.
The then G-7 also wanted to let Russia in as a way to keep an open dialogue going with a country that has such huge territory, natural resources and one of the world's largest nuclear arsenals.
In 1994, G-7 leaders included Russia at the summit in Naples, Italy. In 2002, at the Kananaskis summit in Canada, the G-8 leaders announced that Russia would host the 2006 summit --- heralding Russia's membership in the powerful group.
But despite formal acceptance, Russia still battles the image of belonging to an organization for which it's not necessarily qualified: The country is not one of the world's eight largest economies, which the term G-8 is supposed to connote.
Economically, Russia is still decades behind the other G-8 members, judging by such indicators as GDP per capita --- $2,140 compared to $21,500 for Italy, the next closest. In terms of life expectancy, Russian males live to 62 compared to 76 for Canada.
Lacking economically
Russia is still not invited to participate in the meeting of finance ministers from the other seven members of the group --- a reflection of the fact that when it comes to issues such as currency policy or aid, Russia is not economically strong enough to contribute to or influence those decisions.
But its economy is growing; in 2003, gross domestic product rose by 7.3 percent. And Alexander Livshits, Russia's representative to the G-8 under Yeltsin, points out that with the world's largest natural gas reserves and the eighth largest oil reserves, Russia is a force to be reckoned with in the energy marketplace.
At the June summit, Putin is also expected to highlight the war against terrorism --- specifically Chechnya. After the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist strikes in the United States, Moscow has made headway in bringing the rest of the world, especially Washington, around to its view that the war in Chechnya is directly tied to the international war against terrorism.
Russia has been fighting the insurgency in the breakaway Chechen republic on its southern borders since 1999 and increasingly, Chechen rebels have been resorting to suicide bomb attacks.
At Sea Island, experts say, Putin will push for greater cooperation from other countries in gathering intelligence on Chechen leaders and halting their financing. Putin, they say, will also seek to remind G-8 leaders about the threat of terrorism and Islamic extremism in Central Asia.
Russia, however, may balk at signing on to President Bush's Proliferation Security Initiative.
U.S. officials proposed the plan --- which aims to increase international efforts to stop illegal air, sea and ground shipments of materials and equipment used to make nuclear, biological or chemical weapons --- last May.
They say Russia has reservations about the legal basis of seizing planes or boats believed to be carrying such materials.
On the economic front, Putin is expected to lobby hard for more progress on Russia's entry into the World Trade Organization. Russia is the only member of the G-8 that is not also a member of the WTO.
Close eye on EU
One of the main stumbling blocks has been the fact that Russia sells its natural gas to European Union countries at a higher price than it does domestically. EU countries decry this as an unfair advantage for Russian companies while Moscow says raising domestic prices would hurt millions of Russian consumers.
For Putin, says Sergei Karaganov, a foreign policy adviser to the Russian president, the Sea Island summit presents a chance to assess whether EU leaders are really serious about Russian membership in the WTO.
"We would be very interested in looking in their eyes and seeing how their statements of support for Russia joining the WTO correspond to the official policies of their minor bureaucrats sitting in Brussels [EU headquarters] and negotiating with Russia, which are becoming less and less constructive," said Karaganov.
One issue that could cast a cloud over Russia at the summit will be questions about Putin's commitment to democratic principles.
The Russian leader has come under heavy international criticism over the Dec. 7 parliamentary elections and the March 14 presidential ballot, which international observers said were skewed in favor of Putin and the United Russia party that he favors.
An ongoing scandal surrounding one of Russia's wealthiest businessmen, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, has also given rise to accusations that Russia under Putin is returning to repressive Soviet-era tactics.
Last October, Khodorkovsky, who used to head Russia's largest oil company, Yukos, was jailed after masked security agents stormed his plane. The case is viewed by many as an attempt to cut the oil magnate down to size after he began financing opposition political groups.
After Khodorkovsky's arrest, Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) called for Russia's ouster from the G-8. McCain, with Sen. Joe Lieberman (D-Conn.), sponsored a resolution in the Senate that would suspend Russia's membership in the G-8 for failing to adhere to democratic principles.
At home, however, the summit is likely to burnish Putin's credentials as the man who has put Moscow back on the global stage. A recent poll conducted by the Moscow-based Levada Center found that 72 percent of respondents credited Putin with strengthening Russia's international position.
In another poll by the same agency, 58 percent said the most important role of the president is to return Russia to the status of a great power.
That's why, says G-8 expert Kirton, Russia is looking forward to hosting the 2006 summit.
"It would be basically a declaration of victory that Russia is back as a generally great power," he said.

Graphic

 
Photo: FEATURED ISSUE: DEMOCRACY
An elderly Russian woman casts her ballot papers at home in Moscow in March. Election officials bring ballot boxes to elderly and disabled people who cannot leave their homes. The turnout in the Russian presidential vote exceeded 50 percent, making the election valid. / SERGEY PONOMAREV / Associated Press; Photo: Russian President Vladimir Putin; Photo: Roman Abramovich; Map: Map of Russia indicates the major cities, rivers and immediate neighbors of Russia; Inset map of the world pinpoints Area of detail.
Second inset compares Russia to the state of Georgia:
Size of Russia: 6.6 million square miles
Size of Georgia: 59,441 square miles
/ DALE E. DODSON / Staff; Graphic: The Russian flag containing three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red.; Graphic: FLAG: Three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red, adopted in 1991. The Russian Empire used the flag from 1699 to 1918. The Communists replaced the banner with their own red and yellow, hammer and sickle flag when they came to power. The old flag was readopted following the end of Communism.
CAPITAL: Moscow
GOVERNMENT: Federation
POPULATION: 144,526,278 (July 2003 est.)
LIFE EXPECTANCY: 67.66 years
RACIAL/ETHNIC GROUPS: Russian 81.5%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 3%, Chuvash 1.2%, Bashkir 0.9%, Belarusian 0.8%, Moldavian 0.7%, other 8.1%
RELIGIOUS GROUPS: Christians 57.4%, Nonreligious 28.2%, Muslims 7.6%, Other 6.8%
PRINCIPAL LANGUAGE: Russian
HISTORY: The 300-year-old Romanov Dynasty was overthrown in 1917. The Communists under Vladimir Lenin seized power soon after and formed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Josef Stalin took over from Lenin in 1928.  The Soviet Union was an ally of the United States in World War II, but the postwar period saw the two superpowers engaged in a Cold War. Mikhail Gorbachev's rise to power in 1985 saw the beginning of the end of the Soviet empire and Communism. By December 1991, the Soviet Union splintered into 15 independent republics.
G-8 REPRESENTATIVE
PRESIDENT: Vladimir Putin
POLITICAL PARTY: United Russia
Vladimir Putin has been president of Russia since Dec. 31, 1999. A former official of the KGB, the Soviet spy agency, Putin and President Bush, himself the son of a former CIA director, have a friendly personal relationship that has survived the strains imposed on it when Putin refused to back the U.S.-led war on Iraq.
ECONOMY: Russia is still struggling to establish a modern market economy. Oil, natural gas, metals and timber account for more than 80 percent of exports. A dilapidated industrial infrastructure, a weak banking system, corruption and widespread lack of trust in institutions add to Russia's problems.
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT PER CAPITA: $9,700 (2002 est.)
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: 7.9% (2002)
CURRENCY: 1 Russian ruble = 3 U.S. cents
TOURISM (2003)
Visitors to United States from Russia: 62,330
CULTURAL FACTS
TOP OF THE MUSIC CHARTS
1. "Not In Love," by Enrique Iglesias (left)
2. "Dudu," by Tarkan
3. "Shut Up," by Black Eyed Peas
FAMOUS RUSSIANS
1. Valentina Tereshkova, first woman in space
2. Boris Spassky, chess grandmaster and former world champion
3. Roman Abramovich (left), the 49th richest person on Forbes list and owner of the Chelsea soccer club in England.
Sources: CIA World Factbook; World Book Encyclopedia; World Christian Encyclopedia
--- Compiled by ALICE WERTHEIM / Staff
ME: One in a series of backgrounders on the eight nations involved in the Group of Eight meeting at Sea Island, Ga., June 8-10, 2004.

Load-Date: May 6, 2004


End of Document