G-8 summit to step up war on terrorism;
Meeting in western Canada, the leaders of eight powerful nations will also focus on the Middle East and aid to Africa.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 26, 2002 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A02; news
Length: 627 words
Byline: Martin Crutsinger Associated Press
Dateline: KANANASKIS, Alberta
Body


Leaders of the world's most powerful countries, intent on demonstrating a united front against terrorism at their annual summit, prepared a joint plan to make air travel and cargo shipments safer.
On the eve of the opening of the economic summit, President Bush met one-on-one with Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien, and launched a campaign for support for his new Middle East plan.
Bush repeated his belief that the Palestinians need new leadership, and stood by Israel's increased incursions into Palestinian areas. "What Palestinians need is leadership - elected leadership," Bush said, standing by Chretien.
But, Bush added, "All parties must work for peace."
He won strong backing from Koizumi, who deemed Bush's initiative, which calls for the replacement of Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat as a condition for creation of a Palestinian state, "proactive."
Canada expressed reservations about the U.S. call for Arafat's ouster.
Chretien, sitting side-by-side with Bush, declined to back his demand, saying, "I don't have a specific view on that."
Bush also talked with the two leaders about other foreign policy and economic issues that will be taken up at the summit.
Terrorism topped the agenda for the Group of Eight summit set to formally begin today. Chretien, this year's host, also hoped to devote significant attention to boosting assistance to Africa, the world's poorest continent, although U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan warned against "unrealistic expectations" and "magic success."
Annan and the presidents of four African nations were invited to join in the discussions on Africa, which were expected to result in approval of an aid plan to boost support by billions of dollars for countries pursuing economic and governmental reforms.
Underscoring the theme of cooperating against terrorism, Bush signed legislation yestersday allowing the United States to participate in two U.N. terrorism initiatives.
The White House said leaders would also issue a joint "action plan" on ways to make air travel and the transport of goods between their countries more secure, while allowing for the free flow of goods.
Separately, the U.S. Custom Service said yesterday that U.S. inspectors will screen U.S.-bound cargo containers before they leave the seaport in Rotterdam, Netherlands, part of an effort to prevent terrorists from smuggling in nuclear and other weapons. The port is one of the busiest in the world.
Customs commissioner Robert Bonner has negotiated similar deals with Singapore and Canada.
Before leaving Washington, Bush said in a statement that he planned to use the G-8 summit to urge all countries to intensify their efforts against terrorism.
"Working together, America and the other freedom-loving nations of the world are moving toward a day when our children can live free from the fear of terrorism and free to achieve their dreams," Bush said.
On his way to Canada, Bush stopped in Arizona to view the devastation of wildfires that have destroyed thousands of acres of forests in the West.
This year's summit was being held under intense security, with thousands of Canadian military forces deployed to protect an eight-mile wide security zone. There was only one paved road leading to the summit site, located in a lush green mountain valley. Camouflage-clad soldiers with automatic weapons were stationed at quarter-mile intervals watching Bush's motorcade arrive.
Anti-globalization demonstrators, who last year engaged in clashes with police in Genoa, Italy, which left one protester dead, were being kept miles away from the meetings.
As an alternative, they planned protest marches for today in Calgary, where reporters covering the summit were staying, and in Ottawa, the Canadian capital.

Load-Date: June 26, 2002


End of Document