G.O.P. Takes Hard Line in Pushing Military Trials for All Terrorism Suspects
The New York Times
October 28, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 1121 words
Byline: By CHARLIE SAVAGE
Body


WASHINGTON -- Congressional Republicans increasingly reject any use of the civilian criminal justice system for handling cases involving Al Qaeda, hardening their stance in a dispute with the Obama administration over whether such suspects should be held and prosecuted exclusively by the military.
Republican senators are pushing to include a provision in a 2012 military authorization bill that would require Qaeda suspects accused of plotting attacks and who are not American citizens to be held in military custody -- even people arrested in the United States. The White House opposes such a blanket rule.
Amid negotiations over the bill, Republicans -- who see their position as a potent election issue in 2012 -- delivered an overwhelming show of unity in support of such ideas late last week, as 45 of the party's 47 senators voted for a similar proposal to ban civilian trials for such ''enemy combatants.'' The endorsement highlighted a drastic shift to the right in the politics of counterterrorism since President Obama succeeded George W. Bush.
Mr. Bush used the criminal justice system for some cases and the military system for others, as has Mr. Obama. In recent years, the once-fierce criticism from liberals about the legitimacy of any use of military detention and tribunals has become muted. Meanwhile, Republicans, who accepted the hybrid approach under Mr. Bush, increasingly reject any use of the civilian system.
''The goal posts are moving,'' said Robert Chesney, a law professor at the University of Texas at Austin. ''In the Bush years, there was little complaint from the right about keeping both civilian and military options -- least of all for persons captured in the U.S. But now the Congressional Republican consensus is moving toward a monolithic military approach, to the point where things Bush did would today be denounced as weak.''
The military custody fight comes as the administration is adopting a more combative tone. The top White House counterterrorism official, John O. Brennan, recently declared that the administration's ''firm position'' was that civilian courts would handle terrorism cases on domestic soil.
In a speech last week, the Pentagon's general counsel, Jeh C. Johnson, reinforced the warning against ''overmilitarizing our approach to Al Qaeda,'' saying that it would be dangerous to permit ''the U.S. military to extend its powerful reach into areas traditionally reserved for civilian law enforcement in this country.''
On the campaign trail, the Republican presidential candidates have barely discussed such issues, so it is unclear whether the nominee will embrace the party's Congressional approach.
Several candidates, including Mitt Romney, have made passing comments in support of prosecuting the conspirators accused in the Sept. 11 attacks in a tribunal and criticizing Miranda warnings given to terrorism suspects at the start of an interrogation. But their views remain largely a mystery on issues like whether to ban any use of the criminal justice system, or if the administration's policy of encouraging interrogators to delay Miranda warnings for lengthy periods is sufficient in terrorism cases.
But Congressional Republicans are closing ranks behind the exclusively military model. In the House, the party's leaders routinely attack the administration for using civilian trials, including its recent decision to charge a Somali man in New York after first detaining him on a Navy ship and interrogating him for two months. The top Republican in the Senate, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, has objected to terrorism charges against two Iraqi men arrested in his state this year.
Last week, Mr. McConnell and several other Republican senators, including the 2008 presidential nominee, John McCain of Arizona, denounced a decision by Senator Harry Reid, the majority leader, to delay the military bill because the White House objected to its custody provision.
It is unclear whether the provision can pass the Democratic-controlled Senate. Although the similar proposal banning civilian trials -- put forward by Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire -- narrowly failed, that measure was more extreme: it had no waiver, while the mandatory military custody bill allows the defense secretary to make exceptions.
Moreover, 11 Democrats who voted against the Ayotte amendment have already voted for the military bill -- including its custody provision -- in the Armed Services Committee, where it was part of a bipartisan deal between its chairman, Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, and Mr. McCain, its ranking Republican.
Still, that panel is more conservative than the overall Senate. This week, 13 Democrats on the Intelligence and Judiciary Committees called the provision ''dangerous'' and urged its removal.
Whatever the outcome, Republicans have clearly moved toward a more aggressive stance on counterterrorism policies than Mr. Bush employed. This year, a moderate Republican senator, Susan Collins of Maine, co-sponsored a bill that would require the attorney general to obtain permission from intelligence officials before providing Miranda warnings to terrorism suspects who are not citizens or charging them in regular court.
And before Mr. Obama's election, both Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain backed closing the detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and Mr. McCain said he would transfer the detainees to a military prison in Kansas. Since 2009, the Republican consensus has swung to the view that the Guantanamo Bay prison should accept new inmates and that it was too dangerous to bring detainees to a domestic prison.
There is less support for banning civilian trials among Bush-era counterterrorism officials, several of whom have argued that maintaining a criminal justice system option is better for national security. ''Some of the rules that they are talking about are not rules that any Republican president would want to live under,'' said Benjamin Wittes, a counterterrorism expert at the Brookings Institution. ''There are still going to be times when the best option is going to be to try a suspect in U.S. federal court. That is not a liberal position -- that is an executive functioning position.''
But the lawmakers' stance may be evolving into a core party value. The vote last week on banning civilian trials suggested that the range of acceptable Republican opinion is narrowing: among the ban's supporters was Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who opposed a similar measure last year.
A spokesman said Mr. Graham voted for the ban as a one-year ''timeout'' on the issue: ''Today, the Obama administration seems intent on criminalizing the war. This is a disturbing trend, and the Ayotte amendment would have slowed that down.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 28, 2011


End of Document