Gadhafi clearly worried about retribution
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 15, 1991, Metro Edition


Copyright 1991 Star Tribune
Section: News; Washington report; Pg. 3A
Length: 859 words
Byline: William Beecher; Staff Writer
Body


A bizarre tableau was staged last week at the Libyan supreme court in Tripoli. Two Libyan security agents accused by the United States and Britain of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland in 1988 were ushered before Western reporters.  Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifya Fhimah insisted that they were "not guilty" and then were whisked away. The whole playlet took about two minutes.
 Plainly, Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi is worried. He vividly remembers U.S. bombers swinging over his country in 1986 after it allegedly planted a bomb in a German disco frequented by U.S. servicemen. One of the targets for retaliation was a tent in which Col. Gadhafi sometimes slept.
In the disco bombing, one American lost his life; in the Pan Am tragedy, 270 lives were lost. So what might the United States be planning in the way of retribution this time?
 Gadhafi has reason to sweat. He not only has the United States and Britain on his case, but France as well, for the 1989 bombing of a UTA airliner over Niger in which 171 died. France seeks the extradition of four Libyan operatives in that case.
 Gadhafi says he has arrested the two Pan Am suspects and is willing to conduct a swift trial in Libya, if Western evidence is presented. He presumably is prepared to mete out equally fast justice in the case of the men France seeks. Not surprisingly, none of the governments involved would consider leaving justice in his hands.
 But even if Gadhafi unexpectedly turns over the six accused operatives, that would not settle the score. The United States, Britain and France agree that the terrorist missions could not have been carried out without approval at the top of Libya's police state. And that means Gadhafi personally.
 To conduct the 1986 raid, U.S. F-111s flew nonstop from bases in Britain, with aerial refueling en route, after France and Spain refused landing rights. Before the raid, the planes practiced bombing runs on a Scottish island. Earlier this month, F-111s were at it again, aiming ordnance at the same range. The London Daily Telegraph quoted a lighthouse keeper as saying: "They have been practicing bombing up here all week. The weather has been foul, with occasional gale force winds. But not even that has stopped the planes."
 However, while the Bush administration says it has ruled out nothing, military retaliation is an option of last resort.
 Policymakers concede the 1986 raid accomplished little. It did not convince Gadhafi to shun terrorism, only to try to better mask Libyan involvement. And even though the United States imposed economic sanctions, including a ban on Libyan oil, few countries followed suit.
 The strategy now is different. This time, instead of Uncle Sam strapping on his six-guns and going it alone, an effort is underway to put together a package of international sanctions to punish Libya significantly and to deter Gadhafi and others from future acts of terrorism.
 As one senior official put it: "The international community must get together and say: 'This is beyond the pale. Any state that commits such an atrocity must suffer the consequences.' "
 A global oil embargo would devastate the Libyan economy. But at a time of widespread economic fragility, when Soviet oil production is slumping, when Kuwait isn't fully back on stream and when Iraq is foreclosed from exports unless it accepts U.N. conditions, would the oil weapon hurt Western allies such as Italy, Spain, Greece and Germany too severely? Planners say if an oil sanction is to be applied, it might make sense to wait until spring, when demand falls off.
 Another option would bar the Libyan Arab Airline from landing rights abroad and perhaps impose a total air quarantine on the country. The Libyan airline is said to be the principal means by which Gadhafi moves weapons and agents around the world. And Libya is very dependent on air cargo for urgently needed spare parts for the oil industry.
 Still another measure would ban sales of high-tech equipment, including such spare parts. Another would prohibit the delivery of both arms and spares for the largely Soviet-equipped forces of Libya. Expulsion of suspected Libyan intelligence operatives or breaking diplomatic relations are also being considered.
 A freeze on financial assets aboard is another obvious possibility, so obvious that Libya is busily shifting some assets home. But a nation that engages daily in the global oil market requires considerable liquidity abroad.
 Among potential military targets would be the chemical warfare factory at Rabta, various terrorist training camps and possibly oil production, refining and storage facilities.
 "Looking back, Gadhafi felt he could have it both ways," one official said. "He made speeches denouncing international terrorism and closed one or two terrorist training camps. As for (terrorist mastermind) Abu Nidal, he said he's in Libya working as a doctor for the Red Crescent organization. But he can't pretend these were unauthorized operations; he can't evade responsibility."
 Said another: "If sanctions don't work, we reserve the right to use military measures, but we prefer sanctions instead."

Load-Date: December 17, 1991


End of Document