Gadhafi takes stand against terrorist acts
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 3, 1999, Friday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 410 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


TRIPOLI, Libya -- Libya's latest denunciation of terrorism has drawn a guarded response from the United States, which said it is not yet ready to fully welcome the Arab nation back into the international community.
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's pledge against terrorism came Thursday in a joint statement with visiting Italian Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema. D'Alema and Gadhafi said their governments "underlined the necessity of denying sustenance and protection to those responsible for terrorist acts."
In Washington, State Department spokesman James P. Rubin was cautious about the statement. He said U.S. allies in contact with Libyan leaders should urge them to follow through on promises not to engage in terrorism.
"We have acknowledged that Libya has made statements indicating their intent to change their behavior, but we obviously want to monitor that very carefully," Rubin said.
He said the United States is not yet ready to support a lifting of sanctions against Libya. Unilateral U.S. measures against Libya include a ban on Americans using their passports to travel to Libya and a prohibition on the spending of U.S. dollars by Americans in that country.
Italy, which ruled Libya from 1911 to 1941 and is its largest trading partner, has long been the Western country with the closest ties there. It is now positioning itself as the nation's sponsor as Gadhafi works to end years of international isolation.
D'Alema's two-day trip, which ended Thursday, was the first to Libya by a Western leader since April, when Gadhafi handed over two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over Lockerbie, Scotland. The bombing killed 270 people, most of them Americans and Britons.
After the handover, the United Nations suspended economic sanctions imposed to force Libya to surrender the suspects. And Britain re-established normal relations this year after Libya accepted responsibility and paid compensation for the 1984 death of a London policewoman shot by a gunman firing from inside the Libyan Embassy.
But Washington has not had normal relations with Tripoli in more than two decades. The U.S. administration has said there can be no improvement until Libya ends and renounces all forms of terrorism and pays compensation to families of the Pan Am victims.
Gadhafi said the United States should make the next move to improve ties.
Libya's relationship with Britain "is no longer a problem," he said Thursday. "With America, it depends on America.

Load-Date: December 3, 1999


End of Document