Gaining perspective on domestic terrorism
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
November 19, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; LETTERS
Length: 550 words
Body


To the Editor:
I couldn't agree more when the writer ("Women's clinics have been targets"Intell, Oct. 30) urges that we "clean up our own house by holding all those who practice terrorism, from the extreme anti-abortion far right to the militant environmental movement of the far left, equally responsible for their actions."
Nevertheless, I do believe there is "the other side of the story" that needs to be expressed since the writer's letter focused on terrorist acts against "women's clinics" across the country.
First, "domestic terrorism" practiced by any group in the United States for whatever reason, even if the activity is a hoax, should be punished to the full extent of the law. And this would include terrorism against what the writer refers to as "women's clinics" in which, it is relevant to note, abortions are performed. Thus, I agree with the writer's perspective that terrorism directed at these clinics (or any person or group) cannot be justified under any circumstances.
#CASTANO.NOV78#
Second, since the writer cites "women's clinics" as one of the targets of terrorism, I believe it is relevant to mention another type of terrorism carried out by the clinics themselves. It takes the form of legal violence against the unborn. According to the Alan Guttmacher Institute, an abortion sector organization, abortions in the Unite States are performed at the rate of 1.37 million abortions each year (3,700 per day). The worldwide figure, according to them, is 46 million abortions each year (126,000 per day). I mention this not to trivialize the tragic terrorist acts against our nations since Sept. 11 nor to minimize the evil of terrorist activity against "women's clinics" but rather to highlight the fact that human life at whatever stage is a precious gift from God that needs to be protected.
Third, the fact that the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1973 that women, in consultation with their physicians, have a right protected by the Constitution to have abortions before viability (i.e., the point at which the fetus no longer must depend on its mother) doesn't make the law right or just. When life begins is not determined by a court of law, but by God alone. Most people (i.e., pregnant women, physicians and even society in general) know when human life begins and therefore know that abortion kills, but many are caught up in a popular culture, supported by the media, that for years has been telling them otherwise, and they become indifferent at best while others are in denial or ignore the truth entirely. In the meantime the terror of abortion continues.
Finally, as we think about the threat of terrorism in the coming weeks, months or even years, and hope that our government will be successful in finding and bringing the terrorists to justice, let's not forget about the violence of abortion against the unborn that takes the lives of so many every single day. If we consider if our mothers had chosen abortion for us, it might help us better understand the seamless connection between our lives today as "viable" persons and our lives during those nine months when we ourselves were among the pre-born whose lives began at conception.  So, the defenseless pre-born who are terrorized and destroyed daily make up "the other side of the story."
Gregory L. Castano
Lancaster

Load-Date: November 30, 2001


End of Document