Games trumped terrorism, Rocky tells mayors group
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 18, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 617 words
Byline: By Lee DavidsonDeseret News Washington correspondent
Body


WASHINGTON -- Cities worldwide should fight terrorism by continuing to host large events such as the Olympics, Salt Lake Mayor Rocky Anderson told international mayors Wednesday.
He said that as each hosts sports championships, conventions and festivals, they "send the message that terrorists will never win out over the people of the freedom-loving world." Anderson added, "We will never let terrorism defeat us. We're not going to shy away from living our lives and pursuing what's best in our communities and throughout the world."
It came as Anderson addressed a gathering of the International Association of Mayors discussing terrorism-related issues. It attracted not only mayors from America, but from Greece, Ghana, Germany, Italy, Mexico and Ecuador.
In a Wednesday luncheon, Anderson talked about success of the 2002 Olympics, and Athens, Greece Mayor Dimitris Avramopoulos talked about preparations for the 2004 Summer Games there. Both said all cities may take lessons from their experiences.
"It's very clear that when we can put on events that have high exposure . . . safely and securely, it speaks so loudly to people throughout the world," Anderson said.
He said a main reason Salt Lake City achieved a safe Olympics was securing "unprecedented" cooperation among city, local, state and federal officials to coordinate efforts and thousands of police, soldiers and volunteers helping with security.
Anderson said monumental work was needed by all because Salt Lake City faced threats of all sizes and shapes from an increasingly violent world.
"They included a single bomber, like in Atlanta (at the 1996 Olympics) and the Seattle-type riots" caused by anarchists protesting against the World Bank. He said officials worried of possible arson from animal-rights groups that had burned ski resorts elsewhere.
And, of course, they faced the possibility of air attack or weapons of mass destruction from groups like al-Qaida.
"The Olympics stand for international peace and unity. And they stand for goodwill among nations. All of these are values that are despised by bin Laden and al-Qaida. For all of these reasons, the 2002 Olympic Games faced very significant threats," he said.
"By the results we saw, everything that had to be done was accomplished," Anderson said. "And as a result, we were able to put on an amazing 18 days of these Games in a very troubled and threatening time without a significant incident -- without so much as a broken nose on the streets.
"In fact, somebody said there were more injuries in the hockey games from flying pucks than we saw on the streets of Salt Lake City," he said.
Anderson added that Salt Lake City's experience shows "that with the resources and the commitment and the will of the people, we can continue to put on events like this."
He said that amounted to winning a major battle in the war on terrorism.
"We must continue to commit to hold these sorts of events," he said. "We will never be intimidated, because to be intimidated is to allow terrorism to prevail. We as unified nations can never do that."
Anderson also urged steps including inspecting all checked baggage on airplanes and said Salt Lake City International is the only U.S. airport where that now happens. He also suggested showing enough strength to scare away violence, but not so much that it makes residents feel they are living in an armed siege.
Avramopoulos said Athens and Greece still suffer some "scarce" terrorism by local groups, but he vowed to eliminate it "well in advance of the 2004 Games." He also called for international cooperation to fight terrorism. "It is an international threat, and it requires international cooperation," he said.
E-mail: lee@desnews.com  

Load-Date: April 18, 2002


End of Document