GANDHI OFFERS BILL TO RAISE PENALTIES FOR TERRORISM
The New York Times
May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 652 words
Byline: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: NEW DELHI, May 18
Body


Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government introduced a sweeping measure in Parliament today that would increase punishment for those convicted of carrying out bombings, shootings and other terrorist activities.
The authorities, meanwhile, announced that two more Sikhs were arrested this morning in connection with the bombings that killed more than 80 people in northern India last weekend. A total of 11 people have been held on charges of taking part in the bombings, and one of those held has died in prison.
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government introduces sweeping measure in Parliament that would increase punishment for those convicted of carrying out terrorist acts; authorities announce arrest of two more Sikhs in connection with recent bombings that killed more than 80 people in northern India; police also arrest prominent lawyer, Kartar Singh Narang, after uncovering what they say is evidence that he might also be connected with bombings; photo (M)
In addition, the police arrested a prominent lawyer, Kartar Singh Narang, after uncovering what they said was evidence that he might also be connected with the bombings.
More than 1,600 people have been reported arrested in northern India under a preventive detention law since the bombings began eight days ago.
Newspapers here are suggesting that Indian investigators are making progress in their efforts to find those responsible for the incidents, but that several groups appear to have carried out the bombings.
The Press Trust of India, a news agency, reported tonight that investigators believed that at least 30 people had been involved in carrying out the bombings in New Delhi, where 45 people were killed.
 
More Bombs Explode in Capital
In other developments, more small bombs have exploded in New Delhi and elsewhere, wounding several people. An explosive device hidden inside a metal tobacco container exploded in Bombay, wounding a young man who found it in a garbage bin.
On Friday, a bomb exploded on the balcony of a New Delhi apartment house, wounding two children. The police said six other bombs hidden in what looked like transistor radios had been found near a railroad track in an industrial area. The police said the devices were defused.
In Parliament today, some members of the opposition indicated they would oppose parts of the Government's new antiterrorism legislation as too broad in its definition of terrorism and disruptive activities.
The legislation would considerably expand police power and increase the authority of state governments to open mail, tap telephones and engage in other activities to investigate terrorism. At present such powers are given to police authorities only in such troubled areas as the Punjab and Assam.
 
Increased Prison Terms
The measure was introduced a day after Parliament amended various arms statutes and increased the prison terms for those disturbing the peace in the Punjab and Chandigarh, where much of the Sikh agitation has been taking place.
The bill introduced today would provide a maximum punishment of life imprisonment for terrorism or disruptive actions and the death penalty for acts resulting in the death of the victims. It would also set up special courts to handle terrorist cases, a step likely to be challenged. One of the demands by Sikhs is the abolition of special courts that already exist in the Punjab.
After the bombings, Mr. Gandhi promised to seek stronger laws to combat terrorism, but he also appealed to Hindus and others not to retaliate against Sikhs.
Leading Sikhs are demanding greater autonomy in the Punjab, the state on the Pakistani border in which they predominate. The Sikh radicals who are believed to be responsible for the bombings favor an independent state in the Punjab. Political analysts say the radicals hope the bombings will divide Hindus and Sikhs, causing both to feel that an independent state would be the only solution to the strife.

Graphic

 
Photo of Harminder Singh after his arrest in New Delhi (Reuters)


End of Document