GAO urges ICE to shift focus to terrorism
Federal Times
April 3, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 14
Length: 505 words
Byline: By STEPHEN LOSEY
Body


Three years after its creation, Immigration and Customs Enforcement's investigators are only recently giving more focus to stopping terrorism, the Government Accountability Office said March 28.
ICE's investigations office is still mostly concerned with stopping drugs, human smuggling, illegal immigration and commercial fraud, said Richard Stana, GAO's Homeland Security and Justice director. ICE told GAO that its investigators spend 10 to 15 percent of their hours directly investigating national security matters.
Stana said GAO found no evidence that ICE is ignoring national security leads, but said the agency should turn its attention to crimes that have the broadest consequences to make sure it does not miss anything.
Such a risk management approach would also help ICE get the most out of its resources, Stana said. He made his comments before a hearing of the House Government Reform subcommittee on national security, emerging threats and international relations.
Stana said ICE's workplace enforcement of immigration laws is an example of how it is focusing on national security. ICE says it targets for arrest illegal aliens working at critical infrastructure sites and other sensitive locations. For example, ICE announced Feb. 10 that it arrested nine illegal aliens working at the Dugway Proving Ground, a military testing facility in Utah.
But more needs to be done, Stana said. ICE needs to set performance goals for its investigators to measure how their cases help the agency accomplish its mission of enforcing immigration and customs laws, he said.
And ICE should develop a reliable way to track investigations related to national security, so it can make sure terrorists and other criminals are not exploiting vulnerabilities in the nation's customs and immigration processes, Stana said.
In a response to GAO's concerns, the Homeland Security Department said the outcome-based performance goals Stana described may not be a good idea for law enforcement. Homeland Security said measuring results of investigations is difficult and performance can be gauged in other ways.
Robert Schoch, deputy assistant director for the national security division of ICE's investigations office, said his agency is focused on protecting the United States against terrorist attack and other dangers.
"ICE seeks to identify and close vulnerabilities in our immigration and customs systems before the vulnerabilities manifest into, or support, lethal national security threats," Schoch said.
To show how ICE helps to guard national security, Schoch pointed to the discovery in January of a tunnel running from Tijuana, Mexico, to Otay Mesa, Calif., believed to be used for smuggling drugs, people and weapons.
He said ICE dismantled a human smuggling organization in September 2004 that specialized in moving Iraqis, Jordanians and Syrians. ICE also conducted a sting operation beginning in June 2004 that nabbed two Americans who allegedly agreed to provide false documents to informants posing as members of terrorist group Abu Sayyaf.

Load-Date: April 12, 2006


End of Document