Garbs, Spc. Ryan C.age 20
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 24, 2007 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING
Length: 456 words
Body


Garbs, Spc. Ryan C.age 20, of Edwardsville, IL, was mortally injured in a helicopter crash in Afghanistan while executing operations in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. He was assigned to Company B., 3rd Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment at Fort Benning, GA. 
He was born Oct. 17, 1986 in Maryville, the son of Douglas and Jill Anne Burkard Garbs, who survive in Edwardsville. He is also survived by his sister, Melanie Neely and husband, Staff Sgt. Matthew Neely, U.S.A.F. of Fairfield, California; paternal grandfather, Lawrence Garbs of Edwardsville; his paternal grandmother, Geneva ''Jean'' Garbs, also of Edwardsville; and his maternal grandmother, Vera M. Burkard of Springfield, IL. He was preceded in death by his maternal grandfather, A.A. ''Bill'' Burkard. He was a member of Glen Carbon New Bethel United Methodist Church. After graduating from Edwardsville High School in 2005, Spc. Garbs entered the U.S. Army. He completed basic training and advanced individual training in the military occupational specialty of Infantryman at Fort Benning, GA. He continued his military training and graduated from the U.S. Army Airborne School in February, 2006. Following graduation from the Ranger Indoctrination Program, he was assigned to 1st Platoon, B Company, 3rd Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment in March, 2006. Spc. Garbs was a two-time veteran of the Global War on Terrorism, deployed in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Assigned to 3rd Bn., he served as a grenadier and rifleman. His awards and decorations include the Army Service Ribbon, the National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Afghanistan Campaign Medal, the Iraqi Campaign Medal, the Combat Infantryman's Badge and the Parachutist Badge. He was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star, Meritorious Service Medal and Good Conduct Medal, and was promoted from Private 1st Class to Specialist. As a Ranger, Spc. Garbs distinguished himself as a member of the Army's premier light infantry unit, traveled to all corners of the world in support of the Global War on Terrorism and fought valiantly to ''uphold the prestige, honor and high 'espirit de corp' of the Ranger Regiment''.Services:Visitation will be from 3 p.m. to 8 p.m. Mon., Feb. 26, 2007 at WEBER & RODNEY Funeral Home. Services will be at 10 a.m. Tues., Feb. 27, 2007 at the Morris University Center Meridian Ballroom at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Burial with full military honors will be at Jefferson Barracks National Cemetery in St. Louis. Memorials may be given to Special Operations Warrior Foundation or to the Metro East Humane Society. An online guest register can be signed at weberfunerahome.com

Load-Date: February 24, 2007


End of Document