Garretson to Run for Brooke County Sheriff
The Brooke County Review (Wellsburg, West Virginia)
March 16, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 The Brooke County Review


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 298 words
Byline: The Brooke County Review staff
Body


Roger Garretson of Wellsbrg is a candidate for Sheriff in the May 8 primary.
Garretson lists as his qualificatiions a Masters Degree in Safely, Bachelor of Science Criminal Justice, 20 Years Experienced Investigator, 13 Years Military law Enforcement Experience, Fugitive Recovery Agent. Chemical/Biological Warfare Training, Anti-Terrorism Trainer. Certified Fire Arms Instructor.
Served during the Libya Crisis and Operation Desert Storm;on the Special Operations Team for threats against the United States Nuclear Weapons; and Instructor of Criminal Justice at West Liberty
If elected he said he will: 1. seek and find funds to keep school resource officers in schools full time.
2. designate a full time deputy to the multi-jurisdictional drug task force.
3. designate a full time deputy to the detective division to aggressively pursue criminals who commit crimes against the elderly, children, homes, and businesses.
4. personally and actively pursue the drug dealers who are threatening our children's lives with illegal drugs and prescriptions.
5. implement training and provide the tools to the department to protect our children and elderly from Internet crimes.
6. work closely to identify local sex offenders. and coordinate and assist the State Police in their efforts to maintain checks on these individuals.
And 7. iimplement a Street Crimes Task Force, working with local city police departments and citizens, identifying high crime rate areas.
AS a hunter and NRA Instructor, he advocates 2nd amendment rights and promises if elected to have high expectations for himself and members of the Sheriffs Office. He promises to be accessible and accountable to the citizens of Brooke County with an "open door" policy that puts no restrictions on who wishes to discuss issues or concerns.

Load-Date: April 27, 2013


End of Document