Gaviria Targets Drug Terrorists
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 30, 1990, Wednesday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 3; Colombia's President-Elect
Length: 838 words
Byline: Stan Yarbro; Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
Body


A HIGH abstention rate in Sunday's election diminished a popular mandate for Colombia's new president-elect, Cesar Gaviria. But analysts here say that Mr. Gaviria can still lead effectively if he heeds Colombians' cries for political change.
Gaviria's ability to establish his authority is crucial if the country is to win its fight against cocaine terrorists. Authorities blame the Medellin cartel for scores of bombings that have killed 268 people in the last nine months.
With 85 percent of the precincts reporting, Gaviria had won 47 percent of the vote. His closest rival, Alvaro Gomez of the National Salvation Movement, had captured 24 percent.
The 41.5 percent voter turnout was the lowest in recent presidential elections.
Hernando Gomez, director of a liberal think tank in Bogota, says that both drug traffickers' terrorism and Gaviria's near-certain victory accounted for the high abstention rate. ''There was fear and there was a lack of competition,'' Mr. Gomez says. ''Gaviria is going to have to deal with the fact that fewer than 20 percent of eligible voters supported him,'' says Jorge Melo, a political scientist at Bogota's National University.
''The election results may still allow Gaviria to lead effectively,'' Mr. Melo says. ''But he must make significant overtures to the public.''
Political analysts said before the election that a high abstention rate combined with a strong showing by the rightist Gomez could force the centrist Gaviria to depend on his rival in a governing alliance.
Gaviria, they said, would have a difficult time implementing his planned reform of both the judicial system, decimated by traffickers' violence, and the Congress, partly corrupted by the drug bosses' bribes. The Liberal candidate's commitment to a frontal assault on drug terrorists apparently caused some party members tired of the fight to vote for Gomez, who promised negotiations with traffickers.
But Gaviria's slimmer-than-predicted margin of victory will probably not endanger his reform program, because Colombians expressed their yearning for change in other ways.
A more radical reformist captured more votes from Gaviria than did Gomez.
Antonio Navarro of the leftist M19 had about 12 percent of the vote, it was announced yesterday. He was vying for third place with the Conservative Party candidate, Rodrigo Lloreda.
Mr. Navarro's showing was surprising considering that the M19 is a former leftist guerrilla group that laid down its arms only two months ago.
The M19's commander and first presidential candidate, Carlos Pizarro, was one of three contenders assassinated during the campaign. The two others were Sen. Luis Carlos Galan, replaced by Gaviria, and Bernardo Jaramillo of the Patriotic Union Party.
Navarro's success was evidence of voters' desire for an end to a political monopoly by the Colombian Liberal and Conservative Parties, political analysts here say.
Also helping Gaviria avoid an alliance with the right are Sunday's results of a plebiscite on constitutional reform. Colombians voted nearly 10 to 1 to include a national representation of smaller parties in Congress.
Gaviria's election by whatever margin will likely bring new political power to the fight against drug traffickers' terrorism.
Gaviria has said his administration will increase support for security forces to put an end to the terrorism within months.
But during the campaign the candidate was careful to distinguish between the cartel's violence and its cocaine business. He said repeatedly that while the fight against drug terrorism was one the country could manage, the battle against drug trafficking was another matter.
''We will crush narco-terrorism,'' he said in his victory speech, ''but drug trafficking is a multilateral problem. Industrial countries are doing little to confront … drug consumption. If they do not act it will be more and more difficult for the Colombian people to confront the problem.''
Some of Gaviria's closest advisers say his words are meant to send a strong message to the United States and other cocaine-consuming countries.
''Gaviria is saying that he will have the ability to fight cocaine trafficking only if he has public support,'' says Luis Jaramillo, who directed Gaviria's campaign.
''Support for the antidrug policy has already dropped because Colombians feel that consuming countries are doing little to help. If help is not forthcoming, the so-called Colombian war against trafficking may end,'' Jaramillo adds.
Political analysts here say that Gaviria's most urgent mission is to capture Pablo Escobar, the Medellin cartel leader accused of perpetrating many terrorist attacks in recent months.
''Violence may not end with Mr. Escobar's capture or death; but indiscriminate terrorist attacks against the population will,'' a Western diplomat says.
Tracking Escobar has proven no easy task for hundreds of special antiterrorist police.
Some officials have blamed the lack of results on poor coordination between security forces, especially between the secret police and the Colombian Army.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: FORMER OFFICES OF EL SPECTADOR NEWSPAPER: Authorities say such drug-related bombings have killed hundreds of people., SYGMA


End of Document