Gaza's long war against Israel
Daily News (New York)
August 10, 2018 Friday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; CS; Pg. 22
Length: 587 words
Byline: Judith Bergman
Body


Since Wednesday night, Hamas has launched more than 150 rockets at Israel from the Gaza strip, killing one person and injuring 19 others. In response, the IDF targeted over 150 terrorist targets.
Hamas exclusively aims to kill and maim civilians in Israel, and Hamas rockets have repeatedly landed in or near kindergartens in southern Israeli border communities. Targeting civilians indiscriminately is a war crime, but no one in the international community is rushing to condemn Hamas for it.
The irony is that this month marks 13 years since Israel unilaterally withdrew from the Gaza Strip. Israel pulled out its entire military, along with the 8,500 Israeli civilians who had built communities there.
The withdrawal demonstrated Israel's willingness to make significant land concessions for peace and was meant to make Israeli citizens safer. Instead, rocket attacks on Israeli civilians increased manifold and new forms of terrorism proliferated - terror tunnels and environmental terrorism. Since April, Hamas terrorists have burned 8,000 acres of land and wildlife, even using falcons as incendiary devices.
Despite the disengagement from Gaza, the international community continues to speak of "occupation" and "blockade."
There is no occupation, as Hamas controls the Gaza Strip. The only "blockade" is the naval one, which the UN concluded is legal, as it prevents weapons from entering Gaza by sea. All goods are allowed to enter Gaza from Israel. Last month, for example, Israel facilitated the passing of 5,255 tons of gas, over 16 million liters of diesel and benzene, and 4,917 trucks with goods.
In the same period, 12,072 Gazans crossed into Israel, many of them for medical treatment in Israeli hospitals, and 129,224 tons of merchandise were exported from Gaza. The Rafah border crossing between Gaza and Egypt, on the other hand, has been closed most of the time since 2013.
After Israel left in 2005, Hamas took over. In its election platform, it promised to continue the "resistance" (launching rockets and suicide bombings) and vowed not to accept Israel's right to exist. Since then, Hamas has turned Gaza into a jihadist base.
In 2016, a news report showed that Hamas spends $100 million per year on its terrorist infrastructure, including $40 million on terror tunnels alone (the equivalent of four months of electricity use in the Strip).
Naturally, these are inconvenient facts, which muddle the accepted narrative, according to which everything is Israel's fault.
Nor does the fact that Iran is behind Hamas get much attention. Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar recently said that his people would "tear out the hearts" of Israelis and "erase" the border with Israel. He also revealed that Iran is an influencing factor in Gaza and in Hamas' border conflict with Israel when he admitted in a May interview that Iran funnels "a lot of money, equipment and expertise" to Hamas and other Gaza-based terrorist organizations.
As Israel continues to respond militarily to the barrage of rockets against its civilians, the front pages of international media outlets are bound to fill up with headlines such as this recent one from the BBC: "Gaza air strikes 'kill woman and child' after rockets hit Israel" which confuse the effect with the cause. When the social justice activists and other Hamas sympathizers gather, as they undoubtedly will, under the banner of "Free Gaza," the only coherent answer to their exhortation will be "from Hamas."
Bergman is a fellow with the news and public policy group Haym Salomon Center.

Load-Date: August 11, 2018


End of Document