GBI agent answers terrorism questions
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 23, 2001 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Gwinnett;
Length: 329 words
Byline: BETH WARREN
Body


Students at Gainesville College peppered a GBI agent with questions Monday about how terrorism affects Georgia.
Students, members of the Democrats/Republicans Club, wanted to know whether residents' concerns over terrorism have risen to the level of panic and how closely the Georgia Bureau of Investigation is working with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention during the anthrax outbreak.
They also wanted to know what it meant to be on "high alert."
AJC
Special Agent Jeff Branyon answered the call. He is stationed in Gainesville, but covers 13 northeast counties. Club members had asked if a GBI official could talk about terrorism at one of their weekly meetings, said club sponsor Douglas Young, associate professor of political science.
Branyon told students who asked about the CDC that he felt there were more vulnerable locations in metro Atlanta. He declined to name the locations.  He said agents have been inundated with phone calls from residents concerned about possible exposure to anthrax.
"I don't know if I'd call it panic, but obviously people are concerned," Branyon told the attentive crowd of about 35 students and teachers.
Branyon also said remaining on "high alert" status means keeping your gas tank full and having enough clothes in the car to last three days. But agents have to be ready to roll all the time, he added.
In other efforts to combat terrorism, Branyon said, GBI special agents have been sent to airports across the state to photograph crop-dusting aircraft and log tail identification numbers.
Some students said the fear of another terrorist attack was waning.
"I feel like it has hit me more in the heart than other students in general," said Jessica Chesbro, a sophomore whose family lives in New York. "When it first happened, everyone was upset, but now that time has gone on, they're starting to move on."
Talk of terrorism is common on campus, "but we're not dwelling on it," freshman and club member Michael Ashley said.

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document