GENERAL IS SLAIN IN MADRID; BASQUE TERRORISTS SUSPECTED
The New York Times
January 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 971 words
Byline: By JOHN DARNTON
Dateline: MADRID, Jan. 29
Body


Two gunmen thought to be Basque terrorists shot and killed a high-ranking military officer on his way home from church here this afternoon.
 The killing, which was quickly and soundly condemned by Government leaders and by the ruling Socialists and other political parties, thrust terrorism to the forefront of national concern once again.
It was widely regarded here as an attempt by the Basque separatist organization E.T.A. to demonstrate that, despite a series of setbacks in recent weeks, it is still able to mount attacks intended to unbalance the Government. The group has carried out scores of similar murders in its campaign for independence for Spain's four northern provinces.
Two gunmen thought to be Basque terrorists shoot and kill high-ranking military officer, Lieut Gen Guillermo Quintana Lacaci in front of his home in Madrid; police say bullet shells recovered from scene ewere of type customarily used by assassins of Basque separatist organization ETA (M)Slain in Front of Home
The victim, Lieut. Gen. Guillermo Quintana Lacaci, who was 67 years old and semiretired, was gunned down on the sidewalk in front of his home on Romero Robledo Street in a fashionable residential district of the capital shortly before 1 P.M.
His wife, Elena Ramos, 50, was slightly wounded in the attack, receiving a bullet wound in the leg. A retired colonel, Francisco Gil Pachon, 64, was grazed by two shots.
General Quintana, a veteran of the Franco forces in the 1936-39 civil war and of the Blue Division that fought alongside Nazi German forces against the Soviet Union in World War II, was a conservative military man but also a defender of the post-Franco Constitution. From 1979 until 1982 he held a key position as commander of the Madrid military region. He was instrumental in persuading officers in the strategically situated command to obey King Juan Carlos and refrain from joining an attempted coup in February 1981.
General Quintana was the sixth army general assassinated since 1978 and the first since the Socialists took office in December 1982.
 
Getaway Car Is Found
The assailants fled in a white Renault driven by an accomplice and then transferred to another car. The Renault, bearing Madrid license plates, was found by the police in a nearby street.
Although no group had taken responsibility for the assassination by tonight, the police and officials said the attack had the markings of an E.T.A. operation.
In particular, police sources said that 13 bullet shells recovered in front of the general's house, a building for military officers, were of a type customarily used by E.T.A. assassins. General Quintana was shot three times in the head and died instantly.
Among the blows that have set back the Basque terrorist organization recently was a decision by the French Government to remove E.T.A. activists from southern France. According to the Spanish Government, E.T.A. leaders and militants have used bases in southern France for years to plan and execute assassinations, kidnappings and extortion across the border.
 
French Police in Crackdown
In mid-January, several weeks after the problem was discussed at a meeting between Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez and President Francois Mitterrand, the French police began rounding up E.T.A. activists. So far at least seven have been moved to northern France and six have been expelled from France to Guadeloupe in the Caribbean and then to Panama.
After the French crackdown, Spanish authorities began an antiterrorist sweep of their own in the northern region. Five days ago, 14 people, including a policeman from the town of Tolosa, were arrested on charges of having links with E.T.A., whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom,
At the same time, Basque refugees in southern France and suspected E.T.A. members in Spain were frightened by the actions of a shadowy organization called G.A.L. The group has vowed to retaliate in kind for every E.T.A. killing and is believed responsible for the disappearance of several E.T.A. members,
The Socialist Government's tough stand on Basque terrorism is codified in new legislation that will permit detention without trial for up to two and a half years, increase penalties for acts of terrorism and expand police powers in searching homes, making arrests without warrants and tapping telephones.
But it is accompanied by the stepped- up application of a year-and-a-half-old program that allows E.T.A. members abroad who renounce violence to return to Spain and pay token fines if they are not wanted for acts that shed blood. A group of four such people returned only last week.
 
Dramatic Exploit Expected
It is widely believed here that the pressures closing in on E.T.A. from all sides have serverely, though perhaps not indefinitely, hampered its operations. Many expected it to engage in some dramatic exploit to show that it is still a force to contend with. Ten days ago, the police tightened security in Madrid after reports that an E.T.A. hit squad was in the capital.
It is questionable whether the killing of General Quintana will be seen as dramatic enough. Although a high- ranking officer, he passed into semiretirement in April 1982. He was an easy target since he was not accompanied by bodyguards and often followed the same routine, attending mass at the Sacred Heart Church near his home at the same time every Sunday.
By contrast, the previous army general killed by E.T.A., Gen. Victor Lago Roman, gunned down inside a car on Nov. 4, 1982, was still in a command position, heading the elite Brunete First Armored Division outside of Madrid.
After the slaying today, the police mounted roadblocks around Madrid and tightened security at Barajas airport. King Juan Carlos cut short a visit to Barcelona and Queen Sofia visited the general's widow in Generalisimo Hospital.

Graphic

 
photo of Lieut. Gen. Guillermo Lacaci (page A1)


End of Document