General Calls War on Terrorism Pivotal Moment in U.S. History 
 The New York Times
October 23, 2003 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 275 words
Byline:  By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.
Body


In a speech alternately whimsical and defiant, the commander of United States forces in Afghanistan and Iraq, Tommy R. Franks, told New York's political elite last night that the war on terrorism represented a pivotal moment in the country's history that could determine the course of the republic for the next 200 years.
     Mr. 
Franks, a retired general, also urged New Yorkers to look at the 2004 presidential race through the prism of the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, an event that he said revealed the true depth of American resolve, which he termed "superpower on steroids." 
 "Someone asked me if you believe the prize we seek is worth the price we have to pay," General Franks told about 1,100 people gathered for an annual Catholic charity dinner in Manhattan. "I said, 'You bet.' The prize we seek is another 200-plus years of freedom in this country."
General Franks spoke at the 58th Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner, an annual political event, at the Waldorf-Astoria hotel. This year, the event had a distinctly patriotic flavor, as the organizers decided to hang a flag as big as a house behind the podium and the three-tiered dais, a study in white tablecloths and roses, where some of the most powerful and influential politicians in the state sat.
The general, who retired after leading the campaign in which the forces under his command took Iraq with minimal casualties, said "in the next 3, 4, 5, years, we are going to be crafting the next 200 years of American history." He also spoke of the need for American forces to continue their presence in Afghanistan and Iraq: "Two wars were won and now two peaces have to be won." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 23, 2003


End of Document