Generation Z set to upend the gun debate in the US
LNP (Lancaster, PA)
March 5, 2018 Monday


Copyright 2018 LNP Media Group, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Length: 829 words
Byline: BY APRIL KELLY-WOESSNER, SPECIAL TO LNP
Body


In the days following Sept. 11, 2001, political experts speculated about the impact the terrorist attacks would have on America's young people, whose illusions of safety and security had been shattered. In the years that followed, we searched for evidence of what many thought would become "the security generation."
Theoretically, this cohort of Americans would be profoundly shaped by the fear of terrorism in their formative years and would be more willing to surrender personal liberty in exchange for protection. Some thought that these young people would adopt a Republican stance on military action and foreign policy.
Although millennials recognize the 9/11 attacks as an important life experience, the security generation failed to materialize. On issues of terrorism, national security and civil liberties, millennials are actually more progressive than their parents. They are highly critical of Bush-era conservatism and the war on terror.
A 2009 survey by the Center for American Progress found that "far fewer younger Americans than older ones agree that military force is the most effective way to keep America safe; that restrictions on civil liberties and torture are okay in order to protect us from terrorism; and that it is unpatriotic to criticize leaders during war."
Consistent with their generally progressive views and tendencies to vote Democratic, millennials are more likely than older generations to support the legalization of marijuana, favor same-sex marriage, and support a pathway to citizenship for immigrants who came to the United States illegally. Somewhat surprisingly, however, millennials do not differ significantly from others in their views on gun control. According to a 2014 Pew Research study, about half of millennials say that controlling gun ownership is more important than protecting gun rights, which makes them similar to other generations.
While the security generation didn't emerge after 9/11, it may be forming now. It is difficult to assess the extent to which the next generation- sometimes referred to as Generation Z or iGen - varies from millennials, in part because most of them are too young to participate in surveys. Born between 1996 and 2010, this generation is technologically savvy and pragmatic. The few studies that exist about this cohort of teens and adolescents agree on one thing: Gen Z is focused on safety.
They are much less prone to take risks than millennials and Gen Xers were at their age. The positive benefits of this reduction in risk-taking are clear: We have seen a considerable drop in teenage pregnancy and underage drinking. The kids of Generation Z are more careful drivers and they are willing to seek parental guidance. Psychology professor Jean M. Twenge concludes in her book, "iGen," that this post-millennial generation is obsessed with safety.
This obsession with safety, combined with the experience of watching their peers get gunned down in their schools, is destined to shape their attitudes on gun control. Witness the swelling Never Again movement, being led by the survivors of the Feb. 14 Parkland massacre.
Generation Z will demand tougher gun control laws, including a ban on assault rifles. Americans are already divided enough on these issues that it won't take much for Gen Z to shift the balance of power.
In fact, a recent CNN poll shows that a majority of Americans already favor stricter gun control laws. While Americans' opinions on this issue have fluctuated over time, this recent shift toward gun control is significantly larger than in the past and Generation Z is likely to make it permanent.
If change is inevitable, those who advocate for Second Amendment rights should proactively seek reasonable compromises that satisfy young people's demand for safety while balancing the rights of law-abiding citizens. No right is absolute and one can be deprived of constitutional rights through due process.
In his article for National Review, "A Gun-Control Measure Conservatives Should Consider," David French makes a compelling case for the use of gun-violence restraining orders, which would prevent people with a history of domestic assault and other violent behaviors from owning and purchasing guns. This process protects the liberty of the law-abiding citizen - the proverbial good guy with a gun - while removing weapons from those who, through their own conduct, have shown themselves to be a danger to others. And the bad guy without a gun had legitimate due process.
If gun rights advocates can't actively embrace these sort of compromises that protect individual liberty for law-abiding citizens while making it more difficult for dangerous people to acquire guns, then they will soon be at the mercy of their opponents, who aren't nearly as concerned with the protection of liberty.
April Kelly-Woessner is a professor and chairwoman of the political science department at Elizabethtown College. She also is a correspondent for LNP. Email: woessnerak@etown.edu

Load-Date: March 6, 2018


End of Document