General: Attacks thwarted in Horn of Africa; U.S. officials describe the Islamic region as a critical theater in the war on terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 25, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a10
Length: 353 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CAMP LEMONIER, Djibouti
Body


U.S. forces have disrupted several planned terrorist attacks against Western and other targets in the Horn of Africa and local authorities have killed or captured more than two dozen militants, the U.S. general in command of an anti-terrorism task force told The Associated Press.
Of the hundreds of foreign fighters detained by U.S. troops in Iraq, about 25 percent come from the seven countries that fall under the purview of the Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa, Marine Brig. Gen. Mastin Robeson told AP in his first in-depth interview since taking command in May.
The task force is responsible for fighting terrorism in seven Horn of Africa countries: Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Yemen, Sudan, Kenya and Somalia. The impoverished, Islamic region is a well-established recruiting ground for terrorist groups, and U.S. officials describe it as a critical theater in the war on terrorism.
Robeson said suspected terrorists from Tanzania, through the Horn of Africa, all the way to southern Egypt and Saudi Arabia are working with each other to promote radicalism.
"There are three issues here: There is transnational terrorist networking, at large, there are specific cells planning terrorist attacks and there's the recruiting, training and shipping of foreign fighters into Iraq," Robeson said Saturday night at his headquarters on a former French Foreign Legion post in Djibouti.
"They are down here training and recruiting," he said. "They are trying to create numbers and what we want to do is prevent them from creating numbers."
U.S. forces first arrived in Djibouti, a country the size of Massachusetts located where the Red Sea opens into the Gulf of Aden, in June 2002. The country was a French colony, carved out of the Horn of Africa because of its strategic location and a natural, deep water harbor.
In August 1998, car bombs destroyed the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania; in October 2000, suicide bombers attacked the USS Cole while it was refueling in Yemen; and in November 2002, attackers tried to shoot down an Israeli airliner minutes before a car bomb destroyed a hotel on the Kenya coast.

Graphic

 
mug: Mastin Robeson

Load-Date: November 25, 2003


End of Document