Gentleman Who Finds Terrorism Amusing
The New York Times
March 27, 2012 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1; BOOKS OF THE TIMES
Length: 1051 words
Byline: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI
Body


THE NEW REPUBLIC
By Lionel Shriver
373 pages. Harper. $26.99.
An Evelyn Waugh-inspired satire that uses Sept. 11 at its end for a kicker? A comic novel about terrorism featuring a misanthropic hero striving to take credit for deadly bombings around the world? This is the off-putting premise of Lionel Shriver's very unfunny new novel, ''The New Republic.''
The novel, Ms. Shriver tells us in an author's note, was actually completed in 1998. It was not published then, she says, because her ''sales record was poisonous,'' and because ''my American compatriots largely dismissed terrorism as Foreigners' Boring Problem.''
In the years since, Ms. Shriver says her sales record improved -- she is the author of the best sellers ''We Need to Talk About Kevin'' and ''The Post-Birthday'' -- but she then faced another sort of hurdle: ''Post-9/11, Americans became if anything too interested in terrorism,'' and ''for years after the calamity in New York, I was obliged to put the novel on ice, because a book that treated this issue with a light touch would have been perceived as in poor taste.''
Now, she says, that ''taboo seems to have run its course,'' and she is publishing ''The New Republic'' ''roughly as I first wrote it, with one small, irresistible addition in the epilogue that readers will readily recognize.'' Certainly this is a first: the real-life terrorist attacks of 9/11's being referred to as ''one small, irresistible addition.''
In recent years there have already been at least two comic novels that made Osama bin Laden the object of their heroines' romantic fantasies: Chris Cleave's ''Incendiary'' (2005) and Helen Fielding's ''Olivia Joules and the Overactive Imagination'' (2004). Ms. Shriver's novel is even more cringe-making, as its central character, a hapless twit named Edgar Kellogg, doesn't fall under the spell of a terrorist but deliberately sets about impersonating one -- or at least taking credit for unattributed bombings -- thereby igniting more real terrorist activity and a cascade of other violence.
Edgar does this not out of misguided ideological fervor but as a sort of prank that feeds his ego, gives him a sense of secret power and helps him shrug off his past as a fat, ineffectual dweeb. He is ''exhilarated by the sensation of control'' and by his discovery of ''the miracle of his own agency.''
In fact, Edgar's entire view of life has been shaped by his high school experiences as the sidekick of the glamorous big man on campus, one Toby Falconer, a golden boy who exuded confidence and charisma. Now Edgar has abandoned a career in law to become a fledgling reporter on assignment in a remote corner of Portugal (Ms. Shriver calls this imaginary place Barba, where a terrorist organization known as SOB is supposedly fighting for Barban independence.)
There, Edgar falls under the spell of another charmer, a larger-than-life foreign correspondent named Barrington Saddler, who has swashbuckled his way across the world collecting bylines, women and adoring acolytes along the way.
Barrington has mysteriously disappeared from Barba, and Edgar moves into his palatial mansion, where he starts having conversations with Barrington's ghost (who may be a figment of Edgar's own fevered imagination).
Through these exchanges, Edgar learns that SOB does not in fact exist, but was created by Barrington as an elaborate hoax that gave him a sensational story to cover. After various terrorist incidents (committed by other organizations or lone wolves) occurred around the world, Barrington would call in ''atrocity claims'' on behalf of the fictional SOB.
His hoax, it seems, has not been discovered because an actual Barban independence party known as O Creme has used the SOB bombings to exert political pressure on the Portuguese government, because law enforcement officials are bumbling fools, and because the swarm of journalists who have descended on Barba are venal or stupid.
Barrington's ghost exhorts Edgar to carry on his work, and soon Edgar is using a pay phone to call in new bombing claims of his own. By doing so, he hopes to impress Barrington and, somehow by extension, Barrington's former paramour, Nicola, on whom he's developed a terrible crush.
In creating this ramshackle plot, Ms. Shriver has pilfered an assortment of elements from various classics -- a feckless, put-upon hero from Kingsley Amis's ''Lucky Jim,'' a send-up of journalism from Waugh's ''Scoop,'' and a fun-loving ghost from the movie ''Topper'' -- but she never welds them into anything coherent, compelling or remotely original. As for Ms. Shriver's own gift for psychological portraiture -- demonstrated with such elan in ''We Need to Talk About Kevin'' and ''So Much for That'' -- it is completely absent from these pages, drowned out by her flailing efforts to write satire.
One of the problems is that Ms. Shriver is not the least bit funny. Her portraits of reporters as lying, self-promoting mercenaries are served up with a leaden hand and quickly devolve into an exercise in vituperation. Her willfully breezy depiction of terrorism is something worse.
Ms. Shriver describes Edgar's success in having a Madrid bombing that kills a pregnant woman attributed to the fictional SOB as giving him ''clout he could spend like money,'' and reminding him of his favorite children's book, ''The Velveteen Rabbit,'' in which a stuffed bunny becomes a real bunny through the power of love. She also describes the SOB's growing fame as leading to a booming business in terrorism souvenirs, including ''a G.I. Joe-style SOB guerrilla doll with balaclava, dark glasses and automatic'' and a model airplane (presumably based on a downed plane that killed 245 people) that pulls apart ''to scatter a confetti of tiny plastic passengers.''
There are very real consequences to SOB's fame as well. The Portuguese government increasingly tries to accommodate O Creme's demands. There are more terrorist wannabes, more brutal round-ups of immigrants in Barba and the murder of two Muslims during an anti-immigration riot.
It is a damning comment on this ghastly novel that Ms. Shriver's characters Barrington and Edgar -- whom she seems to want us to see as foolish but endearing heroes -- regard their dabbling in terrorism as an ''asinine stunt,'' or ''eccentric hobby'' -- in short, a ''ha-ha.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: PHOTO (C1)
 Lionel Shriver, the author of ''The New Republic.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY SUKI DHANDA) (C6)                                                      

Load-Date: March 27, 2012


End of Document