Georgia Supreme Court upholds two Colquitt County murder convictions
The Albany Herald (Georgia)
September 14, 2017 Thursday


Copyright 2017 The Albany Herald
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 613 words
Byline: The Albany Herald, Ga.
Body


Sept. 14--ATLANTA -- Two murder convictions and life prison sentences that originated in Colquitt County have been upheld by the Georgia Supreme Court.
Demetrius Tyshaun Daniels appealed his convictions and sentence for felony murder, violation of the Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Act and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony in connection with the death of Alvin Hunt on July 2, 2010.
In a companion case, Tobias Demere Thomas appealed his convictions and sentence for the felony murder of Bernardino Perez on April 25, 2009, violations of the Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Act, armed robbery, aggravated assault and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony in connection with multiple criminal incidents.
At the time of the crimes, Daniels and Thomas were thought to be members of the Forrest Hill Boyz gang. In their cases before the state's highest court, Daniels contended that his trial counsel did not provide him effective assistance, while Thomas claimed -- among other things -- that the evidence presented against him was "insufficient to authorize the jury to find him guilty of the crimes of which he was convicted."
Ultimately, Georgia's high court unanimously upheld the pair's convictions.
On March 22, 2011, a Colquitt County grand jury returned an 80-count indictment charging Daniels, Thomas and nine other people with various crimes. Daniels was charged with eight counts in the indictment based on incidents that occurred in the area of the Shy Manor Apartments in Moultrie.
In those counts, Daniels -- along with others, including Thomas -- was charged with the felony murder of Hunt while in the commission of aggravated assault, the aggravated assault of Hunt, possession of a firearm during the commission of the felony murder of Hunt, possession of a firearm while in the commission of the aggravated assault of Hunt, and separate violations of the Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Act.
Thomas was charged in 72 counts of the indictment. Nine counts were based on incidents that occurred in the Sardis Church Road area of Moultrie. In these counts, he and a few others, excluding Daniels, were charged with the felony murder of Perez while in the commission of aggravated assault, the aggravated assault of Perez, possession of a firearm during the commission of each of the crimes against Perez, and a violation of the Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Act for participation in a criminal street gang during the commission of the crimes.
On July 16, 2012, Daniels was sentenced to life in prison for felony murder and prison terms totaling 35 years for the crimes that were not merged or vacated. On the same day, Thomas was sentenced to life in prison for felony murder, and prison terms totaling 190 years, to be served both consecutively and concurrently, for the crimes that were not merged or vacated.
On June 11, 2012, Daniels filed a motion for a new trial, which he amended on Dec. 29, 2014. The motion, as amended, was denied on April 28, 2016. Thomas filed a motion for a new trial on Aug. 6, 2012, which he amended on Oct. 17, 2014. Thomas' motion, as amended, was denied on Nov. 13, 2015.
Daniels filed a notice of appeal on April 4, 2016, and Thomas filed his notice of appeal on Dec. 8, 2015. The appeals were docketed in the state Supreme Court for the April 2017 term.
The Georgia Department of Corrections offender query system lists Daniels as serving a life sentence at Wheeler Correctional Facility. Thomas is serving a life sentence at Ware State Prison.
___ (c)2017 The Albany Herald, Ga. Visit The Albany Herald, Ga. at www.albanyherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: October 3, 2017


End of Document