Gephardt links public trust to success of democracy A Peruvian is the keynote speaker at the first public event for Gephardt's institute.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 20, 2005 Tuesday
MISSOURI THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B4
Length: 409 words
Byline: By Jo Mannies POST-DISPATCH POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT
Body


Democracy works, says former U.S. Rep. Richard A. Gephardt, only as long as it's seen as an effective substitute for violence.
Any collapse in that public trust in democracy, here or abroad, "easily and inevitably can become a naked fistfight for power," he said.
Gephardt offered his cautionary observations to a packed house at Washington University's Graham Chapel, as he helped launch the inaugural public event hosted by his new Richard A. Gephardt Institute for Public Service. 
Two of the biggest threats to the public's trust in democracy, Gephardt asserted, is the widening gap between the rich and poor, and global terrorism.
Growing poverty robs people of trust that government can work for them, he said. Growing terrorism can use "random and crippling violence" that paralyzes governments and ignites further public distrust, he added.
While emphasizing that he had confidence in the U.S. government and its people, Gephardt contended that "our own democracy is sagging a bit, as free democracies often do."
Hernando de Soto, president of the Institute for Liberty and Democracy in Peru, was the keynote speaker at the event, which was moderated by university Chancellor Mark Wrighton.
De Soto linked the stability of various countries' governments to the trust that their citizens had in one another. Citing recent polls, de Soto said 60 percent of those polled in Sweden trusted their fellow citizens. That percentage dropped to 40 percent in the United States and 4 percent in Brazil, he said.
Gephardt and de Soto both emphasized the importance that democracy can play in easing poverty -- if all of a country's citizens have equal access to the ballot box.
Gephardt said his aim was to use the institute to encourage more public participation in government and in communities. Funded primarily by donors, with interim aid from the university, the institute's target groups include baby boomers. That group -- made up of people born between 1946 and 1964 -- is about to launch a huge wave of retirees who Gephardt hopes can be tapped for second careers in politics and government.
Institute Director Jim Davis is a retired political science professor and former head of the university's teaching center. The assistant director is Kristin Lappin, Gephardt's former congressional liaison. Former state Rep. May Scheve Reardon is the development director for the institute.
---
STLtoday.com/links Go online to find out more about the Gephardt Institute.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Richard A. Gephardt calls poverty and terrorism dual threats to democracy. 

Load-Date: September 21, 2005


End of Document