German who plotted against U.S. freed early; Al-Qaida loyalist released, no longer deemed a danger.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
August 18, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A2
Length: 508 words
Byline: Sewell Chan
Body


AGermanmanwhotrained in Pakistan with an offshoot of al-Qaida and confessed in 2009 to plotting to bomb American targets in Germany was released from prison this week.
The decision to grant early release to the leader of the plot, Fritz Gelowicz, comes as the country grapples with the aftershocks of two recent attacks in Bavaria by people claiming loyalty to the Islamic State.
Gelowicz, 36, was sentenced in 2010 to 12 years in prison. Counting time served before his sentencing, he had been in prison for nearly nine years and was eligible for early release based on good behavior and because he was no longer deemed to be a danger, according to Andreas Vitek, a spokesman for the Duesseldorf Higher Regional Court. Gelowicz will have to report regularly to a probation officer.
The court in Duesseldorf released Gelowicz on Monday, but the decision did not receive widespread attention until Wednesday, when his defense lawyer, Dirk Uden, wrote about it on his website.
"I'm sure he will not use any violence against anybody," Uden said Wednesday, adding that his client had cooperated with the authorities and expressed remorse.
Itwasnotclearwhetherthe U.S. authorities objected to Gelowicz's release. A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in Berlin said the embassy was aware of the decision to release Gelowicz.
In 2008, after his arrest, the U.S. Treasury Department designated Gelowicz a terrorist. He also remains on a United Nations sanctions list, so it is likely that U.S. intelligence services and the German authorities will keep an eye on him.
Guido Steinberg, a terrorism expert at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, who was an expert witness at the trial of Gelowicz and his accomplices, said the early release was likely to reinforce suspicions in the United States that Germany is soft on terrorism.
"Fritz Gelowicz is a well-known personality," Steinberg said. "We are a lot softer on terrorism than the Americans, the British, the French. It is obvious."
Steinberg said he did not object to the decision to release Gelowicz but was concerned about what he described as persistent weaknesses in the collection and sharing of intelligence by and among German authorities.
Steinberg said it was the U.S.NationalSecurityAgency that tipped off the German Federal Intelligence Service in 2006 that Gelowicz had traveled to Pakistan to train with the Islamic Jihad Union, an affiliate of al-Qaida.
L ast week, partly in response to recent attacks in Bavaria by men proclaimingloyaltytotheIslamicState, Germany's interior minister proposed new security measures. They included closermonitoringofrefugees, enhanced surveillance, the hiring of more federal police and greater sharing of intelligence data with other European nations. But Steinberg said he feared the measures did not go far enough.
"Our intelligence services don't have a clue about communications among the Islamic State recruits in Iraq andSyria,"hesaid."Ourintelligenceservicesareextremely weak. They have to become stronger if we are going to fight ISIS."

Load-Date: August 18, 2016


End of Document