German High Court Rules a State's Wiretap Law Is Unlawful
The New York Times
July 28, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 451 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Dateline: BERLIN, July 27 
Body


Germany's highest court on Wednesday struck down a state law permitting wiretapping that supporters said would have let the police maintain closer surveillance of potential terrorists and other dangerous criminals.
  The German Constitutional Court ruled against a state law in Lower Saxony that permitted wiretapping even when there was no concrete evidence that a crime was being planned, calling it an unconstitutional infringement of civil liberties.
 ''The loss of constitutionally guaranteed freedoms must not be disproportionate to the aims served by the limitation of basic rights,'' the court's judgment read.
  Germany, with its Nazi past, is especially sensitive to possible violations of civil rights or abuses of police power.
  The decision was the second in a week by the German Constitutional Court against stronger law-enforcement measures that could be relevant to the fight against terrorism in Germany and Europe. Last week, the court ordered the release of Mamoun Darkazanli, a Syrian-born German citizen who was suspected of being a supporter of Al Qaeda. 
  Mr. Darkazanli's extradition had been requested by Spain under the terms of a new European Arrest Warrant aimed at preventing terrorism suspects wanted in one European country from gaining refuge in another. 
  But the court said the provision failed to provide adequate protection against what might turn out to be unwarranted extradition requests.
  The Lower Saxony law, passed at the end of 2003, let the police intercept phone calls, text messages and Internet connections of groups or individuals whom the police suspected -- even in the absence of concrete evidence -- of plotting ''crimes of considerable importance.''
  The law would have made it possible, for example, for the police in Lower Saxony to carry out preventive surveillance of mosques or Islamic groups in the state almost without restriction.
  The court's judgment will almost certainly have a wider impact because other German states have already passed laws similar to the one in Lower Saxony or were planning to do so.
  The decision did not seem likely to affect other wiretapping and surveillance laws that let both the federal and state police monitor anyone suspected of carrying out a list of crimes, from terrorism to child pornography, as long as there is some concrete reason for the suspicion.
  Still, since the identification of Hamburg as the site of the Qaeda cell mainly responsible for carrying out the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States, Germany has carried out regular surveillance and investigations of Islamic groups and even banned some that it believed had supported terrorism or violated strict German laws against inciting racial hatred.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 28, 2005


End of Document