Germany pledges troops for battle; War on terrorism: Japan also considers assistance
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 7, 2001 Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c7
Length: 511 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BERLIN
Body


The German chancellor pledged up to 3,900 German troops for the U.S. war on terrorism Tuesday, pushing the nation toward its most far-reaching participation in military action since World War II.
Gerhard Schroeder's decision to seek a leading role in the anti-terror campaign is a new step in Germany's quest for greater world influence as it sheds its reluctance to join in warfare.
However, the chancellor said there were no plans to send ground troops, and the defense minister said German forces would not necessarily be deployed inside Afghanistan.
Germany would offer armored vehicles equipped to detect nuclear, biological and chemical weapons; special forces; a medical- evacuation unit; and air transport and naval forces to protect shipping lanes, Schroeder told a news conference.
Schroeder and key aides have prepared a wavering public for weeks for a German military role, saying the nation could not stand aside and provide only financial backing as it did during the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
Japan, another country haunted by memories of World War II, loosened postwar restrictions on its military Oct. 29. It has been considering various non-combat roles, including sending warships and personnel to help with refueling and reconnaissance missions in the Indian Ocean.
Schroeder's offer, though short on specifics, would put Germany in the forefront of U.S. allies supporting the campaign - second only to Britain.
Canada, another major contributor with ships, aircraft and special forces, has provided 2,000 personnel. France has about 2,000 military personnel involved in the effort, according to a French official in Washington.
Italy has offered an armored regiment, attack helicopters, fighter jets and specialists in nuclear, chemical and germ warfare.
Other contributors include Australia with SAS special forces, war ships and aircraft; New Zealand with a commitment of special forces and humanitarian aid, and Turkey, which pledged an anti-guerrilla mountain warfare unit.
But Schroeder also sought to address concerns among many Germans - including members of his center-left governing coalition - that the envisaged deployment is a step too far in military involvement abroad, which began after Germany reunited in 1990.
He stressed the importance of political and diplomatic efforts to hold the international coalition against terrorism together, the humanitarian mission to help Afghans, economic sanctions aimed at undermining terror networks and cooperation of secret services.
Germany has gradually relaxed a postwar taboo against sending troops abroad, starting with support for a Cambodian peacekeeping mission in 1992.
German troops have helped hunt war criminals in Bosnia and taken part in NATO airstrikes on Yugoslavia. In another milestone, Germany in September took command of a 1,000-strong military force to protect international observers in Macedonia.
Despite the divisions, support for the military deployment appeared to be broad. Only the former East German communists are uniformly opposed to a German military role.
$$ @122:America at war

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document