Germans Calm As They Face A Rare Alert On Terrorism
The New York Times
November 19, 2010 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 684 words
Byline: By STEFAN PAULY and MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Stefan Pauly reported from Berlin, and Michael Slackman from Warsaw. Reporting was contributed by Barry Bearak from Johannesburg; John Grobler from Windhoek, Namibia; Joseph Berger from New York; Victor Homola from Berlin; and Souad Mekhennet from Marrakech, Morocco.
Body


BERLIN -- One day after Germany's interior minister said there was a concrete threat of a terrorist strike, the nation woke to reports of a possible bomb intended for an Air Berlin flight, hypercautious police forces at transportation hubs around the nation and a determined call not to let fear change the way people live.
By day's end, Air Berlin said a suspicious laptop bag -- identified in Namibia on Wednesday, just a few hours before the minister's alert -- did not contain any explosive material. Police officials said that it had batteries wired to a clock and detonator, and that it would take several days to determine whether it could have exploded or was a false alarm.
The day was for the most part routine for Germany's 82 million citizens. Train stations were buzzing, coffee shops busy, government offices going about their business. Facing one of their most serious terror alerts, Germans broadly supported their government's call to fight back by resisting fear.
''There are situations in which calm is actually a civic duty and has nothing to do with apathy,'' wrote the conservative daily Die Welt. ''It is not a sign of carelessness but of strength if life goes on as normal in dangerous situations.''
But there was an undercurrent of concern, a permeating jitteriness, especially for law enforcement. At Berlin's main train station, two suitcases left by an entrance were quickly surrounded by heavily armed police officers. They brought in a bomb sniffing dog and kept the public at a distance. The surprised owner returned and opened his bags, and slipped away embarrassed.
Two men working for the national railroad said that on Wednesday the trains stopped running for about 45 minutes because of a package found unattended at the next station. They said it contained a harmless liquid.
Germany's state interior ministers met in Hamburg and issued a statement noting that there was ''proof of a high degree of a security threat, both in terms of time and content.'' Speaking on Deutschlandfunk radio, Berlin's interior minister, Ehrhart Korting, told listeners that regardless of the best efforts of law enforcement, ''Terrorists will not allow themselves to be disrupted by the warnings,'' and added, ''You will never be able to guarantee 100 percent security against terrorists.''
The Rhineland-Palatinate interior minister, Karl Peter Bruch, told The German Press Agency that the authorities had ''concrete evidence'' that Berlin, Munich and Hamburg were possible targets, as well as the Ruhr region in the southwest.
Germany had resisted declaring a public terrorism alert for many weeks, even when it repeatedly emerged at the center of new concerns. Some German citizens have been arrested and killed in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region in connection with terrorism. One of two bombs mailed from Yemen passed undetected through the airport in Cologne-Bonn before being found in Britain on a tip from Saudi Arabia. Days later, a package bomb sent from Greece and addressed to Chancellor Angela Merkel was found in her mail room in Berlin.
The government had been under pressure from Washington to take the threats more seriously. Officials in Berlin said they had received angry calls from a White House official, demanding stepped-up counterterror efforts -- calls that were passed on to Mrs. Merkel. But Germany held to its view that the threats against it were ''abstract.''
That changed Wednesday in the hours after German officials learned that luggage screeners had found the untagged laptop bag and, scanning it, discovered the strange batteries-fuse-clock contraption.
Four hours later, Germany's interior minister, Thomas de Maiziere, said at a news conference that there was reason for concern, though not panic, and that information had been received from a foreign intelligence source indicating that Germany faced ''concrete indications of a series of attacks planned for the end of November.'' Intelligence officials in Germany said that the assessment was based on mounting evidence and nearly daily intelligence reports of a planned strike coming in from multiple sources.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 19, 2010


End of Document