GERMANS TRAIN AS MILITANTS IN PAKISTAN; MANY HAVE ALREADY GONE HOME TO PLOT ACTS OF TERRORISM THROUGHOUT EUROPE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 8, 2010 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 1023 words
Byline: David Rising, The Associated Press
Body


ISLAMABAD -- The video at first seems like many others filmed in Pakistan's tribal areas: The bearded militant sits cross-legged on the floor, an AK-47 propped against the wall behind him. But as he applauds his three companions' decision to join jihad, the words come out in fluent German: "Wir sind die Soldaten Allahs," he says -- "We are the soldiers of Allah."
Between 15 and 40 Germans and a smaller contingent of other Europeans are believed to be getting militant training in Pakistan's lawless border region, intending to join the Taliban's fight against NATO forces in neighboring Afghanistan or return to Europe and strike at the soft underbelly of those countries.
Their presence has attracted fresh scrutiny after a European terror warning based on information from a German-Afghan captured in Afghanistan, and a CIA drone strike Tuesday that allegedly killed eight German militants in North Waziristan -- an al-Qaida and Taliban hub that the Pakistani army has so far left largely alone.
The German speaker in the jihad video, Mounir Chouka, is one of two Bonn-born brothers with dual German-Moroccan citizenship, well known for appearances in videos made by the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan apparently aimed at recruiting more militants from Germany. German federal prosecutors confirmed Thursday that the two are under investigation on suspicion of membership in a terrorist organization.
The clip appeared on a militant website earlier this summer, a nearly 40-minute video telling new recruits about the legitimacy of jihad, or holy war.
"At every border crossing, at every airport and at every search, we pray to Allah ... to make these enemies blind," he says. "Allah answered. The proof? We are here."
Germans are thought to be one of the largest European groups in Pakistan's northwest, though information is scant. Most are believed to be immigrants from Muslim nations or their descendants.
The Germans killed Tuesday were hit by a drone strike in Mir Ali, a town about 20 miles from the border with Afghanistan.
Reporters who have been to Mir Ali describe Internet cafes in the basements of shops where militants from all over the world watch extremist videos or send e-mails. The Pakistani army has a base nearby, but soldiers do not patrol the area.
"For three or four months, we have been hearing that there are people who say they are from Germany who have been trickling in, one by one," said retired Brig. Mahmood Shah, former chief of security for Pakistan's tribal regions. "Some people say they are Turkish, or appear to be Turkish, or maybe Turkish from Germany."
Brig. Shah said the group is thought to number about 15 to 20, but "nothing much is known about them," he conceded.
Many top al-Qaida Arab leaders are believed to be somewhere in the border region, including Osama bin Laden and his Egyptian deputy, Ayman al-Zawahri.
Of the Germans in the region, most recent attention has been on Ahmed Siddiqui, a German citizen of Afghan descent, who had been in the Mir Ali area and was captured in Afghanistan in July. He is now being interrogated by U.S. forces at the Bagram Air Field, German and U.S. officials have said.
U.S. officials say Mr. Siddiqui provided some details about an early-stage terrorist plot to attack targets in Britain, France and Germany, which led to the recent warnings in Europe.
Mr. Siddiqui was one of about a dozen radical Muslims who left the northern port city of Hamburg in 2009 to pursue terror training in the border region, said Rolf Tophoven, director of the Germany-based Institute for Terrorism Research and Security Policy.
Mr. Siddiqui prayed at the same mosque that was earlier frequented by Mohamed Atta and other Sept. 11 hijackers who used Hamburg as a base before they moved to the United States to attend flight school. Hamburg authorities closed the mosque in August, after saying it was again being used as a meeting point for Islamic radicals.
But unlike the Sept. 11 hijackers, already a terror cell while in Hamburg, Mr. Siddiqui and the others who left in 2009 are thought to have less-organized plans.
"We have a lot of single people, lone fighters who are going to these areas [in Pakistan] and want to be trained as terrorists there," Mr. Tophoven said.
A German intelligence official said authorities were aware that Mr. Siddiqui was part of the "Hamburg scene of Islamists," who they assumed was going to Pakistan to "take part in jihad," but there was no way to keep him from leaving the country.
In addition to Mounir Chouka, who goes locally by the name Abu Adam al-Almani -- "Abu Adam the German" -- and his brother Yassin, other Germans linked to the Mir Ali area include Muslim-convert Eric Breininger, who was killed April 30 by Pakistani soldiers. He was part of the Islamic Jihad Union, which has been linked to a thwarted plot inside Germany to attack U.S. targets.
Four IJU members, two German converts to Islam and two Turks who lived in Germany, all trained in a Mir Ali area camp, were convicted in March of planning the attacks and sentenced to between five to 12 years.
It is not yet clear who the eight Germans were that were killed in Tuesday's CIA drone strike in Mir Ali. German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said Wednesday that Berlin has received no "reliable information" regarding their identities.
Germany's Federal Criminal Police office said they have "indications" that a total of 220 Germans have traveled to the region for terrorism training in recent years, about half of whom have returned to Germany. Of the total, a spokeswoman, speaking on departmental policy of anonymity, said there is "concrete evidence" that 70 have undergone such training, and about a third of those militants have returned to Germany.
Mr. Tophoven said estimates are that "between 30 and 40 hardcore terrorists" from Germany are now in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region.
Some go to try and fight in Afghanistan, but Mr. Tophoven said local militant commanders are worried about possible CIA or other infiltrators there, so European militants are more likely to return to Europe after their training -- where they could also be a greater threat.

Load-Date: October 8, 2010


End of Document