Germany Relives 1970s Terror as 2 Seek Release From Jail - Correction Appended
The New York Times
February 7, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4; MEMO FROM FRANKFURT
Length: 1103 words
Byline: By MARK LANDLER
Dateline: FRANKFURT, Feb. 6 
Body


Thirty years ago this October, the leaders of the Baader-Meinhof gang committed suicide in their high-security German prison cells, putting a bloody exclamation mark on an anarchic season of kidnappings and killings now known as the ''German autumn.''
  Just in time for the news media commemorations of those chaotic days, two of the last four jailed members of the terrorist gang, later known as the Red Army Faction, are petitioning to be released early.
Their requests have kicked up a furious debate in Germany over how to treat a pair of aging far-left terrorists, neither of whom has publicly expressed remorse for their crimes. This being Germany, it has inevitably become a debate about how to confront the ghosts of history.
  The two, Brigitte Mohnhaupt and Christian Klar, were convicted of murdering a bank president, a federal prosecutor and the head of an employers' union during a seven-month rampage in 1977 that left the country traumatized. Sentenced to life in prison, they have each served 24 years.
  Ms. Mohnhaupt, 57, has filed for parole, and prosecutors have backed her appeal on the ground that she no longer poses a threat to society. Mr. Klar, 54, must serve two more years before being eligible for parole, but he has asked President Horst Kohler to grant him clemency.
  As Mr. Kohler weighs the request, he is getting free advice from all corners. 
  ''Remorse would be very helpful; so far, Klar hasn't shown any,'' the Stuttgarter Nachrichten wrote. Der Tagesspiegel, a Berlin daily, declared that under the law, the court had little choice but to release Ms. Mohnhaupt, a relic from ''the Paleozoic era of German terrorism.''
  To judge by the attention being lavished on these terrorist throwbacks, Germans remain deeply fascinated, if not nostalgic, for a time when terrorists railed against ''capitalist pigs'' in the name of world revolution.
  ''There's a bit of typical German romanticism here,'' said Henryk M. Broder, a writer for Der Spiegel. ''These people were not after money. They were not after power. They were not after high office. They were perverted or misguided idealists, and this Germans tend to idolize.''
  With the collapse of Communism, the ideology of the Red Army Faction seems anachronistic to the point of quaintness, and certainly no longer threatening.
  For many prominent Germans, these desperadoes function mostly as a cautionary tale. Men like Joschka Fischer, the country's foreign minister from 1998 to 2005, and Daniel Cohn-Bendit, a member of the European Parliament, gained their first fame as leftist student leaders during the unrest of the late 1960s. For them the surviving gang members stand as a grim reminder of the road not taken. 
  To be sure, a large majority of Germans oppose freeing Ms. Mohnhaupt and Mr. Klar early. And even those who support their petitions argue on strictly legal grounds that by German standards, which are far more lenient than American ones, they have served extremely long sentences and appear to pose no threat to society. Twenty-four years, some note, is longer than almost any Nazi war criminal served here. 
  To demand public expressions of remorse, some say, would be to accord these ex-terrorists a status above that of common criminals, which is exactly what the Red Army Faction always craved.
  Yet the recent coverage of the Baader-Meinhof gang has had an unmistakably mythic quality, recalling in detail how they ambushed wealthy industrialists on the streets of German cities. Accompanying the stories are black-and-white pictures of bullet-riddled Mercedes-Benzes.
  For West Germany, the terrorist wave of the 1970s and 1980s was a test for its young democracy -- one that it generally passed. While some on the left groused about heavy-handed tactics, the police smashed the Red Army Faction well before it officially disbanded in 1998.
  The Islamic terrorism of today is of an altogether different variety. While Germany has not suffered a terrorist strike in the 9/11 era, few here forget that the hijacking plot was hatched in Hamburg by Muslim terrorists with none of the notoriety of the Baader-Meinhof gangsters.
  ''Compared to the terrorism we are fighting today, this was pat-a-cake,'' said Josef Joffe, the publisher and editor of the weekly paper Die Zeit. ''This was the kind of terrorism we could combat and vanquish with national means and with the normal tools of criminal justice.''
  That is cold comfort for the 34 victims of the Red Army Faction and their survivors.
  Waltrude Schleyer, the widow of one of the most famous victims, has publicly opposed the early release of Ms. Mohnhaupt and Mr. Klar, saying neither has expressed contrition. ''These people don't deserve mercy,'' Mrs. Schleyer said in an interview with the mass-market paper Bild.
  Her husband, Hanns-Martin Schleyer -- an ex-Nazi who was the head of the employers' federation and a former board member of DaimlerBenz, and therefore an ideal target -- was abducted in Cologne on Sept. 5, 1977, in an attack that left his driver and bodyguard dead. His kidnappers demanded the release of their imprisoned mates, including the gang's founder, Andreas Baader.
  Ransom pictures of Mr. Schleyer posed in front of the Red Army Faction's crude symbol, a star bisected by a Kalashnikov rifle, came to symbolize the scourge of 1970s terrorism. Mr. Schleyer was later shot in a forest in France, and his body stuffed into the trunk of an Audi.
  After Mr. Baader's suicide in 1977, Ms. Mohnhaupt became one of the gang's leaders. In 1981 she took part in a rocket attack on an American general, Frederick Kroesen, which he barely survived. She was arrested the next year and, along with Mr. Klar, sentenced to five life terms. Ms. Mohnhaupt is eligible for parole in March; Mr. Klar in 2009.
  Experts on the Red Army Faction say they doubt that the two truly regret their actions. ''Brigitte Mohnhaupt was on the extreme hard-line edge of the R.A.F., and Klar was also a hard-liner,'' said Wolfgang Kraushaar, a historian who has just published a book on the gang.
  Still, he said Ms. Mohnhaupt's case should be decided on legal grounds. Mr. Klar's case, he said, is more complicated in that he is asking for clemency rather than parole, which previous German presidents have granted to other gang members.
  Whatever the judgment, some here hope it will happen fast so that Germany can get back to focusing on the real danger. ''We have enough to do fighting militant jihad terrorism,'' said Rolf Tophoven, a counterterrorism expert. ''In comparison to Al Qaeda, the Red Army Faction will only be a footnote in the history books.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


The Memo From Frankfurt article on Feb. 7, about the efforts of two Red Army Faction terrorists to be released early from prison in Germany, misstated the firearm shown in the group's symbol, as it appeared in a ransom photograph behind Hanns-Martin Schleyer, a German industrialist kidnapped and murdered by the group in 1977. It was a Heckler & Koch MP5 machine gun -- not a Kalashnikov, which the group had used earlier in its symbol.
Correction-Date: February 16, 2007

Graphic

 
Photos: In October 1977 the body of a German industrialist, Hanns-Martin Schleyer, was found in France in the trunk of a car. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)
 Christian Klar, left, in a 1983 photo, and Brigitte Mohnhaupt, in an undated photo, are Red Army Faction leaders serving life sentences. They are seeking release from prison.                                               

Load-Date: February 7, 2007


End of Document