GERMANY FINDS 3 GUILTY IN PLOT TO KILL IRAQI PM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 16, 2008 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 307 words
Byline: NICHOLAS KULISH, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body


A state court in Germany yesterday convicted three men who it said were members of a terrorist organization of plotting to kill the Iraqi prime minister on a visit to Berlin in 2004.
The court, in Stuttgart, found that the men were members of Ansar al-Islam, a radical Islamist group that has been linked to al-Qaida, and that they conspired to murder then-Iraqi Prime Minister Ayad Allawi. All three men received prison sentences, the shortest being 7 1/2 years and the longest, 10 years.
The verdict, more than two years after the trial began, was hailed by terrorism experts here as a victory for German counterterrorism efforts, a sign that prosecutors could turn intelligence and widely publicized arrests of terrorism suspects into convictions in court.
A court statement said one of the men, identified only as Ata A., as part of standard criminal procedure in Germany, was "an important, leading member" of the terrorist organization with "regular close and trusted contact to the highest levels of the organization's leadership." Ata and his two accomplices, identified as Mazen S. and Rafik M., were arrested in early-morning raids Dec. 3, 2004.
Investigators intercepted phone calls and e-mail correspondence to gather evidence against them.
According to the statement, the man identified as Rafik had sought permission to carry out the attack against Mr. Allawi, who was scheduled to appear at an event discussing German-Iraqi economic relations at a Deutsche Bank building in Berlin.
"The severity of the decision demonstrates that the German justice system, when the evidence is sufficient, can send a clear signal against terrorism," said Rolf Tophoven, director of the Institute for Terrorism Research and Security Policy in Essen. But he cautioned that hard-core Islamists "would not allow themselves to be scared by such decisions."

Load-Date: July 16, 2008


End of Document