GERMAN POLICE SEIZE 2 TERROR SUSPECTS ON PLANE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 27, 2008 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 341 words
Byline: Nicholas Kulish and Souad Mekhennet, The New York Times
Body


The arrest of two terrorism suspects at the Cologne-Bonn Airport and a nationwide search for two others rattled Germany yesterday.
German police boarded a KLM airliner at 6:55 a.m., shortly before it was to take off, and seized two men identified as a 23-year-old Somali and a 24-year-old German born in Somalia. Officials said the men were unarmed, but that documents saying they were ready to fight and die in jihad had been found.
The men had been under surveillance for some time, according to a German security official, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the case. Their travel plans had them going to Uganda by way of Amsterdam, the official said, with a likely final destination of Somalia.
The extent of any threat posed by the two men was far from certain yesterday. Theirs were the second set of terrorism-related arrests in barely over a week, as German officials charged with preventing a terrorist attack on their country said they saw signs of heightened activity among radical Islamists. Even more troubling, officials said, were two suspects not yet in custody.
The German Federal Criminal Police made a public plea Thursday for information on the whereabouts of Eric Breininger, a German convert to Islam, and Houssain al-Malla of Lebanon. Officials said the two were on their way to Germany from a Pakistan terror training camp.
Investigators said Mr. Breininger was a close friend of Daniel Martin Schneider, one of the men charged in a bombing attack plot in Germany last year. That case received significant attention because two of the suspects were, like Mr. Breininger, German converts to Islam, and they had amassed large quantities of explosive chemicals.
August Hanning, state secretary at the German Interior Ministry and an outspoken German government voice on the threat of terrorism, said, "Mr. Breininger is dangerous precisely because he is blond and blue-eyed." He added, "It would be easier for him to reach certain facilities and areas than someone from Afghanistan or Pakistan."

Load-Date: September 30, 2008


End of Document