German official: Somalia next on U.S. agenda ; War on terrorism: U.S. officials have suspected that Yemen and Sudan also are harboring terrorists
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 20, 2001 Thursday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 448 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body


The United States has decided to take its fight against Osama bin Laden's terror network to Somalia, a senior German official said early Wednesday.
The official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there was no longer a question of whether to go after al-Qaida terrorists in the east African nation, but only when and how.
However, a Pentagon spokesman said Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has not said named the United States' next target in its anti-terrorism campaign.
"I can almost guarantee you that the secretary has not indicated what any next country - if there is a next country - will be," spokesman Richard McGraw said Wednesday in Washington.
Rumsfeld on Tuesday had mentioned Yemen and Sudan as countries suspected of supporting terrorism.
At NATO headquarters in Brussels, Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said: "We are not going to speculate on any next operation."
But when pressed, he said: "Countries that harbor terrorists worry us. Somalia is one potential country, but there are others as well."
Somali Transport Minister Abdi Guled Mohamed said Wednesday that "there are no terrorists that we know of" in Somalia. He said Somalia's transitional government has told the Bush administration it is ready to cooperate in the war against terrorism.
"We have said since Sept. 11 that we want to help. If the Americans say there are terrorists in Somalia, they should tell us how they know this," he said in Nairobi, Kenya, where he was attending peace talks between Somali faction leaders and the transitional government.
"If there are terrorists there, than we will put them in prison, put them where they belong. We will work with the Americans to fight terrorists," he added.
The United States, however, does not recognize the transitional government led by Abdiqasim Salat Hassan, U.S. diplomat Glen Warren told reporters in Mogadishu, the Somali capital.
"We of the American government do not recognize any government or regional government or any other sort of administration in Somalia," Warren said.
U.S. officials have said the United States is concerned Somalia's lack of central authority makes it an attractive base for terrorists.
Earlier this month, nine people identified by aid workers and a regional security official as Americans visited a town in western Somalia, where they met with local faction leaders and Ethiopian military officers.
The Americans met with leaders of the Rahanwein Resistance Army, a clan-based faction opposed to Somalia's fledgling transitional government, and with Mohamed Saeed Hirsi, the leader of an Ethiopian-backed faction also opposed to the government, the official said on condition of anonymity.

Load-Date: December 23, 2001


End of Document