German Court Permits Limited Cybermonitoring
The New York Times
February 28, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 440 words
Byline: By REUTERS
Dateline: KARLSRUHE, Germany 
Body


Germany's domestic security services are permitted to  monitor the computers of people suspected of crimes or terrorism but only if they have evidence showing the suspects are dangerous, the country's top court ruled Wednesday.
  The decision by the Constitutional Court opens the door to a new federal law, long advocated by Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative Christian Democrats, to allow online surveillance under only strict conditions.
  Such surveillance is a delicate  issue in Germany, which has a legacy of distrust of state intrusion through spying by the Nazi Gestapo and East Germany's secret police, the Stasi.
  The ruling, which concerned a law in the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia, is a compromise between those who say secret online searches are a vital tool to combat terrorism and critics who argue they infringe on civil liberties.
  ''The basic right that guarantees the confidentiality and integrity of Information Technology systems is not without limits,'' said the court's president, Hans-Jurgen Papier.
  He said clandestine online surveillance was allowed only in the case of a concrete threat to human life or to the state. Searches would be subject to an order from a judge, and personal data should be protected or quickly deleted, he said.
  Interior Minister Wolfgang Schauble, a Christian Democrat, said the ruling enabled the government to introduce federal laws to better equip security services to fight terrorists.
  ''I expect the ruling, which is deemed necessary by experts and police workers, can be converted into a federal law as quickly as possible,'' he said.
  The surveillance technique at issue involves sending  e-mail messages that plant so-called Trojan software on a suspect's computer, which would enable the authorities to scan the hard drive.
  Leading Social Democrats, who share power with the Christian Democrats in an uneasy coalition and have opposed online surveillance, welcomed the tight limits the court set and said they expected ministers to start writing a national law soon.
  ''The balance between freedom and security remains protected,'' the party's chairman, Kurt Beck, said in a statement. ''The exaggerated ideas of security and political hard-liners were rebuffed.'' 
  Several European countries have struggled since 2001 to increase police and intelligence agency powers to help prevent terrorist attacks and at the same time to protect civil rights. The debate has been particularly fraught in Germany, especially since the authorities arrested three men last year who they accused of planning to carry out bomb attacks against American installations in Germany.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 28, 2008


End of Document