Germany Arrests 2 Syrians on Terrorism Charges
The New York Times
March 3, 2017 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 552 words
Byline: By MELISSA EDDY
Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.
Body


BERLIN -- Two Syrian men, one of whom faces war crime charges in the killing of 36 Syrian civilian government employees, have been arrested in Germany and accused of membership in a terrorist organization, federal prosecutors said on Thursday.
The men are suspected of belonging to a combat unit of the Nusra Front, formerly Al Qaeda's branch in Syria. They were arrested in raids on their homes on Wednesday and Thursday in the western cities of Düsseldorf and Giessen, and appeared before a judge on Thursday, prosecutors said in a statement. 
  The arrests are the latest in what appears to be an effort by the German authorities to move against the growing number of radical Islamists in the country. Germany's domestic intelligence service estimates that number at 1,600, up from 100 three years ago.
  ''We receive between two and four credible tips on planned terrorist activity in Germany each day,'' Hans-Georg Maassen, the head of the intelligence service, said at a security conference last month. ''We have to recognize that we are living in a different situation now.''
  One of the Syrian men, identified only as Abdalfatah H.A., 35 -- German privacy laws forbid revealing suspects' identities -- is suspected of carrying out what prosecutors called ''so-called Shariah death sentences'' against 36 Syrian government employees in March 2013. He is also accused of being a member of the combat unit of the Nusra Front that prosecutors say was founded by the second suspect arrested this week, Abdulrahman A.A., 26, together with a third Syrian, Abd Arahman A.K., that same year. Abd Arahman A.K. was detained last June on suspicion of plotting to carry out an attack in Düsseldorf with two other Syrians.
  Prosecutors said Abdulrahman A.A. and Abd Arahman A.K. had participated in an armed battle against Syrian government troops, including taking over a big arms depot near Mahin in November 2013.
  Frauke Köhler, a spokeswoman for federal prosecutors, declined to give information about when the suspects had entered the country.
  Abd Arahman A.K. is suspected of taking part in a plot to carry out a multipronged attack similar to the November 2015 massacre in Paris, which left 129 dead. Prosecutors said that the suspect, who was 31 at the time, had been part of a plan to have two suicide bombers attack a downtown Düsseldorf district, the Altstadt, that is packed with bars, cafes and nightclubs.
  ''The attack was to take place on a Friday or a Saturday, because the Altstadt is regularly full on these two days,'' according to a December ruling by the country's Federal Court of Justice that extended his pretrial detention. Prosecutors believe that he had trained in Syria on how to construct explosive vests and had been sent to Germany as part of a sleeper cell.
  Human rights groups have pressured governments to bring people suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria to trial.
  Last year, the German authorities detained nearly 50 people on suspicion of belonging to a terrorist organization or plotting to carry out a terrorist attack in the country.
  Also Thursday, a Lebanese man identified only as Tarik A., 19, was arrested in Düsseldorf on suspicion of belonging to the Islamic State, a case that Ms. Köhler said had no connection to the arrest of the two Syrians.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/02/world/europe/germany-arrests-terrorism-nusra-front.html

Load-Date: March 3, 2017


End of Document