Germany extends terrorism backstop; Extension beyond 2009 is likely, but at a lower level
Business Insurance
November 12, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 33
Length: 405 words
Byline: RICHARD MILLER
Body


BERLIN-Germany's Finance Ministry has agreed to a two-year extension of its e8 billion ($11.6 billion) backstop of EXTREMUS A.G., the country's terrorism insurance pool.
After the end of 2009, the government will likely extend the guarantee further but at a lower amount, said a ministry spokesman. The ministry offered no details on the extent to which the government might reduce its involvement in the future.
EXTREMUS was founded in 2002 by 16 insurance companies to cover large property and business interruption risks against acts of terrorism. The industry provides coverage through EXTREMUS of e2 billion ($2.9 billion), and the government provides e8 billion in federal warranties, which run out at the end of 2007.
Earlier this year, the ministry signaled that it might not extend the two-year guarantee for EXTREMUS for a fourth term from 2008 until 2010. At the time, the government suggested that insurance buyers could get coverage from local and international insurance markets instead.
``We looked at the market, and we looked whether there are private alternatives, and as a result of this investigation we came to the conclusion that, at the moment, we should not change anything in that respect,'' the spokesman said.
Leo Zagel, chief executive of Cologne-based EXTREMUS, said he believes the support of the insurance industry and insurance buyers were important in getting the backstop extended for another two years.
He said he also believes the German government was influenced by efforts in the United States to extend the federal backstop for terrorism coverage.
Meanwhile, discussions on a reduced government role in Germany will likely start in the second half of 2008, Mr. Zagel said.
``Right now, we are happy that we have two years and then later on we will discuss the future,'' he said.
``We think it's the right decision,'' said Gunter Schlicht, managing director of the Deutscher Versicherungs-Schutzverband e.V., the German commercial insurance buyers association in Bonn. The DVS was among the groups that lobbied the government to extend the guarantee.
``We have been somewhat irritated that it took so long to make the decision,'' Mr. Schlicht said. ``By now-the beginning of November-it would have been difficult to imagine that they would withdraw (the guarantee) by Dec. 31...It should have been very difficult to say `no' at this stage, when companies have seven weeks left to arrange for their cover.''

Load-Date: November 17, 2007


End of Document