Germany Convicts 3 Men in 2004 Plot to Kill Iraqi Leader
The New York Times
July 16, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 458 words
Byline: By NICHOLAS KULISH
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body


A state court in Germany on Tuesday convicted three men who it said were members of a terrorist organization of plotting to kill the Iraqi prime minister on a visit to Berlin in 2004.
  The court, in Stuttgart, found that the men were members of Ansar al-Islam, a radical Islamist organization that has been linked to Al Qaeda, and that they had conspired to murder Ayad Allawi, who was prime minister of Iraq at the time. All three men received prison sentences, with the shortest being 7 1/2 years and the longest 10 years.
  The verdict, which came just over two years after the trial began, was hailed by terrorism experts here as a victory for German counterterrorism efforts, a sign that prosecutors could turn intelligence and widely publicized arrests of terrorism suspects into convictions in court.
  A statement from the court said that one of the men, identified only as Ata A. as part of standard criminal procedure in Germany, was ''an important, leading member'' of the terrorist organization with ''regular close and trusted contact to the highest levels of the organization's leadership.'' Ata and his two accomplices, identified as Mazen S. and Rafik M., were arrested in early morning raids on Dec. 3, 2004.
  Investigators intercepted telephone calls and e-mail correspondence to gather evidence against the men. According to the statement, the man identified as Rafik had sought permission to carry out the attack against Mr. Allawi, who was scheduled to appear at an event discussing German-Iraqi economic relations at a Deutsche Bank building in Berlin. Rafik received approval from Mazen, after consultation with Ata, in a telephone call the night before the three were arrested, the statement said. 
  ''The severity of the decision demonstrates that the German justice system, when the evidence is sufficient, can send a clear signal against terrorism,'' said Rolf Tophoven, director of the Institute for Terrorism Research and Security Policy in Essen, Germany. He cautioned, however, that although the decision was a ''cornerstone in the fight against terrorism,'' hard-core Islamists ''would not allow themselves to be scared by such decisions.''
  Germany was also shaken last year by the arrest of three men who the authorities said were in the process of planning a major terrorist attack against American and German targets, seizing military detonators and large amounts of potentially explosive chemicals.
  Ansar al-Islam, which has roots in the Kurdish region in northern Iraq, has been blamed for suicide bombings throughout the country. Last year an Iraqi Kurd in Germany was sentenced to two and a half years in prison for supporting a foreign terrorism organization by transferring more than $10,000 to Ansar al-Islam.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 16, 2008


End of Document