Germany, Belgium and France Make Arrests in Reported Plots
The New York Times
June 26, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 415 words
Byline: By ALISON SMALE and SCOTT SAYARE; Alison Smale reported from Berlin, and Scott Sayare from Paris.
Body


BERLIN -- Scores of special police officers raided at least nine sites in southern Germany and Belgium on Tuesday after what the German authorities said was a tip about an Islamist plot involving two men of Tunisian origin who were planning to stage terrorist attacks involving explosives and remote-controlled model airplanes.
Separately, the French authorities detained nine people in raids on Monday and Tuesday, security officials said. The nine were suspected of plotting acts of Islamic terrorism in France or of having ties to jihadist networks.
In Germany, the chief federal prosecutor's office in Karlsruhe said in a statement that the two men of Tunisian origin were the target of raids in the area around Stuttgart in southwestern Germany and at unspecified locations in Belgium.
Other raids around Munich and Stuttgart were aimed at four contacts of the Tunisian-born men who were suspected of financing terrorist activities, and a another person suspected of money laundering, the statement said.
Raids also took place in the eastern state of Saxony, the statement said. None of the suspects or their contacts were identified by name, and no one was detained in the raids in Germany and Belgium, which the prosecutor's office said were intended to collect evidence of plans and preparations for attacks and knowledge of how ''terrorism motivated by radical Islam'' is financed.
In France, agents from the domestic intelligence service detained three people in the south on Tuesday morning, Interior Minister Manuel Valls said. The suspects were known for ''their affiliations with jihadism'' and for posting threats against French institutions and ''values'' on the Internet, he said.
The French news media, citing anonymous police sources, suggested the suspects may have been involved in efforts to send jihadist fighters or trainees from France to other countries.
In separate raids on Monday in the Paris suburbs, the police detained six men whom Mr. Valls described as ''particularly dangerous'' and having the ''intention'' to carry out terrorist attacks in France. The suspects in that case, described in media reports as men between the ages of 22 and 38 who may have converted to Islam during prison stays, were known to the police ''for acts linked to organized crime'' and were ''probably'' involved in a recent robbery, Mr. Valls said.
No charges were announced for any of the nine; under French law, suspects in terrorism cases may be held for up to four days without charge.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/26/world/europe/germany-belgium-and-france-make-arrests-in-reported-plots.html

Load-Date: June 26, 2013


End of Document