Germanys Move Against Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 15, 1990, Friday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 4
Length: 733 words
Byline: Francine S. Kiefer, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: BONN
Highlight: COOPERATIVE EFFORTS
Body


EAST and West German officials are joining forces in the fight against terrorism.
Within a week, two long-sought West Germans who are alleged members of the Red Army Faction (RAF) have been arrested in East Germany. The two suspects, wanted for murder, were living in East Germany under false identities provided by the former communist regime.
The progress on these cases is indicative of a turn in Eastern European policy toward terrorists.
''The two arrests are significant. They suggest a whole new era of cooperation in this area,'' says a United States official with long experience in terrorist matters.
''You are seeing signs of similar shifts … among the other East European countries,'' especially Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, the official said. ''What's happening publicly in East Germany is happening less publicly in the other countries.''
The RAF is a uniquely German, extremely violent organization. It has no nationalist cause. Rather, it fights against the so-called ''military-industrial-complex'' of capitalism, explains Lutz Irrgang, deputy director of intelligence for the West German state of Hessen. This state includes the business capital of Frankfurt - a prime RAF target.
The RAF was most active in the 1970s. Between 1970 and 1978, the RAF, the Baader-Meinhof gang (its parent organization), and other German groups killed 28 people, wounded 93, took 162 hostages, and seized 5.4 million deutsche marks ($3.12 million) in 35 bank robberies.
The acts and the accompanying broad police crackdown that at times infringed on individual rights threw the country into turmoil. But by the early '80s, most of the leading outlaws had been caught and imprisoned.
Although RAF activity is much more sporadic now, it is just as deadly. Last November, for instance, the RAF killed the chairman of Deutsche Bank, Alfred Herrhausen, when they blew up his armored car on his way to work. Deutsche Bank is West Germany's largest bank.
For years, West German intelligence has suspected East Germany of harboring RAF terrorists, ''but we weren't able to do anything about it because of bad relations'' between the two Germanys, says Mr. Irrgang.
There are still about 20 RAF terrorists wanted by West Germany, says Irrgang, and he expects that the new cooperation between the Germanys will lead to more arrests.
The two suspects arrested were Susanne Albrecht and Inge Viett. Ms. Viett, arrested Tuesday night, was wanted in connection with the murder of a senior West Berlin judge in 1974 and a kidnapping of a politician in 1975. Ms. Albrecht, arrested last Wednesday, has been suspected in a 1977 execution-style murder of prominent West German banker Jurgen Ponto, who was a friend of the Albrecht family.
The tip on Viett came from neighbors who notified West German officials after recognizing her picture on West German most-wanted posters. The tip on Albrecht reached West German officials before the the fall of the communist regime. But West Germany wasn't able to get any cooperation on the case until after the wall came down on Nov. 9, said a West German government official who has been tracking terrorism for over 15 years.
East Germany protected the terrorists to show solidarity with their anti-capitalist, anti-imperialist cause, but also ''to be well informed of their enemies as well as their friends,'' says the West German official. The secret police made it possible for terrorists to live in East Germany, ''but they also kept their activities tightly controlled,'' he said.
The US official says that East Germany and other East European countries have also provided sanctuary for, or aided in the transit of Palestinian terrorists, including those in the Abu Nidal organization. The Japanese Red Army also operated in Eastern Europe, he says.
The acknowledgment that terrorism is a crime is part of a growing consensus worldwide, the US official said. ''The Soviets are moving in that direction also.'' Czechoslovakia's halt on production of the undetectable explosive Semtex is just one public example of this, although the communist regime sold enough Semtex before its fall ''to last into the next century,'' he said.
With Eastern Europe smoking out terrorists, ''it's getting harder for terrorists to operate easily,'' the US official says. They are still protected in the Mideast, but ''hopefully it will be harder for them to move around'' in other parts of the world.


End of Document