Germany: Dresden knife attack likely motivated by Islamic extremism
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 22, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 400 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


A 20-year-old Syrian man, who is believed to have an Islamist background, was arrested on Tuesday evening in connection with the attack, according to police and prosecutors. They said the suspect came to authorities' attention as a result of examining evidence at the crime scene.
"Islamic terror is a permanent threat, which we must combat with the greatest possible coherence", said German Justice Minister Christine Lambrecht, on the social network Twitter, while the Interior Minister in the German executive, Horst Seehofer, considered that the incident in question "demonstrates once again the risky nature of Islamic violence" which "requires maximum vigilance". "Islamist terror is a major, enduring threat to our society that we have to tackle determinedly".
The court suspects "an act with Islamic motives", the Dresden prosecutor's office said in a statement.
The authorities said the suspect had an extensive criminal record, including charges of soliciting support for a foreign terrorist organization, and charges of bodily injury, and making threats.
"Utmost vigilance is necessary, whatever the form of extremism and terrorism". A large number of Syrians and other migrants arrived in Germany that year.
He had been living in Germany under "tolerated" status granted to people whose asylum requests have been rejected, but who can not be deported.
LILLEY: Trudeau wins, Canadians lose in Commons showdown
This means that if Trudeau's proposed committee fails to get the support of the NDP, a snap election will be triggered. It comes after the federal Liberals survived a confidence vote this afternoon with the support of Green and NDP MPs.
The two victims, both from the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia, were visiting Dresden together.
A 53-year-old German tourist from the German city of Cologne was stabbed to death, while another 55-year-old German citizen was injured.
The DNA was already stored in police databases, the report said.
"First Paris, now Dresden. why was this Syrian Islamist not in preventive custody or deported?" party leadership contender Friedrich Merz told news site Spiegel Online.
AHH was sentenced to two years and nine months imprisonment under juvenile criminal law at the Regis-Breitingen juvenile prison but was released on September 29 this year.
The pair had ordered castor seeds, explosives and metal ball bearings on the internet to build the toxic bomb.

Load-Date: October 22, 2020


End of Document