GERMAN AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES IRAQ;
   THE AMBASSADOR TO THE U.S. SAYS AN ATTACK ON IRAQ COULD DERAIL THE WAR AGAINST TERRORISM.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 17, 2002 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. B1
Length: 371 words
Byline: Anita Clark Wisconsin State Journal
Body


Germany fears immediate military action against Iraq would be a dangerous diversion from the international war on terrorism, the German ambassador to the United States said Wednesday.
"It is, in our view, not necessary to do it right now," Wolfgang Ischinger told about 150 people in the Fluno Center at UW-Madison. "There are enormous risks associated with military action against Iraq."
His speech on "Trans-Atlantic Relations: Challenges and Opportunities," comes at a sensitive time.
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's coalition government of Social Democrats and Greens narrowly held on to power in September's election after a campaign that focused critical attention on U.S. foreign policy.
Schroeder opposed military action against Iraq, even with a United Nations mandate, and one of his ministers reportedly compared President Bush to Adolf Hitler.
Ischinger spoke diplomatically, in perfect English sprinkled with wit and American idioms, of what he called "a more intensive relationship between Berlin and Washington than in the past."
Germans have only negative reactions to talk of war and some started to panic over screaming headlines from the United States, he said.
In the days immediately after Sept. 11, 2001, the German government declared its solidarity with the United States and its soldiers have died in Afghanistan, becoming Germany's first combat casualties since World War II.
"These German soldiers died fighting on the right side of the war, and we Germans have not been certain about being able to say that about the wars we've been fighting for the last 100 years or so," Ischinger said.
Germans agree that Iraq is a problem, he continued, but are terribly worried that military action now would lead to a crisis in the region, impede or derail the war against terrorism and be seen by millions as another humiliation of Muslims and Arabs.
He called for the United States to work with other countries, despite its military might.
"Power and influence in the world cannot only be measured by the number of aircraft carriers and the firepower you have," Ischinger said. "That would be a tragic mistake."
His appearance was sponsored by UW-Madison's International Institute and the European Studies Alliance.

Graphic

 
Photo of Wolfgang Ischinger

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document