GETTING BIN LADEN IS HUGE FOR OBAMA
The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)
May 4, 2011 Wednesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: THE CAP TIMES; Pg. 25; Our View
Length: 709 words
Body


Forget trumping Trump with the long-form birth certificate. President Obama's Sunday night announcement that he had ordered a successful mission to kill Osama bin Laden was a political coup that will yield him benefits for months, perhaps years, to come.
The president, who conservative critics continue to dismiss as somehow less capable or less committed to battling terrorism than his predecessor, George W. Bush, has done what Bush never could: announce that U.S. forces under his command had found and killed the leader of al-Qaida.
Real questions linger regarding threats that may remain, and about undeclared wars - in Iraq and Afghanistan, in particular - that continue to be waged as part of some grand strategy that always seemed to have more to do with neocon fantasies than fighting terrorism in any practical sense. Obama has never done enough to distinguish between necessary initiatives to maintain national security and the wars he inherited from Bush - and that he has, in the case of Afghanistan, foolishly extended.
It is unfortunate but true that the end of bin Laden may not be recognized as the proper point at which to end the broad war on terror initiated almost a decade ago by Bush and Dick Cheney.
So what is the practical political prospect for Obama in the wake of bin Laden's demise?
The political teams of American presidents, especially presidents seeking new terms, are quick to recognize the advantages accorded wartime commanders in chief - and that goes double for commanders in chief who can claim tangible victories.
So it was that a confident, in-charge and successful American president appeared Sunday night to detail the steps taken to track down Osama bin Laden.
This was no George Bush "Mission Accomplished" juggernaut.
But the lack of bravado ought not be mistaken for a lack of political calculus.
Obama did not boast about getting his man "dead or alive." Rather, he struck a tone that, while humble on the surface, emphasized his personal role in the mission.
"Today, at my direction, the United States launched a targeted operation against that compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. A small team of Americans carried out the operation with extraordinary courage and capability. No Americans were harmed. They took care to avoid civilian casualties. After a firefight, they killed Osama bin Laden and took custody of his body," explained the president. "For over two decades, bin Laden has been al-Qaida's leader and symbol, and has continued to plot attacks against our country and our friends and allies. The death of bin Laden marks the most significant achievement to date in our nation's effort to defeat al-Qaida."
Perhaps.
But what is certain is that the crowds were cheering on Obama's watch.
Obama did not have to engage in the cowboy antics of the previous administration. He could simply announce: "Justice has been done." He avoided hyperbole yet made unmistakable appeals to national pride and the sense of unity that prevailed after Sept. 11, 2001.
As terrorism experts discussed "one of the great anti-terror initiatives" in recent American history - and thousands of young people swarmed outside the White House waving American flags and chanting "USA! USA!" - Obama restated themes that have been constants of his presidency. For instance, he declared that "we must also reaffirm that the United States is not - and never will be - at war with Islam."
This sort of talk may unsettle the most ardent neocons. But it will play well politically, as the president gets credit for having accomplished what Bush did not.
Ultimately, in times of economic instability, foreign policy coups are less definitional than strategists imagine. There will be market surges in the short term. But it would be silly to imagine that an era of good feeling about Obama ushered in now will continue unhindered through the November 2012 election. Remember that the presidential "hero" of the first Gulf War, George H.W. Bush, traded 91 percent approval ratings in 1991 for defeat at the hands of Democrat Bill Clinton in 1992.
But the fact is that Republican prospects for portraying the president as disengaged or dysfunctional when it comes to foreign policy in general - and the war on terror in particular - just took a hard hit.

Load-Date: May 5, 2011


End of Document