Gingrich rallies conservatives here; Warns of bleak days should Dems win
Intelligencer Journal (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
October 27, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 494 words
Byline: Dave Pidgeon
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Former U.S. House speaker Newt Gingrich said Thursday that if Democrats win a majority in Congress, the nation will see higher taxes and a weakened anti-terrorism campaign.
"Every conservative who fails to vote is a victory for the liberals," Gingrich told an audience of about 400 people gathered at Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology for the Lancaster County Republican Committee's fall banquet.
Gingrich directed his harshest comments at U.S. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California and Democratic Senate hopeful Bob Casey Jr., who is looking to unseat U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum Nov. 7.
There's speculation that should Democrats win a majority in the House of Representatives, Pelosi would be made speaker, a post Gingrich held in the 1990s.
"Nancy Pelosi is the honest, legitimate representative of San Francisco values, and she should be," he said. "She represents San Francisco. But the idea that the Democrats will make her (second) in line (to the) commander in chief is amazing."
Pelosi has voted against defense funding and anti-terrorism measures, including the Patriot Act and phone surveillance of suspected terrorists.
Gingrich said if Casey defeats Santorum, the third-ranking Republican in the U.S. Senate, it would be a "disaster" for the country.
"You have a Democratic nominee who does not have a clue" about national defense, Gingrich said.
Gingrich was Thursday's keynote speaker, but it was Santorum who received the longest applause and loudest cheers. Santorum has trailed Casey in recent polls of likely voters by double digits.
Santorum acknowledged some of his conservative stances have been controversial and have put a "target on my back" in the election, but he said his re-election would "surprise" people in Washington and "change the face of the country."
He urged Republicans to turn out the same number of voters who participated in the 2004 presidential election. That year, President Bush received more than 144,000 votes in Lancaster County, or nearly twice what Democrat John Kerry did.
"I know what we're capable of," Santorum said.
Following Santorum's optimism, Gingrich painted a bleak picture of a world rife with terrorism, conflict and anti-American sentiment, saying the globe is on the brink of a "third world war."
"You are faced with an enemy whose ferociousness and intensity are beyond anything we have seen in modern times," he said.
Gingrich later added the danger posed by Islamic terrorism is the "greatest threat to America since the Civil War."
Gingrich has expressed interest in running for president in 2008, but he made no reference to any political aspirations Thursday night.
He currently provides political commentary on a number of television shows and recently published a book titled "Rediscovering God in America: Reflections on the Role of Faith in Our Nation's History and Future."
Gingrich served as speaker from 1995 to 1999 after helping to spearhead Republican efforts to control the House in 1994.

Graphic

 
Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich speaks to county Republicans Thursday. Deb Grove, Intelligencer Journal

Load-Date: October 27, 2006


End of Document