Gingrich Calls For Profiling And Discrimination In Searching For Potential Terrorists
RTT News (United States)
December 30, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 489 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., wrote an op-ed piece for the conservative Human Events magazine Wednesday in which he called on President Barack Obama to encourage discrimination and profiling in searching out potential terrorist threats.
"It is time to know more about would-be terrorists, to profile for terrorists and to actively discriminate based on suspicious terrorist information," Gingrich wrote.
"It is time to be honest about what we know. We know our opponents are radical extremists of the irreconcilable wing of Islam (Islamists, some would call them)," he added. "We know how to identify these enemies but our elites have refused to do so."
Gingrich argued that, instead of targeting the source of potential terrorist threats, "our politically correct government decides to make life more miserable for the travelling public by imposing hopelessly meaningless rules such as not allowing passengers to leave their seats in the last hour of the flight."
"Bound by cultural sensitivities, the default reaction of the bureaucracy is to review the procedures and wring its hands ineffectively," he said.
Gingrich also said the U.S. should "track down the owners of every website that promotes terrorism and systematically root them out. It should be as dangerous to a person promoting terrorism as it is to execute an act of terrorism."
Further, Gingrich said that Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano&apos;s claim that the would-be Detroit bomber was allowed to board a plan with explosives hidden in his underwear proved the system worked "is proof we need a new Homeland Security Secretary who knows we need a new strategy and a new focus."
He called these the "first steps toward defeating the extremists," and said the U.S. should take them "before there is a tragic attack that kills a lot of people."
Gingrich&apos;s comments come in response to a near-bombing on Christmas by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, who boarded a plane bound for Detroit with explosives in his underwear. He attempted to detonate them once the plane was in the air but was only unsuccessful because his explosives failed to detonate.
The incident has since sparked a lot of debate over the security measures taken in regards to air travel. Abdulmutallab&apos;s name was included in a list of terror suspects, but he was never put on any &apos;no-fly&apos; list.
Gingrich&apos;s comments are also in direct contrast to those made by House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Bennie Thompson, D-Miss., during an interview with MSNBC, where he said, "You pat down every person who&apos;s suspicious. I don&apos;t think you have to target people."
Thompson added, "This Swedish grandmother could just as well be a part of a terrorist plot as anyone else. So I think we have to be very careful when we try to target people."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 18, 2010


End of Document