Gingrich setting trap for himself on Sharia law
Chicago Daily Herald
December 20, 2011 Tuesday
ML2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 600 words
Body


The epochs of Newt Gingrich's public life are defined by the books that have revolutionized him — generally of the type that sell well at airports. There is Isaac Asimov's "Foundation" trilogy, Alvin Toffler's "The Third Wave," Steven Covey's "The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People" and various foundational texts of Total Quality Management and Lean Six Sigma.
These idea crushes are mostly harmless. Sometimes they are not. Gingrich has embraced Dinesh D'Souza's slapdash thesis about Barack Obama's Kenyan, anti-colonial ideology as "the most accurate, predictive model for his behavior." And Gingrich has recently been captured by the theory, developed in books such as Andrew McCarthy's "The Grand Jihad," that Sharia law is a mortal threat to the survival of freedom in the United States and the world as we know it.
Does this seem an exaggerated description of Gingrich's view? Here is the former speaker: "Sharia is a mortal threat to the survival of freedom in the United States and the world as we know it." Gingrich often precludes the possibility of exaggeration.
The Republican front-runner set out his argument about Islamic law in a speech last year to the American Enterprise Institute. America's problem, Gingrich argued, is not primarily terrorism; it is Sharia —"the heart of the enemy movement from which the terrorists spring forth." Sharia law, in his view, is inherently brutal — defined by oppression, stonings and beheadings. Its triumph is pursued not only by violent jihadists but by stealthy ones attending the mosque down the street. "The victory of Sharia," he concludes, "would clearly mean the end of the government Lincoln was describing."
It was not a casual theme. Gingrich Productions has generated a movie on the topic called "America at Risk: The War with No Name." Gingrich has called for a "federal law that says Sharia law cannot be recognized by any court in the United States." So he would be America's first officially anti-Sharia president. And he knows exactly what Sharia really means. It is totalitarianism.
Who else shares this interpretation of Sharia law? Well, totalitarians naturally do. Gingrich joins Iranian clerics, Taliban leaders and Salafists of various stripes in believing that the most authentic expression of Sharia law is fundamentalism and despotism.
Other Muslims — many other Muslims — dispute this. The varied traditions of Islamic jurisprudence assign different weights to scripture, tradition, reason and consensus in the interpretation of Islamic law. Most Muslims respect Islamic law. But the interpretation of Sharia varies greatly from Saudi Arabia to Indonesia to Tanzania to Detroit.
The governing implications of Gingrich's views are uncharted. Would President Gingrich reaffirm his belief that the most radical form of Islamic law is the most authentic? Would he tell American Muslims that to be good citizens they should renounce Sharia? And how would President Gingrich deal with predominantly Muslim nations if the war against terrorism were transformed into a struggle against Sharia? Wouldn't every Muslim friend and ally be discredited and undermined by having a relationship with the anti-Sharia superpower? Wouldn't Islamic radicals welcome the civilizational struggle that Gingrich offers? No strategy would be more likely to undermine the cause of America and the safety of its people.
Of course, none of this is possible. As president, Gingrich would be forced to repudiate his previous views out of strategic necessity. But those views demonstrate a disturbing tendency: the passionate embrace of shallow ideas.

Load-Date: December 20, 2011


End of Document