Giuliani talks about terrorism in Va. speech
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
June 27, 2007 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-2
Length: 542 words
Byline: BILL GEROUX

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Dateline: VIRGINIA BEACH 
Body


Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani avoided divisive social issues yesterday in a speech at Pat Robertson's Founders Inn, asking listeners to support him for tough leadership against terrorism.
 Giuliani, the former New York City mayor who became a national figure after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, filled his speech with references to that day and its aftermath. He told a luncheon crowd of about 650 Regent officials and local business leaders that terrorism is America's overriding issue.
 "Islamic terrorists are planning to kill us; they've succeeded in doing it, and they want to do it again," Giuliani said. And the Democrats "are in denial - they can't face the threat."
 Like his top GOP rivals Mitt Romney and John McCain, Giuliani is not an ideal candidate among the religious conservatives who predominate in places such as Regent. He has supported abortion rights and gay rights in the past and has been married three times.
 But he did not mention social issues yesterday and focused squarely on the threat of terrorism, punctuating his remarks with admiring references to the late President Ronald Reagan.
 The crowd applauded warmly, and Robertson called him "a dear friend and great leader," recalling that Giuliani, a prostate-cancer survivor, called him to offer encouragement several years ago when Robertson was undergoing treatment for the same illness.
 Robertson also welcomed Romney warmly last month when Romney gave the commencement speech at Regent, which was founded to "train Christian leaders to change the world." Giuliani - who now runs an emergency-preparedness consulting firm - originally was to have spoken at Regent University on April 17 but postponed his appearance in the immediate wake of the Virginia Tech killings the previous day.
 In his 20-minute address yesterday, Giuliani said politicians who allow polls to guide their views are "not leaders but actors." He did not mention anyone by name.
 Giuliani said Reagan set the standard for leadership because he would compromise on many issues but was unyielding on a set of core beliefs, including the need to defeat communism. He said it was no accident that as soon as Reagan took office in 1981, Iran released 62 U.S. hostages it had held for 444 days. "For 444 days the Iranians looked in Jimmy Carter's eyes; for one hour they looked in Ronald Reagan's eyes."
 Giuliani said that if he is elected president he would not allow Iran to become a nuclear power. "No how, no way, not acceptable."
 During the 1990s, Giuliani said, President Bill Clinton and many other Americans underestimated the resolve and the reach of Islamic terrorists, even after 500 Americans died in attacks on foreign soil and on the decks of the destroyer Cole in a harbor at Yemen. When America did not respond forcefully enough, he said, the terrorists only grew bolder.
 "They do not respect weakness; they do respect strength."
 Giuliani said Democrats will repeat that mistake if they succeed in pulling U.S. troops out of Iraq before that country is sufficiently stable, leaving a chaotic playground for terrorists as well as a potential flashpoint for a wider regional war between Shiite and Sunni Muslims.
Contact Bill Geroux at (757) 625-1358 or wgeroux@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document