GIULIANI URGES U.N. TO ISOLATE NATIONS NEUTRAL ON TERRORISM;
 NEW YORK MAYOR'S SPEECH DRAWS APPLAUSE EVEN FROM IRAQ
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 2, 2001 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 682 words
Byline: Edith M. Lederer The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani told the United Nations Monday that the global fight against terrorism had no room for neutrality - and no need for more studies or vague directives.
He said the United Nations should ostracize nations that support terrorism and isolate nations that remain neutral.
In an often impassioned address, Giuliani said, "Recognize that there is no room for neutrality on the issue of terrorism. You're either with civilization, or you're with terrorism."
He told diplomats from more that 150 countries that the evidence of terrorism, brutality and inhumanity "is lying beneath the rubble of the World Trade Center less than two miles from where we meet today."
Since the attack on Sept. 11, the mayor's popularity has soared with New Yorkers. On Monday, the United Nations joined in the applause - even Iraq, which is on the U.S. list of nations that sponsor terrorism.
Its U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said, "There is no neutrality. We are all against terrorism."
A weeklong General Assembly meeting that began Monday is the first global forum since the attacks to focus on terrorism.
Giuliani challenged nations in doubt that terrorism is "wrong and evil" to join him at the funerals of victims and to explain their position to thousands of children who will grow up orphaned.
"Instead," Giuliani said, "I ask each of you to allow me to say at those funerals that your nations stand with America in making a solemn promise and pledge that we will achieve unconditional victory over terrorism and terrorists."
The U.N. observer for the Palestinians said the mayor's tough words might have drawn a negative reaction had Giuliani not spoken against the backdrop of the devastation in lower Manhattan.
"No state would hesitate in expressing a clear-cut position against international terrorism, and in favor of the fight," said the Palestinian, Nasser al-Kidwa. "The sympathy was clear."
On Friday, the General Assembly and the Security Council set aside their typically deliberative pace to condemn the attacks immediately. The council moved rapidly to adopt a U.S.-sponsored resolution that requires all 189 of the world body's member nations to deny money, support and sanctuary to terrorists.
Under the resolution, all countries must:
* Criminalize the willful financing of terrorism.
* Freeze terrorist-related funds immediately.
* Deny terrorists safe haven.
* Speed the exchange of information, especially on terrorist acts and movements.
In his first U.N. speech, newly installed U.S. Ambassador John Negroponte called for swift action to carry out the resolution.
He also repeated American charges that Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaida organization were behind the suicide hijackings that hit the trade center and the Pentagon. Those attacks killed more than 6,000 people from 80 countries.
Negroponte said, "We cannot let them act together, we cannot let them act alone, we cannot let them act at all. Freedom - the first value of the new millennium - is worth the price of vigilance, and more."
Giuliani said he believed the increase in terrorism and terrorist groups over the past 15 years stemmed from the spread of freedom and democracy to many nations.
"Our freedom threatens them," the mayor said, "because they know that if our ideas of freedom gain a foothold among their people, it will destroy their power. So they strike out against us to keep those ideas from reaching their people."
Secretary-General Kofi Annan urged the General Assembly to maintain the unity that was forged among members right after the attacks.
He said, "Terrorism will be defeated if the international community summons the will to unite in a broad coalition - or it will not be defeated at all."
Since 1963, the General Assembly has adopted a dozen legal instruments to fight terrorism. But only five have been ratified by more than 100 countries.
Annan urged all nations to ratify the conventions and to agree on a new and detailed convention on international terrorism. He also called for strengthening controls over nuclear, chemical and biological weapons lest terrorists use them.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document