Give FBI all legal tools
USA TODAY
June 2, 2005, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 433 words
Byline: Pat Roberts
Body

Today's debate: Fighting terrorism
Opposing view: Power already used to fight other crimes would help beat terrorism.
***
The nation expects the FBI to prevent terrorist attacks. With terrorists willing to hijack planes and acquire weapons of mass destruction, failure is too costly. Congress cannot hold the FBI accountable for failures to pre-empt terrorism while asking it to fight the threat with one hand tied behind its back. We must give the FBI every constitutional tool available to win the battle.
The USA Patriot Act was a step in the right direction. It tore down walls that prevented information sharing and updated intelligence laws that predated the cellphone and Internet. Opponents criticized the act, but their claims haven't been supported by facts. Through aggressive congressional oversight, we know the FBI wisely uses Patriot Act authority within the law. Congress should permanently authorize expiring intelligence provisions this year; it is the right thing to do.
Congress should also ask itself why FBI intelligence officials don't have the same authority to investigate terrorism and espionage that law enforcement officers can use to stop health care fraud, child pornography, narcotics trafficking and other crimes: the administrative subpoena. If it can stop "dirty doctors," we should use it to stop dirty bombers. A bill that the Intelligence Committee is now considering would do just that.
Congress has already granted various agencies authority to use administrative subpoenas 335 times. The Supreme Court has upheld this tool against constitutional challenge for over 50 years. The Secret Service can use it to protect the president, but the FBI can't use it to protect America from terrorism and espionage. This does not make sense, and we should change it.
Opponents of the terrorism and espionage administrative subpoena will claim that it gives the FBI unfettered discretion to conduct "fishing expeditions." I would remind opponents that the year is 2005. We are not granting this well-established, constitutional authority to the FBI of the 1960s, which was nearly devoid of congressional oversight.
Today's FBI honors the rule of law, is bound by executive orders and attorney general guidelines, and is subject to vigorous oversight by congressional committees that will monitor closely how it uses administrative subpoenas. In four years, I predict we will find again that the tool was used wisely and that allegations of abuse are not supported by facts -- and Americans will be safer.
***
Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

Load-Date: June 2, 2005


End of Document