Giving Away Far Too Many Of Our Constitutional Rights - Amendment Iv Of The U.S. Constitution
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
December 4, 2010 Saturday


Copyright 2010 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 11
Length: 699 words
Byline: Carol Petersen/Columnist
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized."
How much do your constitutional rights mean to you?
How well do you know your constitutional rights?
I have been thinking about our rights a lot recently as I have watched our government trample them under foot, and listened to airport interviews with travelers willing to trade away their freedoms and their rights for the illusion of physical safety.
From where I sit, it appears that the terrorists have won.
The point of terrorism is to terrorize. Unlike conventional warfare with battles, front lines, territory gained, military versus military, terrorism is directed against a civilian population and the object of terrorism is to frighten, intimidate and terrify that population to the point of surrender out of fear.
Terrorists win when our open society becomes an increasingly closed society, when a free society becomes less and less free and when citizens permit government intrusion into every area of their lives in a vain attempt to feel more secure.
The erosion of our constitutional rights began a long time ago but markedly accelerated after Sept. 11, 2001, and, alarmingly, has continued through both Republican and Democratic administrations.
It began with The Patriot Act, which provided for increased surveillance, including wiretaps. But look around you. Even in little Lancaster, Pa., there are now surveillance cameras everywhere, including residential streets around a local college.
We began submitting to metal detectors and hand-held wands at airports and train stations, submitting to searched carry-ons and purses, had our personal items confiscated, endured the banning of liquids, had those restrictions expanded to apply to sports stadiums and arenas and concert venues, been growled at by dogs and NSA employees, and we quietly submitted.
And because the American people quietly submitted themselves to each of those increasingly intrusive indignities, the government did not miss a beat in installing full-body scanners and instituting physical searches that border on sexual molestation.
I have heard American citizens ask, "What is the problem with being searched if you have nothing to hide?"
I have heard American citizens say, "I don't like it, but I will do anything just to be safe."
And I have to admit that makes me despair for the state of our Republic.
How many U.S. citizens have been gate-raped in airports? How many have been scanned? How many terrorists have been caught as a result?
I said earlier that all we would gain from these infringements on our rights was the illusion of safety. It is illusion because our security measures are always playing catch-up, running behind the curve.
What good does it do to prevent citizens from carrying on liquids after a failed terrorist attempt using liquids?
What good does it do to ban matches and lighters after a failed terrorist attempt to light a shoe bomb?
It seems to me rather like locking the barn door after the horse is already gone.
By the way, those particular terrorists were not caught by screening. They were stopped by observant and intrepid U.S. citizen travelers!
How about using the money wasted on scanners that cannot even detect plastic explosives or the latest powdered or compounded bomb materials to replace all the poorly paid, untrained faux security people with military veterans who are already trained to recognize insurgents and terrorists, already trained in martial techniques, already proven capable in emergencies, and pay them what they are worth?
And how about we, as Americans citizens, take back our rights to our own constitutional personal freedoms while we are at it.
Benjamin Franklin said, "Any people that would give up liberty for a little temporary safety deserves neither liberty nor safety."
I agree with him.
Carol Petersen is a freelance writer, artist and photographer from Lancaster Township. Her e-mail address is cpetersencolumn@gmail.com

Graphic

 
Carol Petersen Columnist

Load-Date: December 4, 2010


End of Document