Giving more ground
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 4, 1996, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 579 words
Byline: DAVID HARDIN
Body


A pipe-bomb explosion at the Olympics and suspected foul play in the downing of TWA Flight 800 have raised not only the specter of terrorism at home but restrictions on the freedom of movement Americans hold dear.
Judging from the various outcries, the incidents indeed suggest that the country is heading in a direction that may parallel the security arrangements of Europe or Israel. This in turn is looked upon as a necessary but regrettable price to be paid for one's personal safety.
Yet domestic terrorism and limits on freedom of movement are hardly rooted in the 1990s. They've been with us for years. Say what you will, but big chunks of American cities long have been placed off-limits by and on behalf of the greater part of the population, who otherwise would risk life and limb by venturing within at most moments of the day.
If that's not terrorism, then what is it? And clearly, if the threat to one's safety, perceived or actual, has not caused millions of people to compromise their freedom of movement by wide detours and avoidance, then see how many turn out for a ride in an armored car through what we euphemistically call the typical "inner city."
Today's random acts of the new terrorism are news, for one thing, because their victims and their locations are indiscriminate. Most people are largely safe from the daily crimes of the inner city - the burglaries, the drug shoot-outs, the gang wars, the casual drive-by killings and assaults - because they have fled to the 'burbs or have somehow managed to grab back a patch of lost territory.
The new terrorism with its pipe-bomb portability threatens to intrude upon what was formerly safe ground and relatively safe preoccupations. In fact, the death toll so far this year from domestic commercial aviation is still only 1 percent of those who will die on the road, many of them victims of another kind of urban terrorist, the drunken driver. Nevertheless, the system is again mobilizing to address it: more baggage checks, more cops, more German shepherds, more cameras and X-ray machines, etc.
Well, it's hard to argue against precautionary steps, so why bother?
But somehow, there is the less-than-admirable suspicion that the new terrorism has a certain horrific attraction both because it is recent to this country and because we haven't yet had a chance to fail in trying to do something about it.
Whereas we have failed ignominiously in much of metropolitan America toward eradicating generational poverty, drug dealing and homicide that exist at its daily core. It is not for lack of spending and preaching, and welfare reform is now trotted out as the most recent of magic bullets.
Perhaps it will be, but most people long ago wearied of the battle and clicked off on victim and thug alike.
To say that Americans may have to put up with more restrictions for the sake of personal safety, and that their chance of terrorist injury has gone from zero to something still on the slim side of minuscule, pales beside what millions of their fellow countrymen have endured for decades. To say that we may have to give up some of our freedom in exchange for security is to overlook or forget that we've done this before, to our shame and discredit.
The nation has long ceased to be an America where one could go anywhere anytime in virtual safety. And all the big talk of not giving in to terrorism sounds rather hollow when compared with our track record.  David Hardin is a Tribune assistant managing editor.

Notes

OPINION

Graphic

 
SIGNATURE

Load-Date: August 6, 1996


End of Document