GLOBAL FOCUS;POOL RE WORKS WITH GOVERNMENT TO REINSURE U.K. TERROR RISKS
Business Insurance
October 07, 1996


Copyright 1996 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: International; Pg. G2
Length: 882 words
Byline: CAROLYN ALDRED  
Body


LONDON-The British government is likely to remain the ultimate reinsurer of terrorist risks in the United Kingdom for the foreseeable future, despite sporadic peace talks in Northern Ireland and increasing capacity for U.K.  terrorist risks from private markets.
Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd., a mutual reinsurer for 248 insurance companies and about 90 Lloyd's of London syndicates, began underwriting in 1993 with the British government as its retrocessionaire and guarantor after the withdrawal of reinsurance capacity in the open market for terrorist risks.
The government agreed to step in as a ''last resort'' insurer for terrorist risks after an Irish Republican Army bombing in April 1992 at St. Mary Axe in the heart of London's financial district, which caused 350 million ($546 million) in damages and forced the insurance and reinsurance market to restrict its exposure.
In its first two years of operation after that disaster, Pool Re paid out 365 million ($569.4 million) in claims. Although it received no claims last year, the mutual reinsurer faces substantial claims after two IRA explosions already this year.
Pool Re provides commercial property policyholders with limited terrorism coverage of up to 100,000 ($156,000) for each of the main areas of property coverage (see story, page G4).
With support from most of the U.K. insurance market and a 90% renewal rates, the government-backed reinsurer is credited with providing a much-needed source of coverage to U.K. businesses at a time when traditional reinsurers proved unwilling to provide capacity for insurers covering the terrorism exposure in the United Kingdom.
Pool Re ''has been very successful. It made available property and business interruption insurance cover for acts of terrorism, which was under threat of being withdrawn or severely limited by the market,'' said Pool Re Chief Executive Leslie Lucas.
''I am sure Pool Re will continue to be there at least in the immediate future. In that sense, it has been successful and is providing a source of cover,'' said David Cooper, a divisional director of broker Willis Corroon London Ltd.
Pool Re marks the only time the British government has stepped in as a retrocessionaire of the commercial insurance market, and there are very few other examples of state-backed insurance or reinsurance pools worldwide that offer terrorist coverage, Mr. Lucas pointed out. Similar pools offering terrorism coverage operate in Spain and South Africa, he noted (see related story).
The Pool Re arrangement came about ''as a partnership between insurers, banks and the government,'' according to Mr. Lucas.
''The whole purpose is to establish a fund to pay claims out of premiums while the government acts as our retrocessionaire, guaranteeing our security and ability to pay claims,'' he said.
A stand-by loan facility of 500 million ($780 million) arranged through the banks ''has never been drawn upon to date,'' according to Mr. Lucas.
Pool Re will pay a retrocession premium to the government when its aggregate insurance fund and revenue reserves exceed 1 billion ($1.56 billion). As of year-end 1995, provisions for outstanding claims, including the facility's reserves totaled 531 million ($828.4 million).
In spite of its success, Pool Re does receive some criticism from brokers and policyholders for its rigid underwriting.
Pool Re provides all member insurers with an underwriting manual that specifies the procedures to be followed for accounting, claims handling and calculating the premiums for terrorist coverage.
''The underwriting manual is an extension of the reinsurance agreement and compliance with its requirements in every respect is a condition precedent to the liability of Pool Re,'' explained Pool Re's Mr. Lucas.
Under its retrocession agreement with the government, Pool Re cannot make any changes to the underwriting manual without the approval of the U.K.  Department of Trade and Industry.
''This means that rates, terms and conditions cannot be changed without government approval,'' according to Pool Re.
Because the terrorism coverage is an extension of standard property policy coverage, policyholders cannot be selective about which properties are insured for the terrorism risk.
''The terrorism cover must be all-or-nothing. The policyholder cannot select which properties are covered,'' Mr. Lucas said.
It is this inflexibility of coverage that has led many larger companies to self-insure their U.K. terrorism exposure or seek coverage elsewhere. As a result, in recent years an alternative market for terrorism coverage has re-emerged in the Lloyd's of London market.
''A lot of insureds have some concerns which stem from (Pool Re's) quite rigid approach to underwriting. It is an all-or-nothing approach working on a non-selection principle,'' said Willis Corroon's Mr. Cooper.
''The client has to make the decision to buy cover for all its assets or none. There isn't the ability to select properties. It's a very rigid and prescriptive approach,'' he added.
It is a view echoed widely among brokers and risk managers.
''Pool Re is fulfilling a very important role for full-value coverage,'' said Stuart Sutherland, a divisional director for Marsh & McLennan Global Broking Ltd., part of London-based Bowring Group Ltd.
However, many clients wish to insure

Load-Date: October 10, 1996


End of Document