Global Terrorism Database Presentation
The Retriever Weekly: University of Maryland - Baltimore County
March 25, 2014 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 1
Length: 418 words
Body


Since the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center, terrorism is at the forefront of national news and a constant concern for citizens and legislators.
At this year's Interdisciplinary Studies sponsored Slobodan B. Petrovich Memorial lecture, Dr. Gary La Free gave a presentation entitled "Black Swans and Burstiness: Countering Myths about Terrorism" to enlighten the UMBC community about the reality of worldwide terrorism activity.
Dr. La Free is a criminology and criminal justice professor at the University of Maryland as well as the director of the institution's National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism program.
His presentation highlighted his research with the Global Terrorism Database which is an online compilation of all documented terrorist attacks around the world from 1970 to 2012.
With records of over 113,000 events, the database is considered to be the largest amassed source of unclassified terrorism information in the world. Users can easily explore the site's quantitative information to reveal statistical data categorized by numerous characteristics including country, target, weapon or region.
"There is no single definition of terrorism. ... [e]ven different branches of the U.S. government disagree on terrorism definitions," said LaFree in an online news article. For this reason, the site attempts to specify what it considers to be terroristic activity to determine which events are incorporated in official records.
Since the database's creation of the original definition published in 1970, the term terrorism has become more particular.
According to the Global Terrorism Database website, the current definition of terrorism spans to include three major aspects: terrorism is a violent act that has intentions of attaining a political, economic, religious, or social goal; conveying a message to an audience greater than the act's victims; violating the International Humanitarian Law.
During his lecture, La Free demonstrated how he and other terrorism researchers are utilizing their statistical data to analyze attack patterns in order to best understand the nature of events and effectively prevent future tragedies.
La Free first explained the concept of "black swan events" which are attacks that are difficult to predict, large in scale, and alter history.
He proceeded to explain the term "burstiness" which he defined in the context of terrorism activity as a great number of events occurring in the same time period in the same region. 12

Load-Date: March 25, 2014


End of Document