Go slow on Patriot II
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 17, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; IN OUR VIEW
Length: 536 words
Body


President Bush used the second anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks to urge an expansion of the anti-terrorism laws passed in the days after the attacks.
That bill, called the Patriot Act, gave law enforcement authorities broad new powers to make inquiries into the activities of Americans and to detain people suspected of having a connection to terrorists or terrorist groups.
Although organizations on all points of the political spectrum have found things about the initial Patriot Act to be troubling, it enjoys broad support within the Bush administration. In the weeks before the Sept. 11 anniversary, Attorney General John Ashcroft crisscrossed the country promoting its benefits, apparently paving the way for the president's new initiative.
#PATRIOTII.ED#
The expanded measure, which is being called Patriot II, has three essential components:
Allow federal agents to issue their own subpoenas for records or to compel testimony, without the approval of a judge or grand jury.
Expand the death penalty to crimes related to terrorism, such as the financing of groups or activities.
Make it more difficult for suspects in terrorism cases to be freed on bail before trial.
The implementation of any of these measures could represent a significant shift in the balance between domestic security and individual rights. All should be carefully weighed before legislative approval.
The subpoena issue is probably the most controversial. While federal agents do have the right to issue subpoenas in some investigations -- health care fraud, for example -- these cases usually begin as civil matters with criminal action only coming at the end.
The United States has a long history of requiring judges to approve subpoenas in criminal cases, including terrorism investigations. This is an important check on prosecutorial zeal, and we toy with it reluctantly, at best.
We're not persuaded by the administration's argument that fast-moving investigations require quick action on subpoenas.  Judges have historically been made available at all hours of the day and night, and we think it unlikely that any would stand in the way with lives potentially at stake.
We have similar concerns about the matter of limiting bail for terrorism suspects. Under the Patriot II proposal, the burden of proof for whether a defendant should be granted bail would essentially be reversed: Rather than requiring a prosecutor to show why bail should not be granted -- the defendant is a flight risk, dangerous, etc. -- it would be up to the defense to show why it should be granted.
This is another troubling precedent.
We were happy to see U.S. Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., express reservations about the subpoena and bail provisions of Patriot II.  "I'm concerned that it may be too sweeping," he told The New York Times.
At the same time, Specter is sponsoring the measure to broaden the death penalty in terrorism cases.
The original Patriot Act passed quickly as smoke still rose from the ruins of the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. It was an emotional response to a horrific attack.
While the wounds remain, we, as a nation, have turned more to rebuilding. As such, Patriot II requires a much more rigorous and detailed review before passage.

Load-Date: September 18, 2003


End of Document