God loves terrorism; Non-Muslim nations with religious themed flags
University Wire
October 11, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 954 words
Byline: By Peter Miller, Daily Targum
Dateline: New Brunswick, N.J.
Body


In the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, then-General Ariel Sharon marched his troops towards Beirut intent on rooting out all Palestinian and affiliated terrorists hiding in the city. This action was predicated by Sharon's meeting with the Phalangists, an independent band of civil war-era Lebanese Christian militia, whom he enlisted as mercenaries to help capture Beirut and set up a Phalangist government who would then sign a peace treaty with Israel. After the death of over 14,000 Lebanese and Palestinian people, Prime Minister Menahem Begin decided that enough was enough, and ordered Sharon to abandon Beirut.
Knowing that he lacked the public and governmental support for an all out war, Sharon found a way to accomplish his original objective against the Palestinian terrorists, whom he called "beasts walking on two legs." The Israeli forces surrounded the towns of Sabra and Shatila and allowed the Phalangists to essentially pillage and kill thousands of men, women and children while Sharon's forces stood idly by, claiming no involvement, and therefore no wrongdoing.
Rutgers U.
Fast-forward almost 20 years. The United States has begun its own mission to eradicate terrorism. In doing so, President Bush and his Cabinet have been shoring up international support for their elaborate campaign, including quite a few Middle Eastern and Arab nations, whose cooperation is critical due to their proximity to major terrorist organizations and the region's inextricable economic ties. Even before this global coalition building began, most people realized that Israel would use the Sept. 11 attack on America as a measure to convince the United States that this war is very real, and the elimination of terrorism is more necessary than ever. Unfortunately, now-Prime Minister Sharon has forgotten the importance of forming coalitions with neutral neighbors as a means to accomplish something greater, like he so shrewdly did in 1982, and has criticized the United States for trying to "appease the Arabs" at his nation's expense.
None of this is surprising, considering Sharon is widely known in Israel as "a war looking for a place to happen." This man has made himself an enemy of the entire Arab world, and in turn, helped make Israel and all of its allies' targets for terrorism. Make no mistake about it; America has supported Israel for half a century, and all we have earned is the right to be victimized by OPEC, and the responsibility of burying at least 6,000 American victims of the backlash before this year comes to a close. It is time that we cut ties with Israel, if only for the safety of our own citizens.
There are a lot of Islamic fundamentalists in the Middle East region who believe that America - as the major source of both military and monetary power in - is directly responsible for the conditions that they have been forced to endure during the last 50 years. Regardless of who is right or wrong in this never-ending conflict, the fact remains that certain people have marked Americans for death because they believe we've infringed on their existence, and the only way to eliminate or lessen that contention is to disassociate ourselves with Israel and allow them to count on only themselves, as Sharon so desperately wants.
There is, however, another option that most people have not been willing to consider. We helped create a monster in Israel. It was an interesting exercise in third-party imperialism. We, along with our colonial cohort Great Britain, facilitated a state in a region where we have considerable economic interests. We even armed them and allowed them to defend their newfound sovereignty. Alas, things have gotten out of control. In Shelley's Frankenstein, the repercussions of creating the monster were not properly thought out, and after terrorizing the countryside, it became necessary to destroy said monster. Israel needs to be dismantled, either politically or physically. My reasoning follows President Bush's statement that any state harboring terrorists is an enemy of freedom.
The nation of Israel is among the worst offenders of state-sponsored terrorism. In any given year, they bulldoze enough Palestinian towns to equal two World Trade Centers, and partake in what amounts to nothing more than execution without a trial through their assassinations of alleged PLO leaders. This is discounting the numerous invasions and wars that Israel has started during the past few decades in the name of "self defense." One can only imagine how aggressive they would be, especially being (mis)led by the hawkish Sharon, if the United States weren't pulling the strings.
If President Bush is serious about this war on terrorism, the Israeli situation must be addressed. They are the chief catalyst in the most hostile region of the world; both a literal and symbolic representation of the westernization that irks their neighboring nations, and our continued support for their stalled struggle for supremacy has put us in harm's way. The fact that Israel is populated mainly by Jews of European descent does not mean that they do not harbor and sponsor terrorism. It just means that they've managed to slip under the radar, while indoctrinating the entire world to think "Arab" when they hear the word "terror." If we continue to support this hypocrisy, then we will essentially be responsible for waging the "Crusade" that Osama bin Laden has accused us of. Targeting Islamic and Arab terrorists is not enough. There is a cancer spreading through the Middle East, a cancer brought on by the introduction of a foreign substance. That foreign substance is Israel, and it must be removed before it causes any more damage.
(C) 2001 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document