GOLDWATER WOULD MEET P.L.O.
The New York Times
September 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 299 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1
Body


Senator Barry Goldwater, in a deviation from Reagan Administration policy, said today that he would be in favor of talking with the Palestine Liberation Organization if it would help reduce international terrorism.
The Arizona Republican was speaking from Phoenix by telephone with Ken Alvord of the program ''News Talk 98'' on WRC, an NBC radio affiliate in Washington.
Senator Barry Goldwater states that he would be in favor of talking with Palestine Liberation Organization if such talks would reduce terrorism
Saying that one terrorist act begets another, Senator Goldwater added: ''That's what you're seeing in Iran, but I think that's what you're going to see more of in the Middle East, where the P.L.O. is demanding not necessarily recognition, but that they be talked to, and while I don't think anything is ever going to come of any talks with them, I think until we do talk to them, we're going to have more and more trouble.'' The Senator said he would ''do anything to calm down these acts of terrorism.''
The Administration affirmed last month, after the visit to Washington of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt, that it would not talk directly with the P.L.O. until the Palestinian organization accepted United Nations Resolutions 242 and 338 and recognized the right of Israel to exist. The United States made that promise to Israel in 1975, at the time of the second Israeli-Egyptian disengagement agreement.
Reached by telephone in Phoenix later today, Senator Goldwater said that he had been saying this ''for at least five years'' but that no one had listened. He said that terrorism was part of the larger Middle East problem. ''I think the U.S. should urge Begin and the Arab leaders to sit down and talk to this man,'' Senator Goldwater said of Yasir Arafat, head of the P.L.O.


End of Document