GONZALES RAPS TORTURE, BACKS PATRIOT ACT RENEWAL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 19, 2005 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 399 words
Byline: MICHELLE MITTELSTADT, THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Attorney General-designate Alberto Gonzales offered a less-than-unequivocal answer this month when asked if U.S. personnel could engage in torture under certain circumstances.
 "I don't believe so, but I'd want to get back to you on that," the White House counsel told Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., at a confirmation hearing that focused on the Bush administration's interrogation policies for terrorism suspects and Iraqi prisoners.
 Yesterday, he revisited the torture question. "No," he responded in written answers delivered to the Senate Judiciary Committee a day before the panel could vote on his nomination. "U.S. personnel are prohibited from doing so."
Answering dozens of questions posed by senators of both parties, Gonzales shed little new light on his role in shaping anti-terrorism policy, including a now-repudiated August 2002 Justice Department memo narrowing the definition of torture.
 Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., complained yesterday that Gonzales' answers were "vague, unresponsive or AWOL."
 "Judge Gonzales gives the impression that he feels that he does not have to substantively answer questions before his confirmation, even though he wants to be attorney general of the United States," Leahy said.
 Offering his views in response to questions submitted by Judiciary Committee members, Gonzales:
 * Expressed strong support for renewal of Patriot Act provisions that expire at year's end. "I believe the USA Patriot Act has greatly improved our nation's ability to detect and prevent terrorist attacks," he said.
 * Said he was unaware of any executive branch official giving permission to move terrorism suspects to countries known to practice torture. Several suspects have charged that they were shipped to Egypt, Syria and other countries, where they were tortured.
 * Did not commit to recusing himself from the prosecution of former Enron Corp. executives, though he pledged to "take very seriously" his obligation to recuse himself in any case where he has a potential conflict. He did legal work for Enron more than a decade ago.
 * Vowed to make the investigation and prosecution of obscenity "one of my highest criminal enforcement priorities."
 * Said he and the administration favor renewal of the federal assault weapons ban and background checks for gun-show purchases. The administration was largely silent as Congress allowed the assault weapons ban to expire last year.

Load-Date: January 19, 2005


End of Document