Good guys! Bad guys! Guns! What we'll really miss in Jack Bauer's '24'
Daily News (New York)
March 29, 2010 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


Section: TELEVISION; Pg. 64
Length: 540 words
Byline: BY DAVID HINCKLEY DAILY NEWS TV CRITIC
Body


MAYBE TONIGHT, or maybe a couple of Mondays from now, Jack Bauer will discover that America's foremost counter-terrorism agency, CTU, has been infiltrated by anFOT - a Friend Of Terrorists who are setting up Manhattan for a nuclear attack.
And he will deal with it - because that's what he does.
For eight seasons on Fox's "24," Kiefer Sutherland's Jack Bauer has been saving America. Bad guys have shot him, beaten him, tortured him and poisoned him, and he has survived to stop them.
He has been a defining TV character of the last decade. He may be the best comic book-style action superhero in TV history.
So it's sad that rising production costs and declining viewership, likely rooted in the perception that there are only so many fresh CTU plots and themes, have done what terrorists and assassins could not - stop him. Fox said Friday that this eighth season, which wraps with a two-hour finale on May 24, will be the end of the TV line.
The only consolation for fans is that a script has already circulated for a theatrical movie continuation of the story.
Instead of "24," presumably the movie will be called "Two." But unlike many TV/movie crossovers, this one should have a decent shot at succeeding - because the essence of "24" really isn't that complex.
It's great action drama.
For all the talk of the show dramatizing contemporary moral dilemmas over law enforcement interrogation issues, "24" has drawn tens of millions of viewers mostly because it shows really good guys battling really bad guys, a plot device that has worked for scriptwriters since ancient Greece. Sure, it's also about fighting terrorism in a decade when we have been acutely aware of terrorism in the real world. But long before 9/11 we were forgiving a good TV cop who returned a scared child to a frantic mother because he extracted information from a sneering kidnapper by any means necessary.
"24" has been compelling television not because it encourages academic panels on law enforcement codes - PBS can do that - but because it tells high-octane stories, with guns, fights and quality characters.
Jack's loyal friend Chloe O'Brian (Mary Lynn Rajskub) is a great good guy. Alison Taylor (Cherry Jones) makes a nice, human President. Jack's late-arriving love interest Renee Walker (Annie Wersching) reflects the impact of Jack's moral code on a person who didn't start in his world. The show has had a dozen first-rate bad guys and another dozen in the shadows between, like the fascinating Tony Almeida (Carlos Bernard) last season.
Are moral discussions part of the "24" legacy? They are. So is whatever role Jack Bauer played in reassuring Americans we have powerful, deeply embedded instincts that enable us to beat the baddest guys.
Purely as a TV show, "24" helped elevate Fox from the fourth network to a serious contender for No. 1. It helped open the door for serial shows like "Lost," and it's no accident that as "24" winds down, Fox has launched another action-packed comic hero show, "Human Target." Fox's sister FX has launched an animated satire on a counterterrorism agency, "Archer."
But the biggest reason we'll miss "24" is that in its heart and at its best, it's just plain old-fashioned good popcorn television. dhinckley@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Kiefer Sutherland's Jack Bauer, the face of '24' since its inception, is never more than a few minutes from pulling his gun in service of America.

Load-Date: March 29, 2010


End of Document