Good, and lucky, too. Our view • What was that about terrorism not being a law enforcement problem? OPINION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 5, 2010 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10
Length: 565 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


In a remarkable display of solid police work, the FBI and New York City police had a suspect in the failed Times Square car bombing in custody within 54 hours of the discovery of the bomb Saturday evening.
Officials in Pakistan also had arrested several people who, Pakistani officials believe, may have been in league with the would-be bomber. He was identified by U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder as Faisal Shahzad, 30, a naturalized American citizen from Bridgeport, Conn. The FBI said Tuesday that Mr. Shahzad had admitted his role.
"The investigation is ongoing, as are our attempts to gather useful intelligence, and we continue to pursue a number of leads," Mr. Holder said early Tuesday. "But it's clear that the intent behind this terrorist act was to kill Americans."
Also clear is that there is much more to come in this investigation, but one conclusion stands out: Terrorism is a crime, not an act of war, and is best dealt with by people who investigate crimes for a living and the justice system that punishes the people they arrest.
This may become an issue if Mr. Shahzad is found to have ties to al-Qaida, as was the case with Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the Nigerian student accused in the Christmas Day bomb plot aboard a Detroit-bound Northwest Airlines flight.
Former Vice President Dick Cheney and Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., were among those who complained that the FBI had read Mr. Abdulmutallab his Miranda rights and interrogated him in according to U.S. laws.
On March 14, Mr. Cheney criticized President Barack Obama for returning to the "law enforcement mode" in dealing with terrorism. "We made a decision after 9/11 that I think was crucial," Mr. Cheney said on CNN, "We said, 'This is a war - it's not a law enforcement problem.'"
On the other hand, under the Bush Doctrine, which says that any "nation that continues to harbor or support terrorism will be regarded by the United States as a hostile regime," we might have had to bomb ourselves, or at least Connecticut.
Lately, law enforcement's got a pretty good streak going, particularly when you count the arrests in March of eight other alleged domestic terrorists, members of the so-called Hutaree militia, who were planning to kill a cop so that they could attack a police funeral.
Indeed, some analysts believe the al-Qaida attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, could have been foiled had the CIA cooperated more fully with the FBI's investigation of the bombing of the USS Cole 11 months earlier. U.S. law enforcement agencies, working with their counterparts in other nations, have caught big targets, including Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the alleged mastermind of the 9/11 attacks.
To be sure, the United States has been lucky in the last six months in the fecklessness of its enemies. Mr. Abdulmutallab couldn't get his underwear bomb to go off. The Hutaree leaked like a New Orleans levee. And Mr. Shahzad apparently flunked bomb-making school.
"He was trying to cover his tracks, but he left more clues than a guy walking into a bank to rob it without a mask," former New York City bomb squad detective Kevin Barry told The New York Times. "This guy left everything here but his wallet."
The United States won't always be so lucky. Counterintelligence agencies must assume that terrorists will get smarter, so they must get smarter, too. Ten years of dealing with al-Qaida have shown there is no substitute for smart cops.

Load-Date: May 5, 2010


End of Document