GOP Aims to Curb Federal Backing Of Terror Coverage
American Banker
March 18, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 3; Vol. 170; No. 53
Length: 595 words
Byline: Michele Heller
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


House Republicans said Thursday that they are researching ways to reduce
government involvement in insuring American businesses against terrorist
attacks.
Democrats and business interests are pushing Congress to act quickly to
extend the program under which the government serves as the reinsurer for
property/casualty policies that cover acts of terrorism. It is set to expire 
at yearend.
But key GOP lawmakers said they are working on a permanent solution for
the insurance industry, which says it cannot offer such coverage unless the
government promises assistance.
"Folks are looking for a long-term solution, not just an extension," said
Rep. Eric Cantor, the chief deputy majority whip, at a U.S. Chamber of
Commerce forum. "We want to put in place a permanent public-private
partnership. ... We can't just continue providing an extension without
thinking long-term."
Rep. Cantor, of Virginia, said Republicans on the House Financial
Services Committee are studying the problem and will seek "market-based"
alternatives even if the Treasury Department does not make such
recommendations in a report due June 30.
He said House Financial Services Chairman Michael G. Oxley "is actively
working" with Rep. Richard Baker, the chairman of the subcommittee with
jurisdiction over insurance matters, "to look at a variety of options and
ways to proceed."
The program was established by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, which
was passed after the 9/11 attacks. This year it would cover 85% of any
terrorism-related claims beyond a total of $15 billion.
The House GOP's reform plan could include a temporary extension.
"Some temporary extension may be part of the deal, but it would be tied
with reforms," Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Tex., told reporters after speaking at
the forum.
The goal is for the legislation to "better define what the government is
responsible for and what insurers are responsible for" and "give insurers
more flexibility to have greater ... reserves on hand to respond to a
terrorist attack," Rep. Sessions said. It should be "flexible enough to make 
sure the marketplace is the answer, not the government," he said.
Gregory Zerzan, the Treasury's acting assistant secretary for financial
institutions, said at the same event that the administration is "actively
considering all the policy options."
A week ago the monthly newsletter of the Property Casualty Insurers
Association of America ran a letter from Majority Leader Tom Delay
criticizing the insurance industry for not creating a market for terrorism
coverage.
"It is important for the industry to work with Congress to develop a
long-term solution that does not involve the federal government serving as a
reinsurer or permanent backstop," Rep. Delay wrote. "If the industry will
work with us on Capitol Hill to find a way to accomplish this, we will likely
be more understanding of a limited, short-term program to help get it
started."
The chief House Democrat in the debate said Thursday that crafting a
market-based alternative to the existing program is a worthy goal that he
also is weighing -- but that it is unrealistic to think it will be
accomplished this year.
"Anybody who thinks we can come up with a long-term solution in the next
10 months I think is being foolhardy," said Rep. Paul Kanjorski of
Pennsylvania, the top Democrat on the House insurance subcommittee, in
remarks at the Chamber of Commerce event. "What we have to do is get a
two-year extension" of the expiring program "to stabilize the economy."
Copyright 2005 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com            http://www.americanbanker.com

Graphic

 
photo, Cantor

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document