GOP FOES DERIDE JIM RYAN'S ANTI-TERRORISM PLAN;
 ATTORNEY GENERAL SAYS PROPOSAL IS NOT MOTIVATED BY GUBERNATORIAL QUEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 17, 2001 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 708 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan wants to change state laws to provide wider police discretion in telephone and e-mail surveillance, quicker approval of search warrants and tougher sentencing in terrorism cases.
"Terrorism has become a clear and present danger," said Ryan, Illinois' highest-ranking law enforcement official and a Republican candidate for governor in 2002. At a news conference Tuesday, he billed the package as the state's first domestic terrorism statute.
But Ryan's proposals didn't draw support from some of his political opponents in the GOP.
"It is my hope … that we not give in to temptation and seek to duplicate the powers of the federal government at the state level simply to say that we are doing something," Gov. George Ryan (who isn't related to Jim Ryan) said in a speech Monday. The governor is not seeking re-election.
George Ryan, a fellow Republican whose relations with Jim Ryan have been strained, did not mention the attorney general by name. The governor's spokesman, Dennis Culloton, said the criticism wasn't aimed at any specific person, but only at "well-intentioned initiatives" that might be proposed as the Legislature prepares to convene in its fall veto session next month.
Lt. Gov. Corinne Wood, also a GOP candidate for governor, said Tuesday she hadn't seen the proposal. But she questioned the validity of focusing on terrorism investigatory issues, which many believe is a federal responsibility.
"We all want to 'do something.' I believe what we need to be doing (at the state level) is focusing on the safety of our residents" with emergency response planning, said Wood. "We all want to make sure our law enforcement officers have the tools to do their jobs. But the question is, would any of this have stopped bin Laden?"
When asked whether she believed Jim Ryan was using the anti-terrorism proposal to further his campaign for governor, Wood responded: "I'll let you answer that question."
The third GOP candidate, state Rep. Patrick O'Malley, R-Palos Park, hadn't yet seen the proposal, said a spokesman.
Jim Ryan on Tuesday acknowledged that "sometimes good policy is good politics." But he stressed that his proposal has nothing to do with his campaign against the two other GOP candidates vying for the party's nomination.
"This has to do with serving as attorney general," Ryan said. His role in that office, he said, "isn't suspended because I'm a candidate."
The attorney general's proposal was the latest in a flurry of recent terrorism-preparation activity by Illinois officials, who believe the state's high population, its skyscrapers and its role as a national transportation hub make it a potential terrorist target.
On Monday, Gov. Ryan appointed the state's first "Homeland Security" coordinator and said he would soon propose a major anti-terrorism spending package.
Those proposals could come to a vote before the Legislature during its fall veto session next month.
Jim Ryan's proposed changes to aid law enforcement in Illinois would:
* Allow court-ordered interception of all voice, wire and Internet com munication of specific people under surveillance in terrorism investigations.
* Allow courts to issue emergency search warrants orally if police can show an immediate urgency in a terrorism case.
* Create the new offenses of "solicitation of material support for terrorism" and "making a terrorist threat." The offenses, aimed at the financiers and organizers of terrorist attacks, would be punishable as Class X felonies, the highest level of crime.
* Impose a minimum sentence of mandatory natural life in prison for terrorism that causes death, and would establish terrorism as a qualifying factor for the state's death penalty.
* Limit the ability of nonresident aliens to obtain state Firearm Owner Identification cards.
Jim Ryan said he believed the proposals would stand up to constitutional scrutiny. Ed Yohnka, a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union, said the organization wouldn't comment on the proposal until it can review the wording.
"We've worked very hard to assure that the legislation at the federal level did not constitute a wholesale abuse or violation of individual civil liberties," Yohnka said. "We'll be doing the same thing on the state level."

Notes

Reporter Kevin McDermott:; E-mail: kmcdermott@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 217-782-4912  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color PHOTO by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan proposes new laws to combat terrorism at a news conference Tuesday in Springfield.

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document