GOP CRITICIZES OBAMA ON NATIONAL SECURITY ISSUES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 30, 2009 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 816 words
Byline: PHILIP RUCKER, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON -- Republicans are jumping on President Barack Obama's response to the attempted Christmas Day bombing of a U.S. airliner as the latest evidence that Democrats do not aggressively fight terrorism to protect the country, returning to a campaign theme the GOP has employed successfully over the past decade.
Since before Mr. Obama was sworn into office, Republicans have been building a case that he is weak on national security, and in the wake of the intelligence and security failures that led to last week's incident, they think that narrative might stick. Congressional Republicans and GOP pollsters said they believe the administration's wavering response to the failed attack on a Detroit-bound plane -- along with Mr. Obama's decisions on Guantanamo Bay and the intelligence lapses connected to November's massacre at Fort Hood, Tex. -- damages the Democratic brand.
After dispatching surrogates to speak on his behalf over the weekend, Mr. Obama tried to quell critics who thought he had been quiet for too long by addressing the nation yesterday for the second time in two days. But Republicans said his admission of "systemic failures" by U.S. intelligence agencies -- which did not share or act upon information about the Nigerian suspect who boarded the Northwest Airlines flight -- underscored what they have been arguing for days. The result of the GOP offensive could be to create doubt, even fear, among the American public that Mr. Obama cannot protect them.
Republicans spent much of the 2008 campaign criticizing Mr. Obama for his lack of national security experience and have not relented since he took office about a year ago. Eleven months out from the 2010 midterm elections, however, pollsters said it is difficult, if not impossible, to predict whether the issue will drive voters.
The nation's economy and health-care reform are sure to be dominant themes. But if the public remains concerned about the safety of air travel and about international terrorism, the Republican attacks on Mr. Obama could be "very influential," said Andrew Kohut, a veteran pollster and president of the nonpartisan Pew Research Center.
"I don't know if it has legs, but it certainly has potential if it has legs," Mr. Kohut said.
As the GOP seeks a path out of the political abyss in the 2010 midterm elections, its leaders seem to be turning to the issue of terrorism, which worked for them in the 2002 congressional midterms and in President George W. Bush's 2004 reelection.
"They just don't get it," Rep. Peter Hoekstra of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the House intelligence committee, wrote in a fundraising letter for his gubernatorial campaign. "These are the same weak-kneed liberals who have recently tried to bring Guantanamo Bay terrorists right here to Michigan!"
But the strategy could be as potentially risky as powerful for Republicans, who open themselves to criticism that they are exploiting acts of terrorism for partisan gain. In 2008, attacking Mr. Obama on national security proved to be a losing strategy, both for Democratic candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton and the Republican nominee, Sen. John McCain of Arizona.
David Axelrod, Mr. Obama's senior adviser, who has battled Republicans on national security issues for decades, said the GOP is hoping to reclaim its political power on the issue.
"They can run on rhetoric," Mr. Axelrod said in an interview yesterday. "We will run on our record when the time comes. ... The president's record, I think, is very clear and very strong. This president has taken the fight to al-Qaida in Afghanistan, in Pakistan, in Somalia, in Yemen. He has focused on the threat in a way that it hasn't been."
Still, Mr. Kohut said national security is "fertile territory for the GOP."
"It's one of the few cards that Republicans still continue to hold over the Democrats," he said. "It is something that is exploitable by them."
Mr. Obama's approval rating on national security has remained relatively steady since he took office. In a mid-November Washington Post-ABC News poll, 53 percent of Americans said they approved of the way Mr. Obama was handling the threat of terrorism, while 41 percent said they disapproved.
But pollsters warned that the president's standing is tenuous, especially as the threat of terrorism remains a constant in the American psyche, with the transfer of detainees from the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; the New York trial of Sept. 11 terrorists; and security searches at airports.
"There's a certain fragility to his numbers on the perception of how he's handling national security issues," said Republican pollster Neil Newhouse. "They certainly can move and move quickly based on a specific incident such as this." The Detroit incident is "a black eye" for the administration, Mr. Newhouse continued, because it feeds the perception that dangerous jihadists are "falling through the cracks."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jim Watson/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images: Passengers wait to check in at Baltimore Washington International Airport yesterday in Baltimore. Security measures have been heightened at airports after the Christmas Day terror attempt.

Load-Date: December 30, 2009


End of Document