GOP DEFEATS DEMOCRATS' TERRORISM PACKAGE
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
December 8, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a5
Length: 426 words
Byline: ALAN FRAM, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Senate killed a Democratic $ 35 billion anti-terrorism package Friday as Republicans handed a victory to President Bush by standing solidly against a plan the White House called too expensive.
Eager to keep their stamp on the government's response to the Sept. 11 attacks, Democrats began crafting a $ 20 billion alternative. Bush had said he would veto any package exceeding that amount.
The Senate vote capped a showdown in which Democrats had hoped to draw support from Republicans leery of opposing efforts to strengthen domestic security. Democrats accused GOP lawmakers of blocking added money for border security, food safety and other initiatives in order to win a political fight for Bush.
"We do not seem to be able to pull together in this town for America even in this time when the people of the United States are united" against terrorism, said Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., main author of the rejected Democratic plan.
But Republicans unanimously backed Bush's insistence on limiting federal anti-terror spending, saying it was Democrats who were purposely forcing politically sensitive votes.
And on the 60th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, they noted that the fight was slowing work on this year's wartime $ 318 billion defense bill, to which the terrorism package had been appended.
'Political positioning'
"We have our men and women on the ground and in the air and at sea," Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., told reporters. "We should not revert back to political positioning and amendments that cause difficulty for one party."
White House officials have promised to seek more money next year. They have said the government already has approved enough money to cover the next few months of warfare in Afghanistan and programs to enhance security at home.
In Friday's pivotal action, the Senate voted 50-50 to derail the entire defense bill. Republicans got nine votes more than the 41 they needed on the procedural motion upending the bill. Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., was the only lawmaker to cross party lines.
The defense measure seemed sure to be revived quickly when the anti-terrorism plan was rewritten and approved. As Democrats realized they lacked the votes to prevail, they became less willing to hold up a wartime spending bill for the military.
Democrats said that while their smaller package would be within the $ 20 billion limit declared by Bush, it would contain more money than the president proposed for battling bioterrorism and helping New York and other areas where the terrorists struck.

Load-Date: December 10, 2001


End of Document