Gop Vote For Obama Luis A. Mendozaaurelia Cañizares Mendozalancaster
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
October 30, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 11
Length: 294 words
Byline: Letters To The Editor
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


The GOP claims to stand for core values, such as family, faith, integrity, freedom and business opportunities, but the Republican ticket for president presumes to be of superior knowledge, qualifications and moral principals, although their actions reveal the complete opposite.
Does the Republican ticket truly represent real GOP values? Are the candidates truly doing what is in the best interest of the nation? Are they exhibiting the morals and status of true leaders?
Sen. McCain and Gov. Palin are utilizing despicable tactics to win the election. Rhetoric and harsh accusations are dividing the country, and bigotry is on the rise as a result. The 2008 GOP campaign for president is a sad commentary, considering this great nation faces the worst economic crisis in history.
What should be most important are the very freedoms and equality of rights granted to all citizens by the Founding Fathers in the Constitution and reinforced by the civil-rights movement and the ultimate sacrifices of men like Dr. King.
The world and our nation have changed drastically, with the escalation of terrorism and war, nuclear proliferation, civil-rights violations, genocide and social and economic turmoil.
As we rely on our men and women in uniform to serve as the vanguard in the war on terrorism, we should expect America's political leaders, including those who would be president, to act with intelligence, diplomacy and as a uniting force.
We Republicans need to acknowledge the failures of the party and move forward with a positive and realistic vision. We need to walk the talk of God and edify, not destroy.
We support Sen. Barack Obama for president. He has demonstrated intelligence, prudence, diplomacy, compassion, a desire for unity and respect for all citizens.

Load-Date: October 31, 2008


End of Document