GOP convention security planning gets specific; State, local and federal officials begin meetings this week to coordinate and create strategies to handle crowds and protesters. It will take 18 subcommittees to iron out all the logistical details.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 7, 2007 Monday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 680 words
Byline: Randy Furst, Staff Writer
Body


Law enforcement leaders will begin this week the job of coordinating the largest security operation Minnesota has ever seen - the 2008 Republican National Convention.
Thousands of police officers from across the state and hundreds of Secret Service and FBI agents will be deployed to provide security for the convention, and National Guard troops will be on standby.
It's a big challenge, local law enforcement officials say.
"We know how to respond to crises, we have done it for years," said Deborah Pierce, the former agent in charge of the Minneapolis FBI who is now state security coordinator for the convention. "We know how to work together. We just haven't done it on this scale."
There will be special teams from the Department of Homeland Security, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, hostage negotiators and hostage rescue teams. There may be specialty teams from the military to identify airborne contaminants, and military planes will patrol the skies.
With 20,000 convention delegates and guests expected to turn up along with 15,000 members of the news media, Twin Cities hotels will be jammed.
Hennepin County Sheriff Rich Stanek, who will be part of a meeting Tuesday to map security plans, said it will be a huge logistical challenge.
The security planners will break into 18 subcommittees to tackle such issues as civil disturbances, gathering intelligence and organizing security for St. Paul's Xcel Center, the site of the convention Sept. 1-4, 2008.
"There are two fundamental elements for large venue security," said David Cid, a former FBI agent in Minneapolis. "One part is physical security, using bomb-sniffing dogs and metal detectors. The other is an intelligence system.
"You have to have an intelligence system that is sufficiently broad and robust that it will bring to you indicators of terrorism activity so you can disrupt the terrorism planning at the convention."
Cid, who is now deputy director of the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism, a research organization in Oklahoma City, said work will become more intense as the convention nears. Authorities will be watching for everything from "a couple guys in a garage who are angry with the government, to the major terrorism cells ... anywhere in the world," he said.
Much of the information about threats will be synthesized at the Minnesota Joint Analysis Center, an information and intelligence sharing network that includes local, state and federal law enforcement, Stanek said.
He helped set up the center when he was state commissioner of public safety.
The size of demonstrations is a wild card, with some protest organizers, such as Jessica Sundin of the Anti-War Committee, predicting 50,000 to 100,000 protesters. Matt Bostrom, the deputy St. Paul police chief who will cochair the law enforcement committee with the Secret Service, said it's too early to know, but  estimated there might be 15,000 to 30,000 protesters.
If the Iraq war is going badly, 100,000 might protest, but if the war is over, protests could be minimal, said Hy Berman, a professor emeritus of history at the U of M.
With the convention designated a national special security event, the Secret Service will take charge of security, but St. Paul police will have  authority, in consultation with the Secret Service, over protest marches.
Bostrom estimates there will be about 1,000 Secret Service agents at the convention. He expects to need 3,000 to 4,000 police officers, which will require contracting for police from other jurisdictions to supplement the Minneapolis and St. Paul police forces.
He estimates having 500 to 2,000 members of the National Guard in a backup role, although nothing has been negotiated yet. "If we are completely overwhelmed, that is when we bring in the Guard."
If a crisis occurs at the convention, the FBI becomes the lead federal agency, Pierce said. The Secret Service will move to protect the dignitaries under its responsibility and the Federal Emergency Management Agency takes charge of any cleanup and ensures victims get to the hospital.
Randy Furst - 612-673-7382

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 8, 2007


End of Document