GOP focuses on tough security stance; The Republican strategy is to make the war on terrorism a central campaign issue
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 5, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a7
Length: 298 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BLOOMINGTON, Minn. 
Body


The head of the Republican Party accused Democrats of being willing to surrender the tools necessary to combat terrorism as the GOP tries to capitalize on its national security advantage in a tough election year.
Faced with President Bush's low approval ratings and diminishing support for the Iraq war, the Republican strategy is to make the war on terrorism a central campaign issue and argue that Democrats hold a pre-Sept. 11 view of the world.
Ken Mehlman, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, stressed that argument in a speech Friday at the organization's two-day summer meeting, similar to points made by White House adviser Karl Rove in January.
"America faces a critical question," Mehlman said in his prepared text. "Will we elect leaders who recognize we're at war and want to use every tool to win it, or politicians who would surrender important tools we need to win?"
If Democrats win control of Congress, Mehlman claimed that their leaders will stop the National Security Agency from eavesdropping on foreign terrorists and pursue impeachment of President Bush.
The Democratic National Committee dismissed Mehlman's comments, saying his "desperate rantings won't change the fact that Bush and his rubber-stamp Republicans are in deep trouble with the American people who can see right through their trickery and spin.
"The American people will not be fooled again," said Karen Finney, a spokeswoman for the DNC.
Mehlman singled out House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and Democratic National Committee Chairman Howard Dean.
"As foreign jihadists call into the United States, do we use (National Security Agency) technology to stop sleeper cells before they hit us? Or do we surrender use of this technology, as Nancy Pelosi and Howard Dean would have us do?"

Load-Date: August 5, 2006


End of Document