GOP VOICES SUPPORT FOR ATTACKS ON TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
August 24, 1998, Monday


Copyright 1998 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 551 words
Byline: JIM ABRAMS, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON The administration is warning of an escalating battle against terrorism, even as Republicans put aside their criticisms of President Clinton to support last week's missile attacks against suspected terrorist sites.
"This is a scourge that we are dealing with today, we are likely to deal with it tomorrow, and we will likely face the kind of terrorism that could use chemical and biological weapons, as well," Defense Secretary William Cohen said Sunday.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright also repeated the pro-active stance the administration has stressed since last Thursday's attacks in Sudan and Afghanistan. "We believe that we have a legal right to self-defense," she said on ABC's "This Week." The United States will seek the cooperation of its friends, she said, but "We will take unilateral action when we think that our national interest has been threatened."
The United States launched more than 70 Tomahawk cruise missiles against a chemical plant in Sudan and terrorist camps in Afghanistan on Thursday. Both were linked to Saudi extremist Osama bin Laden, who the administration has accused of masterminding the American embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug. 7.
White House national security adviser Sandy Berger said the six bin Laden training camps in Afghanistan "have been rendered ineffective."
The assassination of foreigners has been banned since the Ford administration and Cohen, on NBC's "Meet the Press," said bin Laden was not the target of the missile strikes. But he said bin Laden is responsible for the deaths of some 270 people in the embassy bombings, and he wouldn't be bothered if bin Laden were killed in a future U.S. raid.
"If he has declared war against the United States, which he has, and if he is part of the command and control of that terror network, then if he is in the line of fire as such, that's his problem," Cohen said.
"What bin Laden did was an act of war," Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., agreed. "When you're at war it's not assassination."
Specter, who last week questioned whether Clinton timed the attack to divert attention from the sex scandal with Monica Lewinsky, praised the intelligence community for its work leading up to the attack. "It's really a matter that we have no alternative. We are at war with terrorism," he said on "Fox News Sunday."
"I think the president deserves a lot of credit for having made the decision to do this," Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, another frequent Clinton critic, said on CBS' "Face the Nation."
Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind., who also questioned Clinton's motives last week, welcomed the stepped-up campaign against terrorism and told CNN's "Late Edition" that while the president still has a credibility problem, there was "credible evidence" warranting the military response.
Cohen said briefings given some of the doubting lawmakers after the attacks convinced them there is strong evidence that bin Laden was involved in the embassy bombings and planned other attacks on Americans.
Army Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told CBS that U.S. officials had very reliable evidence the embassy bombings were the first of three or possible four attacks.
Newsweek magazine said the operation, code-named "Infinite Reach," was so secret that even people in Cohen's office weren't informed.

Load-Date: September 4, 1998


End of Document