GOP YANKS PHONE BLITZ ON BOMBING 'I think they were embarrassed,' says Hil
Daily News (New York)
October 30, 2000, Monday
RACING FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;; POLITICS 2000
Length: 586 words
Byline: By WILLIAM GOLDSCHLAG in Rochester, N.Y. and JOEL SIEGEL in New York DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body

A Republican Party telephone blitz linking Hillary Rodham Clinton's backers to the bombing of the destroyer Cole suddenly ended yesterday, one day after Clinton denounced it as a "new low" in the Senate race.
"We called as many people as we were going to call with that message," said Dan Allen, a spokesman for the state's GOP committee. "The chairman is done with that script."
The GOP had defended the phone blitz Saturday - the day the campaign was revealed - saying the calling would continue.
Clinton's subsequent condemnation of the phone campaign - she said it exploited the Cole tragedy - drew intense publicity. But Allen said that played no role in ending the calls.
Clinton responded at a campaign stop in Rochester: "I think that they were embarrassed . . . it was something they were trying to do below the radar screen."
Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), appearing with Clinton, questioned whether the GOP could have reached its goal of making 500,000 calls so soon.
Allen said other GOP calls targeting Jewish voters, with a script that omits the Cole bombing, would continue.
Rick Lazio, Clinton's Senate foe, again sought to distance himself from the phone banks. "That is a state committee matter," he said.
He declined to say whether he agreed with the calls, but added, "The real story here is that you have one candidate who is receiving money from people who affiliate themselves with people who support terrorism."
In the calls, voters were told Clinton's campaign took $50,000 from an "Arab organization that openly brags about its support of a Mideast terrorism group, conducting the same kind of terrorism that killed 17 of our sailors."
The calls began after the Daily News reported that the American Muslim Alliance had claimed credit for sponsoring a $50,000 fund-raiser for Clinton.
The News quoted the group's leader as saying that while he backs achieving a Palestinian state through peaceful means, UN resolutions allow armed force. But neither the leader nor other alliance members said they support terrorism.
Clinton returned the $50,000 after the story appeared, saying she was unaware of the alliance's role and was offended by remarks attributed to members.
Meanwhile, Clinton and Lazio visited black churches yesterday, receiving reactions that reflected different levels of support among black voters.
Lazio spoke for nine minutes at the Abyssinian Baptist Church, on W. 138th St., focusing on education and the need for taxpayer-funded school vouchers. He said vouchers and competition are the way to help troubled schools.
"I think universal high-quality education is the civil rights issue of this new century," he said, his voice assuming a more inner-city cadence. "We all want racial equality . . . but we won't get there until we have better schools."
Lazio won scattered applause four times during his remarks and polite applause at the end. When Clinton visited the church two weeks ago, she was applauded 15 times and got two standing ovations.
The Rev. Calvin Butts spoke warmly of Lazio and urged the congregation to keep an open mind, but he did not invite him to speak from the pulpit, as he did for Clinton.
It was Lazio's first visit to a black church this campaign. Advisers had vowed a vigorous effort in normally Democratic black neighborhoods, but Lazio abandoned the outreach in the last two months to focus on reversing Clinton's gains in Republican upstate.
Clinton went to two black churches in Buffalo, bringing to 19 the number of such churches she has visited since Sept. 10.

Load-Date: October 30, 2000


End of Document