GOP WIMP-LASHED AS TERROR BILL OKD
Daily News (New York)
August 03, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  2
Length: 331 words
Byline: By RICHARD SISK Daily News Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON House Republicans yesterday shoved through a watered-down anti-terrorism bill to boost airport security that the Democrats called "wimpish" but grudgingly supported.
Several New York-area Republicans, including Reps. Peter King and Michael Forbes, also griped that the bill was toothless. But it passed 389 to 22, with all New Yorkers voting aye as the members fled the chamber for a month-long break.
Capping a week of on-again, off-again election-year maneuvering, GOP leaders emerged from a testy midnight caucus with a bill that ignored President Clinton's demands for expanded wiretapping authority and a requirement to put chemical tracers in explosives and gunpowder.
King said of the caucus: "I felt like I was at a 1960s left-wing rally against the government. For these guys, the ATF [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms] is the enemy."
Under the House bill, bomb-sniffing dogs and an FBI agent would be required at 50 high-risk airports and background checks of airport security workers would be intensified.
Study commissions also would be created to look into the use of chemical tracers in explosives and the terrorism threat in general.
Neither party could say how much the bill would cost because it was passed before the Congressional Budget Office could give an estimate. Its fate in the Senate was uncertain.
The tone of the debate was demonstrated in one exchange between Reps. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-Tex.) and Jim Saxton (R-N.J.). "This bill is a wimpish bill," Lee said. Saxton replied, "This is not a wimpish bill."
Rep. Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.) charged that the GOP was more concerned with appeasing the National Rifle Association than in giving the FBI what it needs to fight terrorism.
Schumer and other Democrats variously called the GOP bill a "disgrace," "pure bunk" and "a fake and a fraud."
But Majority Leader Dick Armey (R-Tex.) said the bill would help fight terrorism without giving in to a "panic that infringes against the liberties" of Americans.

Load-Date: August 6, 1996


End of Document