Gorbachev to U.S.: Don't be cop
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 1, 1992, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WORLD DIGEST; Pg. 8A; DIGEST
Length: 547 words
Dateline: MOSCOW; WASHINGTON; KABUL, Afghanistan; ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast; HONG KONG
Body


Mikhail Gorbachev, preparing for a U.S. tour, said Thursday the United States should give up being the world's "policeman" and focus on building democracies around the world. Although he generally endorsed President Bush in an AP interview, he rejected "the proposal that America should become the policeman, teacher, or prosecutor or instructor" to the world. "I am in favor of a new role for America, a constructive and democratic role and a continued contribution to building new international relations." Gorbachev said he would discuss the U.S. role further in a speech May 6 at Fulton, Mo., where Winston Churchill delivered his "Iron Curtain" speech in 1946. He begins his two-week visit on Saturday.
Syria stays on U.S. terrorist list
 WASHINGTON The United States on Thursday released its annual report on global terrorism, retaining Syria, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya and North Korea on its list of states that it says sponsor extremist acts. Syria, which is engaged in Middle East peace talks with Israel and joined in the U.S.-led alliance against Iraq, in recent years has developed improved relations with the United States and has been pushing to get off the list. The report says that Syria in 1991 "continued to provide support and safe haven to a number of groups that engage in international terrorism." However, it adds that Syria "is not known to have sponsored any international terrorist attacks outside Lebanon since 1987."
 Rulers seek normality in Kabul
 KABUL, Afghanistan As rockets continued to rain on the crippled Afghan capital, the nation's new Islamic rulers struggled Thursday to restore electricity, water, telephones, air travel and, if possible, a semblance of normality to a city battered by four days of urban warfare and more than a decade of authoritarian regimes.  The interim governing council of moderate Moslems, backed by guerrilla commander Ahmad Shah Masood, convened for the first time since last Saturday's mad race for control of the capital against fundamentalist followers of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. At the top of the agenda were steps to bring Kabul back to the 20th century: restoring phone, power and water lines that were destroyed in a hellish three days of fighting between Masood's and Hekmatyar's fighters.
 Sierra Leone president ousted
 ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast Mutinous troops in Sierra Leone overthrew President Joseph Momoh and said Thursday that they had set up a new government. Momoh was reported to have fled to Guinea. There were no reports of deaths, though reporters saw wounded soldiers. Diplomats reported from Freetown later in the day that military officers had formed a National Provisional Defense Council. The only council member identified, Lt. Col.  Yahya Kanu, said that the soldiers favored a return to democracy in the former British colony. Momoh had been in power since 1985.
 Elsewhere . . .
 HONG KONG China's southern province of Guangdong has 644 centenarians, the Beijing-funded China News Service said Thursday. According to the province's census department, 60 of the centenarians were men, with the oldest 113 years old, and 584 were women, the oldest 118, the Hong Kong-based CNS said. Sixty-five percent lived in farming villages. Most ate more vegetables than meat and refrained from smoking or drinking.

Load-Date: November 3, 1992


End of Document