GORBACHEV PROMISES SYRIANS ARMS SUPPLIES WILL CONTINUE
The New York Times
May 29, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 474 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MOSCOW, May 28
Body


Mikhail S. Gorbachev told a visiting Syrian leader today that the Soviet Union would continue to supply military aid, according to the Government press agency Tass.
The agency said that the Soviet leader had stressed the aid issue in a meeting with Vice President Abdel Halim Khaddam of Syria because of ''escalating threats from U.S. imperialism and Israel against Syria.''
Tass quoted Mr. Gorbachev as having said that all Middle East issues should be resolved by political means.
Israeli-Syrian tensions increased recently, with diplomats in the area warning that a miscalculation by either side could touch off a war. Syrian Appears Overshadowed Western diplomats said Soviet accounts of Vice President Khaddam's visit had a cautious tone, suggesting that Mr. Gorbachev hoped a military confrontation could be avoided.
The two-day visit was somewhat overshadowed by the presence of a senior Libyan official who has received more attention in the press.
On Tuesday, according to Tass, Mr. Gorbachev indirectly told the Libyan, Abdel Salam Jalloud, the top deputy to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, that Libya should avoid terrorist acts.
Tass said that Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Jalloud had reviewed the implications of the United States bombing of Libya, noting it might happen again.
Tass said the two leaders agreed that ''there is the need for vigilance, steadfastness and high-level defense capacity of countries that may become a target of an imperialist attack, and the need for adherence to principle and consistency in the condemnation of those pretexts that imperialists use, especially terrorism in any of its forms.''
Diplomats said the account suggested that Mr. Gorbachev had urged Libyan restraint in terrorist attacks.
Mr. Gorbachev condemned terrorism in his keynote address to a party congress in February, but Moscow rallied to Libya's defense after the American air raid, calling it an example of state-sponsored terrorism.
The handling of the Jalloud visit seemed to underscore Soviet ambivalence about Colonel Qaddafi, diplomats said. They noted that the visit was given unusual prominence in the press, at the risk of snubbing Mr. Khaddam and creating the impression of greater Soviet support for Libya.
Libyan officials complained after the American raid that Moscow had failed to provide sufficient support.
But accounts of Mr. Jalloud's meetings revealed no new Soviet initiatives to aid Libya and suggested that Moscow remained wary of Colonel Qaddafi.
Although the Soviet Union has been the main supplier of military equipment to Libya, the two countries have not signed the kind of friendship treaty that the Soviet Union has with its allies.
The Soviet Union and Libya agreed during a visit by Colonel Qaddafi last fall to extend economic cooperation, but diplomats said then that the accords fell short of the Libyan leader's expectations.


End of Document