GORE MEETS WITH PLO CHIEF URGE TERRORISM CRACKDOWN
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 24, 1995, Friday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P
Length: 307 words
Body


JERICHO, West Bank _ Vice President Al Gore met today with PLO
chief Yasser Arafat to urge a crackdown on terrorists, which Israel
has demanded as the price for expanding Palestinian autonomy in the
West Bank.
Gore's message was that Arafat must "act decisively" against
foes of peace in the Middle East.
As an incentive, Gore announced a $ 73 million U.S. aid package
for development and public works in the Gaza Strip.
Arafat welcomed Gore at the government house in this desert
oasis as gun-toting Palestinians provided security.  The two leaders
posed for pictures, smiling and shaking hands.
Before meeting with Gore, Arafat promised in a speech from a
city hall balcony that he would soon take control of the West Bank
despite Israel's reluctance to withdraw its troops.
"The message is clear.  We are close to taking the rest of the
West Bank," Arafat said.  "I feel that we are at the end of a
long road."
He accused Israel of reneging on parts of its accord with the
PLO, including the promise to create a land passage between Gaza and
Jericho through the Israeli land that separates them.
Arafat said he had to fly from Gaza to Jericho in an Egyptian
air force helicopter because Israel has not created the passage for
Palestinians.  And he insisted that the troop pullout take place.
"The Israelis must commit themselves to what we have agreed
upon," Arafat told a crowd of about 2,000 in the main square.
"They have to withdraw so we can start elections."
Arafat took control of Jericho and the Gaza Strip last May under
the first stage of a self-rule agreement between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization.
Negotiations over the interim stage, in which Israel will
withdraw its troops from Palestinian populations centers in the West
Bank and allow for Palestinian general elections, broke down after a
spate of violent attacks by Palestinian militants.

Load-Date: April 10, 1995


End of Document