Gov't stays open
Emergency funding bill pushes problem to Dec. 20
Daily News (New York)
November 22, 2019 Friday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2019 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 12
Length: 397 words
Byline: Michael McAuliff

New York Daily News
Highlight: Congress passed legislation Thursday that keeps the government open for one month.Getty
Body


WASHINGTON - The Senate passed a last-minute bill to keep the government open Thursday, using it as an opportunity to extend controversial surveillance laws and open a terrorism compensation fund to some 9/11 victims.
Congress had to pass the stopgap bill just hours before the government would have shut down because it was unable to agree to a full-year's funding for the second time this year. The temporary funding lasts through Dec. 20, setting up a potential pre-Christmas showdown to fill Uncle Sam's pockets again.
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), who has warned President Trump might try to close government to distract from impeachment, called the 74 to 20 vote "something Congress can build from."
But he warned again that Trump could lead Congress down another path if he "stomps his feet and makes impossible demands" on things like funding his border wall.
"The second path leads, as we all know, to another Trump government shutdown," Schumer said.
The four-week spending bill allows Congress to put off until March a controversial debate on America's foreign intelligence surveillance laws, which were due to expire next month. They include measures that allow the government to track lone wolf terror suspects, to have roving wiretaps, and to collect data on Americans possibly linked to terror cases.
The National Security Agency revealed earlier this year that program inadvertently collected data from people improperly, and shut it down because the problem could not be corrected. But the NSA asked for the authority to be extended anyway over the objections of libertarian-minded lawmakers on the left and right.
The short-term funding bill also opens a window for 9/11 attack victims who have already been paid by the 9/11 Victim Compensation Fund to also seek money from a separate pot of money - the United States Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund.
That fund was created to pay out lawsuits filed by relatives and victims of acts linked to foreign governments, such as the Iranian hostage crisis. But people who accept money from the 9/11 fund were barred by law from participating in lawsuits such as those paid by the terror fund.
The terrorism fund gets its money from cash seized in cases involving violations of international sanctions. It can be more generous than the 9/11 fund, and pays attorneys 25% instead of the 10% cap in the 9/11 bill.

Load-Date: November 22, 2019


End of Document