Gov. McDonnell signs Va. ultrasound law
USA TODAY
March 8, 2012 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 620 words
Byline: John Bacon with staff and wire reports
Body


Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell signed into law Wednesday a bill requiring women to undergo abdominal ultrasound exams before having abortions, weeks after lawmakers dropped language requiring the exams be medically invasive.
The earlier proposal calling for vaginally invasive ultrasounds prompted a national outcry and was a target for lampooning on Saturday Night Live and The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. The national uproar prompted state lawmakers backed by McDonnell, a Republican, to remove the requirement for a medically invasive exam. The law will take effect in July.
Victoria Cobb, head of the anti-abortion Family Foundation, hailed the bill. Protester Molly Vick decried "an all-out war on women's rights and women's health all across the country."
Eight  students injured in school brawl
A brawl involving dozens of students that left eight students injured at a Los Angeles-area high school wasn't fueled by conflict between black and Latino students, contrary to initial reports, school district officials and police said.
"This campus has no current racial issues," L.A. schools police Chief Steven Zimmerman said about the melee at Carson High School.
Principal Windy Warren said student leaders  assured her of the same thing. About 30 students traded punches and kicks in a series of fights, said school district spokeswoman Monica Carazo. Seven students were arrested or suspended.
'Winter' was 4th-warmest since 1890s
The winter of 2011-12 was the nation's fourth-warmest on record, the National Climatic Data Center reported. Defined as the months of December, January and February, the average temperature for the season was almost 4 degrees above average, and the warmest since 2000. Climate records go back to the 1890s. Climate scientist Deke Arndt said the U.S. was south of the jet stream most of the winter, keeping away the coldest air. Twenty-seven states in the northern Plains, Midwest, Northeast and Southeast had one of their 10 warmest winters. --Doyle Rice
FBI, NYPD at odds over public trust
Some covert operations by the New York Police Department's intelligence division targeting Muslims in New Jersey have damaged the public's trust in law enforcement, an FBI official said.
Michael Ward, special agent in charge of the FBI's Newark Division, said two NYPD investigators had been assigned to the New Jersey-based Joint Terrorism Task Force for years. But Ward said he wasn't briefed on the extent of the NYPD's operations outside the task force. NYPD spokesman Paul Browne said the department's relationship with Muslims in the region is strong and has led to the arrest of several terrorism suspects in New Jersey and elsewhere.
Vatican 'of concern' for cash laundering
The Vatican is one of 68 countries  "of concern" for money laundering or other financial crimes, the State Department reported in its annual International Narcotics Control Strategy Report.
The Vatican is on the list because it isn't clear whether a year-old effort to combat money laundering and terror financing is effective, the report said. The report, which places Belgium, Ireland, Portugal and South Korea on the same list, looks at national laws to fight financial crime, their enforcement and the size of the banking sector.
Teacher on leave pending porn probe
Students at Haydock Intermediate School in Oxnard, Calif., have been asked not to search Internet sex sites for a teacher who may have been moonlighting as a porn star, the school district said in a letter to parents.
The teacher, whose name hasn't been released, is on paid administrative leave while the district tries to "determine if there's a nexus on what she does on her own time and what she does in the classroom," Superintendent Jeff Chancer said. 

Load-Date: March 8, 2012


End of Document