Government corruption tops fear survey for fourth year
The Panther: Chapman University
October 28, 2018 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 652 words
Byline: Carolina Valencia
Body


Graphic by Emma Reith
What is the U.S. more afraid of than goblins, ghosts and monsters under the bed? Government corruption is America's top-rated fear, according to the fifth annual Chapman American Fears survey, with water pollution taking second place, beating out the fear of not having enough money in the future and loved ones dying. One of the top five fears in 2017, changes in healthcare, is no longer on the list.
Despite the new top fears, seven out of the top 10 fears remained the same from 2017 to 2018.
"Some fears are always with us: Fears about dying and other fears prop out in response to current events," said Ann Gordon, the researcher responsible for the fears related to terrorism and responses to disasters section of the survey.
The responses came from more than 1,000 adults across the United States, who were randomly selected by Chapman researchers to participate in the survey that measures the public's fears related to environmental issues, economic issues, religion and crime and more.
In 2016, two of the fears in the top 10 category were related to terrorism.
Karen Mao, a Chapman graduate student studying leadership development, said that terrorism's exclusion in the 2018 study shows how society is starting to face different concerns.
"I think it speaks to the increase in knowledge and diversity and empathy," Mao said. "Fear of terrorism is just fear of others."
Lemuel Day, the researcher responsible for the survey's Islamophobia and fear-based actions portion, told The Panther that people are losing trust in the government.
As part of the survey, researchers made up a fictional national crisis called the North Dakota crash, then asked the participants if they believe the government hasn't revealed enough about the incident.
"One-third of Americans say the government is hiding information about the North Dakota crash, but there is no North Dakota crash," Day said. "We made that up to see how many people would say the government is hiding information about it. We were absolutely shocked that one out of three believed the government is hiding information about something that never happened."
Aika Donne, a senior dance major, said that she expected corruption of government to be on the top 10 list of American fears - and wasn't surprised when it made the cut.
"It just makes a lot of sense, just because of the political climate we're in," Donne said. "There are things that are going on in the news and throughout the word that's establishing a lot more fear in the public."
In 2016, when presidential nominees Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton were running, just over 60 percent of Americans feared corrupt government officials, according to the 2016 American Fears survey. But as Trump stands to enter his third year in office, more than 70 percent of Americans fear government officials - a 13 percent increase.
"Trump is our president, so of course we are seeing corruption within the government right now," Mao said. "I'm surprised that number is not higher."
In 2016, no environmental issues topped the list. But in the 2018 study, environmental issues represent five of the 10 fears, which Gordon said correlates with political issues and the Trump administration's denial of global warming.
Gordon said environmental fears seem to peak for three reasons: the economy doing well, natural disasters and policy-making in Washington, D.C. When people experience environmental issues like hurricanes, wildfires and events like the Flint water crisis, fear related to environmental issues tends to rise.
"The Trump administration has taken actions to curve environmental protections; they have rolled back the (former President Barack) Obama environmental protections, such as rules meant to protect air and water from pollution, as well as the Endangered Species Act," Gordon said. "People are responding (with fear) to what they see policy makers doing in Washington, D.C."

Load-Date: October 29, 2018


End of Document