GOVERNMENT DROPS TERRORISM ALERT ONE NOTCH - TO ELEVATED - AFTER 11 DAYS AT HIGH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 31, 2003 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 472 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* Ridge says security measures will remain in place "at federal facilities and other key areas of the country."
After 11 days at orange, the national terrorism alert level was dropped one notch to yellow Friday after officials determined that the threat of imminent terrorist strikes had diminished.
The alert level was changed after various intelligence sources noted a modest decrease in terrorist threats. Officials were also worried about a possible attack on Memorial Day, which passed without incident.
"The lowering of the threat level is not a signal to government, law enforcement or citizens that the danger of a terrorist attack has passed," Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said in a statement. "The U.S. intelligence community remains concerned that al-Qaida is attempting to exploit our weaknesses and believes that the United States and its interests are still at a significant risk of terrorist attack."
Ridge said the government "will continue to have security measures in place at federal facilities and other key areas of the country." No domestic terrorist strikes were attempted during the relatively brief orange alert that just ended. Previous alerts lasted roughly a month.
Yellow indicates an elevated risk of terrorist attack, while the old level, orange, means a high risk.
Yellow is the middle level on a five-color scale. The lowest two le vels, green and blue, and the highest, red, have not been used since the system was adopted in March 2002.
Homeland Security Department officials say the system serves as guidance for law enforcement authorities, businesses and the public on how likely a terrorist attack is at a given time.
The alert level was raised May 20 after terrorists believed to be linked to al-Qaida struck in Saudi Arabia and Morocco. Seventy-five people were killed, including eight Americans.
At the time, Ridge said it was feared the incidents could mark the beginning of a wave of worldwide attacks that could include U.S. targets.
With the alert, government authorities and businesses stepped up security, particularly at Memorial Day gatherings. Lowering the alert level allows authorities to scale back some measures, a move favored by many local governments struggling with budget shortfalls.
The terrorism alert has been at orange four times since the system was put in place. No domestic attacks have occurred during any of the alerts.
While some have raised concerns that too many nonspecific alerts will desensitize the public, officials say they have little choice but to put them out in the face of very real threats. Homeland Security officials believe that increased security accompanying the alerts deters would-be terrorists from striking.
U.S. officials suspect al-Qaida's top leaders coordinated the Morocco and Saudi Arabia attacks to demonstrate al-Qaida still is viable.

Notes

TOP OF THE NEWS

Load-Date: May 31, 2003


End of Document