Government rules by fear
University Wire
November 2, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Bruin via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 709 words
Byline: By Katie Strickland, Daily Bruin; SOURCE: UCLA
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


First there was the duct tape. Then there was the Crayola-inspired, color-coded warning system. Now the latest, most refined techniques are being employed in Washington for counteracting terrorism: made-up words.
In an effort to combat potential terrorism, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority designed and displayed posters on its buses asking passengers to report "sumpnspicious," then defined the term as an unattended bag.
Public awareness can greatly assist in the promotion of many causes, but is there no better way to protect citizens from terrorists? The official in charge of the project claimed it was an attempt at "humor" (ah, the hilarity of terrorism) and a way to get people's attention, since the public is overwhelmed with warnings from the police department, the local government and Homeland Security.
Many complain that the media terrifies the public by over-emphasizing the negative in our society. While newspapers don't make a great profit from running feature stories on sunshine and smiley faces, we should not continue to ignore the real scare-mongers: our government.
Yet the president irresponsibly manipulates fear in an attempt to preserve his political popularity. Opponents to the war in Iraq have argued that a U.S.-led invasion could be cultivating resentment among the Iraqis, who, due to their eccentric culture, dislike being bombed. Therefore, the United States could inadvertently be promoting terrorism in its attempts to stop it.
On Oct. 28, President Bush gave a speech addressing this idea. He did not use a well-reasoned argument, or point to evidence or statistics, but instead relied on misconceptions: "We were not in Iraq on Sept. 11th, 2001, and al-Qaida attacked us anyway." Translation: Something really bad happened, and if you don't support me, it will probably happen again.
All of us - except the federal government, apparently - are aware that the majority of the Sept. 11 terrorists were from Saudi Arabia. But the facts don't help Bush conceal his desperation to avoid further criticism. Indictments coupled with criminal investigations have him running short on staff and supporters, so he implies the war is the only way to ensure U.S. security. It's little wonder that Americans may feel inclined to blindly believe him, hoping to avoid another catastrophe.
Another scare tactic used by the federal government is the Department of Homeland Security's Rainbow of Terrorism Chart. According to the department's Web site, we're currently at medium risk of an attack. That sounds threatening, but what does it mean? Should I find a bomb shelter? Close the blinds? No one tells us. The public needs to begin demanding accountability from those who are supposed to be protecting us. Perhaps the war will strengthen our security, but we need logic to convince us, not sound bites or a lovely shade of fuchsia.
It leads one to wonder how legitimate the constant warnings we receive - from the officials on television to posters on buses - really are. On Oct. 12, Keith Olbermann of MSNBC ran a story listing instances of the administration announcing possible terrorist attacks every time it experienced political trouble.
In May 2002, the media was publicizing the negligence of the federal government in ignoring that now-infamous memo declaring al-Qaida's planned attack on the United States. Two days later, we were warned of "inevitable" attacks and railroad systems nationwide were secured. All the warnings - including those inevitable attacks - given by the federal government since Sept. 11 have been false alarms.
It is time we begin to recognize these vague threats for what they are: distractions from the truth. The current administration hopes to conceal its incompetency with fear. It hopes to divert our focus from issues deserving our attention, such as allegations of top-secret information being leaked by government officials. This practice of vague and unwarranted warnings in Washington illuminates a bigger problem on a national level. Until we begin demanding reasons for the fright we are constantly bombarded with, the public "fearanoia" will only continue.
If you enjoy making up words too, e-mail Strickland at
mkstrickland@media.ucla.edu.
(C) 2005 Daily Bruin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 2, 2005


End of Document