Government must take steps to protect citizens from terrorism;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
January 27, 2003 Monday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: IN LIFE/OUR GENERATION; Speak for Yourself<; Pg.B7; COLUMN
Length: 285 words
Byline: Erin Boyington, Home-schooler
Body


Editor's note: Two weeks ago, Our Generation writer Nathan Empsall wrote an
 article critical of what he considered an attack on civil liberties by
 President Bush and his administration. Today, an Our Generation member
 responds to that editorial.
 In the wake of Sept. 11, President Bush declared war on terrorists and made
 steps to wipe out terrorism, concentrating first on the Middle East.
The hijackers who used planes as bombs on Sept. 11 did not just happen to
 be Muslim Arabs - their beliefs served as motivation for the attacks,
 something made clear by their leaders. These terrorists were sent here as
 enemy soldiers to kill Americans.
 In wartime, enemy soldiers are tried by military tribunals. They have no
 civil liberties because they are not citizens. Military law is different from
 civil law in many regards. And where are these thousands of detainees Empsall
 mentions? The Bush administration has been very careful not to profile
 Arab-Americans unjustly.
 Illegal immigration is a bigger problem for the United States. When people
 come here illegally, they have no civil rights. Recent proposals to give tax
 money to illegal immigrants are ridiculous. If these people can be found, they
 should be deported, not rewarded.
 American citizenship is not a right, it is a privilege. We have no
 obligation to allow foreign students in or even allow immigration to continue
 at all.
 We are a generous society, but we should have no mercy for foreign
 terrorists, and we should respect our own borders. If immigrants are coming
 here for peaceful reasons, let them do it through the proper channels.
 Obviously the process isn't too difficult when you consider the flaws that
 allowed the hijackers into the country.

Load-Date: January 29, 2003


End of Document