GOVERNOR A PLAYER IN TERRORISM FIGHT
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 30, 2003 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-7
Length: 774 words
Byline: Michael Martz, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Michael Martz at (804) 649-6964 or mmartz@timesdispatch.com  
Body


Conditions were ripe for bad things to happen in Virginia.
Kofi Annan, secretary-general of the United Nations, was scheduled to speak at the College of William and Mary. Federal intelligence agencies didn't like what they were hearing about potential terrorist attacks in the United States by al-Qaida. The Bush administration was making its case for war in Iraq.
On Feb. 7, the day before Annan's Charter Day speech in Williamsburg, President Bush declared the threat of terrorism to be high and raised the color-coded alert from yellow to orange for the second time since the system's creation.
"We took that alert very seriously," Virginia Gov. Mark R. Warner said in an interview last week at the Capitol.
Warner has had to improvise a new role for the state's chief executive as Virginia has emerged as a likely battleground in the international war on terrorism and, for more than three terrifying weeks last fall, the regional hunt for a deadly sniper.
Those circumstances have made him an important player in the flow of sensitive information from Washington to Richmond and from the capital to local officials across the state.
It's not an entirely comfortable role for a businessman and politician whose biggest challenges were supposed to be building roads and balancing a budget. "I'm thinking through these issues [that] I'm not sure any governor in the last 50 years has had to deal with," Warner said.
His predecessor, Gov. Jim Gilmore, had to respond to the terrorist attack on the Pentagon in Arlington County on Sept. 11, 2001, and the subsequent anthrax scare during which three Virginians were hospitalized with the deadly disease.
But preparing the state for a long-term conflict, with no clear battlefront or certainty of relief, has proved to be a different kind of challenge for the governorship anti-terrorism commission, appointed after the Pentagon attack, suffered from too little time, exaggerated costs for key security measures, and a brewing budget crisis.
Warner named his own commission, the Secure Virginia panel, soon after taking office more than a year ago. He appointed a prominent Republican, former Lt. Gov. John H. Hager, to lead it.
The panel's job, like that of the Gilmore commission, was to identify where Virginia was most vulnerable to terrorist attack and how to fortify those critical areas without spending money the state didn't have.
The state's vulnerabilities include an abundance of military bases and federal government operations. Among them, of course, is the newly repaired Pentagon.
"It might be different in Virginia than in many states in the Midwest," Warner said. "It's so much more real here."
The declaration of an orange alert on Feb. 7 was national, but its effect was felt more strongly in Virginia than most states.
Warner would not say whether intelligence had shown Virginia to be a specific target, or whether he discussed the state's status directly with Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge.
In contrast, the governor was clear about the most recent decision to raise the alert to orange, announced by Bush on March 17 in a speech to prepare the country for the beginning of the war in Iraq. "The last time, there was no specific threat," Warner said.
The February alert lasted about three weeks, but the initial tension gave way in less than a week to public jokes about the best uses for duct tape.
Virginia officials continued to take the situation seriously. Two days before the administration lowered the threat level to yellow, the governor received a detailed briefing, at his request, at the Pentagon.
The briefing included by Paul Wolfowitz, deputy secretary of defense. It focused on improving coordination among the state, the Pentagon and other governments in the Washington area.
The state has established closer ties to the Department of Homeland Security. Warner has an encryption telephone next to his desk for confidential conversations with federal officials. The state installed a $22,000 wide-screen television in Chief of Staff William Leighty's office for closed-circuit conference calls on homeland security.
Hager's office briefs the governor each morning on security issues. Warner, in turn, briefed more than 160 local law-enforcement and elected officials after the president raised the alert level to high again this month.
The governor agreed reluctantly to some high-visibility security measures, such as closing Governor Street behind the Executive Mansion. "I'm still not too keen on it," he said, "but that's not something I'm going to second-guess … at this time."
At the same time, Warner added, "Personally, I feel very secure on the Capitol grounds."

Load-Date: April 1, 2003


End of Document