Govt extends ban on 4G services in J&K amid demand for restoration
The Sentinel
July 9, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 362 words
Byline: Sentinel Digital Desk
Body


In Jammu and Kashmir, the mobile internet is available at low 2G speeds -- a move brought into effect to combat terrorism
Guwahati: The Jammu and Kashmir administration has extended the ban on high-speed internet in the Union Territory till July 29, 2020 "in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India."
Since the ban came into effect in Jammu and Kashmir, the mobile internet is only available at low 2G speed. According to the security agencies, this move, while ensuring the maintenance of public order, the administration has been successful in eliminating a large number of militants.
The administration has reportedly banned high-speed internet due to stop the misuse of the world wide web by the anti-social elements and overground workers (OGWs) of militant groups.
The Principal Secretary had issued an order to Home Shaleen Kabra which stated that the restrictions have not negatively impacted the efforts of the government towards Covid-19 control, education, and business activities.
"Now, therefore, upon assessment of the reports of the field agencies bringing out in unambiguous terms the necessity for the continuation of the restrictions on access to internet services." It states that it is imperative to restrict the internet in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the state and for maintaining public order", the order reads.
Meanwhile, the netizens from Jammu have been persistently demanding restoration of high-speed (4G) mobile internet. A tweeter user by the name Rahul Puri criticizing the BJP government, and wrote, "11 Months & 2 days and counting- Our fault? We have participated in the democratic process peacefully. We have supported ur party's every move since 2014. We stood with you on Article 370 & 35A. We gave you the mandate u didn't deserve. What did we get? 2G (sic)."
The Supreme Court on 11th May had directed for the constitution of a "Special Committee" which is to be headed by the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs in order to examine the issues that had been raised by the petitioners in a plea which sought for the restoration of 4G speed internet services in Jammu and Kashmir.

Load-Date: July 10, 2020


End of Document