Graham blasts Bush's anti-terrorism effort; The Florida Democrat says the administration has abandoned the fight
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 28, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c5
Length: 416 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Democratic presidential candidate Bob Graham said Sunday that President Bush has virtually abandoned Afghanistan and the fight against terrorism, which allowed al-Qaida to regroup while he pursued war in Iraq.
The Florida senator also said that by refusing to allow an Iranian-style religious government to take power in Baghdad, even if elected by the Iraqis, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld "demonstrates the kind of quagmire that we are potentially going to be in in Iraq."
"If you talk about a democracy, which means that people vote and select the political leadership that they desire, then you can't say, 'But there are certain segments of the population that are off-limits,'" he told ABC's "This Week."
"One of the concerns that many of the Middle Eastern leaders have said is that if you have a pure Jeffersonian democracy, you're going to have some of the most extreme elements within the country elected to the positions of responsibility."
Bush has said that one reason he initiated military action to end the rule of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was to replace his dictatorship with a stable democracy that would be a pattern for Iraq's Middle East and Persian Gulf neighbors.
Graham said should he be elected president, he would restore the anti-terror emphasis, which he said Bush has let lapse.
"I would point out that we have virtually abandoned the war on terrorism; that we have not taken on the 'A' team of Hezbollah and the others in Syria and Lebanon; that we have allowed our alliances, which are going to be absolutely critical to winning the war on terrorism, to disintegrate," Graham said. "I don't think that's a very impressive national security record."
White House spokeswoman Nicolle Devenish rejected Graham's charges as baseless. "The war on terrorism remains a priority and a focus for the president," she said.
Graham is among nine Democrats already entered in the race for the party's presidential nomination next year.
One of his rivals, Missouri Rep. Dick Gephardt, disclosed a plan last week that would give almost all Americans access to health care, funded in large part by repealing Bush's tax cuts.
Graham said he would not repeal tax cuts that already have been implemented but would freeze those that have not yet taken effect. He said he also would offer workers a two-year holiday from portions of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes.
Graham said he supports balanced budgets, but the country probably is committed to deficits for at least five years.

Graphic

 
Mug - Bob Graham

Load-Date: April 28, 2003


End of Document