Grant County taking part in preparedness exercise
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 8, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OTHER; Pg. a3
Length: 340 words
Byline: Telegraph Herald Staff
Body


Several Grant County communities are sharing more than $8,000 to conduct full-scale or tabletop terrorism and emergency response exercises.
The money comes from the Wisconsin Office of Justice Assistance, which is giving more than $32,000 to communities in Oneida, Milwaukee, Outagamie, Eau Claire and Grant counties to conduct similar exercises.
The exercise scenarios will simulate a terrorist attack and test emergency response capabilities, equipment and training in the event of a large-scale disaster.
Grant County has received multiple grants for local and multi-jurisdictional emergency response exercises, including:
* $2,700 for an exercise in conjunction with the city of Fennimore. A real-time response of public safety personnel will test and verify response capabilities, communications and emergency center operational plans in the event of an improvised explosive device at a large group gathering.
* $2,561 for a full-scale, multi-jurisdictional regional terrorism exercise. The scenario will consist of a simulated terrorist event in a school setting and a real-time active response by emergency personnel testing response training, protocols and operational plans.
* $1,116 for an exercise in conjunction with the village of Cassville. The exercise will consist of a simulated train derailment in an urban setting and limited real-time response of public safety officials and personnel.
* $900 for a series of tabletop emergency response exercises. The scenarios will consist of a terrorist event involving a hazardous chemical leak in an urban setting and through an ongoing dialogue and discussion will test emergency response capabilities, communications and operational plans.
* $893 for a series of tabletop emergency response exercises in Boscobel, Bloomington and Montfort.
A discussion between public safety officials will examine all aspects of emergency response plans, including emergency center operations and communication and coordination of response resources, in the face of a hazardous chemical leak in an urban area.

Load-Date: September 8, 2006


End of Document