Greece mail bomb campaignexpands, threatens embassies
The Salt Lake Tribune
November 2, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World; Local
Length: 490 words
Byline: By Nicholas Paphitis, Elena Becatoros And Melissa Eddy The Associated Press
Body


Athens, Greece » Suspected Greek terrorists unleashed an unprecedented two-day wave of mail bombs with blasts at the Russian and Swiss embassies in Athens and at international organizations. German authorities destroyed a bomb sent to German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
By Tuesday evening, at least 11 mail bombs had been detected in the Greek capital -- one addressed to French President Nicolas Sarkozy and eight to the embassies of Bulgaria, Russia, Germany, Switzerland, Mexico, Chile, the Netherlands and Belgium.
Two more were destroyed in controlled explosions at the Athens airport -- one addressed to the European Union's highest court in Luxembourg and the other to law enforcement agency Europol in the Netherlands.
Domestic Greek terrorist groups are suspected. If that is confirmed, it would mark a dramatic escalation for organizations that have never before attempted to strike targets abroad. Security at all embassies in Athens has been increased.
The campaign used small devices that only caused one injury and minimal damage. But it highlights the difficulty of keeping bombs out of the international delivery system -- also a target of Yemen-based militants armed with more powerful and potentially deadly explosives.
It was unclear whether the bomb sent to Germany was delivered by land or air. If sent by air, it would highlight the potential limitations of air cargo security that remain, despite the concern triggered by the mail bombs dispatched recently from Yemen.
German Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere said the package that arrived Tuesday at Merkel's office was sent from Greece two days earlier by UPS delivery and resembled the Athens packages. He described it as a package that appeared to be a book.
The news agency DAPD reported the package contained a pipe filled with black powder.
Sarkozy said French authorities were working with Greek police.
"The threat is very serious. We are extremely vigilant and I am following it very closely," Sarkozy said.
Packages addressed to embassies and state leaders were not likely to reach their intended targets, said Andrew Silke, Director Terrorism Studies at the University of East London. But the bombers probably achieved their aim by generating worldwide publicity.
Police have arrested two men in their 20s. They were allegedly carrying mail bombs addressed to Sarkozy and the Belgian Embassy, along with handguns and bullets in waist pouches.
The two -- Panagiotis Argyros, 22 and Gerasimos Tsakalos, 24, were charged with terrorism-related offenses Tuesday. Both refused to cooperate with authorities, declining to give their names and claiming to be political prisoners. Alt Heads:
Greece mail bomb campaignexpands, threatens embassies Greece shuts down mail service
Greece's civil aviation authorities were suspending all deliveries of mail and parcels abroad for 48 hours to allow authorities to check for the existence of more mail bombs, police said early Wednesday.

Graphic

 
Anti-terrorism police escort mail bomb suspect Gerasimos Tsakalos to a public prosecutor's office Tuesday. Eight embassies in Athens were the intended targets of mail bomb attacks Monday and Tuesday. French President Nicholas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel were also targeted.

Load-Date: November 3, 2010


End of Document