Greenbacks outpoll green
The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
April 21, 2012 Saturday


Copyright 2012 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 344 words
Byline: Guy Kovner, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
Body


April 21--The green on many people's minds these days is not the environment, but greenbacks -- cold hard cash.
Six polls by major news organizations this year asked people to rate the most important issue facing the nation, or influencing their choice of a president, and topping every one of them was the economy and jobs.
Economic concerns didn't just lead the polls, they blew away everything else, including health care, immigration, terrorism and education.
Together, economy and jobs were the No. 1 concern of more than 50 percent of respondents in four polls, and more than 40 percent in the other two.
The second leading concern -- which was the federal budget deficit in four polls -- was foremost for 20 percent of respondents, at most.
All other concerns drew primarily single-digit rating as the respondent's top issue.
The environment wasn't even listed on any of the six polls.
In a Bloomberg National Poll last month, for example, unemployment and jobs was the most important issue for 42 percent, followed by the federal deficit (21 percent) and gas prices (11 percent), giving economic matters a total of 74 percent.
Health care got 10 percent; immigration, taxes and terrorism each had 4 percent or less.
Keith Woods, chief executive officer of the North Coast Builders Exchange in Santa Rosa, said the polling was "no surprise whatsoever" with job losses and home foreclosures still tearing the social fabric.
When people are financially secure, they "focus their attention elsewhere," he said, on issues like crime, education and the environment.
"When the economy is bad, the economy is No. 1," said Caryl Hart, a conservationist and Sonoma County parks director.
"Do people's concerns about the environment rank near the top when they don't have a job? No," she said.
The polls were conducted by CNN/ORC, Bloomberg, CBS News/New York Times and ABC News/Washington Post between January and March.
___ (c)2012 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: April 24, 2012


End of Document