Greece Proposes New Anti-Terrorism Measures
The New York Times
June 13, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 304 words
Byline: AP 
Dateline: ATHENS, June 12
Body


Greece will propose to Britain a European Union initiative to combat terrorism, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today, adding that the shooting last week of a British military attache here made a case for joint action.
A similar agreement for increased police cooperation with the United States has already been drafted, said the spokesman, Panos Beglitis.
Both actions come after increased criticism of Greece's law enforcement record, following the killing last Thursday of Brig. Stephen Saunders. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by the terrorist group November 17.
The group is thought to have killed 22 people -- including four American officials -- since 1975, but none of its members have ever been caught.  Even with assistance from Scotland Yard investigators, Greek police have made no headway in the Saunders case.
Mr. Beglitis said Deputy Foreign Minister Elisavet Papazoi would discuss the initiative to fight terrorism with Britain's foreign secretary, Robin Cook, in Luxembourg, where both officials were attending a meeting of the 15-nation bloc's foreign ministers.
"Today the terrorism question can't be dealt with on a local level," Mr. Beglitis said. "We would like to take it to a European level."
He did not elaborate on the initiative, but said that the Amsterdam charter adopted by the European Union in 1997 had given member states the ability to work more closely on issues like terrorism. "Now we have the tools to work on a European level, something we did not have before Amsterdam," he said.
The memorandum with the United States has been drafted and was ready to be signed by Public Order Minister Michalis Chrisohoidis, Mr. Beglitis said.
Mr. Chrisohoidis said over the weekend that Greece was doubling its reward to $2.8 million for information leading to the arrest of November 17 members.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 13, 2000


End of Document