GREECE TOUGHENS LAW ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Part 1;; Column 1;
Length: 390 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times

Special to The New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, Dec. 15
Body


Declaring that Greece "can no longer be the only remaining country in Europe with a terrorism problem," Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis has pushed a new anti-terrorism bill through Parliament.
The new law, approved on Thursday, provides for penalties of up to life in prison for those who participate in a terrorist group, commit terrorist acts or support and finance such activity. It gives the police and the judiciary greater latitude in house searches and the arrest and imprisonment of suspects, and offers a reward of up to $165,000 to anyone providing substantive information on terrorism.
It also specifies that the state prosecutor will decide whether any terrorist proclamation can be published or broadcast. Newspapers that violate prosecutor's orders can be fined up to $660,000 and radio stations can be closed for up to six months.
 
Muzzling of Press Charged
 Dora Bacoyanni, the Cabinet minister who led the campaign for the bill, told Parliament that those who supported the press's right to publish statements by terrorists were "moral accomplices to terrorist-dictated journalism." But the union of Athens newspaper owners and editors described the measures as "an attempt to muzzle the press" and warned that they would not comply.
A number of terrorist groups have been operating in Greece, deadliest among them the elusive "November 17" organization. Since it first made its appearance in 1975 with the assassination in Athens of the American station chief of the Central Intelligence Agency, it has taken responsibility for the killing of an additional 14 Greek and American officials and private businessmen, including Mrs. Bacoyannis's husband.
 
Greece Accused in Past
 During the decade of rule by the Socialist Party of Andreas Papandreou, Western governments repeatedly accused Greece of failing to cooperate with them in their efforts to combat international terrorism.
The current Government, elected eight months ago, is now participating in joint anti-terrorism programs with Western countries, is sharing more information with them and has installed more advanced security equipment at potential targets like airports, foreign missions and companies.
A number of arrests of terrorist suspects have been made in the last month, after the discovery of a hideout and of an arms cache of two other terrorist groups.

Load-Date: December 17, 1990


End of Document