GREEN, FERRER TRADE RAPS OVER TERRORISM, SECURITY
Daily News (New York)
October 5, 2001, Friday
FOUR STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 571 words
Byline: By RALPH R. ORTEGA and JOEL SIEGEL DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body

Mark Green intensified his assault on Democratic rival Fernando Ferrer yesterday, accusing him of being unprepared to protect New York against terrorism and crime and of waging a "polarizing" mayoral campaign.
Ferrer, the Bronx borough president, has "said next to nothing on security and safety issues," Green charged.
Ferrer lashed back, accusing the public advocate of violating his own pledge to shun negative campaigning in the runoff for the Democratic nomination. He said Green was the one being divisive.
"My only question for Mark is, 'What made you break your word?' " Ferrer said.
The harsh words came on a day that Ferrer won the endorsement of the United Federation of Teachers. With the UFT's backing, Ferrer now has the support of the three major municipal unions - including District Council 37 and Local 1199 - that have the most sophisticated get-out-the-vote operations.
Ferrer also got endorsements yesterday from the electricians, carpenters and correction officers unions.
Green's attack continued a shift in tactics from the relentlessly upbeat approach he took all year when he led in the polls.
Defensive stance
But he finished behind Ferrer, 35% to 31%, in the Sept. 25 primary, and is on the defensive about his support of Mayor Giuliani's proposal for a 90-day term extension, an idea Ferrer rejected.
In invoking the themes of safety and security, and of divisiveness, Green appeared to be making a new play for white Democrats, the largest pool of undecided voters in next Thursday's runoff.
Repeatedly, Green belittled Ferrer's plan to deal with the World Trade Center crisis as too little, too late. He seized on what he called Ferrer's failure to confront security issues and Ferrer's new proposal for a blue-ribbon commission to help him name a police commissioner.
"When it comes to safety and security, it's all about citywide experience . . . decisive leadership . . . strong plans," Green said at Union Square. "I felt his response on safety and security was lacking."
Supporter Jerry Hauer, Giuliani's former Office of Emergency Management director, added, "This is not the time to ponder. This is not the time for commissions. . . . This is a time for a mayor who's prepared."
Green repeatedly seized on his development of three sets of proposals to deal with the Trade Center crisis, to Ferrer's one.
And although Green has had no more hands-on public safety experience than Ferrer, he pointed to advisers, who include Hauer and former Police Commissioner William Bratton.
Speaking at Columbus Circle, Ferrer mocked Green's Trade Center response.
"You know, to be sure, I didn't rush . . . days after a tragedy to issue a two-page press release. This is a topic that . . . requires a thoughtful, comprehensive approach," Ferrer said.
Swipe at Bratton
Ferrer again called it "troubling" that Bratton - one of Green's most important supporters - has said he would like to be top cop again. "It seems to me that being police commissioner should not be a political reward," Ferrer said.
Earlier, in an interview on WOR-AM, Green ratcheted up his attack on Ferrer, saying he campaigned all spring and summer on a theme of New York divided into a city of haves and have-nots.
"I don't think Freddy Ferrer is divisive," Green said. "But the Ferrer campaign has been based on a polarizing theme that we're 'two cities.' "
"In fact, it is [Green], unfortunately, [who's] trying to exploit division," Ferrer answered.

Graphic

 
Todd Maisel Daily News DONS ANOTHER HAT Fernando Ferrer puts on a hardhat after winning the endorsement of the carpenters and electrical unions in his mayoral run. Electricians Union Business Manager Tom Van Arsdale is at left.

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document