Greece vows tougher stand against terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 10, 2000, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A
Length: 375 words
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body


As the Greek government pledged Friday to introduce new anti-terrorism measures after the killing of a British military attache, the victim's widow delivered an emotional appeal to the Greek nation.
"I stand before you half the person I was yesterday," Heather Saunders said outside her house in Athens, with her two teenage daughters at her side. "The Greek people, I know, are not responsible for what happened yesterday. But for the sake and future of Greece within a European community, I feel that these wicked men must be brought to justice."
Compiled from Times WiresGREECE
In a 13-page letter to the independent Athens newspaper Eleftherotypia, the left-wing guerrilla group November 17 asserted that Brig. Stephen Saunders had helped coordinate NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia last year. The group said Saunders was "one of those who participated in the Nazi-type raids and mass murder of innocent, unarmed civilians."
A Defense Ministry spokesman in London said that the charge was unfounded and that Saunders had been with the U.N. observer mission on Iraq when the Yugoslav bombing started.
Saunders was shot four times by two gunmen on a motorcycle who pulled up beside his car as he drove to the British Embassy on Thursday. He died at a hospital.
According to Reuters, a Greek official who asked not to be named said that an unprecedented search had been launched for the killers. As yet, police had not even found the motorcycle.
A spokesman for the Greek government said Prime Minister Costas Simitis had held a Cabinet meeting to discuss new counter-terrorism steps.
"The prime minister is determined to undertake all the necessary and additional measures that are required to combat and eradicate terrorism," said the spokesman, Dimitris Reppas. "Efforts in the future will be more intense."
Reppas said the government did not foresee fundamental changes to the legal system, but was considering some extraordinary measures. He cited the possibility of using a one-judge trial in terrorist cases instead of a jury, a step used by Italy in the 1970s to try Red Brigades terrorists.
Reppas said that Simitis "also stressed the importance of taking all the necessary measures to ensure a framework of total safety for the 2004 Athens Olympic Games."

Load-Date: June 10, 2000


End of Document