Greece changes "frequent flyer' policy for terrorists
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 29, 1991, Monday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 849 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Body


It used to be that Greece was notorious among anti-terrorism experts for what they called its "frequent flyer" program. By that, they meant that every time a suspected terrorist was arrested in Greece, the authorities there would hustle him aboard a plane to Lebanon or Libya.
 
    In the days when Andreas Papandreou was running the country as prime minister, Greece was the closest thing to a safe haven outside of Beirut or Baghdad. Terrorists of all stripes counted on the frequent flyer program to get them home safely no matter what outrage they had committed against innocent civilians.
   Papandreou's government had even cut a deal with the notorious Abu Nidal organization, allowing it to open an office in Athens in exchange for a promise not to kill Greek citizens. Under Papandreou's Pan-Hellenic Socialist Party, Greece had close and enduring ties in the Arab world and wasn't about to let a few terrorists get in the way of national policy.
 
    That's why Greece refused to extradite Abdulrahim Khaled, a Palestinian wanted by Italian authorities for involvement in the Achille Lauro cruise ship hijacking. It's also why Greece refused another Italian extradition request for Abdel Ossama al-Zomar, a member of the Abu Nidal group wanted for the bombing of a Rome synagogue that killed a 2-year-old boy and wounded 36 others in 1982. Instead, it put Zomar on a plane to Libya.
 
    Attitudes like that began changing a year ago, however, when Constantine Mitsotakis and his New Democracy Party took power in Athens after eight years of scandal-plagued Socialist rule.
 
    Under Mitsotakis, Greece put aside the aggressively anti-American rhetoric of Papandreou's day and finally started getting in step with the rest of Europe. It also started to deal more seriously with terrorism. Soon, maybe as early as next month, we may learn how seriously.
 
    In May or June, Greek authorities are expected to bring a Palestinian named Mohammed Rashid to trial on terrorism charges. If the trial goes ahead as planned, it will culminate a nine-year effort by investigators on both sides of the Atlantic to stop a man they believe has been one of the most dangerous terrorist bombers around.
 
    Another indicator of just how serious the Greeks are getting about dealing with terrorism came this week when they arrested Assar Nobani, a 26-year-old Palestinian suspected of involvement in a botched bombing attack that killed seven people in the port city of Patras a week ago.
 
    Authorities in the United States as well as Europe will be closely watching both the Rashid and Nobani cases to see if the Greek justice system really works this time. There's ample reason for concern.
 
    The campaign to free Rashid began shortly after his arrest at Athens airport in May 1988 on a tip from the U.S. Justice Department that he was traveling with a phony passport. The PLO got into the act quickly, providing a lawyer for Rashid and warning Papandreou's government that there could be ominous consequences if the Palestinian was extradited to the United States as the Justice Department demanded.
 
    The Justice Department had been tracking Rashid since 1982 when U.S. intelligence services pinpointed him as the man who planted a time bomb on a Pan Am jet flying from Tokyo to Honolulu with 280 passengers on board. Miraculously, only one person, a 16-year-old Japanese tourist, was killed in the explosion.  Rashid also was the prime suspect in 15 other bombing attacks on American facilities and planes, including the explosion aboard a TWA flight from Rome to Athens in 1986 that killed four Americans.
 
    When a Greek lower court ruled that the Justice Department had presented a solid enough case for extradition, terror groups assassinated two government prosecutors and bombed the home of a Greek Supreme Court justice. The bombing caused three terrified Supreme Court justices to resign.
 
    Despite Washington's evidence, Papandreou heeded the PLO warnings and rejected the American extradition demand. As a sop to Washington, he decided to try Rashid on the minor charge of traveling with false documents. The plan, apparently, was to let him serve a few months in jail then quietly put him on a plane to Baghdad.
 
    That got side-tracked in May 1989 when the Greek Supreme Court overcame fears of terrorist retribution and affirmed the lower court ruling that Washington had made its case for Rashid's extradition.  Again, Papandreou exercised the government's prerogative and refused extradition. Instead, he put the case on hold indefinitely, neither trying the Palestinian on more serious charges in Greece nor invoking the "frequent flyer" solution.
 
    That's where matters stood until April 1990, when Greek voters decided they had had enough of Papandreou and elected Mitsotakis and his New Democrats. Within months, Greek authorities formally charged Rashid on four counts of terrorism, including the 1982 Pan Am bombing near Honolulu.
 
    This trial, along with the Patras bombing case, will tell the world whether Greek justice has finally come to grips with terrorism.

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document