Greeks, police clash over U.S. bases
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 24, 1990, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WORLD DIGEST; Pg. 11A; DIGEST
Length: 561 words
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece; ALGIERS, Algeria; NICOSIA, Cyprus; WASHINGTON; LONDON; JERUSALEM; MANILA, Philippines; SRINAGAR, India; SOFIA, Bulgaria; BONN; MONTREAL
Body


Demonstrators opposing a new agreement on American military bases in Greece clashed with riot police officers Monday night on the Mediterranean island of Crete. Police said tear gas was used to disperse the estimated 100 demonstrators, and 10 people were slightly injured. The clash occurred hours before the Greek Parliament ratified the treaty this morning. The new accord phases out some U.S. bases in Greece, with the remaining U.S. installations on Crete.
N. African states step up integration
 ALGIERS, Algeria Faced with a resurgent Europe, the leaders of R five North African nations Monday vowed to speed up economic integration and announced plans for a customs union by 1995.  Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and Mauritania also called for strengthened ties with the European Community, their main trading partner, and signed five economic accords on investment,  taxation and food security.
 Iranian president attacks hard-liners
 NICOSIA, Cyprus Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani reiterated plans to liberalize Iranian society in a scathing attack Monday on his hard-line opponents. "Islam has never wanted people to live in confinement, and those who say the people accept poverty, ignorance and infirmity, do not speak the truth," Tehran radio quoted Rafsanjani as saying. Rafsanjani advocates a tempering of the zealous 1979 Islamic revolution in favor of a moderate foreign policy, laissez-faire economy and postwar reconstruction.
 CIA denies ties to terrorism, killing
 WASHINGTON The Central Intelligence Agency on Monday denied involvement in Italian terrorism and the assassination of Swedish Prime Minister Olaf Palme as investigations into allegations of the agency's role got under way in Sweden and Italy.  The CIA denied claims made by Oregon businessman Dick Brenneke, who said on Italian television this month that the U.S.  spy agency backed the P-2 Masonic Lodge in committing terrorist acts in Italy. Another purported ex-CIA operative maintained P-2 got CIA support for the Palme assassination.
 Elsewhere .
 LONDON A London video firm will appeal a ban on International Guerrillas, a fantasy film about author Salman Rushdie which portrays him as a pro-Israeli playboy killed by lightning for attacking the Prophet Mohammed, the video's distributor said Monday.
 JERUSALEM Israeli belly dancers made a rare appearance in parliament Monday to protest against religious authorities who are trying to restrict their shows.
 MANILA, Philippines President Corazon Aquino asked lawmakers Monday for a half-billion dollars to pay for earthquake recovery. Officials have put the death toll at 1,621.
 SRINAGAR, India Secessionist violence in Kashmir killed at least 24 people over the past day, police said Monday.
 SOFIA, Bulgaria About 150,000 people took part in a funeral procession Monday to pay their respects to former Bulgarian Communist leader Georgi Dimitrov.
 BONN The United States will start removing all its chemical weapons from West German territory Thursday, the West German defense ministry said Monday.
 MONTREAL Quebec police blocked food supplies to Mohawk Indians who have set up blockades for two weeks to protest government plans to extend a golf course on land they claim as their ancestral territory. Quebec offered Monday to resume talks with Oka Mohawks and agreed observers from human rights  organizations could attend.
 

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document