Greek Court Backs Extraditing Palestinian to U.S.
The New York Times
May 13, 1989, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 447 words
Byline: By PAUL ANASTASI, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, May 12
Body


The Greek Supreme Court today upheld an American request for the extradition of a Palestinian in connection with a 1982 bomb explosion aboard a Pan Am airliner.
The ruling left a final decision in the hands of the Justice Minister in Greece's Socialist Government, which has overruled extradition orders in two recent terrorism cases.
An Athens police spokesman said a police alert had been ordered in anticipation of possible retaliation for the court's decision. He said additional security measures had been taken at Western embassies and airline offices and the homes and offices of judges.
Terrorists have killed two Supreme Court judges and threatened to assassinate anyone who supports the Palestinian's extradition. Two other judges resigned this year rather than be assigned to the hearing.
 
Court Rejects Appeal
The suspect, Mohammed Rashid, was appealing a lower-court decision allowing his extradition. He maintained his innocence and said the United States was pursuing him for his political convictions. But the court today ruled that there was sufficient evidence on his involvement in the terrorist incident.
The United States Justice Department maintains that Mr. Rashid, who is about 35 years old, was involved in planting a bomb on a Pan American World Airways jet flying from Tokyo to Honolulu. One person was killed and 15 were wounded.
Members of Congress and American officials have said the extradition case is a test of Greek-American relations. and could affect American military aid to Greece. [In a statement issued in Washington, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said, ''The court's decision sends a strong signal around the world that outright, senseless murder cannot be excused under the dubious claim of political motivation.''] Warning From U.S.
The Palestinian was arrested at Athens Airport last May after a tip by American officials. He was sentenced to five months in prison for traveling on a forged Syrian passport, and to an additional eight months for possessing a dangerous instrument in his cell.
The final decision by the Justice Minister may not come until after the June 18 general elections. Recent opinion polls show that the conservative opposition is about 10 percentage points ahead of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou. The conservative leader, Constantine Mitsotakis, has repeatedly stated that he favors extradition of Mr. Rashid.
The Socialist Government has been criticized by some Western governments for failing to cooperate in combatting international terrorism. When the Supreme Court approved extradition of a Palestinian and an Italian in terrorism cases, the Government overturned the decisions.


End of Document