GREECE PLEDGES ACTION AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 10, 2000, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 577 words
Byline: JEREMY GAUNT, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: ATHENS --
Body


Greece, reeling from the assassination on an Athens street of a senior British diplomat by the elusive November 17 urban guerrilla group, pledged yesterday to work harder to combat terrorism.
A day after British defense attache Brigadier Stephen Saunders was gunned down by two men on a motorbike, the government said it would step up the restructuring of its police force and make more intense efforts to end terrorist attacks.
"The prime minister is determined to undertake all the necessary and additional measures that are required to combat and eradicate terrorism," government spokesman Dimitris Reppas said after a Cabinet meeting. "Efforts in the future will be more intense. … We must have results."
Greece has often been accused by the United States and other nations of not doing enough to stop attacks on Western interests. Such attacks range from car torchings by self-styled anarchist groups to deadly assaults like Thursday's.
A Greek official, who asked not to be named, said an unprecedented search had been launched for the killers, but so far police had not even found the motorbike that had been used.
Foreign Minister George Papandreou told Britain's visiting minister of defense for procurement, Baroness Symons, that Greece would act. "Greece will do everything in its power to find the guilty parties and bring them to justice," he said.
No member of November 17 has ever been arrested since its inception in 1975. The extreme left-wing group, named for the day in 1973 when a student uprising against Greece's ruling military junta was crushed, has now killed 23 people.
It said the British military attache was murdered as retribution for Britain's role in NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia last year. In a letter to the Athens newspaper Eleftherotypia, the group said Saunders played a key role in the NATO campaign.
The British embassy said Saunders had no direct role in the war.
Greece's pledge of tougher action came as the Saunders family and the British government called on the Greek population to help police track down the killers.
In an emotional news conference, Saunders' widow told reporters in front of her Athens home that her husband was "a man committed to peace" who had never raised his gun to kill anyone. "I stand before you half the person I was yesterday morning," she said. "Anyone who saw anything, even a little thing, please tell the police."
Symons echoed the call. "A lot of Greek people must have seen what happened yesterday. We want to appeal to [them] … to have the courage to come forward and say what they saw," she said.
In London, a Foreign Office spokesman said Britain was reviewing security at its embassies worldwide after the military diplomat's killing.
Greece also vowed to protect the 2004 Olympic Games, which will be held in Athens. Thursday's killing occurred close to the Olympic Stadium, the main venue for the Games.
Reppas, the government spokesman, said Public Order Minister Michalis Chryssohoidis had stressed at the Cabinet meeting the importance of taking all the necessary measures to ensure total safety at the Olympics. Athens 2004 organizers said the safety strategy for the Games, including everything from airport security to venue safety, would be developed by a special committee now being formed.
But Olympics organizers stressed that Greece was relatively safe. "Greece has one of the lowest crime rates in Europe," one official said. "We have our problems, but we are dealing with them."

Load-Date: September 15, 2000


End of Document