GRISLY LOCKERBIE TESTIMONY;
AT TERRORISM TRIAL, RESIDENTS DESCRIBE DESTRUCTION OF NEIGHBORHOOD AFTER PAN;
AM JETLINER CRASHED IN 1988
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 5, 2000, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 646 words
Byline: DONALD G. MCNEIL JR., THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: CAMP ZEIST, Netherlands --
Body


A noise that kept growing louder. A dark mass just clearing the rooftops. A fireball like a mushroom cloud. The Flannigans' house not there anymore, replaced by a pile of rubble as high as a kitchen window. Great gouts of fire raining down, the reek of jet fuel and things lying in the street that, in the light of the flames, slowly became recognizable as bodies.
The residents of the Sherwood Park section of Lockerbie, Scotland, took the witness stand yesterday in the trial of two Libyans accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 and described a hellish scene -- exactly what each of them saw just after 7 p.m. Dec. 21, 1988, when most of a Boeing 747 smashed down in their midst and exploded.
The 11 Lockerbie residents killed that night all lived at Nos. 11, 13, 14, 15 or 16 Sherwood Crescent, a group of row houses wiped out by the crash. Most of the survivors who testified yesterday were their nearest neighbors, who leaped up from an episode of "This Is Your Life" to run outside and see those of others ending.
But the prosecution in the case of Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, the two former Libyan airline officials who are accused of being intelligence agents and of blowing up the plane in an act of terrorism, did not start so intimately. Rather, it focused the day's testimony like a zoom lens, starting from far off and moving in.
The first witness was Stephen C. Teagle, a food plant manager who saw the blast from an empty highway, drove home, ate dinner and learned what it was from the late news. It led to witnesses like Jasmine Anne Bell, who dodged streaks of flaming jet fuel raining down on her brother's driveway, stepping "back and back and back till I couldn't go any further because my back was against the wall."
The only witness the defense cross-examined was the last, Geoffrey John Carpenter, 56, a former police superintendent who was then a regional traffic specialist living in Lockerbie and was rousted from his television by the noise and for some hours was the senior officer at the scene.
The prosecution questioned him about the flying debris and huge crater he saw, and about how he had gotten roads cleared for fire engines and shelters set up for the homeless.
In its turn, the defense asked several apparently disjointed questions. One was about whether it was possible to completely secure a crime scene when debris had rained down in a plume stretching for miles to the North Sea. Carpenter said it was not.
A second was about how quickly journalists had appeared on the scene. Carpenter estimated 90 minutes.
A third was about how quickly "American citizens" began to arrive, particularly an FBI team with "modern, sophisticated equipment such as satellite systems and digital cameras," and more particularly an agent named Hal Hendershot. Carpenter said he thought airline representatives arrived the next day, and that he later met FBI agents with cameras of a type he had never seen.
The defense made no opening statement, so the point of the questions was unclear. Hendershot was the FBI's first liaison to the investigation, and federal agents often have satellite telephones and sophisticated cameras.
But there have been suggestions in the past that the discovery of a crucial piece of evidence against the Libyans, shreds of a bomb detonator, was too convenient and could have been planted. The first question could have been directed at that.
The defense has already announced that it may blame two Palestinian groups -- the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, based in Syria, and the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front, based in the West Bank -- for the explosion. Yesterday, in conversations with a French news agency, representatives of both groups denied responsibility.
The point of the hours of grisly testimony was not explained by the prosecution, nor questioned by the court or the defense.

Load-Date: May 10, 2000


End of Document