Group asks Carbon commissioners to sign resolution against national defense act
Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pennsylvania)
May 7, 2012 Monday


Copyright 2012 Standard-Speaker
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 517 words
Byline: Tom Ragan, Standard-Speaker, Hazleton, Pa.
Body


May 07--JIM THORPE -- A group of area people asked the Carbon County commissioners on Thursday to sign a proposed resolution against the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2012.
Valerie Norato spoke during the commissioners' meeting about the resolution, which was presented to the board a week earlier.
The Constitutional group objects to sections of the act titled "Counter-Terrorism," which state that in limited circumstances, a U.S. citizen may be detained by the U.S. government, or the U.S. armed forces, if suspected of involvement in terrorism, and that the detention could last, without trial, until the end of the hostilities.
Commissioners Chairman Wayne Nothstein said he thinks the government has gone too far, but feels there is room for clarification in the resolution.
"I think the intent is right but I think they have to go back and revisit it. I'm considering signing it," he said.
He was quickly backed up by Vice Chairman Tom Gerhard, who said he's also considering signing it.
Minority Commissioner William O'Gurek was asked by Norato if he would sign it.
He said no. "I don't think there is anything in the act that violates the law."
O'Gurek said the intent of the law is to deal with the threat posed to America, and noted that is one of the reasons why U.S. men and women are fighting wars in foreign countries.
"I stand behind our troops who are dealing with al-Qaida and the Taliban and any terrorists who are opposing the U.S.," O'Gurek said.
He said the provisions apply only to non-lawful people connected to al-Qaida and associates, which is in line with what America is trying to do.
The detention provisions of the act have been criticized by the American Civil Liberties Union and the Bill of Rights Defense Committee and others concerned about the scope of the president's authority.
O'Gurek said nothing in the National Defense Authorization Act undermines the rights that Americans enjoy.
"I'm in favor of the act and I don't think it is unconstitutional," O'Gurek said. "I also think it stands behind veterans who have fought to defend our country."
O'Gurek said he respects the group's opinion but doesn't agree with them.
Settlement OK'd
The commissioners approved a settlement of a lawsuit against the county and the prison regarding an incident in 2008 involving Leonard Cerami, an inmate at the time.
Cerami will be paid $3,000.
He claimed in the suit that he was violently assaulted by another inmate, Patrick Huey, who used a pen to stab Cerami and struck him in the face, causing abrasions and lacerations.
The suit named the county, the prison and the warden at the time (Jim Youngkin).
Controller Robert Crampsie said the prison board also must approve the settlement before any payment is made.
Contractor hired
The commissioners awarded a contract for the installation of ductless heat pump systems at the prison to the low bidder, Master Mechanical Corp., McAdoo, for $22,725.
tragan@standardspeaker.com
___ (c)2012 the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) Visit the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) at standardspeaker.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: May 7, 2012


End of Document