GROUP DIFFERS ON BOMBINGS, TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 12, 2002 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-10; FAITH AND VALUES
Length: 461 words
Byline: From Associated Press Reports
Dateline: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia
Body


Religious leaders from Muslim nations disagreed at a meeting last week over whether suicide bombings in Israel should be condemned or considered legitimate means of resistance.
The debate among religious affairs ministers of the Organization of the Islamic Conference echoed a March meeting of foreign ministers from Muslim countries. They were also unable to agree on a definition of terrorism.
Malaysia's Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi said Monday that holy war cannot be won with violence and that suicide bombings only serve to bolster the view that Palestinians are terrorists.
But Saudi Arabia's minister for Islam, Sheik Salleh Abdul Aziz Mohammed al-Sheik, said "the suicide bombings are permitted" and bombers "are considered to have died a martyr's death."

Jehovah's Witnesses face possible ouster
NEW YORK - Jehovah's Witnesses who publicly criticized how their denomination handles claims of sexual abuse say the religious group has started the process of ousting them from the fellowship.
A former elder, a former researcher in the Jehovah's Witnesses' Brooklyn headquarters and the parents of a girl who was abused say they were summoned to meetings with their local judicial committees.
J.R. Brown, a national spokesman for the Jehovah's Witnesses, confirmed the four had been called to the hearings, but he said the proceedings may focus on "sins" unrelated to any public comments on sexual abuse. He would not provide details.

Archbishop Tutu urges racial reconciliation
SEATTLE - South Africa's Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu delivered a rousing call for an end to racial and ethnic divisions worldwide, then began dancing in the aisle.
More than 1,000 people packed St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral last Sunday to greet Tutu, 71, winner of the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize, at the start of his four-day visit to Seattle.
Tutu's sermon did not refer directly to the war on terrorism or Mideast violence, but spoke of "the divisions in society" at the time of Christ, who he said preached "the radical idea that we are all part of the same family, we are all bound to each other. .*.*. No one is an outsider; we are all insiders."

Elsewhere
LOUISVILLE, Ky.  - Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) headquarters announced that a 35-year downward slide in membership continued in 2001, but the net loss of 31,549 was less than in previous years. …
NEW DELHI, India - The upper house of India's Parliament passed a unanimous resolution demanding greater protection and relief for victims of ongoing Hindu-Muslim violence in western Gujarat state. …
BLOOMINGTON, Minn.  - For the first time, a woman has assumed the office of president of the United Methodist Church's Council of Bishops. Bishop Sharon A. Brown Christopher, 57, of the Illinois Area, took office on May 3.

Load-Date: May 15, 2002


End of Document