Group remembers terrorism
The Daily Cougar: University of Houston
September 12, 2007 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2007 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 622 words
Byline: Chelsea Brotherton
Body


The UH Young Republicans evoked mixed responses from students Tuesday after placing posters around campus showing acts of terrorism.
Sociology senior Heidi Alaswad said the posters neglected to illustrate terrorist attacks conducted by other ethnic or religious groups.
"All this was done by Muslims - its a little biased in that regard," she said when pointing to the displays photos. "Why did they choose six? Theres so much more."
The posters were placed at the University Center, Agnes Arnold Hall and Philip Guthrie Hoffman Hall - some of UHs most trafficked areas.
"Its putting something in my eyes that I dont want to think about right now," history junior Bridget Martin said.
The poster displayed six terrorist-related images, such as the suicide attacks against the World Trade Center, and other terrorist attacks since 1979.
"Its offensive, and it doesnt make sense because 9/11, and what they are showing (on the poster) dont have a relationship. I dont see what Saddam Hussein has to do with 9/11. This just promotes violence," biochemistry freshman Julie Burrell said.
Not all students were offended by the explicit images.
"I dont find it offensive. I wonder what theyre trying to say because how would anyone forget? Why would anyone forget?" economics senior Alfredo Vittone said.
The Young Republicans said they had no intention of offending anyone.
"We are trying to have a memorial of Sept. 11. Were trying to get people to remember that terrorist attacks did happen to U.S. citizens," Young Republican President Rachel Coolidge said. "Graphic is the only way you can do it. Its shocking what happened to American citizens, and I think that we need to always remember that. Its not meant to shock people, but just to create awareness."
Coolidge said that the posters were intended to remind students of the 9/11 attacks.
"They werent intended to be inflammatory in any sense. If they were, we apologize that it seems its targeted to a specific racial group," Young Republican Fundraising Director John Donaho said.
According to the Student Handbook, any student organization is allowed to erect posters as long as certain guidelines are followed, mostly to ensure materials are not placed in undesignated areas.
"The posting policy is like the freedom of expression policy where groups can go to specific designated areas and talk about any topic that they choose to talk about. The Department of Campus Activities does not approve or disapprove postings based on content," Campus Activities Director Marcella Leung said.
The guidelines for posting material on campus are limited to student organizations in order to prevent outside advertisers from cluttering bulletin boards.
Censorship is not practiced at UH, which is why flyer content is not evaluated, Associate Dean of Students Kamran Riaz said.
Pre-business sophomore Miguel Zavala said he didnt need to see the poster to remember the attacks.
"I dont find it offensive, because I know no one is going to ever forget that stuff. Its probably one of the biggest events of my lifetime. Its something good to have on a poster. You can hear about it, but seeing it is different," Zavala said.
Communication sophomore Ian Smith said he didnt mind the posters either.
"It reminds me of how vulnerable society is today," he said. "(The U.S.) may be the world power, but it doesnt mean were immune to disaster and hate. ... I think we take for granted a lot of the people that are fighting for us."
Leung said the poster controversy can be used as an opportunity for students to engage in campuswide dialogue.
"Its an ideal opportunity for conversation, because its one that were having as a whole, as a nation, right now," Leung said.
Additional reporting by Kelsie Hahn and Mayra Cruz

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document