Group: Former Guantanamo detainees tortured, abused; Human Rights Watch urges U.S. to do more to protect rights of terrorism suspects
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 30, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. c19
Length: 288 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MOSCOW 
Body


Russian law enforcement agencies have tortured three former Guantanamo inmates and subjected them and four others to continual harassment and abuse, a U.S.-based rights group said in a report Thursday.
Human Rights Watch urged the United States to do more to protect the rights of terrorism suspects subject to extradition, saying it should not transfer people to countries where they may be tortured.
Allison Gill, Moscow director for the rights group, said three of seven men who were released from the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay in 2004 have been beaten and tortured. All have suffered from detention and other forms of harassment by authorities, especially from the Interior Ministry and the Federal Security Service, she said.
The report said four have been forced into hiding.
Russia's Interior Ministry declined to comment on the accusations. The Federal Security Service, the KGB's main successor agency, also refused immediate comment.
One of the former detainees, Rasul Kudayev, has been held in custody in the North Caucasus city of Nalchik on charges of participating in the October 2005 attack by hundreds of militants on police and government buildings. Kudayev's lawyers and relatives say he was beaten while in custody to extract confessions and a regional court has ordered prosecutors to probe those allegations.
Kudayev's mother Fatima Tekayeva told The Associated Press in a phone interview that her son was repeatedly beaten. "I saw traces of the beatings on his body with my own eyes," she said.
Two others, Ravil Gumarov and Timur Ishmuratov, were sentenced last year to sentences of 13 and 11 years, respectively, for blowing up a natural gas pipeline after having been acquitted in an earlier trial.

Load-Date: April 10, 2007


End of Document