Groups urge governor to stop surveillance of pipeline protesters; Environmental groups call on Northam to stop surveillance of anti-pipeline protesters
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
June 8, 2018 Friday
2 Edition


Copyright 2018 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; Pg. 5A
Length: 288 words
Byline: PATRICK WILSON Richmond TimesDispatch
Body


Two environmental groups on Wednesday called on Gov. Ralph Northam and relevant state leaders to order an end to surveillance of Mountain Valley Pipeline protesters done by a state entity tasked with fighting terrorism.
A statement from the Chesapeake Climate Action Network and Preserve Floyd, citing a Richmond Times-Dispatch report, said there was no need for the Virginia Fusion Center, which has a primary mission of preventing terrorism, to use its resources to monitor activities of peaceful environmental groups and report information to the developer of the Mountain Valley Pipeline.
 Both environmental groups are among those whose Facebook meeting activities were monitored by law enforcement for dissemination in "pipeline situation reports."
 "In our America, you should be able to participate in a protest about an issue you care about without having to worry that government operatives are watching you and reporting your activities directly to a private company that is building an unwanted and unneeded pipeline through Virginians' waterways, beloved mountains, and treasured forests," the groups' statement said.
 The statement said the groups' activities include prayer vigils, peaceful sit-ins and concerts.
 The Mountain Valley Pipeline, one of two natural gas pipelines planned to pass through the state, has generated controversy, protesters and tree sitters over its environmental impacts and questions about its necessity toward meeting Virginia energy needs.
 Northam's office had no comment on the statement.
 A Mountain Valley Pipeline spokeswoman said the developers appreciate the law enforcement tactics because some opponents "engaged in trespassing, harassment, and other illegal and threatening behavior."

Graphic

 
Roanoke County police have their own camp below the tree stand of Theresa Minor Terry, 30, who along with her mother is trying to block a natural gas pipeline from crossing their family's land. HEATHER ROUSSEAU | The Roanoke Times Roanoke County police have their own camp below the tree stand of Theresa Minor Terry, 30, who along with her mother is trying to block a natural gas pipeline from crossing their family's land. HEATHER ROUSSEAU | The Roanoke Times

Load-Date: June 8, 2018


End of Document