Group Life Insurance Provision Could Stall Terrorism Insurance Bill
CongressNow
December 7, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 690 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


A provision to include group life insurance in a measure to reauthorize the federal terrorism risk insurance program could further stall extension of the program, which expires Dec. 31.
The legislation (H.R. 2761) could hit the House floor by Tuesday, after already once passing the House with the provision in and then having it stripped out by the Senate. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act was enacted in 2002, was reauthorized in 2005 to provide reinsurance coverage for insurance companies following a declared terrorism event.
On Thursday, the House Rules Committee approved a closed rule for floor debate allowing the chamber to amend the Senate's changes to the House bill, but not make any other changes not spelled out in the rule.
The proposed changes, sponsored by House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.), would lower the trigger-the amount of damages insurers must pay for before the federal government begins sharing in the cost-from $100 million to $50 million. It keeps the program's extension at seven years and would not mandate NBCR coverage. It also would reinsert the group life insurance provisions, and create a separate $5 billion recoupment pool for group life.
Life insurance lobbying groups, including the American Council of Life Insurers, have been pushing for expanding the program to include group life insurance, arguing that without adequate catastrophic reinsurance, many group life insurers risk financial ruin from a significant terrorist attack. The group notes that while some coverage is currently available the products have higher deductible and low coverage limits.
House Financial Services Member Randy Neugebauer (R-Texas) told the Rules Committee yesterday that the Senate version is "more fiscally responsible" than the House bill but that he would still support Frank's amendment on the floor because "it is better than the earlier version."
While the House may easily approve those changes, stalemate could come when it returns to the Senate with the group life coverage included.
Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), ranking member on the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee has been adamantly opposed to expanding the program to include group life coverage. At press time, Shelby's office did not return calls for comment on negotiations about the provision.
Aides in Senate Banking Chairman Chris Dodd's (D-Conn.) office are not commenting on the provision while staff continues to negotiate.
If the chambers cannot come to agreement to send the President a bill before its expiration, one option may be a 120-day extension that Frank had suggested before the Senate passed its version of the bill. A one-year extension of the current program is more likely to crop up if House and Senate differences are not settled.
Insurance industry sources speculate that if that happens, the bill will never get done, something they don't want to see happen. They want the stability that the federal program provides to the market.
"We anticipate members of the House and Senate will resolve their few remaining differences before the current legislation expires on Dec. 31, as we know they understand the urgency of adopting a program," said Charles Chamness, president and CEO of the National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies.
Frank's amendment also provides that for an act of terrorism resulting in industry losses exceeding $1 billion, the deductible would be 5 percent for acts that occur in 2008, 5.5 percent in 2009 and an increase of 50 basis points for each year after that. The percentages would reset to 5 percent in the year following such an act.
The version passed by the House in September, would have reauthorized the program for 15 years and include mandatory coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical, and radiological risks beginning in 2009. It also would have added group life insurance coverage.
When the Senate took up the measure in November it substituted its own version-extending the program for seven years without making mandatory coverage for NBCR risks or adding group life insurance components. It also doubled the program's trigger to $100 million.

Load-Date: December 12, 2007


End of Document