Grove residences granddaughter a part of anti-terrorism operations
The American (Vinita, Oklahoma)
November 12, 2009


Copyright 2009 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2009 The American


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 382 words
Byline: The American staff
Body


Air Force Tech. Sgt. Tanja K. Orwig has deployed to Southwest Asia to support the missions of Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom, and the Combined Task Forfce-Horn of Africa. The service member will be a part of the 380th Air Expeditionary Wing.
Operation Enduring
Freedom is the official name given to anti-terrorism military operations involving U.S. troops and allied coalition partners. Active duty and reserve component members from all branches of the U.S. armed forces have been deployed to support the war against global terrorism outside the borders of the United States. U.S. troops serve in South, Southwest and Central Asia, the Arabian peninsula, the Horn of Africa, islands in the Pacific, and Europe.
Operation Iraqi Freedom is the official name given to military operations involving members of the U.S. armed forces and coalition forces participating in efforts to free and secure Iraq. Mission objectives focus on force protection, peacekeeping, stabilization, security and counter-insurgency operations as the Iraqi transitional governing bodies assume full sovereign powers to govern the peoples of Iraq. Members from all branches of the U.S. military and multinational forces are also assisting in rebuilding Iraq's economic and governmental infrastructure, and training and preparing Iraqi military and security forces to assume full authority and responsibility in defending and preserving Iraq's sovereignty and independence as a democracy.
The mission of U.S. troops in Operation Horn of Africa is to detect, disrupt and defeat transnational terrorist groups in the region and to support coalition partner efforts to deny opportunity for re-emergence of terrorist networks in the central, eastern Horn of Africa.
Orwig, a ground safety manager with 18 years of military service, is normally assigned to Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, Goldsboro, N.C.
She is the daughter of John R. Short of Scruggs Station Road, Jefferson City, Mo., and granddaughter of Mai-dell Short of 291st Road,
Grove, Okla.
Her mother and stepfather, Elke U. and George E Brennan, reside on Harvest Gate, Lake In The Hills, 111.
The sergeant graduated in 1990 from Lindbergh Senior High School, St. Louis, Mo., and is currently attending Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, Fla.

Load-Date: February 17, 2010


End of Document