GROWING THREAT OF TERRORISM CITED
The New York Times
February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 917 words
Byline: By LESLIE MAITLAND WERNER
Body


Federal and Los Angeles officials disagree over jurisdiction for security against possible terror attacks at the Olympic Games. Page A20.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8 - The director of the State Department's office for combating terrorism testified today that it had ''major problems in dealing with the security of embassies'' around the world, which were designed to be readily accessible to the public.
''We're moving as fast as we can to improve security'' without jeopardizing the department's primary function of serving the public, the director, Robert M. Sayre, told a House subcommittee. He explained that most American embassies were in downtown areas, on main streets and in buildings with entrances at the curb, all factors that complicated efforts to increase protection.
Robert M Sayre, who heads State Department's office for combating terrorism,' discusses difficulties of protecting US embassies, House subcommittee; says 85 nations were affected by international terrorism in '83; holds US interests and diplomats remain primary terrorist targets; Federal Bureau of Investigation Dir William H Webster testifies on terrorism in US; photos (M)
Mr. Sayre, who is also chairman of an interdepartmental policy group on terrorism, said, ''The problem has been steadily growing since we began keeping statistics in 1968.'' He conceded that ''although the incidents within the United States declined in 1983, our problems overseas have grown.''
Largely as a result of the truck- bombing of the Marine headquarters in Beirut last fall, ''more American diplomats and military personnel lost their lives to terrorist acts in 1983 than in all the previous years combined,'' Mr. Sayre said. ''American interests and diplomats continue to be the primary target of international terrorism, although 85 countries were affected in 1983.''
 
Largest Category Is Diplomats
Preliminary 1983 figures for an annual State Department study called Patterns of International Terrorism indicate that there were 898 international terrorist incidents last year compared with 791 the year before, contributing to a total of 7,371 such incidents since 1973. The department's figures for 1983 includes 336 hoaxes and threats.
The largest category of terrorist incidents, 455 cases, involved attacks on diplomats. More than 300 of the incidents involved bombings, and 311 of 1983's total took place in Western Europe. The department's study also found that the number of armed attacks increased sharply, from 7 in 1982 to 24 last year.
Representative Don Edwards, the California Democrat who held the hearing of the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the Judiciary Committee, said diplomatic service had become a dangerous job and commended those who were still willing to do it.
William H. Webster, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, also testified at the hearing, saying, ''We have seen an increased propensity on the part of terrorist groups to plan and carry out terrorist acts in the United States.''
 
How Terrorists Use U.S.
He said he did not believe the United States offered ''fertile ground'' for breeding domestic terrorist groups because ''violence is not a necessity for seeking change here.'' But groups are using the United States as a theater, he said, to dramatize their opposition to events elsewhere in the world, whether or not they involve the United States.
Partly because the bureau prevented some incidents last year, Mr. Webster said, in 1983 there were 31 incidents of terrorism in the United States in which six people were killed and four people were injured. This was a decline from 1982, when there were 51 incidents that killed 7 people and injured 26. He defined terrorism as the ''unlawful use of force or violence'' to ''intimidate or coerce'' in furtherance ''of political or social objectives.''
Investigations leading to the arrests of violent Puerto Rican nationalists and Armenian terrorists significantly decreased the number of terrorist acts attributed to those groups last year, Mr. Webster said.
Mr. Webster said that since Attorney General William French Smith relaxed the guidelines for opening domestic security investigations last April, the F.B.I. now opened cases ''when facts or circumstances indicate that two or more persons are engaged in an enterprise for the purpose of furthering political or social goals wholly or in part through activities that involve force or violence.''
 
Plans for the Olympics
He said the F.B.I. had identified ''two groups well worth looking at'' that it could not have investigated under the former, stricter guidelines.
Under questioning by Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, Mr. Webster said the bureau was investigating allegations that death squads in El Salvador had been obtaining weapons from American sources. He said the bureau had had ''no success so far in proving the allegations.'' The inquiry was requested by the State Department and the National Security Council.
Mr. Webster also said the bureau was at work to prevent terrorist acts at the Olympic Games in Los Angeles. A 50-member hostage-rescue team will be sent to Los Angeles, he said, and will offer ''an alternative to the use of military force'' in case of problems. He said the varied sites of the Games, stretching along 135 miles of highway, required extra precautions.
He said the F.B.I. was also working to prevent terrorist acts at the World's Fair in New Orleans and the national political conventions in Dallas and San Francisco.

Graphic

 
photos of security measures taken at U.S. missions in Europe


End of Document