Growing up in the shadow of terrorism - Correction Appended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 11, 2006 Monday
THIRD EDITION


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1389 words
Byline: By Elizabethe Holland ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Body


Five years ago, the horror and pain of 9/11 prompted our children to send letters and pictures and banners to people they'd never met. To sell beads and lemonade and brownies to raise money to help. To tape red, white and blue stars to school lockers and wedge cups into chain-link fences to spell out patriotic messages to passers-by.
Until 9/11, many of our children had never heard the word "terrorist." Or had the notion that anyone could, or would, hate America. Or had seen adults -- so many of them -- openly cry.
Until 2001, Sept. 11 was a day like any other.
For all of us, that has forever changed. We shed our shoes before boarding airplanes. We heed color-coded security warnings. We worry about our children in a whole new way.
But how has 9/11 affected our children? Do they think about it? Talk about it? Dread another catastrophe?
Just five years out, it's hard to say, even for child-behavior experts. For some children, it has changed outlooks or sparked uncertainty or strengthened resolve. For others, like so many other defining moments detailed in history books, the significance is yet to be fully realized.
Defining or disappearing?
Richie Frohlichstein, co-editor in chief of the Kirkwood High School newspaper, believes 9/11 is his generation's equivalent of the day President John F. Kennedy was shot.
"It represents the tragedy that will define the young people's generation," said Richie, 17.
Sarah Hutchins, the other co-editor, sees it as tremendously important but a day that has come to be viewed, in many ways, like any other day.
"It's something that has kind of disappeared," said Sarah, also 17.
An upcoming edition of the Kirkwood Call will delve into what people at the school remember about the day and how 9/11 has affected them.
Some may feel as Richie does -- that one day, he and others of his era will tell their children and grandchildren exactly where they were and what they were doing when the planes struck, just as today's parents and grandparents recount the moment they learned Kennedy had been shot.
Sept. 11 is more than a painful memory, though, Richie said.
"I see how much terrorism dominates everything that we see now," said Richie, who earlier this year worked as a congressional page in Washington. "It left such a big mark on me."
It made a deep impression on Sarah as well, so much so that the pain and emotion tied to the event led her to pass up an opportunity two years ago to visit ground zero, where the World Trade Center collapsed and more than 2,000 people died. Not enough time had passed, she explained. That said, when Sept. 11 has its turn on the calendar, it doesn't jump out at her as it did a couple of years ago, Sarah said.
"It was something I would take notice of," she said. "But now it's just another date, and that's so sad to think about. You look at it and you have to think for a few minutes: 'September 11.'
"I hate saying that, because I know what happened and I don't want to suggest that all the people who died aren't important -- they're so important. . . . But it's just one of those things that is just slowly slipping away."
Children are listening
Isaiah Oesterlei recently heard his mother talking about what she could and couldn't carry on to a plane to San Francisco.
The talk confused him. Isaiah, 8, thought they were past all that plane-security stuff; 9/11 was a long time ago, right?
The third-grader's questions offered further evidence of what Laura Oesterlei has come to know: While she and her husband try to act as filters between post-9/11's scary realities and their oldest child, Isaiah listens and absorbs.
"Sometimes adults talk, and he has these eyes that show he's listening to everything that's going on," said Oesterlei, 36, of Webster Groves.
That was the case on Sept. 11, 2001 -- Isaiah's first day of preschool. The events of the day taught Isaiah's parents in short order that they would need to turn off the TV and talk about hard things in hushed tones.
"I remember him asking what a terrorist is," his mother said.
Last year, Isaiah's class launched into a discussion about 9/11. He recently told his mother about it. He told her how some bad guys destroyed huge buildings with planes and that a lot of innocent people died.
"It made me really sad because those people on the planes, they had no idea," Isaiah told his mother.
"He knows a lot," Oesterlei said, "but he doesn't."
Trouble for a Muslim
Romaytha Abdullah's parents wanted to keep her home from school Sept. 11, 2001. They feared people might give their young Muslim daughter trouble because of her religion and her hijab, or head covering.
But Romaytha, a sophomore at Parkway West High at the time, resisted their urgings.
"I told them that since I did nothing wrong, I wanted to go," said Romaytha, now 20 and a pre-pharmacy student at St. Louis University.
For more than a year, she dealt with strange looks and rude comments from strangers.
"They would say, 'If you talk to Osama bin Laden, tell him I said hello,'" she recalled.
Open disdain toward her has lessened in the last five years, she said. But that there are people who believe Islam is based in terrorism troubles her deeply. She would rather strangers approach her and ask her about what it is to be Muslim than to walk away assuming some horrible untruth.
It is against her religion to kill anyone, Romaytha, co-president of SLU's Muslim Students Association, tells them. The Quran says if you kill a person, it's as if you've killed all of mankind, she explains.
"The more I am in public," she says, "the more I have the opportunity for people to ask me questions about Islam and to shed some good light on it."
Career choices
Shortly after 9/11, Michelle Guenther realized that her stepfather, simply by doing his job, could die.
In fifth grade at the time, she had never considered what it means -- and what it sometimes costs -- to be a firefighter.
"And then all those firefighters died," she said. "I just never used to think that they could actually die."
Michelle, now 15 and a member of the St. Louis Fire Department's Explorers program, had another realization as well.
"When I was younger, I just wanted to grow up to be something that would make me a lot of money so I could live in a huge house and have a really nice car," she said.
Sept. 11 changed that. It forced her to understand what her stepfather, city firefighter Shawn Bittle, does for a living and to question why he would take such risks.
The answer has affected her profoundly, she said.
"He loves it so much, and to love something so much that you're actually risking your life to save others makes me proud of him," she said.
Michelle doesn't know whether she'll take the same path -- she's not sure she could take it if she failed to save someone -- but she's considering it. Money and houses and cars mean less than they did before. She wants, she said, to care as deeply for the choices she makes for her life as her stepfather does for his.
Eager to vote
Leah Murry is quite certain there will be another terrorist attack sometime, somewhere, in the United States.
But although she and Sierra Davis, a fellow senior at East St. Louis High, say 9/11 has made them more alert and aware of their surroundings, each refuses to be overwhelmed by the horrifying possibilities they hear about on the news.
"This is a big American facility," said Sierra, 18, just outside the food court at St. Clair Square in Fairview Heights. "What if they target this? It's a main shopping center."
While the two friends are mindful of the possibilities, they refuse to bow to them.
"You can't sit and wait for something to happen," said Leah, 17. "You can't go on thinking about how I can't go here, I can't go there. You've got to go on with your life."
In the meantime, both say they have become schooled in post-9/11 politics. They link gas prices, economic woes and a mess of other problems to 9/11. They want change, and they're eager to have a say in effecting it.
"I can't wait," Leah said, "to vote."
---
HEAR THEIR VOICES | MORE COVERAGE ONLINE
Interviews with the artists * Includes more student essays and drawings
Photo essay * A visual look at how our lives have changed over the last five years
Audio slideshow * Phillip Baldwin enlisted after 9/11 and was injured in Afghanistan
Your comments * A blog for you about how your life has been affected
STLTODAY.COM/LINKS

Notes

 9/11 FIVE YEARS LATER 
Correction


Some of the 9/11 drawings in Monday's paper were from St. Vincent De Paul High School in Perryville. The wrong location of the school was listed in some captions.
Correction-Date: September 12, 2006

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - At a weekly Explorers program at St. Louis Fire Department headquarters last month, Michelle Guenther, 15, of Kirkwood, demonstrates how to wear "turnout gear" to protect the skin from excessive heat. Rebekah Raleigh | Post-Dispatch  PHOTO - Sierra Davis (center) and Leah Murry  work with forensic science teacher Marty Warren  on Friday  in a lab  at East St. Louis High School.   Robert Cohen  Post-Dispatch   PHOTO - Sarah Hutchins didn't want to go to ground zero two years ago. Not enough time had passed, she says.  PHOTO - ROMAYTHA, 20  PHOTO - ISAIAH, 8  PHOTO - LEAH, 17    PHOTO - Cover drawing by Rachel Darin | St.  Vincent De Paul High School | Marthasville 

Load-Date: September 13, 2006


End of Document