GSU speakers rake Patriot Act
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 21, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Metro News;
Length: 452 words
Byline: BILL RANKIN
Body


Despite the Bush administration's claims that the Patriot Act is an effective tool against the war on terrorism, the law must be revoked, a number of opponents told a Georgia State University forum on Saturday.
"We demand nothing less than full restoration of our civil rights," Kellie Gasnik, a candidate for alderman in Savannah who is running on a platform opposing the law, said to applause at the GSU Student Center. "Resist and repeal the USA Patriot Act."
AJC
The forum, Silencing Dissent in the Age of the Patriot Act, attracted more than 150 people and featured speakers who denounced the Bush administration and the controversial anti-terrorism law passed in the weeks following the Sept. 11 attacks.
The Patriot Act, passed without significant debate in Congress, greatly expands the government's surveillance and police powers in terrorism investigations. Since its passage, more than 150 U.S. communities have passed resolutions denouncing the law.
In response, Attorney General John Ashcroft has been speaking nationwide in an attempt to prop up support for the act. In a speech earlier this month in College Park, Ashcroft credited the Patriot Act with helping "win the war on terror."
The law has provided federal agents the necessary tools "to prevent terrorists from unleashing more death and destruction on our soil," Ashcroft said. Justice Department officials also have said that since Sept. 11 the law has helped bring 255 criminal charges in terrorism-related cases and neutralize terrorist cells in Buffalo, N.Y.; Detroit; Portland, Ore.; and Seattle.
But Gasnik, coordinator of the National Coalition to Repeal the USA Patriot Act, said that since Ashcroft began his tour last month a dozen more communities had passed resolutions opposing the law.
"We won't be fooled," she said, accusing the attorney general of waging a "campaign of misinformation."
Also speaking Saturday was the daughter of imprisoned University of South Florida professor Sami Al-Arian. Al-Arian, 53, who spoke out against the Patriot Act after its passage, faces terrorism charges that he was the North American leader of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Laila Al-Arian, 21, of Washington accused the Justice Department of charging her father to stifle criticism of the law. "My father is in prison today because he spoke the truth," she said.
The biggest ovation Saturday was reserved for former Rep. Cynthia McKinney, who challenged forum attendees to speak out against the law and Bush administration policies.
"Every time we fail to act, those who do not hold our beliefs become emboldened," said the former DeKalb County congresswoman, now a speaker on the national lecture circuit and a Cornell University faculty member.

Load-Date: September 21, 2003


End of Document