Guantanamo Must Be Closed
The New York Times
December 18, 2009 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 42; EDITORIAL
Length: 454 words
Body


The White House defied all the chest pounding and announced this week that the federal government would acquire a maximum-security prison in Illinois and use part of it to house inmates from the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. Moving the prisoners is an indispensable step toward closing an extra-legal offshore lockup that has stained this nation's reputation and become a recruitment tool for terrorists.
  There are about 210 inmates in Guantanamo. The administration has said it plans to prosecute 40 in civilian or military courts, including 5 who will be tried in federal court in New York. Some of the others should be tried. Some, perhaps, once posed a threat but no longer do so and should go to other countries under supervision. Some should go free.
  Sorting them out is a difficult process, and we are not happy with the way the administration has been deciding which prisoners should be tried in federal criminal courts and which should be tried in military courts. President Obama has yet to forswear the idea of indefinite detention without charges, as he vowed to do while running for president. And there are signs that he, like George W. Bush, will decree that the entire planet is a battlefield and anyone arrested anywhere on terrorism charges may be tried in military tribunals.
  Liberal human rights groups belittled the announcement about the Illinois prison because it did not resolve those issues. Amnesty International called it nothing more than ''changing the ZIP code of Guantanamo.'' 
  We disagree strongly. Moving the prisoners does not negate the Geneva Convention's requirements about the conditions in which they are held, and Mr. Obama must not simply institutionalize indefinite detention in Illinois. But it is impossible to credibly repair this nation's justice system while it operates a shameful symbol of illegality and inhumanity.
  Republicans offered the usual charge that Mr. Obama is soft on terrorism. Senator John Cornyn of Texas said housing detainees in American cells ''will put our citizens in unnecessary danger.'' We wondered if he didn't know that there are more than 350 people currently serving sentences for terrorism in American prisons -- including the plotters of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center and a former aide of Osama bin Laden.
  Democrats in Congress voted this week against providing money to close Guantanamo. The Democrats and some Republicans, like Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham, who demanded the closing of Guantanamo for years need to step up. They can start by approving money to acquire and refit the Illinois prison. Mr. Obama needs to make much more of a personal effort to keep this important pledge. Guantanamo needs to be closed.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 18, 2009


End of Document