Guard armed forces against terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
September 19, 1996, Thursday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18A
Length: 402 words
Body


Terrorists are ultimately to blame for the June 25 deaths of 19 American airmen billeted at an apartment building in Dharan, Saudi Arabia. But Defense Department officials are also culpable for failing to protect the men and women under their command.
The unvarnished conclusion of a Pentagon inquiry affixes responsibility squarely on the victims' commanding officer, Brig. Gen. Terryl Schwalier. But the buck doesn't stop there.
The investigating panel, headed by retired Gen. Wayne Downing, didn't name any names, but it was implicitly critical of Defense Secretary William Perry and Pentagon aides for not issuing guidelines for protecting U.S. forces stationed in terrorism-prone lands. That is an inexcusable lapse considering the losses U.S. forces sustained in terrorist bombings in Lebanon in 1982 and Saudi Arabia last year.
The weight of the panel's judgment falls heaviest, as it should, on Schwalier. Contrary to early reports, it was not the Saudi government that stalled on enlarging the security perimeter around the U.S. compound in Dharan, an action that might have put U.S. personnel out of killing range of a terrorist truck bombing. In fact, Schwalier never seriously sought a wider security zone.
It is heartbreaking to realize that Schwalier's delay in requesting funds for a synthetic coating of the apartment building's windows turned out to be such a costly economy. Twelve of the 19 U.S. fatalities were attributed to wounds caused by flying glass.
This is one instance where faulty intelligence was not a factor. Schwalier simply did not take seriously the numerous reports suggesting the possibility of a terrorist attack. He even failed to pass them along to superiors.
To put this in perspective, Schwalier saw his principal assignment as coordinating air patrols over the no-fly zone in southern Iraq. That he is said to have done very well. But, as commanding officer in Dharan, he also was responsible for the security of his forces. His failings there have to mean the end of his career.
The Dharan bombing should at long last shake the U.S. military into realizing it must give higher priority to protecting its own from terrorists. They have killed more of our armed forces in the past 15 years than we have lost in combat during that same period. Terrorists are as relentless as any enemy we have confronted on the battlefield. So we must be equally relentless in guarding against them.

Load-Date: September 20, 1996


End of Document