GUARD STABBED IN TERRORISM SUSPECTS' CELL
Daily News (New York)
November 2, 2000, Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 472 words
Byline: By MICHELE McPHEE and GREG B. SMITH DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS With News Wire Services
Body

Two accused terrorists housed in the federal lockup in lower Manhattan attacked a guard yesterday leaving him in critical condition and causing the loss of one of his eyes, authorities said.
The inmates allegedly involved in the bloody assault were identified as Khalid Salim and Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, followers of terrorist Osama Bin Laden, who are awaiting trial on charges they conspired to blow up two U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998.
The 43-year-old guard was taken to Bellevue Hospital, where he underwent surgery for more than 12 hours, Lorinda Klein, a spokeswoman for the hospital said.
A law enforcement source said the inmate's thrust was strong enough to penetrate the guard's brain.
Because of their links to Bin Laden and concerns about security, Salim, Mohamed and three other co-defendants have been held in isolation, segregated from the rest of the prison population at the Metropolitan Correctional Center.
But occasionally, they were allowed to pair up in the same cell, according to sources familiar with the arrangement.
Officials at the Bureau of Prisons in Washington confirmed yesterday that an officer had been assaulted by two inmates, but gave no other details.
A spokesmen for Manhattan U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White declined to comment on the incident.
But Jeffrey Schneider, one of Mohamed's attorneys, confirmed that the correction officer was attacked after he entered a cell in which Mohamed, 24, and Salim, 41, were being held.
Inside the cell, one of the inmates - officials wouldn't say which one - allegedly plunged the sharpened object into the guard's eye, Schneider said.
While an investigation of the incident continues, the two inmates have been placed in administrative detention, isolated from all other inmates for 23 hours a day.
Schneider said the five accused bombers have been allowed to rotate in and out of one another's cells in recent months.
One of the defendants, Wadih El Haje, had complained repeatedly about being kept in isolation. At a court hearing earlier this year, he tried to get at the judge overseeing his case, but was restrained by court officers before he could do any harm.
All five men are charged with plotting to attack the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, in August 1998 allegedly under instructions from Bin Laden, an exiled Saudi millionaire who has called for Muslims to kill American civilians "wherever they may be."
Twelve Americans were among the 224 people killed in the bombings.
Bin Laden also is charged in the case but remains a fugitive on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted List. The FBI is investigating whether he is involved in the recent bombing of the Navy destroyer Cole in Yemen.
Schneider, said his law partner, David Stern, tried to visit Mohamed yesterday but was denied access when prison officials "said there was a problem."

Load-Date: November 2, 2000


End of Document