Guard against bioterrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
August 31, 2000, Thursday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 374 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


The subject of bioterrorism has been lurking in the background as the Clinton administration focuses on possible nuclear threats. An anti-ballistic missile defense shield and the reduction of nuclear weapons are critical for national defense, but bioterrorism may be a more real and immediate threat to the nation's well-being.
That's the opinion of Dr. Tara O'Toole, an expert on biological weapons and deputy director of Johns Hopkins University's Center for Civilian Biodefense Studies. She's right when she notes that the likelihood of a biological weapon attack is a lot higher than that of a missile coming across the Pacific.
While a lot of money and energy is being devoted to missile defense, Congress and the president need to devote more toward defending against terrorism. Utah, and in particular Salt Lake City, could be a prime target for some type of terrorist attack in conjunction with the 2002 Winter Olympic Games in February, just as Sydney apparently was the focus of an attack connected with this year's Olympic games.
O'Toole recommends spending $30 billion over the next 10 years in a variety of ways to combat biological terrorism. Nearly two years ago, Congress received an appraisal from Attorney General Janet Reno and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that the United States continues to be vulnerable to terrorist attacks at home and abroad. That came following a wave of anthrax scares, at least two of which occurred in Salt Lake City.
Not enough has been done since then to ease the nation's fears. In fact, some state officials charge that Washington not only does not have a cohesive policy regarding germ warfare but is fostering turf wars between local governments.
Bioterrorism experts from Johns Hopkins University emphasized then that to remain unprepared is to invite disaster. O'Toole's concerns merely echo those of her colleagues.
At some point, talk about biological warfare and other forms of terrorism needs to turn to action. Effective action usually requires a considerable expenditure.
While $30 billion is a lot of money to spend on anything, it is much better than the alternative -- not being prepared for a bioterrorism attack that could destroy the lives of millions of unsuspecting Americans.

Load-Date: August 31, 2000


End of Document