GUERRILLA LEADER IS CAPTURED IN PERU
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 14, 1992, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 481 words
Body


LIMA, Peru - Abimael Guzman, founder and ideological guiding light of Peru's Maoist Shining Path guerrillas, was being guarded by tanks Sunday after being seized in the capital by anti-terrorist police.  Political leaders and terrorism experts said the arrest of Guzman was the hardest strike yet against the Shining Path. But they also said it would not end the rebellion - and could even lead to more violence because of Guzman's fanatical following.  Guzman and seven others were captured in a raid late Saturday in the Lima suburb of Surco, police said.  The Interior Ministry said that the group was taken by surprise without gunfire and that other key Shining Path leaders were arrested.  Police burst in on the guerrilla chieftain after learning that a meeting of the Shining Path's central committee had been planned in Lima for the weekend.  A large number of arms and internal documents of the Communist Party of Peru, the Shining Path's official name, were seized during the arrest, police sources said. They were said to include Guzman's personal diary and plans for a new offensive.  Troops and tanks were deployed outside the headquarters of the National Directorate Against Terrorism, where Guzman and the other leaders were being held, officials said.  Guzman, 57, who had almost been captured two other times, went underground in 1978 and had not been seen in public since. Police sources said that for the past five months, dozens of agents of a special group assigned to follow the movements of Shining Path militants had been watching the house where Guzman was captured.
El Comercio, Peru's leading daily, said Guzman was writing and did not resist when anti-terrorist police broke into the house where he was hiding.  ''My turn to lose,'' Guzman was reported to have said when police arrested him.  Among the other leaders captured were Elena Iparraguirre, considered by anti-terrorism police to be the group's No. 2 leader; Elvia Zanabria, Guzman's personal secretary; and Laura Zambrano, another top leader.  The capture took place less than three months after the arrest of Victor Polay, leader of the pro-Cuban Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, the smaller of Peru's two main rebel groups, which took up arms in 1984.  Since 1980, the Shining Path - or Sendero Luminoso, as it is known in Spanish - has conducted a terrifying campaign to set up a peasant-worker state in Peru. The campaign coincided with the nation's economic collapse after years of government mismanagement.  The group espouses a communism so orthodox that it hailed the collapse of the Soviet Union, which it said was led by traitors to pure communism.  The Shining Path has shown no mercy toward anyone it suspects of opposing its aims. Many of the 25,000 people who have been killed since the guerrillas took up arms were peasants caught in cross-fire between government troops and rebels.

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document