Guerrilla leader is sentenced to life in prison for treason
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 8, 1992, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A
Length: 515 words
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body


After a secret trial of eight days, an anonymous military judge sentenced  Shining Path guerrilla leader Abimael Guzman to life in prison Wednesday and  levied a $ 25-billion fine against him and two of his lieutenants.
The judge convicted Guzman, 57, of "treason against the fatherland,"  giving him the maximum sentenced allowed by Peruvian law. Anti-terrorist  police captured Guzman on Sept. 12, ending a 12-year manhunt.
Los Angeles Times; Associated PressGUZMAN
Alfredo Crespo, Guzman's attorney, has said he would appeal the decision,  handed down by a "faceless" navy judge whose identity was kept secret for  security reasons.
Guzman has the right to two appeals, the first before a "council of war"  made up of members of the army, navy, air force and police. The council's  decision must be issued within 48 hours after Wednesday's sentence.
The final appeal is to the Supreme Council of Military Justice, which will  have three working days to rule. If the sentence is upheld, Guzman will spend  a mandatory life term at a navy base on the island of San Lorenzo, off Lima.
The island was the venue for the trial of Guzman and two other Shining Path  leaders, who also received life sentences Wednesday. The public and press were  barred from the proceedings.
Eight other Shining Path members - four women and four men - also received  life sentences Wednesday from military courts in Arequipa and Puno. Like  Guzman, they were convicted of treason, and their fines totaled $ 40-million.
There was no word on where money for the fines would come from.
Known in Spanish as Sendero Luminoso, Guzman's Maoist insurgency declared  war against the government in 1980. Since then, more than 25,000 Peruvians  have died in political warfare and terrorism that has cost the country an  estimated $ 22-billion in damages.
The outcome of Guzman's trial was no surprise. President Alberto Fujimori,  who has governed by decree since April 5, had said repeatedly that Guzman  would get a life term. After shutting down Congress in a military-backed  "self-coup," Fujimori decreed several anti-terrorism laws. One declared acts  of terrorism to be treason, putting them under the jurisdiction of military  courts.
Some human rights groups have objected to procedures in Guzman's case,  contending that due process was violated. But a Western diplomat said  Wednesday: "Nobody other than the Sendero doubts that justice is being done  in this particular case." 
Guzman is known to followers as "Presidente Gonzalo" and "the Fourth  Sword of Marxism," after Marx, Lenin and Mao.
When police presented him to the news media on Sept. 24, the former  philosophy professor called his capture "a bend in a long road" that would  not stop communist revolution in Peru.
Analysts have predicted terrorist reprisals for Guzman's capture, and even  before Wednesday's sentence rebels killed four airmen and two police officers.
Experts on the insurgency say that without Guzman his movement most likely  will lose steam, but that could take up to 10 years. 
 
- Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.

Load-Date: October 18, 1992


End of Document