GUERRILLAS IN SALVADOR STEP UP PRE-ELECTION TERRORISM
The New York Times
March 20, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 597 words
Byline: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, March 19
Body


Stepping up their violent effort to stop national elections here on Sunday, Marxist guerrillas have killed one mayor and kidnapped two others in recent days, burned a mayor's office, exploded several bombs and burned cars, trucks and buses to paralyze road traffic.
This afternoon, a bomb, probably planted by the guerrillas, damaged a bank in the center of the capital. No one appeared to be hurt by the explosion.
''They are directly attacking the electoral process,'' said a West European diplomat. ''It is an effort to use violence to undermine the system of government.''
Political killings by suspected rightist assassins, probably tied to the army, have also risen before the election. But attacks on civilians and efforts to stop the election by the rebels of the Marxist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, now appear more frequent than rightist attacks.
 
Peasants Given Warnings
The rebels have warned peasants not to vote in several outlying areas. They underlined that message by killing the mayor of the town of Azacualpa in Chalatenango department on Thursday night and blowing up the mayor's office.
Earlier in the week, the rebels also blew up the mayor's office in El Divisadero in Morazan Department.
The rebels also kidnapped the mayors of the town of Cojutepeque in Santa Ana dapartment and the town of San Miguel de Mercedes in Chalatenango department. The actions recall the rebels' decision to burn more than 30 mayors' offices, kidnap more than 20 mayors and kill one mayor three years ago.
Several mayors and candidates for mayor in country villages have fled to major cities under army protection because they say they are afraid the rebels will shoot or kidnap them.
In several villages in the countryside the rebels have also collected voting cards from peasants and burned them as a warning not to vote. A rebel video film captured by the army last week shows rebel commanders burning voting cards as villagers look on.
 
An Echo of the Past
The rebels have issued several communiques saying they oppose the election and recently captured rebel documents contain precise plans by rebel commanders to step up attacks and violence by rebel supporters in the capital to weaken the government.
The rebels' actions echo their past decision to attack each of the previous three national elections held in El Salvador since 1982.
''Every election has been a political setback for the guerrillas,'' said an academic political analyst here who is critical of the government. ''They have never been able to find an adequate political response to elections, so they attack them.''
The Roman Catholic Church has strongly backed the election and has criticized the rebels for their violence against civilians.
The rebels declared a national ban on all road traffic starting Friday to obstruct the voting. Few public buses are running since the rebels have enforced such bans by firing machine guns at automobiles and buses, killing civilians in their terrorist attacks.
Here in the capital rebel supporters spread nails on some streets to puncture tires and burned a taxi. Other rebel units burned a truck, a taxi and two buses on a highway in Usulutan department.
San Salvador was mostly deserted Friday night with restaurants and bars closed. The evening stillness was broken by rebel bombs, bursts of gunfire and the thud of army artillery in the countryside.
Last weekend the rebels put two car bombs in a crowded restaurant district, destroying 11 vehicles and wounding two children. The rebels had issued no warning to civilians in the area, according to several witnesses.

Graphic

 
Photo of a Salvadoran soldier on patrol in San Salvador to guard against guerrilla attacks expected to disrupt the elections (AP)


End of Document