GUERRILLAS IN PERU KILL 16 IN CAPITAL
The New York Times
November 5, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Column 4;
Length: 371 words
Byline: By JAMES BROOKE,

By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LIMA, Peru, Nov. 4
Body


In this capital's worst massacre in five years of political violence, unidentified hooded gunmen invaded a downtown chicken barbecue here on Sunday night, shooting 16 highland Indians to death and wounding 4, the authorities said.
Today, several police officials blamed the massacre on the Shining Path, a radical movement which first launched its campaign of bombings and violent attacks a decade ago.
But one official in the Attorney General's office said the attack here appeared to be the work of a paramilitary death squad. It was pointed out that in contrast to the methods usually employed by Shining Path, the killers used silencers on their weapons and used two vehicles stolen Saturday, one from the Presidential Palace and one from the Ministry of Foreign Relations.
It was not clear why the Indians were the target of the attack.
Moreover, although the attack took place 25 yards from a police station, the police did not initially respond to neighbors' appeals for help.
Officials of Peru's democratically elected Government routinely deny charges that they are fighting terrorism with terrorism, a strategy that became known as the dirty war when employed by Argentina's military rulers in the late 1970's.
"The dirty war is not our way," Peru's President, Alberto K. Fujimori, last week told a visiting delegation of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, a group sponsored by the Organization of American States.
Indeed, human rights advocates here say military abuses diminished after Mr. Fujimori ordered greater respect for human rights in order to win United States military aid. Last week, for the first time in recent history, Peru's Army announced that an officer would be tried for killing Indian peasants.
"There has been a dramatic reduction in the number of disappearances," Diego Garcia Sayan, Executive Director of the Andean Commission of Jurists, said here last week. "Will this last? We don't know."
At the same time several Peruvian experts on the Shining Path and the conflict it has generated said that the use of death squads was rooted in the frustration of security forces who after arresting suspects would sometimes see them freed by judges they believed were either intimidated or bribed.

Load-Date: November 5, 1991


End of Document