GUEST COLUMN: Resolving religion and terrorism
The Technician: North Carolina State University
December 1, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 645 words
Byline: Jonathan Otten, Guest Columnist
Body


The most succinct response to Ziyi Mai's column "The bottom line of religions" is "citation needed." No facts are offered to support his wild assertions that Muslim immigrants are less likely to assimilate into mainstream society or that they represent a disproportionate security threat. 
I am not Syrian, Muslim, or a child of recent immigrants. I'm a gay atheist, the type of person certain ideologies only care about when there's another group (primarily dark-skinned refugees) who they want to demonize even more. My predominantly German family has lived in this country for generations. However, this raises an interesting point. During World War I, anti-German sentiment predominated. Theodore Roosevelt, in a phrase that should sound familiar, denounced "hyphenated Americanism."   German areas of American cities changed their street names, German-Americans changed their names to sound less Germanic, and churches stopped conducting their services in German.  
My family's home church in Charleston, St. Matthew's German Evangelical Lutheran Church, was one of them. Now, however, it's solidly in the mainstream. Its steeple, the tallest from Maryland to Florida, soars over the city's central Marion Square as testament to its prominent place in that city's religious life. It wasn't always that way, but this shows how America works. 
At the best of times (and we don't always live up to this ideal), we accept all people to build a better life while valuing their own traditions and contributions. While my ancestors faced prejudice, they were ultimately accepted. The places Germans primarily settled, including Iowa, Missouri and Ohio, are now courted by politicians as America's heartland. Why should current refugees be denied this?
To counter a few other points, no evidence is given that Islam is inherently more violent than other religions. Some Muslims are violent, yes, but the same can be said for Christians, atheists, and others. The article alludes to Sharia law and the repugnant practice of stoning women accused of adultery, but I don't see Ziyi citing Leviticus 20:10  as an excuse to deny Christians citizenship . This is likely because we give them credit that religions can evolve past what's written in holy books. Our current secular laws also forbid most illegal actions, even if they're inspired by religion, or people forcing their religion on others (see Obergefell preventing religious regulation of civil marriage or Roe establishing a woman's right to privacy and autonomy in making her own healthcare decisions over others' religious objections ).
Why should refugees be violent? They're fleeing the people who've killed their families and threatened their lives. As Lydia Wilson reports in the Nation,  many ISIS fighters aren't with ISIS because they agree with their theology but because they have no other choice due to coercion by ISIS, lack of stable government, and the destruction of that region by American military action.  
We already place very high boundaries in front of refugees, and it's far easier to come as a tourist or on a temporary visa. Why should small children, the remnants of terrorized families, and queer people come to America and turn to the same murderous ideology that drove them from their homes in the first place?
According to the FBI  and academic researchers , right-wing terrorism, from the Olympic bombing in Atlanta to the Planned Parenthood shooting in Colorado to the murders at Mother Emmanuel in Charleston, is a far more pressing risk than Islamic extremism.  But those perpetrators, of course, aren't described as dangerous terrorists. They're all white men from North Carolina ,  so they're seen as mentally disturbed lone wolves. They aren't tied into a xenophobic clash-of-civilizations narrative like that deployed against refugees. It's about time that hateful narrative is stopped.

Load-Date: December 2, 2015


End of Document