Guest editorial: How to talk to kids about terrorism
Idaho Falls Post Register
November 19, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 The Post Register All Rights Reserved
Length: 768 words
Byline: By Pamela Druckerman, Writer
Dateline: Idaho Falls, ID 
Body


Parents should tell kids the truth - in simple terms - to help them process the reality of living in a terrifying world, writes Pamela Druckerman.
           
      
By Pamela Druckerman
      
Paris - The day after the terrorist attacks in Paris was one my children won't soon forget: They got to watch kids' television all day long.
      
This was my strategy, while I tried to figure out what to tell them (and because I was afraid to take them outside). The attacks weren't some distant news event; they happened in our neighborhood. Le Bataclan, where most of the killings occurred, is a six-minute walk from our apartment.
      
French newspapers and TV shows have done stories and special issues on how to talk to kids about the attacks. I've been reading them avidly. Their advice springs straight from Françoise Dolto, the influential psychoanalyst who was the French equivalent of Dr. Spock: Be honest.
      
Beginning in 1976, Dr. Dolto did a daily 10-minute radio show in which she responded to letters from parents. One of her recurring messages was that kids don't need to be constantly happy; they need to understand what's going on around them. Even in tough times, parents should tell them the truth - often in simple terms - and help them process it. It's far worse if kids sense that something's wrong, but no one talks to them about it. She advised bringing even a small child to a grandparent's funeral, and gently explaining, "Voilà, it's the burial of your grandfather, it's something that happens."
      
Children "don't live on planet Mars," said François Dufour, editor in chief of Le Petit Quotidien and two other daily French newspapers, for kids ages 6 to 17. "They live in the same world we do." But there are limits; he and others agreed that parents shouldn't show kids any photos or footage of the violence. "My advice to parents is to start with the questions of the children," he said.
      
On Sunday, Mr. Dufour assembled a group of children in the newsroom and solicited their questions on Friday night's attacks - to include (and answer) in special editions of the newspapers. A 10-year-old named Théodore asked how a sweet baby could grow up to be an evil terrorist. "They couldn't have been terrorists with their parents, that's for sure," he said. "Maybe they were taken hostage by terrorists?"
      
Others wanted to know whether any children were killed; how the terrorists chose their targets; why they killed people who hadn't done anything wrong; and why they didn't like soccer or rock 'n' roll. (Mr. Dufour told them about the Islamic State statement calling the concert at Le Bataclan perverse.)
      
The kids also didn't understand why someone would carry out an attack, if they were just going to kill themselves afterward. (Because some people are willing to die for an idea, Mr. Dufour said calmly.)
      
The question of the day was the one we grown-ups were asking, too: Will the terrorists come back?
      
Nobody knows. Mr. Dufour said his newspapers would describe the increased police presence and other measures, but "it's impossible for me to say there won't be another attack."
      
A special kids' edition of the newspaper Libération explained that "what happened is very sad and very difficult, attacks are still very rare. But for now, we cannot say there won't be more."
      
On Sunday, parks were open again, and cafes were full. I ran into friends who looked relieved to be outside, but spooked. The shootings were aimed at people just like us: average Parisians out for dinner in the neighborhood.
      
One friend said her 9-year-old told her he wasn't afraid after the Charlie Hebdo attack, which was aimed at journalists, but that he is scared now. ("From that I knew he understood what happened," she said.) He got unlimited TV time on Saturday, too.
      
Another friend, who teaches elementary school, told her 4-year-old that "bad guys killed some people." The little girl said nothing, but later handed her a drawing of a "dead princess."
      
My daughter wanted to know whether it was normal to have two terrorist attacks in your neighborhood in less than a year. When I asked her advice on talking to kids about the attacks, she suggested that parents tell the story of something similar that happened during their own childhoods, and then describe how they overcame it.
      
I struggled to think of anything, then finally told her that my house was robbed twice, while no one was home. I was scared, but gradually got over it. Then I asked if she felt better.
      
"Medium," she said.
      
Under the circumstances, medium is pretty good.
     

Load-Date: November 24, 2015


End of Document