Guidelines reset U.S., Pakistan relations; Cooperation in war on terrorism will continue.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 13, 2012 Friday


Copyright 2012 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A4
Length: 350 words
Byline: By Alex Rodriguez
Body


ISLAMABAD - The Pakistani parliament on Thursday approved guidelines that will frame a reset of the country's relations with the United States, paving the way for an end to a nearly five-month disruption in ties that began when errant U.S. airstrikes killed 24 Pakistani soldiers along the Afghan border.
The guidelines include a call for a halt in U.S. drone strikes on Pakistani territory, but put no mechanism in place to enforce such a ban. Most Pakistanis see the air campaign as a blatant breach of their country's sovereignty.
The guidelines, unanimously passed by lawmakers, also did not explicitly address when the U.S. can resume using Pakistan as a transit country for Afghanistan-bound NATO supplies. Instead, the guidelines leave the issue of those supply routes, shut down since the deaths of the Pakistani soldiers Nov. 26, up to President Asif Ali Zardari's administration.
Outside parliament, lawmakers said the supply routes probably will be opened soon, though no timetable has been established. The only condition parliament imposed was that the NATO material moved through Pakistan cannot include weapons or ammunition - a moot point since the alliance's convoys had been carrying only nonlethal supplies.
Washington probably will welcome Pakistani lawmakers' actions. Though Pakistan has proved to be an extremely difficult partner in the war on terrorism, the U.S. continues to seek its cooperation in pursuing al-Qaida-linked militants who have found sanctuary in the country's northwest, and in facilitating talks between Afghan officials and the Afghan Taliban leadership.
The Nov. 26 attack, which Pakistan insisted was unprovoked and deliberate, was just one of a series of events last year that deeply angered Pakistanis. Ties between Islamabad and Washington were severely damaged by the slaying of two Pakistani men by a CIA contractor in the eastern city of Lahore. The U.S. commando raid that killed al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden in the military city of Abbottabad in May also incensed Pakistani military and civilian leaders because they were not informed of it in advance.

Load-Date: April 13, 2012


End of Document