Guilty.  10 convicted in bomb conspiracy
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 2, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 Telegraph Herald
Section: News, Pg. a 1
Length: 385 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The plan was to paralyze Manhattan with a 10-minute spree of bombings at the United Nations, a federal building, two tunnels and a bridge, then kill the Egyptian president and other political figures.
But the plot aimed at making the United States change its Middle East policies was foiled - and now the 10 conspirators will have to pay for it with lengthy prison terms.
In a federal courtroom just 100 feet from one building the militant Muslims hoped to destroy, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others were convicted Sunday of seditious conspiracy.
"If terrorism is theater, the acts of terrorism planned by these defendants was theater of the absurd," said James Kallstrom, chief of the FBI's New York office, after the verdict. "In their own demented way, they were going to send the United States a message. These verdicts return the favor."
But he said the verdict would not guarantee relief from terrorism.
Security was heightened in Manhattan, where special precautions were already in place for the visit of Pope John Paul II this week and the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
In Washington, Secretary of Transportation Federico Pena ordered tighter security at the nation's airports because of "a general threat against all U. S. interests at home and abroad."
The jury in the biggest terrorism trial in U.S. history finished after just 37 hours over seven days of deliberations. The verdict was reached quickly considering the hundreds of exhibits and more than 200 witnesses jurors viewed over nine months.
Defense lawyers said they would appeal.
SIDEBAR:
Extra security measures at the nation's airports - including the Dubuque Regional Airport - might cause some delays. Ken Kraemer, the manager of Dubuque's airport, suggests that travelers arrive earlier so they and their baggage can be checked through on time. When they arrive, Kraemer said, passengers:
* May be asked to show a photo identification with their ticket.
* Should clearly label luggage.
* May be asked questions about luggage. Airlines are concerned about strangers asking a passenger to carry on baggage for them.
* Should not leave vehicles unattended near terminal.
* Should be prepared to have baggage inspected.
"We should stress that the aviation system is safe and secure," Kraemer said.  "This should cause no reason for concern."

Load-Date: December 10, 1996


End of Document