Gulf War II will be judged on whether it quelled terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 26, 2003 Saturday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Pg.B5; COLUMN, COMMENTARY
Length: 618 words
Byline: Richard Wiens, The Spokesman-Review
Body


Gulf War II is over. But with a groundswell of support in Iraq to establish
 an Islamic state, it's too soon to say who won. We may be spending ourselves
 into an incredible federal debt to create the new nation of West Iran.
 The idea of liberating the Iraqi people was dubious from the start, not
 that they weren't in desperate need of new leadership after 24 years of
 murder, torture and repression under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein.
In the buildup to war, the noble concept of ending oppression was sort of
 tossed in as a secondary bonus: squash the threat of Saddam's weapons of mass
 destruction by sending in a down payment of $74 billion and, if you act now,
 liberate Iraq at no extra charge.
 Postwar chaos reigns, and Islamic fundamentalists seem to have a head start
 on capturing the hearts and loyalties of the Iraqi people. The U.S. role may
 be limited to preventing rampant crime and rebuilding infrastructure. It
 doesn't look like the Iraqi masses are going to sign a big thank-you card to
 America, much less establish a Western-style democracy.
 Iraq is an oil-rich nation, and it may yet evolve into one of the more
 moderate Mideast states, like Saudi Arabia. Right now it feels more like a
 country primed for the second coming of the Ayatollah. Either way, it's likely
 to repress the rights of women and non-Islamics and turn into another breeding
 ground for terrorists.
 Of course, we could impose a bill of rights and force-feed freedom to the
 country we have conquered. That would require long-term military occupation,
 which would be popular with nobody. Not the Iraqis. Not other countries
 already wary of U.S. aggression. And certainly not the American people who pay
 the bill.
 It's disappointing that our American blood and tax dollars may have been
 shed to create a new Islamic state, but it might ultimately be for the best.
 There was only one possible justification for this war. President Bush
 apparently was convinced that Saddam posed a massive threat to the free world,
 a threat that Bush wasn't willing to live with after the 9/11 terrorist
 attacks.
 The success or failure of this endeavor rests on whether Bush was right,
 and that fact might be obscured if Iraq were suddenly transformed into our new
 best friend.
 We can't start invading every country that represses human rights. Having
 the world's strongest military doesn't justify taking on the role of moral
 arbiter for the planet. Besides, intelligent diplomacy works better. It didn't
 take World War III to bring about the fall of many communist states in the
 1990s.
 So when should America wage war? For many decades, the prevailing opinion
 was generally to fight only when we or our allies were attacked. By invading
 Iraq, Bush put forth a new American doctrine: Having been the victim of a
 massive terrorist attack on civilians, we are sometimes justified in taking
 pre-emptive action on a grand scale to thwart future terrorism.
 Sounds reasonable, but it's a difficult and dangerous doctrine to apply.
 Just what level of potential terrorist activity in a foreign land is
 sufficient to trigger a U.S. invasion? And does nuclear proliferation alone
 constitute potential terrorism? If North Korea develops nuclear missiles
 capable of hitting America, will it be more or less inclined to use them now
 that it knows that we won't rule out pre-emptive strikes?
 It's more important to ponder those questions than to dwell on postwar
 Iraq. Gulf War II was a proper use of our military might only if it prevented
 large-scale terrorism.
 Even if a new anti-American regime takes power there, that doesn't mean
 Bush failed. And if Baghdad ends up full of McDonald's restaurants and
 Starbucks shops, that doesn't mean he succeeded.

Notes

A longtime observer of regional politics, Richard Wiens is the former government editor of The Spokesman-Review. He currently runs the City Desk at night.

Load-Date: April 30, 2003


End of Document