Gulf Crisis Unsettles Mortgage Market;
Banks Briefed On Terrorism
The American Banker
January 11, 1991, Friday


Copyright 1991 American Banker, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 410 words
Byline: By JOHN EVANS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


U.S. banks and other American businesses are being advised by the State Department to guard against terrorist attacks on their offices around the world.
Less than a week before the United Nations deadline for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait, the American Embassy in London is briefing banks on ways to protect themselves against terrorism, bankers here said.
Such advice is also being made available by U.S. diplomatic missions in other nations. Signal from Hussein
The Baghdad regime sent a clear signal on Monday that international terrorism would be one of its weapons if war breaks out.
President Saddam Hussein declared the main military battle may be in Iraq but "the theater of our operations (includes) every fighter whose hand can reach out to harm aggressors in the whole world."
In London, an Embassy spokesperson confirmed Thursday that its personnel were giving security briefings to American businesses and industry associations, but played down the action.
"We look on this as a routine security matter," she said. "Our advice includes common-sense action like recommending that people vary the routes they use for traveling to the office." Security Bolstered
A number of U.S. banks operating in London say they are increasing the number of guards on their premises or stepping up checks on visitors, but are reluctant to discuss security measures publicly.
Citicorp is planning to "step up security in Britain" while Manufacturers Hanover's London branch is "reviewing our existing procedures," such as monitoring mail and public access to the bank, say sources at the two banks.
Meantime, some American banks are also pulling their nationals out of the Gulf region, though representation there has been scaled down since last August after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Policies Differ in Bahrain
Chase Manhattan Corp. is in the process of calling back its chief country manager from Bahrain, the Gulf offshore banking center where about 70 foreign banks have offices. Hanover, however, is maintaining operations at its Bahrain branch where its personnel are mostly local Arab nationals.
European-based American bankers and business people were among those killed in the bombing of Pan Am flight 102 over Scotland in December 1988. The attack, linked to unidentified Middle East extremists, stirred controversy over claims that the U.S. authorities did not widely circulate prior warnings that an aircraft bombing could be in prospect.   
The American Banker


End of Document