Gunman kills 2 at abortion clinics;
5 others shot, suspect at large in Massachusetts
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 31, 1994, Saturday,
REGION EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 764 words
Byline: Christopher Wilson, Reuters News Service
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


A gunman in black opened fire with a rifle yesterday on staff and patients at two clinics in a Boston suburb where abortions are performed, killing two women and wounding five other people, officials said.
The killings in Brookline, Mass., bring to five the number of people slain in U.S. clinics that perform abortions. Three people have been killed in shootings at Florida clinics.
Boston police, Massachusetts state police and the FBI launched a massive manhunt for the gunman, described as a white male in his 30s, who fled in a car shortly after the shootings.
Massachusetts Gov. William Weld called the attacker ''nothing more than a terrorist'' and vowed that law enforcement authorities would not rest until he had been caught. Weld also said state police would be available to stand guard at clinics throughout the state.
President Clinton also condemned the killings as ''domestic terrorism.''
In a White House statement, the president called for a thorough investigation into the attack. ''I am committed to ending this form of domestic terrorism,'' he said.
Police said Planned Parenthood clinic receptionist Shannon Lowney, 25, of Arlington, Mass., was shot dead and three other people wounded when the gunman, dressed entirely in black and carrying a rifle, entered the Beacon Street clinic in Brookline just outside Boston shortly after 10 a.m. and opened fire.
About 10 minutes after the first shooting, the gunman burst into the Pre-term Health Services clinic about a mile and a half away on the same street and continued his shooting spree, wounding another three people.
One of those wounded in the second shooting, Leanne Nichols of Salem, N.H., died of multiple gunshot wounds at Boston's Beth Israel Hospital, a spokeswoman said.
Two women and three men were being treated for their wounds.
Police and ambulances ferried the wounded to hospitals as FBI investigators combed the crime scene. A Reuter reporter said investigators found several shell casings, apparently from a small-caliber rifle, but police would not confirm this.
A shaken Nicki Gamble, president of Planned Parenthood in Massachusetts, described the shooting at her clinic in an interview with a local radio station.
''One person is dead and three (other) people have been shot,'' she said. ''It's a terrible, terrible tragedy. We have good security, but clearly it wasn't good enough this morning.''
Planned Parenthood Vice President Edith Salzman was speaking to a clinic official when the shooting started.
''The clinic director was on the phone with me. I heard three cracks, she yelled, she screamed 'Something's happened' and I came over,'' Salzman told CBS Radio news.
After the first shooting, the gunman ran up the street to the Pre-term clinic, where he continued his shooting spree.
One eyewitness inside the Pre-Term clinic told WBZ radio he was sitting in an office when a man carrying a duffle bag entered and asked one of the female employees, ''Is this Pre-Term?''
When the woman answered yes, the man dropped the duffle bag, took out what witnesses called a hunting rifle and opened fire. He shot the woman he had been talking to and then shot a second woman at the copying machine, the witness said.
The man then turned the gun on a security guard, wounding him in the arm, before fleeing, reportedly in a pale-colored car.
Those wounded in the incidents were taken to the Beth Israel and Brigham and Womens hospitals in Boston, where several victims were treated for multiple gunshot wounds.
One eyewitness said both clinics were often the scene of demonstrations by anti-abortion activists.
''It's crazy,'' the witness said. ''They're out there protesting for life and then they go in there and shoot people.''
At least one anti-abortion group denounced the violence.
''The National Right to Life Committee condemns today's clinic shooting in the strongest possible terms,'' the group said in a statement released in Washington. ''We have always, and continue to, oppose any use of violence to fight the violence of abortion.''
Leaders of major abortion rights and feminist groups called for prompt federal action to halt what they called an organized campaign of stalkings, threats and now shootings that they said adds up to ''domestic terrorism.''
They urged tougher enforcement of a new clinic access law and demanded that the FBI step up surveillance and investigation of the groups behind the threats.
Earlier this year, former Presbyterian minister Paul Hill was sentenced to death for killing a doctor who performed abortions and his unarmed escort outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla.

Graphic

 
PHOTO (2), PHOTO: Associated Press/Steve Senne: Two unidentified women accompany a third woman from Pre-term Health Services in Brookline, Mass., yesterday after a gunman opened fire inside the clinic. A Planned Parenthood clinic a mile and a half away had been attacked 10 minutes earlier.; PHOTO: Brian Snyder/Reuters: Massachusetts medical examiners remove the body of a woman shot in a Planned Parenthood clinic in Brookline.

Load-Date: January 2, 1995


End of Document