Gunman from Christmas market attack in France still at large
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 13, 2018 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 568 words
Byline:  By LORI HINNANT and ELAINE GANLEY Associated Press 
Body


STRASBOURG, France - Hundreds of security forces combed eastern France for a man with a long criminal record who shouted "God is great!" in Arabic and sprayed gunfire during a deadly rampage in Strasbourg's famous Christmas market, officials said.
French authorities have issued a wanted poster and are calling for witnesses amid a massive manhunt for the suspected shooter nearly 24 hours after the attack. A photo of Cherif Chekatt, 29, who was born in Strasbourg, was distributed publicly Wednesday evening.
The poster warns: "Dangerous individual, above all do not intervene." It asks anyone with information that could help locate him to contact authorities.
Tuesday night's attack at France's largest Christmas market, which killed two people, left a third brain-dead and injured 12, was a stark reminder to a nation wounded by previous assaults that terrorism remains a threat, even as anti-government protests roil the country.
Interior Minister Christophe Castaner told lawmakers that Chekatt had run-ins with police starting at age 10 and his first conviction at age 13.
Chekatt has been convicted 27 times, mostly in France but also in Switzerland and Germany, for crimes including armed robbery. He had been flagged for extremism and was on a watch list.
Chekatt was flagged as a potential extremist, but Castaner said "the signs had been weak."
A terrorism investigation was opened, but the exact motive remained unclear.
The suspect's parents and two brothers, also known for radicalism, were detained, a judicial official said.
Prosecutor Remy Heitz said the man attacked with a handgun and a knife about 8 p.m. Tuesday and was shot in the arm during an exchange of fire with soldiers. He then took a taxi to another part of the city, boasting of the attack to the driver, and later exchanged more gunfire with police and disappeared, Heitz said.
Witnesses described shots and screams after the gunman opened fire and yelled "God is great!" in Arabic, the prosecutor added.
The dead included a Thai tourist, Anupong Suebsamarn, 45, according to Thai Foreign Ministry and the website of the Khao Sod newspaper. It quoted his uncle as saying he and his wife had planned to visit Paris, but protests there had prompted them to go to Strasbourg instead.
One Italian was reported to be among the wounded. Italian media said Antonio Megalizzi, 28, was in critical condition. Italian daily La Repubblica reported he was in Strasbourg to follow the session of the European Parliament.
About 720 police, soldiers and SWAT team officers in Strasbourg were being reinforced with 500 more soldiers and another 1,300 in coming days to guard public places, Prime Minister Edouard Philippe said after a crisis meeting. The government also raised the security level.
The attack in the heart of old Strasbourg, near its famous cathedral and within the Christmas market that draws many tourists, unsettled the border city, which also is home to the European Parliament.
The Christmas market was closed at least through Thursday.
The attack came as President Emmanuel Macron sought to take back control of the nation after a month of anti-government protests that have spread violence across the country.
Senior Interior Ministry official Laurent Nunez said Chekatt had been radicalized in prison and had been monitored by French intelligence services since his release in late 2015, because of his suspected religious extremism.

Graphic

 
 People pay respect and light candles the night following a shooting in Strasbourg, eastern France, Wednesday, Dec. 12, 2018. Police union officials identified the suspected assailant as Frenchman Cherif Chekatt, a 29-year-old with a thick police record for crimes including armed robbery and monitored as a suspected religious radical by the French intelligence services. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena) 

Load-Date: December 19, 2018


End of Document