Gunman kills 1 in Canada's capital; Ottawa attack raises specter of terrorism.Shooter is also killed after he stormed Parliament building.; IN-DEPTH COVERAGE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 23, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAIN; Pg. A1
Length: 749 words
Byline: By Ian Austen and Rick Gladstone
Body


OTTAWA, ONTARIO - The heart of the Canadian capital was thrown into panic and placed in lockdown on Wednesday after a masked gunman armed with a rifle or shotgun fatally wounded a corporal guarding the tomb of the unknown soldier at the National War Memorial, entered the nearby Parliament building and fired multiple times before he was shot and killed.
It was the second deadly assault on a uniformed member of Canada's armed forces in three days - again by someone who appeared to have been motivated by Islamic extremism. The Ottawa attack heightened fears that Canada, a strong ally of the United States in its campaign against the Islamic State militant group convulsing the Middle East, had been targeted in a reprisal, either as part of an organized plot or a lone-wolf assault by a radicalized Canadian.
Law enforcement authorities in Washington said their Canadian counterparts had identified the assailant as Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, who had changed his name from Michael Joseph Hall, and said he had been a convert to Islam.
The Canadian Broadcasting Corp. said he had a criminal history of offenses that included robbery and drug possession.
Downtown Ottawa, ordinarily bustling on a workday, was both shut down and traumatized as police officers rushed to secure the Parliament building, move occupants to safety and hunt for what they initially said were possibly two or three assailants. The lockdown at Parliament dragged into the evening, when armed officers began herding people who had been confined all day into city buses, but the emergency was not lifted.
a news , the Ottawa police and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police declined to specify how many more gunmen - if any - they might be seeking, adding to the foreboding in the city.
The soldier died at a hospital, and the gunman was killed inside the Parliament building, Chief Charles Bordeleau of the Ottawa Police said. The soldier was identified as Cpl. Nathan Cirillo, a member of the army reserve from Hamilton, Ontario. Bordeleau said that two people, whom he did not name, were injured, although not seriously.
The shootings came amid heightened concern among Canadians about terrorist attacks. Two days earlier, a radical jihadist ran over two soldiers at a strip mall in a city south of Montreal, killing one of them.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper, an outspoken critic of the Islamic State movement and other militant groups, had been expected to introduce new anti-terrorism legislation on Wednesday. "We will not be intimidated," Harper said in a television address Wednesday night. He linked the attacks to radicalism inspired by the Islamic State and called them "despicable."
As members of Parliament gathered for their weekly caucus meetings in the Parliament buildings on Wednesday morning, at 9:52 a.m., calls flooded into Ottawa's 911 system to report a shooting at the war memorial, which sits southwest of Parliament Hill in a square ringed by busy roads. Television images showed passers-by attempting to revive Cirillo before an ambulance arrived.
Eyewitness accounts varied widely about what happened next and ranged from tales of a carjacking to the assailant simply walking away from his gravely wounded victim.
Although motor vehicles cannot drive onto Parliament Hill, a complex of three buildings surrounding a vast lawn used for national celebrations, without passing through a security inspection, there are numerous, unguarded pedestrian access points.
After dealing with reporters who had buttonholed members of Parliament as they entered their meetings, Greta K. Levy, the New Democratic Party's caucus press secretary, and a colleague headed out to her office by way of the large, brass doors at the base of the Peace Tower that dominates the center block of Parliament.
"We heard someone yelling 'gun! gun!' and we flattened ourselves down on the top of step," Levy said Wednesday. After nothing apparently had occurred, Levy looked up to find herself staring at a man walking calmly carrying a rifle or a shotgun aimed forward at his hips.
"He was clearly looking in our general direction, we were two or three feet away, I don't know at what," Levy said. "I didn't notice anything in his eyes, nothing in his expression."
There was no official confirmation of how the gunman died. But Craig Scott, a member of Parliament, credited Kevin Vickers, 58, sergeant-at-arms and a man better known for carrying a ceremonial mace while wearing robes, with shooting the gunman just outside the party caucus rooms.

Load-Date: October 23, 2014


End of Document