GUNMAN KILLS 2 U.S. AIRMEN IN GERMANY; KOSOVAR, 21, ARRESTED IN ATTACK AT AIRPORT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 3, 2011 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 430 words
Byline: JACK EWING AND ELISABETH BUMILLER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


FRANKFURT -- Two U.S. airmen on their way to Afghanistan were killed and two others wounded Wednesday when a gunman opened fire on a U.S. military bus at the Frankfurt airport, according to U.S. military officials in Europe and German police.
In Washington, President Barack Obama said he was "saddened and outraged" by the attack. "We will spare no effort in learning how this outrageous act took place," he said, "and in working with German authorities to ensure that all of the perpetrators are brought to justice."
U.S. officials in Washington said there appeared to be no immediate evidence tying the gunman to any terrorist organization. German police did not initially classify the attack as an act of terrorism, but said they were still investigating.
The suspect arrested at the scene is a 21-year-old Kosovar who lives in Frankfurt, according to police spokesman Manfred Fuellhardt. Police charged him with murder and attempted murder, but they did not rule out terrorism charges.
The Associated Press reported that his uncle in Kosovo identified him as Arid Uka, and said he was born and raised in Germany after his parents moved there about 40 years ago. German police, however, said he was born in Kosovo, the AP said. The uncle, Rexhep Uka, said the family was Muslim, and that Arid Uka worked at the Frankfurt Airport. That could not be immediately confirmed.
The names of the dead were being withheld pending notification of the families. The injured were being treated at Frankfurt hospitals for wounds listed as severe in one case and serious in the other, German police said.
Germany has so far been spared a catastrophic terrorist attack of the kind experienced in Britain and Spain. But three of the Sept. 11, 2001, attackers lived in Germany, and security officials acknowledge that the country remains a breeding ground for Islamic radicals.
Germany, Britain and France have been on edge since last year over warnings of the possibility of pending attacks by radicalized European citizens who might have received training in the lawless border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan. In November, German authorities beefed up security at train stations and airports after an informant said a group linked to al-Qaida was planning to shoot civilians in a public place.
Mr. Fuellhardt said the dead and wounded airmen were part of a group of 13 who had just arrived from London, and had boarded the bus to go to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, about 80 miles southwest of the Frankfurt Airport. He said they were in uniform and headed for deployment in Afghanistan.

Load-Date: March 4, 2011


End of Document