Guy Fawkes Day, a day to pause and to think about a 400-year-old case of faith-based terrorism.
The New York Times
November 5, 2005 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6; Beliefs
Length: 1048 words
Byline: By Peter Steinfels
Body


Today, just in case you had not noticed, is the 400th anniversary of Guy Fawkes Day -- one of the most notable episodes of religion-based terrorism in Anglo-American history. 
  In the early hours of Nov. 5, 1605, officials of King James I of England, pursuing an intelligence lead, found Guy Fawkes and 36 barrels of gunpowder hidden in a storeroom on the ground floor of the Palace of Westminster, a warren of meeting rooms, apartments and even shops, where Parliament was to meet later that day.
Fawkes had fuses at the ready. He was the point man, though not the organizer, of what has been known ever since as the Gunpowder Plot. Inebriated by faith and outraged by the persecution of Catholicism under Queen Elizabeth and James, 13 Roman Catholic conspirators planned to blow up the king, his wife and sons and members of Parliament, detonating, they hoped, not only barrels of gunpowder but also an uprising that would install a Catholic government. 
  Two years ago, although allowing for the difficulty of comparing 17th-century gunpowder to modern explosives, the Center for Explosion Studies at the University of Aberystwyth concluded that the explosion could have obliterated the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Hall, Westminster Abbey and surrounding streets. 
  This estimate is found in ''Remember, Remember: A Cultural History of Guy Fawkes Day'' by James Sharpe, published today by Harvard University Press. His account is a reminder that such religiously inspired terrorism is part of the history of the modern West. 
  He tells the story of the plot, its unraveling and the trials and grisly execution of the conspirators rather economically, and he sets it in a much larger context of what, for English people of the day, was the equivalent of anything that is now described as a ''clash of civilizations.''
  That context includes the persecution of Protestants under the reigns of Mary Tudor and of Catholics under her successor, Elizabeth. In 1570, Pope Pius V, by excommunicating Elizabeth and freeing her subjects to depose her, put all English Catholics under suspicion of being traitors. Then came the 1572 St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre of thousands of French Protestants; the atrocities committed by Spanish troops in the Netherlands, and the failed invasion of England by the Spanish Armada in 1588. 
  English Protestants naturally envisioned an international Catholic evil empire and consequently tried to stamp out any Catholic ''fifth column'' in their own land -- to the point where Mr. Sharpe compares the experiences of underground English Catholics to that of resistance movements in Nazi-occupied Europe. 
  But his account does not stop with this background to the Gunpowder Plot. ''Remember, Remember'' (the book's title comes from an old rhyme beginning ''Remember, remember, the Fifth of November'') is a study in how over time the meaning of a historic event is changed and bent to a variety of religious, political and cultural purposes. 
  At the beginning of 1606, Parliament quickly passed an act mandating that Nov. 5 be a day of annual thanksgiving and commemoration of God's intervention to save the king, Parliament and nation. All loyal subjects were to attend services in every Anglican parish. The prescribed service remained in the Anglican prayer book until 1859. 
  Although there were some surprising voices of religious moderation early on, the sermons at those services were generally exercises in anti-Catholicism, intensified whenever a Catholic threat to England was conjured up, whether by fabricated accusations of Jesuit plots or the repercussions of Louis XIV's persecution of French Protestants after 1685.
  Nov. 5 also became part of a remaking of the calendar of British holidays to suit a new Protestant national identity. It overshadowed All Saints' Day (Nov. 1) and All Souls' Day (Nov. 2), remnants of medieval Catholicism. It also became part of a history in which the throne and nation were understood as enjoying special protection from divine providence. 
  But curiously enough, Guy Fawkes himself was a latecomer to the day that came to be named after him. He was never mentioned in early sermons, and it was the pope, not Fawkes, who was burned in effigy. 
  In Boston, this date was celebrated as Pope Day with parades, bonfires and a dose of vandalism that made the upper classes nervous. ''The Pope Day rituals,'' Mr. Sharpe argues, ''gave plebeian Bostonians a schooling in demonstrating and crowd organization,'' which provided basic training for the rebellion against British taxation and eventually rule.
  At some point, burning Guy Fawkes replaced burning the pope as the central ceremony, and Nov. 5 became less an occasion for religious and patriotic celebration than for the lower classes to blow off steam. In some popular 19th-century entertainment, Guy Fawkes actually became a wrongheaded but brave and defiant hero of sorts.
  Enlightened Victorians wanted to bleach out the day's anti-Catholicism -- and, more important, to discourage public disorder. Public authorities conducted a yearly battle against the marches, bonfires and assorted rowdiness that sometimes tipped into arson, assault and mob violence. 
  In the end, Guy Fawkes Day, like the British working classes, turned respectable, a kind of family-centered festival. Today's controversies over the remaining celebrations, says Mr. Sharpe, center mainly on worries about accidental fires, personal injuries and other damage from fireworks (two years ago a high-flying firework hit an Airbus landing at the Manchester airport) , and even the trauma inflicted on household pets or hedgehogs entering the season of hibernation. 
  ''Remember, Remember'' ends with a few unavoidable reflections on parallels between contemporary fears of faith-based terrorism and those of England in the 17th and 18th centuries. The author also reflects on ''the situation of English Catholics around 1605 and the generality of modern British Muslims,'' both groups overwhelmingly loyal but struggling to maintain their religious and cultural identities in difficult environments. 
  ''Historians should avoid facile comparisons between the past and the present,'' Mr. Sharpe acknowledges, and he simply prods readers to think, after serving up a fascinating tale.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 5, 2005


End of Document