Hafer: tighten finance controls;
 Pa. treasurer tells local GOP about anti-terrorism efforts.
SUNDAY NEWS (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 30, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/STATE,; POLITICAL ANIMALS
Length: 1215 words
Byline: Helen Colwell Adams
Body


Could Pennsylvania be investing in terror?
State Treasurer Barbara Hafer wants to make sure it doesn't.
To that end, she is asking state financial officers nationwide to drop any investments of public money in companies or governments that support terrorism.
Hafer, one of the leading Republican prospects for governor next year, was in Lancaster County again Friday, telling the county Republicans' top donors about the financial impact of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and about her antiterrorism initiatives.
#POLITICS.S3000#
Her luncheon speech at Bent Creek Country Club wasn't open to the press, but she described her remarks afterward.
The possibility of Americans' money being used to finance terror against them isn't as farfetched as it seems.
Before the attacks, Hafer said, a newspaper asked her to determine whether Pennsylvania had invested any funds in a French oil company that had a contract to drill for the government of Sudan.
Sudan, Hafer said, was using profits from the drilling to finance its persecution of Christians in southern Sudan.
As it turned out, one of the state's pension funds did have money in the French firm.
Hafer said she then asked the federal government for a list of companies tied to "the bad guys." But no such list was forthcoming.
Since Sept. 11, the Treasury also learned that someone defrauded Pennsylvania welfare accounts of at least $300,000 in July and August alone. The money has been recovered through banks' insurance.
The perpetrators used financial codes indicating that they either have inside information or someone working in Pennsylvania government, Hafer said. And all the names on the bogus checks were Arabic.
Hafer said she doesn't know yet whether the money scam is connected to terrorism. But the "sophisticated scheme" means new precautions have to be taken, she said.
President George W. Bush has announced a freeze on terrorist assets and creation of a Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center to identify their sources of money.
Hafer sent a letter Wednesday to members of the National Association of State Auditors, Comptrollers and Treasurers -- she is the association's president -- asking them to join the "financial war against global terrorism."
She wants states to divest "all investments of our states' treasuries and pension funds in businesses, financial institutions, governments, nonprofit entities and individuals who in any way support terrorism."
Hafer's speech was her second trip to the county in the last two weeks.
She had been battling state Attorney General Mike Fisher for Republican support in next year's gubernatorial primary, although Fisher had been picking up the early endorsements.
Then Gov. Tom Ridge accepted Bush's call to take over a new homeland security office in the wake of the terror attacks, and Lt.  Gov. Mark Schweiker, who had dropped out of the 2002 governor's race, suddenly became a player.
Hafer said Friday she has encouraged Schweiker to run, although Schweiker seemed to take himself out of the game Saturday by telling the Republican State Committee that he would "not be a candidate anytime soon."
If Schweiker, who shares a conservative base with Fisher, ran, he conceivably could siphon support from Fisher and give Hafer, who's more of a moderate Republican, a better shot at the nomination.
Regardless of political aspirations, Hafer said, Schweiker will have her support as he finishes Ridge's term.
"I wish him well," she said.
Money matters
Another round of campaign expense reports was filed last week, and these were notable more for what wasn't in them than for what was.
Missing from the county Republicans' list of contributors were the names of John Barley and Paul Thibault.
Sources say Barley and Thibault (through the political action committee he founded, Friends of Better Government) aren't giving money to the GOP these days.
Barley's campaign committee, Friends of John Barley, has given $6,000 to the county Republicans since the beginning of the year -- and nothing in the latest reporting period. Last year, Barley's committee donated more than $24,000.
Friends of Better Government, which gave $2,650 last year, so far has contributed nothing in 2001.
Insiders speculate a critical factor in the funding drop is hard feelings over Votergate, the voter registration drive that ended in criminal charges against GOP chairman Chet Beiler.
Beiler had been telling Republicans privately that Barley proposed and funded the piece-rate voter drive in the city, which Attorney General Fisher later ruled was a violation of the state election law.
In reports covering June 5 to Sept. 17, the county GOP reported raising $28,922, spending $41,935 and finishing with a balance of $17,607.
The GOP listed one unpaid debt, $2,847, to the accounting firm of Monchik & Associates PC for a year-end report.
The county Democrats reported raising $5,595, spending $13,096 and finishing with a balance of $9,387.
This reporting period was only for candidates and committees raising or spending money on statewide offices.
Campaign trails
Endorsements -- and political charges -- were flying last week in the state Supreme Court race.
Republican Mike Eakin, a Superior Court judge who lives in West Donegal Township, picked up the endorsement of the Pennsylvania State Fraternal Order of Police and the State Troopers Association.
"We need strong leadership on the court, and we think Mike has earned his way through the ranks, working as a district attorney (in Cumberland County) and a Superior Court judge -- he's earned the right to the top spot as a Supreme Court justice," said Mike Lutz, president of the state FOP.
Eakin's opponent, Democrat Kate Ford Elliott (one of his Superior Court colleagues), was touting the support of Philadelphia's Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 5.
Elliott also was crying foul over Republican State Committee charges that she has been soft on protecting victims of sexual abuse.
RSC vice chairwoman Eileen Barbera Melvin and the current Cumberland DA, Skip Ebert, alleged Monday that Elliott had voted to overturn prison sentences in three sex predator cases.
Elliott's campaign responded with a statement: "The Eakin for Supreme Court campaign today became the first in the country to launch a negative political attack predicated upon issues of safety and security in the wake of the terrorist strikes on Sept. 11."
Let the games begin.
Political potpourri
'County Republicans are hoping that Mark Schweiker, who will be inaugurated as governor Oct. 5, will accept an invitation to speak at the GOP's fall dinner, scheduled Nov. 1 at the Quality Inn, 2363 Oregon Pike.
'The campaign committee of Republican city Councilman Luis Mendoza, who's running for a second term, will sponsor a free picnic for the community from noon to 4 p.m. Saturday at Lancaster County Central Park's Pavilion 1. Food and entertainment will be provided.
'City Councilman John Graupera was a special guest at the 19th annual conference of the United States Hispanic Leadership Institute in Chicago. The conference helps to train more than 8,000 Hispanic leaders in 40 states.
Graupera was among 30 Latino elected officials who were recognized at a luncheon Saturday.
Helen Colwell Adams is an editor of the Sunday News Perspective section. E-mail her at hcolwell@lnpnews.com, or phone 291-8788.  

Load-Date: October 6, 2001


End of Document