HAIG SAYS REBELS ENGAGE IN TERROR AGAINST SALVADOR
The New York Times
August 29, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1133 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 28
Body


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  accused the rebels in El Salvador today of engaging in ''straight terrorism'' and again accused Cuba and the Soviet Union of playing major roles in fomenting the country's civil war.
''We've witnessed the guerrilla movement resort to straight terrorism, the kind of activity which reflects their failure and frustration in major force operations,'' he said. ''They have now gone into an effort in which the main victims of their activity are innocent noncombatants, the people of El Salvador.'' He referred to a campaign in thecountry to destroy power lines and disrupt water supplies.
State Secretary Haig accuses rebels in El Salvador of engaging in "straight terrorism"; also accuses Soviet Union and Cuba of intervention
He also said that the Cubans, and to a lesser extent the Russians, continued to be involved in providing armaments and helping direct rebel movements.
His accusation against the leftist guerrillas came at a wideranging news conference at the State Department shortly before the French and Mexican Governments issued a statement in which they recognized the rebels as a ''representative political force'' in El Salvador.
 
French-Mexican Move Criticized
After the news conference, a senior State Department official said that the joint French-Mexican letter to the United Nations Security Council was ''unhelpful'' to United States efforts to build support for the Salvadoran Government of Jose Napoleon Duarte and to press the leftist forces to agree to elections under the Government's auspices.
But the official said that the statement was not ''a complete disaster'' because it fell short of some earlier Mexican efforts to establish that El Salvador was in a state of ''belligerency'' and that the rebels should have equal political standing with the Government.
Tonight, the State Department said that the French-Mexican statement included several points with which it agreed. The department praised the document for expressing concern for the Salvadoran people, for saying that it was up to El Salvador to solve its own crisis and for emphasizing the need for free elections.
 
'Represent Only a Portion'
But the department said it took exception to the emphasis in the statement on the political recognition of the two leftist parties, which it said ''represent only a portion of a far broader political spectrum in El Salvador.''
The question in Washington was whether the French and the Mexicans would campaign around the world to seek additional signers to the document, thereby disrupting United States efforts and leading to a political confrontation.
At his news conference, Mr. Haig said that the guerrilla forces in El Salvador had resorted to ''a change in tactics.'' Mr. Haig repeated the Reagan Administration's pledge to seek ''social justice'' in El Salvador through measures to build up that country's economy and political stability. But he said that process ''cannot proceed under a set of security conditions which are fed fromoutside Salvador, led first and foremost by Cuba, with provision of more than ample funds and resources from the Soviet Union.''
He said that the United States had ''an obligation'' to help the Salvadoran Government so long as ''this external assistance'' continued. He again said that the Administration was considering ways of confronting Cuba but that it was ''premature'' to reveal them.  Other officials said plans were under consideration to create a radio station to beam broadcasts to Cuba and to tighten the economic embargo.
The Mexican-French statement has made public in a forceful way, officials said, the differences between Washington and some of its closest friends over El Salvador. The Reagan Administration has declared that the main leftist organizations should play a role in the Salvadoran political scene, but only by agreeing to elections.  The Mexicans and French, however, believe that there should be negotiations among the various factions preceding any elections.
 
North Korean Attack Noted
At the news conference, Mr. Haig also touched on these points:
- The United States will take necessary measures to protect its planes against attacks by hostile forces. He repeated the American contention that an SR-71 reconnaissance plane was fired upon by a North Korean antiaircraft missile Wednesday, a charge ambiguously denied today by North Korea.
- For various reasons, the Soviet Union has decided not to intervene militarily in Poland, but the Poles face serious economic and financial problems that both Western nations and other Communist countries should help solve.
- The South African incursion into Angola, which has drawn criticism from around the world, should be viewed along with the continued presence of large numbers of Cuban forces and Soviet advisers in Angola. However, he said the United States was making ''some progress'' in trying to arrange a negotiated settlement for the independence of South-West Africa, or Namibia, from South Africa.
- The announcement by the Egyptian and Israeli leaders of plans to resume Palestinian autonomy talks was ''a pleasant surprise,'' in effect acknowledging that the United States was not consulted. He said he could not confirm the statement of Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel that Libya was supplying Palestine Liberation Organization forces with military equipment in Lebanon in violation of the cease-fire.
- The United States has worked out ''certain arrangements'' with Saudi Arabia on its use of the five Awacs surveillance planes that it wants to sell the Saudis, but he refused to disclose them in advance of Congressional briefings in September.
 
'Fuzziness' Seen in Statement
In the Administration's initial reading of the French-Mexican statement, a senior official said that there was considerable ''fuzziness'' in the document. He said it seemed to reflect a French effort to tone down Mexico's known support for the Salvadoran leftists.
The Socialist Government of President Francois Mitterrand of France has made clear its unhappiness with Washington's stress on the Cuban and Soviet roles in the civil war, but the French have also been unwilling to go as far as the Mexicans in extending formal political backing to the rebels.
 
No Position on Interference Issue
The State Department took no position on whether the French-Mexican document might be interpreted as interference by those countries in the political affairs of El Salvador. The department's statement said that the United States welcomed the document's recognition that it was up to the Salvadoran people to settle their problems.
The United States, the department said, remains committed to the Salvadoran Government's holding an election in March 1982 for a Constituent Assembly that would devise a new legal framework for the country.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Amb. Deane Hinton watching plane land (page 7)


End of Document