HAIG CITES 'HIT LIST' FOR SOVIET CONTROL OF CENTRAL AMERICA
The New York Times
March 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 870 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 18
Body


The Reagan Administration made another attack on the Soviet Union today, with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. accusing it of being responsible for ''international terrorism,'' of having ''a hit list'' for domination of Central America, and of posing ''the most serious threat to world peace that we're facing.''
In the first public appearance before a Congressional committee since confirmation hearings in January, Mr. Haig
 
Excerpts from testimony, page A10.
was combative when liberal Democrats on the House Foreign Affairs Committee suggested he was overzealous in his concerns about Moscow.
In answer to a question from Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, Mr. Haig said he agreed that it would be sterile to have ''a total preoccupation with the so-called Russians-are-coming syndrome,'' but he spent much of the hearing explaining why the Administration was so concerned about their behavior.
Secretary of State Alexander Haig charges Soviet Union with having 'hit list' for domination of Central AmericaExchange With Representative
In a lively exchange with Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Democrat of New York, Mr. Haig said attention ''is focused on the Soviet problem'' because ''of the dangerous trends which have resulted in the recent past from Soviet activity.''
''It does no good to pretend in our policies or our proclamations that that is not the most serious threat to world peace that we're facing today,'' he said.
Ostensibly Mr. Haig appeared before the committee to defend the $6.87 billion security assistance program for the 1982 fiscal year, but his appearance was more akin to a news conference, with committee members asking questions.
Mr. Haig made several other points in his testimony:
- He indicated that the United States might have to supply some of the 2,500 troops for a peacekeeping force to be established in Sinai in April 1982 if other countries do not volunteer. The United States is obliged, under the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, to take the lead in setting up an international force and some Pentagon officials favor an American presence as the first step toward a permanent land force in the Middle East.
- Mr. Haig hinted that he favored repeal of a the 1976 law that bars covert aid to anti-Communist rebels in Angola. He said the legislation restricted Presidential authority. Experts on southern Africa have warned that such aid may upset efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement in South-West Africa.
- He said he favored modification of legislation that bars aid to Pakistan because of a secret program to develop nuclear devices. He said the Administration wanted to avoid isolating countries like Pakistan so that they would not be driven ''toward the nuclear option.''
Several committee members expressed concern at the decision to provide Saudi Arabia with additional equipment for F-15 jets it has ordered. In response to a question from the ranking Republican on the committee, Representative William S. Broomfield of Michigan, Mr.  Haig put the Saudi decision in terms of a threat from the Soviet Union.
 
Arab-Jewish Consensus Needed
''It is fundamentally important to begin to develop a consensus of strategic concerns throughout the region among Arab and Jew and to be sure that the overriding danger of Soviet inroads is not overlooked,'' Mr. Haig said.
In his opening statement, he said Israel played an important role ''in countering the more serious threats involving the Soviet Union.''
The ''most dangerous'' trend in the world, he said, ''is the growth of Soviet military power, which is now capable of supporting an imperial foreign policy.''
''Soviet adventurism in the Horn of Africa, in South Asia, in the Persian Gulf, and in South-West Africa appears to conform to a basic and ominous objective: to strike at countries on or near the vital resource lines of the Western world,'' Mr. Haig said in his statement.
Asked about the concern over Soviet bloc aid to El Salvador, Mr.  Haig told the committee that the insurgency in El Salvador was only part of a ''four-phased operation'' in which the first part was ''the seizure of Nicaragua.''
''Next is El Salvador,'' he said, ''to be followed by Honduras and Guatemala.'' When asked by Representative Robert K. Dornan, Republican of California, whether this was ''a Caribbean domino theory,'' he replied:
''I wouldn't call it necessarily a domino theory. I would call it a priority target list - a hit list, if you will - for the ultimate takeover of Central America.''
 
The 'Bottom Line' on Terrorism
On terrorism, Mr. Haig amplified previous allegations that Moscow was responsible for much of the world's troubles.  ''When you get to the bottom line,'' he said, ''it is the Soviet Union which bears a major responsibility today for the proliferation and hemorrhaging, if you will, of international terrorism as we have come to know it.''
He said terrorrists ''maintain camps, training centers in the Soviet Union, in their Eastern European satellites, in Libya, where literally thousands of third world embryo-terrorists are running through a training course.''
''I think it's time that this issue be addressed publicly and be stated forthrightly no matter how much anguish it may give us,'' he said.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Al Haig


End of Document