HAIRCUTS HIGH ON THE LIST FOR MANY OF THE FREED 52
The New York Times
January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 438 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WIESBADEN, West Germany, Jan. 21
Body


About the first thing that the 52 former hostages did when they arrived here early this morning was to rush to a bank of telephones to call their relatives and friends.
Then, about one-third of the group, including L. Bruce Laingen, the senior diplomat in the group, went to the hospital barber shop.  There the two barbers gave them haircuts and shampoos, and the Marine hostages lost their beards.
Psychologists say good cosmetic care and frequent contact with family are critical first steps in rehabilitation of hostages following their release
Good cosmetic care, along with frequent communication with family and friends, is one of the most critical first steps in the rehabilitation of hostages, according to psychiatrists and psychologists who have treated victims of terrorism. A State Department official said in an interview that the medical plans for the 52 freed Americans were being guided by the experiences of doctors in similar episodes.
Experts consider cosmetic care important because in previous episodes of terrorism, many hostages have suffered impaired feelings of self-esteem after living under humiliating circumstances for long periods of time. Good grooming is one of the many ways in which hostages can be helped to regain that lost self-esteem.
 
Business Is Brisk
By 10 A.M. today Franz Honsowitz and Chrisostomos Kontaxis began giving haircuts to the first freed Americans. By midday business was so brisk that they put up a sign saying, ''Hostages only.'' By the end of the day, Mr. Honsowitz said tonight, he and Mr. Kontaxis had given about 18 haircuts.
''The men didn't look bad and they were not complaining about anything,'' Mr. Honsowitz said. ''But they were quiet - I presume because they were so tired from their ordeal and long trip.''
''They didn't resist - they seemed to want it done that way,'' Mr.  Honsowitz added, in a reference to the feelings of the Marines about losing their long hair and beards.
As Mr. Honsowitz and Mr. Kontaxis cut and shampooed there were brief conversations between them and their customers. ''They weren't very talkative but they were not uncommunicative,'' Mr. Honsowitz said.
The barber said that he asked several of his customers about the pictures he had seen of them wearing blindfolds. ''They said it happened several times,'' Mr. Honsowitz said.
Mr. Laingen, the charge d'affaires in Teheran at the time of the takeover of the United States Embassy, spoke in German as he recalled his diplomatic experiences in Hamburg and his Norwegian heritage, Mr. Honsowitz said. But the conversations were broken off frequently when hospital employees sought autographs.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of L. Bruce Laingen getting a haircut


End of Document