HAITIAN CLERICS BLAST LEADERS;
THOUSANDS MOURN PRIEST
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 3, 1994, SATURDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 271 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI
Body


Fellow clerics and other pro-democracy activists came out into the open briefly Friday to bury "one more victim of state terrorism" - the first priest slain since soldiers seized power in 1991.
A truckload of armed soldiers sat outside on the street as several thousand Haitians sang and prayed for the Rev. Jean-Marie Vincent.
Worshipers had to walk right by the spot where Vincent was shot Sunday night to enter the Montfortain Fathers' residence for the early-morning funeral in the compound's large yard.
On the blood-stained street outside the gate lay a bouquet of flowers and about a dozen small white candles, burnt almost to the ground.
The head of Vincent's order, the Rev. Quesnel Alphonse, blamed coup leaders and the army-supported provisional government for the killing.
"They have never gone so far with their work of destruction," Alphonse declared angrily in his eulogy. "He is one more victim of state terrorism."
To his slain colleague, he added: "You were in the path of the bloodthirsty devil."
The de facto government has denied involvement in the assassination of the 49-year-old priest, who had devoted his life to helping Haiti's peasants.
Vincent was one of several Roman Catholic priests who nurtured the social consciousness of the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who in 1990 became Haiti's first democratically elected president. Aristide was overthrown in a September 1991 military coup.
Vincent suffered head wounds saving Aristide's life in August 1987, when he dove across him to protect him from a band of thugs with machetes.
The solemn funeral was punctuated by worshipers screaming and wailing in grief.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Priests line up at funeral of the Rev. Jean-Marie Vincent, CREDIT: ASSOCIATED PRESS

Load-Date: September 5, 1994


End of Document