Haitian cleared of terrorism may be deported
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 20, 2007, Thursday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P5C
Length: 804 words
Byline: Curt Anderson, The Associated Press
Body


MIAMI - A jury didn't think Lyglenson Lemorin was involved in a terrorism conspiracy to topple Chicago's Sears Tower and bomb FBI offices, but he didn't walk out of court a free man.
Instead, federal agents whisked the legal U.S. resident off to Georgia, where he remained Wednesday facing possible deportation to his native Haiti, his attorneys said. And Lemorin could be forced to return to court early next year in Miami to testify in the retrial of his co-defendants in the so-called "Liberty City Seven" case.
Lemorin's legal limbo has led people involved in the case to question the government's motives, especially if he is charged with largely identical terrorism-related offenses in deportation proceedings.
"Some people could say this is vindictive or sour grapes," said Leonard Fenn, an attorney assisting Lemorin with his immigration case. "In the federal trial, they could not prove he was guilty. Now they have him in a different forum, where they don't have a jury and a lesser burden to prove."
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement spokeswoman Barbara Gonzalez confirmed Wednesday that Lemorin is in custody but would not comment on whether any formal immigration charges have been filed.
A spokeswoman for the Miami U.S. attorney's office declined comment. U.S. District Judge Joan Lenard has issued a gag order prohibiting lawyers in the criminal case from talking with the media.
Lemorin, 32, was the only defendant acquitted last week of four terrorism-related conspiracy charges accusing the group of being a homegrown cell plotting attacks on the 110-story Sears Tower and FBI offices. They supposedly wanted to start an all-out war against the U.S. government.
The jury deadlocked on the remaining six, including alleged ringleader Narseal Batiste. They will be retried next year, with jury selection scheduled to begin Jan. 7. They each face up to 70 years in prison if convicted.
It's possible Lemorin hasn't seen the last of his one-time associates.
Defendant Stanley Grant Phanor wants Lenard to halt Lemorin's deportation proceeding and force him to return to Miami to testify in the second trial. Phanor attorney Roderick Vereen said in papers filed Tuesday that if Lemorin is deported to Haiti it would be "highly unlikely" he would be permitted to return.
Lenard did not immediately rule on that request.
Jurors in the first trial agreed that Lemorin, a U.S. resident since the late 1980s also known as "Brother Levi," was the least involved of the seven. Jury foreman Jeff Agron said the panel was especially swayed by Lemorin's decision to distance himself from Batiste by moving with his wife and children - all U.S. citizens - to Atlanta a few weeks after he and the others took an oath of loyalty to al-Qaida.
The man who administered that oath, known to the men as "Brother Mohammed," was actually an FBI informant and the videotaped ceremony is key government evidence. The group never had contact with real al-Qaida operatives, nor did they ever acquire any explosives or weapons to mount a terrorist attack.
In Atlanta, Lemorin got a job at an Abercrombie & Fitch store and lived quietly until his June 2006 arrest on the terrorism charges. His attorney in Atlanta, Jimmy Hardy, said at the time there was almost no evidence against him, and little came out during the first trial.
"He wasn't involved in anything unusual," Hardy said. "He was just a hard-working man."
Lemorin and the other six men have been in custody since their arrests at Miami's downtown federal detention center. Fenn said Lemorin told them in a phone call that he was taken from his cell Friday night - a day after his acquittal - and flown to several locations before he wound up at the Stewart Detention Center in Lumpkin, Ga.
His lawyers didn't know where he was until Monday, and Lemorin told them he feared he would be taken to the U.S. terrorist detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. A Miami lawyer who represents a co-defendant in the Jose Padilla terrorism case said Lemorin was afraid for good reason.
"This is a category of individuals who are subjected to different rules," said attorney Marshall Dore Louis, who is not involved in the Liberty City Seven case. "I think anybody who is in that system should be terrified about what the government is going to do."
Fenn said rules of evidence in immigration cases are much more relaxed than in a criminal trial. There is no jury and a deportation order can be issued by a judge based on "clear and convincing" proof, which is lower than the "reasonable doubt" standard in criminal trials.
Lemorin could be charged in the deportation proceeding with being a terrorist or providing support to terrorism, Fenn said. ICE would not confirm that Wednesday, and Fenn said he had received no formal notification of any charges.
"It's totally in their ballpark," Fenn said.

Load-Date: December 21, 2007


End of Document