HAITIANS MOURN AS SLAIN PRIEST BURIED HE HAD BACKED ARISTIDE. CLERICS AND OTHER FOES OF THE MILITARY REGIME ASSAILED THE ASSASSINATION.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 3, 1994 Saturday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 605 words
Byline: Lisa M. Hamm, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti
Body


Fellow clerics and other pro-democracy activists came out into the open briefly yesterday to bury a man they called "one more victim of state terrorism" - the first priest ever assassinated in Haiti.
As several thousand Haitians sang and prayed for the Rev. Jean-Marie Vincent, a truckload of armed soldiers sat outside on the street.
Worshipers had to walk right by the spot where Father Vincent was shot Sunday night to enter the Montfortain Fathers' residence for the early-morning funeral in the compound's large yard.
On the bloodstained street outside the gate lay a bouquet of flowers and about a dozen small white candles, burnt almost to the ground.
The head of Father Vincent's order, the Rev. Quesnel Alphonse, blamed coup leaders and the army-supported provisional government for the killing.
"They have never gone so far with their work of destruction," Father Alphonse declared angrily in his eulogy. "He is one more victim of state terrorism."
To his slain colleague, he added: "You were in the path of the bloodthirsty devil."
The de facto government has denied involvement in the assassination of the 49-year-old priest, who had devoted his life to helping Haiti's peasants.
Father Vincent was one of several Roman Catholic priests who nurtured the social consciousness of the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who in 1990 became Haiti's first democratically elected president. Aristide was overthrown in a September 1991 military coup.
Father Vincent suffered head wounds saving Aristide's life in August 1987, when he dove across him to protect him from a band of thugs with machetes.
The funeral was punctuated by worshipers screaming and wailing in grief.
"No, Jesus! Jesus, no!" shrieked one woman. Another fell prostrate with grief beside the casket.
Port-au-Prince Mayor Evans Paul, himself a target of death threats, came out of hiding for the funeral.
"The unity of the church is necessary - both the hierarchy and the grass- roots," Paul said afterward. "The unity of this church is indispensable to accompany this people in its struggle."
Robert Malval, the caretaker prime minister appointed by Aristide but who remains powerless, attended the funeral. He made no public statement.
Also in attendance were Papal Nuncio Lorenzo Baldiserri, U.S. Ambassador William Swing, French charge d'affaires Philippe Selz, six of Haiti's 11 Catholic bishops and a crowd of 2,000 to 3,000, some of them priests and nuns and the poor with whom Father Vincent had worked.
"He was one of their finest sons," Swing said, "a man who was struggling for change and justice and trying to help the poor to have a better opportunity. It's a tragedy."
Rene Leon, director general of Bureau of Religious Denominations, a branch of the Foreign Ministry, represented the de facto government. Volvick Remy Joseph, who was health minister under the Duvalier dynasty, was turned away at the gate.
A hearse brought the casket into the driveway of the Montfortain Fathers home around dawn. A procession of mourners filed solemnly past Father Vincent's body for an hour and a half before the funeral began.
The truckload of soldiers, some in helmets and carrying shotguns, passed by repeatedly before stopping and parking in the street. At that point the gates were padlocked. A number of members of the far-right paramilitary group, the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, also loitered outside.
As Father Vincent's body was lowered into the ground, some mourners began screaming hysterically, falling into the arms of those around them.
"We want justice! We want justice!" shouted activist priest Gerard Jean- Juste and a group of his colleagues.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. A bishop blessed the casket of the Rev. Jean-Marie Vincent in Port-au-
Prince. Some activists came out of hiding to attend the funeral. (Miami
Herald, TIM CHAPMAN)

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document