Halt Raids on Israel Or Put Ties at Risk, U.S. Tells the P.L.O.
The New York Times
March 1, 1989, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 938 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28
Body


The United States called on the Palestine Liberation Organization today to refrain from attacks on Israeli military and civilian targets inside and outside Israel if it wanted to continue its discussions with Washington.
The latest formulation appeared to represent a subtle but significant change in the United States' terms for carrying on a dialogue with the P.L.O.
In December the United States agreed to open direct talks with the P.L.O. after Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the organization, renounced terrorism and said he accepted Israel's right to exist. Now the United States is saying the P.L.O. must abstain from attacks on Israeli military targets regardless of whether such attacks fit the American definition of terrorism.
 
Responsible for All Factions
The United States also said the P.L.O. could not escape responsibility for violent acts by groups belonging to the umbrella organization, even if those factions oppose Mr. Arafat.
The State Department defines terrorism as ''premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets.'' A department official said an attack on people wearing military uniforms might be an act of terrorism if the victims were not in a combat role.
Thus, for example, the department classifies the truck bombing of a United States marine compound in Lebanon in 1983 as a terrorist act.
The shift came as American officials expressed deep concern about an attempted Palestinian guerrilla raid on Israel last week, with some suggesting that it might have violated Mr. Arafat's declaration renouncing terrorism.
Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, would not say whether the incident violated Mr. Arafat's pledge or whether the United States regarded it as an attempted terrorist attack. But Mr. Redman said, ''Attacks against Israeli civilian or military targets inside or outside of Israel are contrary to the peaceful objectives of the dialogue.''
The incident in question occurred Thursday, when members of an Israeli-backed militia in southern Lebanon shot and killed three guerrillas from the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a component of the P.L.O. A member of that faction, Yasir Abed Rabbu, led the P.L.O. delegation that met with the American Ambassador to Tunisia on Dec. 16, two days after the United States dropped a 13-year ban on contacts with the P.L.O.
State Department officials declined to say what would happen if such incidents continued. President Reagan said in December that the United States would ''certainly break off communications'' with the P.L.O. if the group committed terrorist acts in the future, and Israel has been urging the Bush Administration to suspend the dialogue.
The American Ambassador in Tunis, Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., met today with P.L.O. representatives, including Hakam Ballaoui, the head of the P.L.O. office there. Mr. Redman said Mr. Pelletreau told the P.L.O. that the United States did not condone actions like the incident Thursday and that ''the P.L.O. cannot escape responsibility for the actions of its constituent elements.''
But a P.L.O. official was quoted today as saying the organization could not be expected to control its member groups. The official, Farouk Kaddoumi, who often serves as the P.L.O. spokesman on foreign affairs, said it was ''not easy'' for a revolutionary movement like the P.L.O. to control its people completely.
 
Ambiguities
Reuters reported that Mr. Kaddoumi, on a stopover in Saudi Arabia, said the P.L.O. was ''not prepared to condemn'' guerrilla operations by Palestinian factions. ''Individuals or groups might undertake these kinds of operations, but the P.L.O. does not,'' he said.
The latest dispute stems from an ambiguity that was evident in December. Mr. Arafat said on Dec. 14 that he renounced ''all forms of terrorism, including individual, group and state terrorism.'' But within a few days one of his deputies, Saleh Khalef, said the P.L.O. did not intend to stop ''attacks against Israeli military targets,'' and added, ''We will carry on our struggle until the Palestinian flag is hoisted over Jerusalem.''
On Dec. 15 Richard W. Murphy, then the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, said more Palestinian terrorism ''may well occur'' because the P.L.O. was ''very disorganized.''
The United States would expect the P.L.O. to dissociate itself from terrorism by any Palestinian group, he said.
 
Resisting of Occupation Defended
Yossi Gal, a spokesman for the Israeli Embassy here, said today that the incident Thursday, about a mile north of Israel's border with Lebanon, demonstrated that the P.L.O. and its factions were still committed to terrorism. ''The P.L.O. has not lived up to its commitment, if indeed it had any intention to do so in the first place,'' he said.
But Khalil Foutah, a spokesman in Washington for the Palestine Affairs Center, an arm of the Arab League, said: ''Israel is occupying southern Lebanon. Palestinian activities in that area are a form of resistance to the occupation. The P.L.O. distinguishes between such resistance and terrorism.''
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine used similar logic in defending the unsuccessful raid. Jamil Hilal, a spokesman for the front, said, ''As long as the Israeli occupation continues, we will continue actions against military targets.''
State Department officials said the Palestinian faction had several possible reasons for attempting the raid: to show it was an autonomous group within the P.L.O., to show it remained militant in the struggle against Israel, or to test the limits of the commitment made by Mr. Arafat.


End of Document