Hamas Rockets Hit Closer to Heart of Israel; Terrorism Expert: 'Just a Matter of Time Before They Reach Tel Aviv'
The Forward
March 14, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A1
Length: 1001 words
Body


Atypically for Israel, Anat Weinstein-Berkowitz is  dressed so smartly that she would fit in comfortably  at any Wall Street law firm. Except for her sneakers.
She traded her high heels for flats earlier this week,  after Ashkelon, where she is municipal spokeswoman,  became the newest target for Hamas rockets. I can  run fast, but not in heels. To be safe, and able to reach  a shelter, is more important than being elegant now,  she said, adding that sirens give a warning of only  15 to 20 seconds.
Israelis of all political shades reacted with shock  and worry this weekend, as Hamas showed that it  is increasing the range of its rockets. Until then, the  weapons had been confined to a radius of just a few  miles from Gaza, meaning Sderot and the surrounding  areas. But this week, they began to fall on Ashkelon, a  bustling city of 120,000 people situated considerably  farther  12 miles  from Gaza.
Another new target, Netivot, is a Negev development  town like Sderot and home to 25,000 people.  The head of municipal security there, Erez Kidhar,  said he has been inspecting bomb shelters and sirens  and passing calming messages to the public, just  as his counterparts in Ashkelon are doing. Sderot  is already used to daily attacks, and so they are now  targeting every city in range, he said. They are trying  to enlarge the circle of panic.
With the rocketeers' objective in mind, similar preparations  are under way in Ashdod, an important port  city of 250,000 people and a hub of Israel's thriving  export business, 20 miles north of Gaza. Experts say  that the range will continue to expand.
It is just a matter of time before they reach Tel  Aviv, said Eyal Zisser, a terrorism expert at Tel Aviv  University. When Israel withdrew from Gaza, rockets  from there could reach few spots in Israel. Then  they got to Sderot, and they can now reach Ashkelon  and Netivot.
According to the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya's  Ely Karmon, who has written widely on Hamas and  Hezbollah, it may not be just the seaports that are  in danger. Karmon believes that Hamas also has the  capability to target Ben-Gurion Airport. It also has antiaircraft  missiles, he added, saying that the organization  does not like to show all its cards at once.
While many of the Qassam rockets sent to Sderot  are homemade, the projectiles reaching farther are  122 mm Grad rockets, better known as Katyushas.  They are manufactured to military standards by the  conventional arms industry.
The Grads are thought to be arriving in Gaza from  Egypt through tunnels, part of what Zisser and other  experts are calling the Lebanonization of Gaza.
What Hamas is trying to do is to  turn Gaza into another Lebanon,  where terrorists have an arsenal of  weapons used to deter Israel from  entering Gaza and to ensure they  can do what they want, Zisser  said. They will use the weapons  to provoke Israel.
Indeed, Gaza already resembles  Lebanon in some respects, though  the Lebanon of 1990, not of 2006,  said Jonathan Spyer, a Middle East  expert based at the Interdisciplinary  Center. Hamas is at a much earlier  stage than Hezbollah, if you look at  the equipment and fighting abilities  of the two.
This is for obvious reasons,  Spyer said. Hezbollah was created  by the Iranians and given a lot of  money to become what it is.
Although Hamas may be almost  20 years behind Hezbollah, it is  likely to catch up quickly. If left  unhindered by Israel, Spyer said, it  could do so in just five years.
The reason for this is that while  religious differences have traditionally  stopped Shi'ite Iran from  offering extensive help to the Sunni  Hamas organization, a strategic  relationship has emerged, largely  since Hamas showed its power  by taking control of Gaza, Spyer  said. Iran is now providing lots of  money, lots of weaponry and lots  of training, he noted.
There is another parallel between  Lebanon and Gaza, Karmon said.  The objective of Hamas today  reflects the aim of Hezbollah in  2000, namely achieving a cease-fire  and then using the calm to build up  its arsenal.
According to Karmon, Israel's  own priority in the short term is to  stop current attacks. Still, the most  important target for Israel is the  border between Egypt and Gaza,  where it needs to stop weapons  going into the Strip.
These two objectives might  explain the mixed messages coming  from Israel. On Wednesday, March  5, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert  told reporters: One thing should  be clear: If there is no Qassam fire  on Israel, there will be no Israeli  attack on Gaza. We do not rise in  the morning and think about how  to attack Gaza.
Just two days earlier, however,  Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni told  foreign ambassadors that Israel  wants to change the rules of this  game, and will refuse to stop  operations against Hamas after  the organization ceases attacks.  The point has been reiterated on  other occasions.
In Karmon's opinion, there is little  chance of a cease-fire. A likelier  course of action is that rockets will  continue to fall, and that if at some  point in the next few weeks there  is a serious attack, public opinion  will pressure the government and  Israel will take control of Gaza's  border with Egypt, to stop the  weapons coming in.
In Israel's southern cities, this  means preparing now for later  attacks. The challenge of the latest  development is that areas that  had been considered safe are now  at risk. Even Ashkelon's Barzila  Hospital, where wounded Israelis  from Sderot and Gaza are taken for  treatment and recuperation, today  finds itself in the line of fire. Some  wards have been evacuated and  moved into sheltered areas.
Here in the hospital, we hear  the sirens in Ashkelon and immediately  get ready to receive injured  people, spokeswoman Leah Malu  said. It can be just three minutes  before ambulances come in. For  those of us on the staff who live  here, our first thought is, 'What  about our families?' But the pressure  of our work here means we  can't even call.

Graphic

 
IMAGE: The Circle Widens:The mayor of Ashkelon, Roni Mahatzri, shows a member of Knesset one of the manyscenes of destruction in his city after Hamas extended the range of rockets being launched from Gaza.

Load-Date: March 10, 2008


End of Document