Hamas voters fed up with Fatah; Election more aboutcorruption than terrorism, some indicate
USA TODAY
January 27, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 646 words
Byline: Matthew Gutman
Body


RAMALLAH, West Bank -- The U.S. government views Hamas as a terrorist organization. Fatem Nimr, a 58-year old Palestinian homemaker, sees it as a symbol of hope.
"Hamas will educate our children," she said as she stopped by a sweet shop Thursday, a day after Hamas' sweeping victory in Palestinian elections. "They will bring us religion. They will feed the poor."
Hamas' victory in Palestinian elections seemed less an endorsement of terrorism than a vote for an organization that supporters hope will improve government, according to some voters and election analysts. Hamas supporters say they were fed up with the ruling Fatah Party, which many accused of corruption and general incompetence.
Palestinian gross domestic product declined by 35% between 2000 and 2005, during the Palestinian uprising known as the intifada, according to the World Bank.
"Fatah has done nothing but make us poor," Nimr said.
With 95% of the vote counted, Hamas won 76 seats to Fatah's 43 in the 132-member parliament, according to Hanna Nasser, a Palestinian election official.
"Voters wanted to punish Fatah for its dismal performance," said Khalil Shikaki, director of the Center for Policy and Survey Research in Ramallah. "People were fed up with its corruption and incompetence."
In Ramallah, the seat of Palestinian government and one of the most secular West Bank towns, there was little celebration Thursday. A few Hamas activists muscled battered sedans through traffic, blasting Hamas jingles on their car stereos. In the town's bustling vegetable market, several vendors planted Hamas' green flag with the "God is Great" insignia among mounds of tangerines and pomegranates.
Hamas' religious overtones appealed to some voters who believe Hamas leaders will be less susceptible to corruption.
"You can't have a monopoly of power forever," said Hamza Awadallah, 22. He said the time had come for "unbelievers" to leave government. "Hamas officials pray, they fast, they give alms," he said. "Finally, Palestinians got smart, and voted for religious, the true, law."
Awadallah said he condemned suicide bombings.
"I think negotiation is a better way to get back our land," he said.
Even so, Hamas' militancy is credited with pushing Israel to withdraw settlers and troops from Gaza and parts of the West Bank in September. "People ... got the impression that violence pays while diplomacy doesn't," Shikaki said.
Israel says Hamas is responsible for launching 425 terrorist attacks since Sept. 2000, killing 377 Israelis and injuring more than 2,000.
Founded in 1987 in Gaza, Hamas -- the Arabic acronym for Islamic Resistance Movement -- focused on two main tasks: eliminating the state of Israel and filling the social and educational needs of impoverished Palestinians.
In 1989, Hamas took up arms, killing several Israelis in shooting attacks. Israel responded by banning the group. By 1994, the group had graduated to bombing attacks.
The conflict escalated after the start of the Palestinian uprising in September 2000. Hamas' founder, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, was assassinated by Israel in March 2004.
Hamas made its first foray into Palestinian politics when it competed for a handful of offices in the December 2004 municipal elections.
In Thursday's vote, Hamas capitalized on the reputation it earned for incorruptibility and good governance in the towns and cities it controlled after winning municipal elections last year. Hamas has also run a network of hospitals and social services for Palestinians.
Even some Fatah supporters admit their party governed poorly in recent years.
"We all knew Hamas is going to win," said Taha Morar, 24, who wore a checkered scarf made famous by Fatah's founder Yasser Arafat. "They do things for the people and lately Fatah didn't."
Omar Fattah, 55, who owns a downtown sporting goods store said, "I don't support Hamas, but we have to respect our own democracy."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, USA TODAY, Sources: Central Elections Commission - Palestine, USA TODAY research (Pie chart)
PHOTO, B/W, Kevin Frayer, AP

Load-Date: January 27, 2006


End of Document