HAND OVER 2 SUSPECTS, LIBYA TOLD … U.N. COUNCIL TAKES UNANIMOUS ACTION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 22, 1992, WEDNESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 599 words
Body


UNITED NATIONS - The Security Council on Tuesday unanimously adopted an anti-terrorism resolution calling on Libya to hand over two men charged with blowing up a Pan Am jet over Scotland in 1988.  The vote came after Libya told the 15-nation Security Council that the British and U.S. indictments against the men were baseless and that the matter should be submitted to international arbitration.  The vote was believed to be the first time the Security Council had taken sides in a legal dispute among member states. Although the resolution did not use the word ''extradition,'' that was clearly its intent.  The United States and Britain are the sponsors of the resolution, along with France, which seeks four Libyans in another airline bombing. The sponsors have said that if Libya defies the Security Council resolution, the council will consider imposing economic sanctions within two weeks.  Possible sanctions could include denying landing rights to the Libyan airline and prohibiting sales of aircraft and parts to the airline, diplomats said.  By securing the votes of all 15 council members, including its only Arab member, Morocco, the Western powers were successful in putting heavy pressure on Libya to comply despite doubts by several Third World states.  China, for one, said it believed mediation among all parties still was possible and warned that the resolution ''should not lead to any kind of drastic actions or tensions.'' The resolution that was approved Tuesday condemns the bombing in 1988 of Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, which killed 270 people, and the bombing in 1989 of a French airliner over North Africa, which killed 170 people.
The resolution cites U.S., British and French requests that Libyan suspects be turned over for trial and ''urges the Libyan government immediately to provide a full and effective response to those requests so as to contribute to the elimination of international terrorism.'' U.S. Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering, dismissing Libya's calls for arbitration of the dispute, said, ''The council sent the clearest possible signal that the international community will not tolerate such conduct.'' He said the Security Council would proceed ''in a step-by-step manner'' and hoped Libya would swiftly comply, presumably to avoid sanctions.  Before the vote, former Libyan Foreign Minister Jadullah Azuz Talhi told the council the charges were baseless.  Libya denies official involvement in the bombing of New York-bound Flight 103 but has said it may try the two men in Libya.  Talhi said the United States and Britain had denied Libya information for its inquiry into the bombing. He said Libya had appointed judges to look into the case and had volunteered to cooperate but had been thwarted by U.S. and British stubbornness.  Libya's minister for strategic industries, Jadallah Belgassem, told the council that the evidence and proof provided by the U.S. and British indictments ''are not serious; they are based on guesswork.'' He called on the United States and Britain to submit the dispute to arbitration, under the 1971 Montreal Convention on the safety of civil aviation.  The Security Council includes five permanent members with veto power: the United States, Britain, China, France and Russia. The 10 other current members are Austria, Belgium, Cape Verde, Ecuador, Hungary, India, Japan, Morocco, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.  Families of some of the Lockerbie victims charged that investigations into the possible involvement of Iran and Syria in the bombing were dropped for political reasons, leaving Libya as the sole accused.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document