Haphazard U.S. meddling increases threat of terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
January 2, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: VIEWPOINT;
Length: 794 words
Byline: By Thomas J. Lucente Jr. The Lima News
Body


Seems like there may be a Y2K bug after all. But this one is called terrorism. And we have President Clinton and his misguided foreign policy to thank.
First an Algerian man is arrested in Port Angeles, Wash. Then another Algerian man is arrested in Beecher Falls, Vt., along with a Canadian woman. Then the U.S. Postal Service issued a warning about mail bombs coming from Frankfurt, Germany.
Wrapped gifts have been banned from U.S. airports. The Pentagon was evacuated after a workman left an unidentified package in a drop ceiling. A jumbo jet was delayed an hour at Dulles International Airport in Washington after a napkin with a one-word note scrawled on it was found.
The biggest news has been the arrest of the two Algerians. This because suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden has threatened to strike U.S. citizens during the holiday season. He is believed to be hiding in Afghanistan with the protection of Afghanistan's Taliban government.
Ahmed Ressam, 32, was arrested Dec. 14 in Washington trying to smuggle more than 100 pounds of bombmaking materials, including nitroglycerin, into the United States from Canada. He had false Canadian identification papers.
Lucia Garofalo, 35, of Montreal was arrested Dec. 19 in Vermont trying to enter the country with false identification papers. Algerian national Bouabide Chamchi, 20, was also arrested. Garofalo had made at least one other trip to the United States in December.
Police agencies across the nation are warning Americans about possible terrorist activity. The State Department is telling Americans to remain vigilant at home and abroad.
Is the terrorist threat real?
Maybe.
It is hard to believe anything the Clinton administration says. This is a prime example of why we should have rejected the liberal mantra that lying under oath is no big deal if it is about a personal behavior. Without credibility, Clinton cannot be believed.
Add to that his administration's habit over the past seven years to label everything a crisis, and it is hard to believe anything coming out of Washington these days.
And in light of the shabbiness of the U.S. intelligence agencies of late, it is hard to accept that they are so wired into the terrorist networks that they know bin Laden is communicating with terrorists around the globe, as the State Department alleges.
The question we should be asking ourselves is why we have become targets for international terrorists. Liberals would have you believe the world is changing and terrorism is something that comes along with modern life.
That's a lie. Terrorism has existed since the dawn of the nation-states.
What should be kept in mind here is that a terrorist doesn't kill for joy. He kills for a reason. He is not a common criminal but a fighter for a cause. It's government that places the terrorist label on a group. When Clinton bombs an aspirin factory in Sudan, it's called a surgical strike to protect U.S. interests. If a group that is not a nation-state does the same thing, it's termed an illegal terrorist attack.
Middle East terrorist groups did not start attacking U.S. interests until the United States got itself involved in Middle Eastern affairs.
"What does the average American get from U.S. meddling in far-flung corners of the world that do not remotely affect U.S. vital interests?" asked Ivan Eland of the libertarian Cato Institute. "A much lighter wallet and an increasing uneasiness when traveling abroad or even when participating in large public celebrations at home."
Reform Party presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan has also asked the same question. "Have we not suffered enough atrocities . . . to awaken our elites to the reality that interventionism is the incubator of terrorism?"
I am by no means an isolationist. However, I have to wonder what U.S. interests we have in East Timor, the Balkans, Haiti and the list goes on and on.
Americans are getting killed because Clinton does not know how to use military force properly. Americans are getting killed because liberals of Clinton's ilk, such as Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, truly believe they can remold the world in a liberal image through the indiscriminate use of military force.
Meanwhile, the war against terrorism, much like the war against drugs, is being used as an excuse to further erode our civil rights.
It's time Americans said enough to haphazard interventionism, global hegemony and multinational peacekeeping missions in faraway lands. Let's put some logic back in our foreign policy. Unfortunately, this won't happen as long as Clinton occupies the White House and our foreign policy team is run by Samuel R. "Sandy" Berger and Albright.
Thomas J. Lucente Jr. is the editorial-page editor of The Lima (Ohio) News. His e-mail address is tlucente@bigfoot.com  

Load-Date: January 2, 2000


End of Document