Harrisburg Attorney Makes Case As Novelist; William Costopoulos Takes On Terrorism In 'Soul Witness' Details
LNP (Lancaster, PA)
July 26, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 LNP Media Group, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 12
Length: 654 words
Byline: Steve Kopfinger
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


LNP CORRESPONDENT
The name of the book is "Soul Witness," but don't expect a gentle protagonist in this disturbing - but engaging - work by author and lawyer William Costopoulos.
The attorney practices with the law firm of Costopoulos, Foster & Fields in Lemoyne, but lives on a mountaintop near Harrisburg.
That's kind of ironic, as Harrisburg is a prime target in this novel about an enigmatic "lone wolf" terrorist and the men and women who try to bring this person down.
The book, published by Xlibras and available at amazon.com ($19.99 in softcover), opens far from Harrisburg, when a horrific bombing killed 100 people during the Christmas shopping season at New York's famed Macy's department store.
It's a wrenching introduction to a tale of twists and turns which soon hits close to home.
Harrisburg is the next target, when a large portion of State Street is taken out by explosives. Throughout it all, a mysterious figure keeps showing up, silently observing the madness.
Given the recent shootings in Chattanooga, Tennessee, in which five military servicemen were shot by a lone wolf gunman, "Soul Witness" is chillingly timely.
Five books
"Terrorism has been coming to our homes," says Costopoulos, 71, a political science graduate of Dickinson College, a U.S. Army veteran and the author of five previous books, three works of fiction and two of nonfiction.
One, "Principal Suspect: The True Story of Jay Smith and the Main Line Murders," details the 1979 slaying of suburban Philadelphia teacher Susan Reinert and her two children.
Costopoulos defended Smith and after six years on death row Smith's conviction was overturned.
Another Costopoulos work, "Murder is the Charge," details the case of former York mayor Charlie Robertson, whom the attorney defended.
Robertson was once a 1960s police officer who was accused of involvement in the death of an African-American woman, Lillie Belle Allen, during a 1969 racially charged riot in York. Robertson was acquitted in 2002.
So, safe to say, Costopoulos is no stranger to controversy.
"My world has been in the pursuit of justice," Costopoulos says.
Cast of characters
Costopoulos has quite of cast of characters to ensure that justice is done in "Soul Witness." And their names are tailor-made for a movie script.
How can you not resist a character named Liam Spokane, square-jawed director of the FBI's counterterrorism division? Or Special Agent George Yoder (a name that sounds very much at home in Lancaster County). And there's the intriguing computer specialist Yvette Lewis.
Throw in a plane crash and ... well, to say more would spoil the story.
Costopoulos did not come from a literary family, though he has a brother who is a priest in the Greek Orthodox Church, a faith which takes pride in education. Otherwise, Costopoulos says, "There's no history!" when it comes to writing in his family.
But Costopoulos managed to knock off "Soul Witness" in less than six weeks.
"We started in early December and finished in January," he says.
And when he says "we," Costopoulos admits he was not alone in his effort to make "Soul Witness" as realistic as possible.
He gives a special shout-out to Nicholas Ressetar, a friend and law clerk who a is something of a computer expert. It's a field in which Costpoulos admits he's not up to speed.
"I had a blessing ... He is a goldmine on the Internet. (I would ask), 'Describe the Kremlin for me.' " Costopoulos says, making reference to another plot point.
Costopoulos, who has three daughters, Kara, Khristina and Callista, with his wife, Jill, dedicated "Soul Witness" to his two grandsons.
Somewhere between practicing law and raising a family, Costopoulos cranked out this book about terroristic acts that are happening more and more on American soil.
"The hard part was to make it work," he says about the book.
"Once I knew where I was going to go, it happened."
"Soul Witness"
By William Costopoulos
Xlibris
142 pages, $19.99 (paperback)

Graphic

 
William Costopoulos' New Book Is "Soul Witness."

Load-Date: July 28, 2015


End of Document