Harry Maguire: Brendan Rodgers says valuation not met for Leicester defender
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
July 18, 2019 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 1
Length: 317 words
Byline: Sidney Guerrero
Body


United have reportedly already bid £70million for the England worldwide but that was rejected by the Foxes.
However, United are said to have renewed their interest and Leicester boss Rodgers revealed on Tuesday that his club had turned down two offers for a player the Foxes are thought to value at £80million. If we lose him we'd have a number of targets we'd look at.
The England defender has been heavily linked with a big-money move to either Manchester United or City.
"He hasn't said a thing", Rodgers said. He really respects the club in terms of his contract and understands there's a valuation.
And Spector is hopeful young star Marcus Rashford can take the opportunity to step up and prove a top-class heir to the Belgium global. Although he would walk into Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side immediately as the best defender at the club and a stark improvement to United's current situation at the heart of defense, the expectation of playing for a club like United would only be magnified with being the most expensive defender in history.
Pakistan arrests US-wanted terror suspect in Mumbai attacks
Hence, they committed multiple offences of terrorism financing & money laundering under Anti Terrorism Act 1997. Trump's invitation to the Pakistani premier reflected the "importance of the relationship for both sides".
Maguire moved to Leicester from Hull City in a £17m deal in the 2017 summer transfer window after he impressed for the Tigers in their last season in the top flight. Harry is relaxed about it, we are, he's been absolutely brilliant.
Negotiations have been hard, however, with Leicester turning down repeated bids for a player they value at around £80 million [$99m].
"But he is a special guy". He's never once sulked - he's just got on with it. "You've seen that tonight with the 45 minutes he played".
"Players want stability. But he's shown his true commitment and I tip my hat to him".

Load-Date: July 18, 2019


End of Document