Hasan's crime stands out because it's so rare
USA TODAY
August 26, 2013 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 519 words
Body


Much of the debate during the court-martial of Army Maj. Nidal Hasan was about the government's decision to call the killing of 13 fellow soldiers "workplace violence" rather than terrorism -- a semantic argument of little consequence. The term was a legal tactic meant to strip Hasan of a potential defense.
With his conviction last week and the penalty phase set to start today, it's more important to ask whether his crimes are an anomaly or whether they signal a broader threat.
Hasan is by any measure a terrorist -- a homegrown Islamist fanatic who went on a killing spree at Fort Hood, Texas, in a self-proclaimed jihad against the U.S. wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Splice his attack with the Boston Marathon bombings, carried out by two immigrant brothers who had been in the U.S. for a decade, and it's easy to sense a rising threat from within. One of the bombers was married and had a baby. The "friendly and easygoing" younger brother was a student. They had seemed to assimilate. Until, of course, they used an al-Qaeda Internet recipe to build a bomb.
On closer scrutiny, Hasan and the Tsarnaev brothers appear to be an aberration. In the dozen years since 9/11, homegrown terrorists have been few. Their plots have been rare, their successes even more rare.
Numbers alone tell a big part of the story. Since 9/11, about 200 people have been indicted or have identified themselves as terrorists in the USA, according to Brian Jenkins, a RAND Corp. terrorism expert who studies and tracks their cases. They planned a total of 42 plots -- fewer than four per year. They've managed to bring just three to fruition, and the death toll after all these years stands at 17 -- all but four killed by Hasan in 2009.
That same year, another native U.S. citizen and Muslim convert, Carlos Bledsoe, killed one soldier and wounded another at an Army recruiting station in Arkansas. Despite the carnage in Boston, the Tsarnaev brothers killed just three.
There have been narrow escapes, notably the plot by Faisal Shahzad, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Pakistan, to bomb New York's Times Square. The device failed to detonate.
But for all al-Qaeda's recruiting efforts, there has not been much of a yield, considering that 2.8 million Muslims live in the U.S. There is "no army of sleepers, no vast jihadist underground," Jenkins says. In contrast, in the 1960s and '70s, the nation dealt with a parade of terrorist bombings from groups ranging from the far left Weather Underground to the Ku Klux Klan.
The message is that Hasan and his ilk are deluded, dangerous and despicable. But they are just one small segment of extremely violent criminals, and should be dealt with accordingly.
During his trial, Hasan made no secret of his desire to be sentenced to death, so he can be a martyr. Better to deny him his wish and lock him away for life in a tiny cell in a military prison, where the world will forget him but his jailers will never forget his crime.
Meanwhile, the rest of us should feel reassured that this era of terrorism has inspired loyalty not likely to be undone by a handful of fanatics, foreign or domestic. 

Graphic

 
photo Brigitte Woosley, AP

Load-Date: August 26, 2013


End of Document