Hatch links drugs, terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 21, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 557 words
Byline: By Lee DavidsonDeseret News Washington correspondent
Body


WASHINGTON -- Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch said Tuesday that the time has come to quit thinking of drug traffickers and terrorists as separate types of groups.
The Utah Republican said the two groups are increasingly connected.
"If we really want to win the war against terrorism, we need to continue and expand our commitment to cutting off all sources of terrorism financing, including drug trafficking," he told a hearing about the connection between drugs and terrorism.
"By doing so, we will not only cut off an important source of funding for terrorists, but we will reduce the amount of illegal drugs that poison our communities," Hatch said.
Of the 36 groups designated by the State Department as foreign terrorist organizations, 14 (or 39 percent) are connected to drug activities, testified Steven W. Casteel, assistant administrator for intelligence of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
He said they range from Middle Eastern terrorist groups such as Hezbollah and Hamas to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia, the Shining Path in Peru and the Abu Sayyaf Group in the Philippines.
Larry C. Johnson, a former analyst for the CIA and State Department now with Berg Associates, which specializes in money laundering probes, said communist countries had supported terrorism until they collapsed at the end of the Cold War, forcing many terrorist groups to turn to trafficking drugs to finance themselves.
"Prior to 1991, almost all active terrorist groups relied on nation states -- namely the Soviet Union, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Syria and Cuba -- for financing and materiel assistance. Few engaged in the production or distribution of illegal drugs," he said.
But once communism fell, "many terrorist groups faced the dilemma of ceasing operations or finding alternative sources of financing. Moving into the production and distribution of illegal narcotics was a natural shift for many of these groups," he said.
The hearing examined how terrorist groups around the world are now financed by drug money, and how U.S. law enforcement agencies are trying better to dovetail anti-drug and anti-terrorism efforts.
"The war on terror and the war on drugs are linked, with agencies throughout the United States and internationally working together as a force-multiplier in an effort to dismantle narco-terrorist organizations," Casteel said.
Hatch said the combined wars also hit close to home. For example, in San Diego last year, he said two Pakistanis and one American were charged with trying to exchange heroin, hashish and cash for four anti-aircraft missiles for Taliban and al-Qaida associates.
Hatch said that just last month, the FBI and DEA arrested 16 people for shipping heroin to the United States, and seeking to launder profits through Afghan- and Pakistani-owned business in America to send proceeds back to finance terrorists.
Hatch also said he worries about increased opium production in Afghanistan, despite the United States' defeat of the Taliban there.
"We have not succeeded in stabilizing Afghanistan," he said. "Our policy is to support President Karzai, but his Tajik-dominated government has alienated the majority of the Pashtun population, who live in most of the opium producing areas of Afghanistan," which he said fueled resistance by al Qaida and "an increase in opium."
E-mail: lee@desnews.com  

Load-Date: May 21, 2003


End of Document