Hatch revives plan for a mock city at Dugway
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 23, 1998, Thursday


Copyright 1998 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 596 words
Byline: By Lee Davidson Deseret News Washington correspondent
Body


WASHINGTON -- Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, is reviving his push to build a "mock city" in Utah where the military and police can train to handle terrorist attacks of germ and chemical arms.
He said Wednesday he's upset that federal officials have been looking instead at scattering parts of such training outside of Utah -- in Alabama and New Mexico.
But he obtained a promise during a Senate hearing from FBI Director Louis J. Freeh that the administration will look anew at using Utah's Rhode Island-size Dugway Proving Ground as a possible all-inclusive training site.
Hatch has long said he envisions a mock city there -- complete with a working subway, office buildings and homes but no residents -- where officials nationwide can be brought to train to handle chemical and biological attacks by terrorists.
He inserted into an anti-terrorism law a few years ago instructions to the administration to study building such a facility. While it didn't order a specific site, Hatch said at the time he couldn't imagine it anywhere but Dugway.
But Freeh and Attorney Gen- eral Janet Reno told a hearing by the Senate Judiciary and Intelligence committees Wednesday that a study on such a facility is only in its earliest stages.
Meanwhile, the administration has located most ongoing anti-terrorism training at Fort McClellan, Ala., and at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology -- with some oversight operations at Quantico, Va.
Hatch told them, "I am surprised to learn that the FBI until mid-March had not even planned to include Dugway Proving Ground in its site development plan" for a mock city facility.
"Dugway, incidentally, is the nation's most advanced CB (chemical-biological) test and evaluation center. It's the only place in the United States where every function required in CBD (chemical-biological defense) and any future FBI training plan can be carried out on a single-site basis."
Hatch added, "I think you need to acquaint yourself in finite detail with the infrastructure at Dugway. I don't know anywhere else where you could do what was strived (for) in that bill."
Freeh responded, "I'll look into it, senator."
Such a training center could become lucrative as the Senate is calling for stepped-up efforts against what it sees as a growing chemical and biological threat by terrorists and rogue nations.
Freeh said at the hearing Wednesday that his agency investigated 114 cases nationally last year of possible chemical or germ warfare terrorism. He said 80 percent were hoaxes, but the rest were cases of at least attempted or planned use of such weapons.
The two committees held a closed-door session Tuesday for a secret report on the likelihood of such attacks by terrorist groups and foreign nations.
While exact numbers were not made public, Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., said Wednesday, "I was surprised at the high likelihood that it would happen sometime in the next 10 years."
Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., said that closed session also "painted a sobering picture of growing proliferation networks, aggressive national CBW (chemical-biological warfare) development programs, and increasing levels of violence and lethality associated with terrorism."
Reno said Wednesday that most state and local governments lack the proper equipment and training for the necessary first response to such attacks. The administration has a plan to train officials from 120 cities over the next five years.
Reno and Freeh said federal and local officials have been coordinating efforts much better in recent years, which has helped detect and deter many possible cases of terrorism.

Load-Date: April 23, 1998


End of Document