Hate group engaging in 'economic terrorism,' Dayton mayor says
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 11, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 Dayton Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 447 words
Byline: Cornelius Frolik, STAFF WRITER
Body


Dayton Commission approved a new ordinance that makes it illegal to wear masks while committing a crime or engaging in intimidation or behaviors that reasonably would cause others to be afraid.
The new city ordinance was crafted in large part to try to discourage a KKK-affiliated hate group from holding another rally in downtown later this year.
 The hate group is trying to engage in "economic terrorism" by causing the city to spend massive amounts to provide security during the proposed rally to ensure violence does not break out, said Dayton Mayor Nan Whaley.
 "Look, we are going to do everything we can to encourage them not to come," Whaley said.
 The hate group's May 2019 rally in downtown was a huge safety issue, mostly because 75 people brought and carried around assault weapons, Whaley said.
 The anti-mask ordinance will make people show their faces, which will help law enforcement if they need to identify safety threats, officials said.
 At last year's rally, members of the hate group wore masks and bandanas to cover their faces.
 There are, and should be, social and employment repercussions for people who are identified as taking part in extreme hate group demonstrations, Whaley said.
 The new city law prohibits wearing a mask while breaking the law or taking part in threatening behavior, said Martin Gehres, assistant city attorney.
 Some violations of the anti-mask law are a first-degree misdemeanor, punishable up to 180 days in jail and a $1,000 fine.
 The ordinance says that mask-wearing allows people to commit crimes without identification, increasing the likelihood that crime will occur.
 The legislation also says masks were used to provide anonymity to help terrorize, intimidate and harass minority community members.
 The ordinance reads:
 "(A) No person shall wear a mask, hood, bandana, scarf, helmet, device, or other material which hides, covers, or obstructs his or her face with the purpose to conceal his or her identity while purposely intimidating, threatening, or causing reasonable apprehension or fear in another while upon any public right-of-way or public property or upon the private property of another without the permission of the owner or occupier of the property.
 (B) No person shall wear a mask, hood, bandana, scarf, helmet, device, or other material which hides, covers, or obstructs his or her face with the purpose to conceal his or her identity while violating any provision of Title 29 of the Ohio Revised Code or Title 13 of this Revised Code of General Ordinances while upon any public right-of-way or public property or upon the private property of another without the permission of the owner or occupier of the property."

Load-Date: March 12, 2020


End of Document