HATE CRIMES: TERRORISM IN AMERICA
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 14, 1989, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 849 words
Byline: J. David Coldren
Body


Terrorism. The word calls up images of guerrilla warfare, airplane hijackings and kidnappings of international diplomats. But another form of terrorism is being carried out with alarming frequency in Illinois and across the country.  It's called hate crime.  This brand of domestic terrorism ranges from racial or religious taunts to ''gay-bashing'' to murder. It can be committed by a member of an outlaw paramilitary group or by the teen-ager down the street. It occurs in the rural South, in the urban North, in factories, in universities - wherever prejudice is found.  Like the most egregious international terrorism, it has as its target not just the individual whose person or property is threatened or harmed, but an entire community. And, like other forms of terrorism, it is frequently committed by people who believe firmly in their ''cause,'' for whom the statutory illegality of their actions is not a deterrent.  According to the best data available, hate crime is on the rise. During the past two years, 160 U.S. colleges have reported incidents aimed at black, Hispanic, Asian and homosexual students and faculty, according to the National Institute Against Prejudice and Violence.  The Chicago Commission on Human Relations reports that the number of attacks against Asians in Chicago and Jews in the suburbs increased sharply last year, although blacks continued to be the most common targets - victimized in almost half the reported incidents in the Chicago area. The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith reports that anti-Semitic incidents nationwide have risen in the past two years, after a six-year decline.
And the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force reports a 42 percent increase in anti-gay harassments and assaults between 1986 and 1987. In fact, a recent study by the National Institute of Justice concluded that ''homosexuals are probably the most frequent victims'' of hate violence.  Most hate crime is more than a swastika on a wall or a broken window - it's violent. A recent study found that more than half the incidents identified by the Boston police as motivated by bigotry were classified as physical assaults.  This is National Victim Rights Week, a time for each of us to take a careful look at how we treat victims of crime. We must realize that victims of hate crimes - both individuals and their communitie s - can feel isolated and neglected as a result of their experiences. They need to be assured that they have the support of the criminal justice system - and of the larger community, which must take an active, unequivocal stance against such violence. Such assurance defuses mistrust and anger and encourages members of the community to report future incidents.  Direct services to victims can help provide this assurance. The Cook County state's attorney's office has established a 24-hour hate crimes hot line and is developing training programs for prosecutors on hate crimes. And the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority is funding a reporting and support services program, operated by Horizons Community Services, for victims of anti-gay violence in Chicago.  Direct services such as these are important, and more are needed in all parts of the state. But direct services are not enough. We need to work harder to prevent hate crimes. And when they do occur, we must arrest, prosecute and punish those who commit them.  Illinois is one of 20 states with specific hate crime laws covering both institutional vandalism and ethnic intimidation and harassment. These laws increase the penalties for such crimes as assault and criminal damage to property if they are found to be motivated by race, color, religion or national origin. Criminal justice officials must be trained to use these laws aggressively against the perpetrators of hate crimes. Treating hate crimes as the serious offenses they are will send a strong message - both to the offenders and to the victims - that such behavior is not tolerated in our society.  It is impossible to fight hate crime without information on where it is occurring and how often. Few states collect comprehensive data on hate crimes.  In 1987, Illinois passed a law requiring the State Police to gather hate crime statistics, but data collection has not yet begun because of lack of funds.  Legislation pending in Congress would require the collection of national data on hate crimes. Clearly, such data collection is vital, and must begin as quickly as possible.  The fight against hate crime by government and private agencies is vital.  But the most important battle against hate crime must be fought by citizens who refuse to tolerate it - in their neighborhoods, in their schools, in their businesses and in their homes. By speaking and acting against hate crime, we are defending not just its individual victims or even specific social groups - we are defending ourselves. Hate crime strikes at the core values of our society: freedom and equality. That makes all of us its victims.  J. David Coldren is executive director of the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority, Chicago.

Load-Date: October 22, 1993


End of Document