Hazard suits obtained for Mount Joy police
Intelligencer Journal (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
February 21, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: B; Pg. 5
Length: 305 words
Byline: Dean Lee Evans, Correspondent
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Protective suits for Mount Joy police officers responding to biological and chemical hazards will become standard equipment in patrol cars, acting police Chief John O'Connell told council members Feb. 5.
O'Connell said, "We have received four suits from (Lancaster) county under the South Central Pennsylvania Counter Terrorism Task Force. Each of the (borough's) four cruisers will have a bio-suit."
He said borough Officer Jose Ortiz will be the first from the department to undergo training with the new suit.
O'Connell said once Ortiz is trained, he will train another officer. "It is a train to trainer plan."
O'Connell did not release details on the capabilities of the new suits or their cost.
According to Web sites specializing in bio-suits, the gear worn by first responders during emergencies differs from basic model bio-suits in their ability to resist and filter various biological and chemical hazards during terrorist or other catastrophic incidents.
The suits were purchased by county officials for all police departments in Lancaster County through the regional task force, O'Connell said.
The South Central Pennsylvania Counter Terrorism Task Force was founded in 1997 to address the regional needs of local law enforcement agencies in Adams, Cumberland, Dauphin, Franklin, Lebanon, Perry, York and Lancaster counties related to terrorism issues.
O'Connell also told council Detective Joseph Goody has 60 open cases, including nine new cases opened in January. Goody closed two cases in January and has 33 cold files.
O'Connell said cases handled by Goody include felony assaults, criminal mischief incidents, fraud, thefts, homicides and sex cases.
"If an officer cannot follow up a case within two shifts, it is turned over to the detective who has more time to conduct interviews and further investigation," O'Connell said.

Load-Date: February 21, 2007


End of Document