HBO's 'Dirty War' creates a chilling terrorism scenario
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
January 24, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. C7
Length: 666 words
Byline: Vince Horiuchi , TELEVISION
Body


It takes just a brisk 90 minutes for the new HBO film, "Dirty War," to illustrate what would happen if terrorists detonated a homemade nuclear bomb in the middle of London.
In this chilling film, originally made for Britain's BBC, the results are unsettling. Emergency services would be ill-prepared, undermanned and low on resources. Politics would interfere with the process of helping people, and confusion would reign.
"Dirty War," which premieres tonight at 10 p.m. on HBO, was made by director Dan Percival, who made another television movie based on a what-if scenario, the outbreak of a bioterrorist act in FX's "Smallpox."
While that movie was only moderately convincing as it tried to pass itself off as a documentary about a fictional attack of a smallpox strain, "Dirty War" is a drama, but one that feels more authentic.
"Dirty War" begins with a disaster drill involving some of London's firefighters and paramedics. But they learn that hazardous materials workers' suits are poorly made and their training is inadequate. Despite that, the city's politicians cover up the inadequacies and announce that London is prepared for any disaster.
Meanwhile, members of an extremist Muslim cell are hiding in the city and building a "dirty bomb," a homemade explosive containing radioactive powder.
Detectives from Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist unit receive information about the group and attempt to track it down.
But a van of explosives detonates in the middle of the city's financial district, instantly killing more than 300 and spreading radioactive particles throughout London in the wind.
As thousands of surviving victims try to flee, police and soldiers fight to contain the area and keep infected victims from running out and contaminating others.
"Dirty War" was made in a collaboration between BBC Films and BBC's news division, Current Affairs. In the beginning, the producers state that the film was based on factual research. It feels like it, too. The dangers are apparent, the resulting confusion is genuine and the anxiety is real.
The film is slow and a bit perplexing when it starts, but it doesn't take long for your heart to sense that this could happen anywhere.
Thanks heavens it's only a movie -- and a well-made one, too -- but you might wonder if what happens in "Dirty War" is really that far-fetched.
Johnny's Legacy: Some of my earliest memories of watching television were of listening in on Johnny Carson's easy-going banter with celebrities. What I remember is that "The Tonight Show" was as inviting as television got.
Watching his show was like a visit with an old friend every night at 10:30. Thanks to his down-home, charm (Carson was born in Iowa and went to college in Nebraska), there was a sense of familiarity and warmth, something that's been lost on "The Tonight Show" since Carson left in 1992.
Carson died Sunday of emphysema at the age of 79. Now that he's passed on, it's hard not to think about how he shaped television for millions of viewers each night for 30 years. He had a way with comedy that was neither forced or abrasive. His interview style was comfortable not grating. Jay Leno could have learned a thing or two from Carson.
As it stands now in late night, David Letterman's wry humor comes the closest to what Carson brought each night. It's a shame NBC never had the foresight to name one Midwesterner (Letterman's from Indiana) to replace another.
An amateur magician, ventriloquist and Lincoln, Neb., announcer, it turns out that Carson's greatest trick was entertaining America night after night for three decades. I don't know how he did it, but the illusion was great.
-----
Television columnist Vince Horiuchi appears Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. He can be reached at vince@sltrib.com.  
Channeling
Extreme Makeover: Home Edition: KTVX Channel 4, tonight, 7. Oops. Carpenter Ty Pennington realizes a major part of the renovation was done in the wrong room.
BYU Basketball: KPNZ Channel 24, tonight, 8. Brigham Young University vs. New Mexico.

Load-Date: January 24, 2005


End of Document