HE'LL BE CAUGHT< U.S. 'WAY OF BOMBING'< TERRORISM IN ATLANTA SPARKS ANGER, WORRY AND< FEAR AS FBI CONTINUES SEARCH FOR SUSPECT
 Philadelphia Daily News
JULY 29, 1996 Monday PM EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 03
Length: 809 words
Byline: Shaun D. Mullen, Daily News Staff Writer
Body


So much fear. So few answers.
For the first time in their lives, many Americans today feel a vulnerability once unthinkable for the richest and most powerful country on earth.
The World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings. The horror of TWA Flight 800, and nine days later the Saturday-morning bomb blast in Atlanta's Centennial Olympic Park that left two people dead, 111 injured and a nation angry, bewildered and searching for answers.
Why us? Why now? Why at our Olympics?
The FBI said it had "very good leads" in the hunt for the bomber, including eyewitness accounts enabling it to draw composite sketches of possible suspects.
Like the massive April 1995 blast at the Oklahoma City federal building, the Atlanta bombing has all the signs of being home-grown - an element that deepens puzzlement and anger over the rise of domestic terrorism.
This bomb was no sophisticated device. None of the "usual suspects," responsible for terrorism once confined to places like Northern Ireland and Israel appear to have been involved.
Voice experts have already told investigators that the voice of the person who called 911 from a pay phone near the park was that of a white American male. The caller had warned a bomb would go off there within 30 minutes.
The primitive homemade device that exploded only 13 minutes later had been left in a green knapsack at the base of a sound-and-light tower in the park, which as the only venue in the downtown Olympic complex open to the general public was the weakest link in the massive security chain thrown around the games.
The bomb consisted of three plumbing pipes wrapped with wire, filled with nails and screws and stuffed into the kind of container used to freeze leftover food. The detonator probably was gunpowder.
It is, as one investigator put it, "the American way of bombing." And indeed some 60 percent of domestic bombs are of similar construction.
This one was so crude that one of the three pipes was recovered intact, undamaged by an explosion widely described as being massive, but in fact rather puny, if deadly.
The toll could have been considerably higher.
When Georgia Bureau of Investigation Agent Tom Davis spotted the knapsack about 1 a.m. Saturday, he quickly called for assistance and began clearing the area of revelers, some of them drunk, who were attending a late-night rock concert in the packed park.
Davis and fellow agents, unaware of the telephoned warning, had cleared an area about 50 feet around the knapsack when the bomb detonated, spraying deadly shrapnel more than 100 yards in every direction.
Alice S. Hawthorne, a 44-year-old mother of two daughters from Albany, Ga., was standing about 40 yards away. She died later at a hospital. Melih Uzunol, 40, a Turkish television cameraman with a history of coronary problems, died of a heart attack while rushing to the scene and is being considered a murder victim by the FBI.
Among the 111 people injured was one of Hawthorne's daughters, 14-year-old Fallon Stubbs. Of the people still hospitalized, two were in serious condition.
President Clinton has summoned congressional leaders to the White House today to seek tougher measures against terrorism, including making it easier to wiretap telephones and a requirement for putting chemical markers in explosives to help track down bomb-makers.
"As Americans, we can and must join together to defeat terrorism wherever it strikes and whoever practices it," the president said in a speech yesterday.
The explosion heightened a growing feeling that the United States has become as vulnerable to terrorism as anywhere else.
"There's a deep sense of unease in America today, and this is just going to exacerbate that," said terrorism expert Neil Livingstone.
Hawthorne's other daughter spoke for millions.
"I'd just like to know why somebody had to be really angry at something or somebody," Kendra Hawthorne said.
In Atlanta, the city that likes to call itself Too Busy to Hate, flags were lowered to half-staff, and there were moments of silence before competition at Olympic venues resumed on Saturday. But the athletes themselves didn't seem to miss a beat once the decision was made that the games were to continue.
And while many Americans are frightened, many are adamant that they will not let terrorists rule their lives. Crowds Saturday and yesterday at Olympic sites were huge.
Meanwhile, Centennial Park will reopen tomorrow morning with additional security measures.
FBI Special Agent David Tubbs said sketches of possible suspects were being prepared, but would not be released until the search had been narrowed down.
"Experienced investigators are diligently working on the case, and through this cooperative effort we are confident that we will solve this horrible crime," Tubbs said.
Healing the national psyche may be more difficult.
Daily News wire services contributed to this report.

Notes

TERROR AT THE OLYMPICS

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO (2)
1. Aria Johnston is checked yesterday by security personnel at entrance to Georgia Dome in Atlanta (ASSOCIATED PRESS)
2. The Olympic flag flies at half-staff yesterday at Olympic Stadium for the two who died in Saturday's blast (Page 1)

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document