HEADLINERS;
Terrorists Are Indicted -- Now What?
The New York Times
November 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 317 words
Byline: BY CARLYLE C. DOUGLAS

BY CARLYLE C. DOUGLAS
Body


AFTER a three-year investigation including a tedious search of every square inch of Scotland within 16 miles of the crash site of Pan Am Flight 103, authorities in Washington announced last week that they had confirmed what they suspected all along about one of the most horrendous acts of terrorism in recent years: the Libyan Government was responsible for planting the bomb that killed 270 people including 189 Americans. Furthermore, officials suggested, the United States just might do something about it.
Specifically, officials said, they were indicting two men, Ali Basset al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, who were identified as officials of Libyan Arab Airlines and Libyan agents. The two were accused of concealing explosives in a radio-cassette recorder in a suitcase aboard Flight 103, which exploded above Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, killing all 259 people on the plane and 11 people on the ground. "This was a Libyan Government operation from start to finish," said a State Department spokesman. The chances of extraditing the two men were deemed slim, but officials alluded to other options.
A State Department "white paper" cited President Reagan's 1986 air strike on Libya, an attack launched in retaliation for the bombing of a German night club frequented by American Army personnel. The paper noted pointedly that the airstrike "did not end Tripoli's support of terrorism." In Britain, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said: "This was a fiendish act of wickedness. It cannot be passed over or ignored."
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, used similar language and said that Washington's next step would not be taken in haste, but that all options were open. He added that President Bush was consulting his counterparts in Britain and France about the possibility of mounting a "cooperative international response to this latest terrorist atrocity by Qaddafi's Government."

Graphic

 
Photo: A wrecked section of Pam Am Flight 103, which crashed in Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988. (Reuters)

Load-Date: November 17, 1991


End of Document