Head of city's FBI office discusses his work
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 16, 2011 Monday
CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A02
Length: 754 words
Byline: By Nathan Gorenstein

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The man who runs the FBI's Philadelphia office, overseeing about 700 employees, is George Venizelos, 51. He joined the agency in 1991, after earning an accounting degree and spending five years with the Drug Enforcement Administration. He came here from New York, where he was most recently special agent in charge of the administrative division; he served as acting assistant director of the New York office in 2010. He was in charge when the FBI solved the Times Square attempted bombing.Question: So, what's the difference between crime in New York City and crime in Philadelphia?
Venizelos: New York is the main terrorist target in this country, so obviously terrorism in New York is huge. Work on terrorism is on everybody's mind, every day, every second, in New York. Philadelphia is located between New York and Washington, so strategically there is importance to its location.
But also Philadelphia has its other issues. There is a violent-crime issue. A local street-gang issue. We're working very closely with the Philadelphia Police Department. New York has that, but here it's more of a priority. We also go to Camden.
We have more agents working violent crimes here than New York has.
Q: How much of the local investigative priorities are set by the Philadelphia office, versus by the FBI headquarters in Washington?
Venizelos: It's a mix of national priorities and the local priorities, the local crime problems. You have to tailor your resources. . . . Terrorism is always going to be the No. 1 priority, because we are not just investigating, but we are trying to prevent the next terrorist attack. 
Q: What happens now that Osama bin Laden is dead?
Venizelos: Terrorism has not gone away. His death was on the one-year anniversary of the Times Square [attempted] bombing, and no one is talking about that. It was May 1, that initially failed bombing, the car in Times Square. . . . That was a major terrorist attack in New York City, and that would have been devastating, that attack, psychologically and with the loss of life. And it's only a year ago.
Philadelphia is a city with a lot of history, and it can be a target for someone who feels that New York is too hot of a target and Washington is too hard of a target.
Q: You started your career as an accountant. Why accounting?
Venizelos: My purpose was to make myself more competitive to get into the FBI. It's a very difficult job to obtain. On average, there are between 40,000 and 60,000 applications a year, and we're lucky if we hire, on a good year, 1,000 agents. Accounting is one of the tracks . . . to get into the FBI.
Q: That came in handy during the 1990s, when you were posted to Harrisburg and ran a major investigation into Rite Aid. Was that health-care fraud?
Venizelos: It was more of a stock-fraud case. They gave false statements on their financial statements to keep their stock price up. It was actually a feather in Philadelphia's cap, and Harrisburg's cap. A lot of those cases were worked out of New York City. With my accounting background, I was able to convince the Department of Justice that we can work this case in Philadelphia, and out of the Harrisburg office. . . . Unfortunately, I got transferred at the very end. (In 2003, former Rite Aid Corp. chief executive officer Martin L. Grass pleaded guilty to conspiracy in a billion-dollar accounting scandal.)
Q: In a recent criminal case against a Philadelphia police inspector, some jurors complained that it appeared the FBI entrapped him. Can you talk about that? (Daniel Castro was convicted of lying to the FBI and may be retried. He was acquitted of extortion.)
Venizelos: It can be frustrating at times because in ongoing cases, we really can't comment. We present the evidence, and with the jury system, they decide if the evidence is good enough to convict. The one frustrating part is that we really shouldn't comment, but they can, and they can start shaping public opinion, So that's frustrating. So, hopefully, we'll get our day again.
Q: How is cooperation with the Philadelphia police, given the arrests and convictions of city officers stemming from FBI corruption investigations?
Venizelos: Outstanding. We have four [city] detectives working on the [FBI] police-corruption squad, and we work hand-in-hand with them. This commissioner [Charles H. Ramsey] is phenomenal. The best commissioner I've ever worked with. The city is fortunate that he is staying. We have a good team here.
Contact staff writer Nathan Gorenstein at 215-854-2797 or ngorenstein@phillynews.com.

Graphic

 
DAVID SWANSON / Staff Photographer

Load-Date: May 16, 2011


End of Document