Health care law not atop list of concerns; Terrorism, jobs and economy priorities for voters, poll says.; HEALTH CARE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 1, 2016 Monday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A4
Length: 331 words
Byline: ByNoam N.Levey
Body


WASHINGTON - Although President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act continues to animate political debate in Washington and on the campaign trail, Americans are more concerned with basic health care issues such as the cost of their health insurance, a new national poll shows.
The health care law ranked eighth among issues voters identified as most likely to be extremely important to their vote for president this year, with 23 percent identifying the 2010 legislation.
Concern about how much people were paying personally for health care and health insurance tied for third, with 28 percent of voters saying the issue would be very important.
The top two issues were terrorism, cited by 38 percent of voters, and the economy and jobs, picked by 34 percent, according to the survey by the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation.
The findings underscore a transition underway in the national health care debate, nearly six years after the Affordable Care Act was enacted.
While the public remains deeply divided over the law, particularly along partisan lines, Americans increasingly point to pocketbook concerns including drug prices and surprise medical bills as issues they want elected officials to tackle.
At the same time, Americans also remain generally satisfied with their own health insurance and medical care, a sentiment illustrated again by the latest Kaiser poll.
These complex public sentiments are helping drive contrasting health care platforms from the 2016 presidential candidates.
The Republican contenders all pledge to repeal the health care law, amid vows to replace it with something that will further reduce costs.
Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders is advocating an even more sweeping proposal that would move all Americans into a single government-run health insurance plan that he says would lower their premiums.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Sanders' rival for the Democratic nomination, has offered a more incremental platform that would build on the current law.

Load-Date: February 1, 2016


End of Document