Health expert fears backlash to foreign aid cut; 
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
March 10, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 Lincoln Journal Star All Rights Reserved
Section: NEBRASKA; Pg. B3
Length: 583 words
Byline: MARK ANDERSEN
Body


It's hard enough to draw a direct line between the congressional budget showdown and its significance to Nebraskans.
But global health expert Laurie Garrett draws lines connecting the two through AIDS-plagued sub-Saharan Africa.
The threat from global terrorism could grow from a tea party campaign pledge to cut $100 billion from the federal budget, Garrett said.
She fears that pledge, coupled with the political expediency of bypassing controversial cuts to big programs like Social Security and Medicare, could cause the ax to fall heavily on foreign aid.
Cuts to the U.S. investment in global health, she said, won't greatly dent the federal deficit, but they could sour a decade of tremendous growth in global health spending, turning something good into a fountain of outrage.
Since 2002, and led by President George Bush, she said, the United States has vastly increased foreign spending to confront AIDS, malaria and to improve children's health.
"And now the whole thing is about fall to pieces because of Congress," Garrett said in an interview before her appearance as the E.N. Thompson Forum on World Issues speaker in Lincoln on Wednesday night.
She is a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York City and a Pulitzer Prize-winning health journalist.
In 2000, global sympathy coalesced around the plight of Africans dying from AIDS, a disease that finally had been tamed through frequent medication in the developed world.
In Africa, the disease was creating a continent of orphans, Garrett said. When the mother dies, she said, the father leaves.
"I've been in villages where I've been surrounded by children raising children," Garrett said.
After 2002, billions in corporate and public dollars began pouring into the global AIDS effort. At first, it swamped existing health programs that served other needs, drawing away doctors who saw they could earn more money dispensing medicine that brought people back from the edge of death.
In some cases, the chaos increased death rates among women and children, setting rival agencies at cross purposes.
That resulted in the Global Health Initiative, she said, a U.S.-led effort to coordinate various health and assistance programs.
It also recognized that people coming for AIDS medication, Garrett said, were those also at risk for tuberculosis. And women coming for those treatments often carried children who could benefit from pediatric medicine.
Today, Garrett said, "four million people are alive because of the efforts of American taxpayers."
The global recession of 2008, she said, shifted the burden more heavily to the United States.
If financial assistance for AIDS medications is withdrawn, she said, those people in Africa will die immediately.
"We will get blamed," she said. "The rage will be huge."
And yet, new leadership in the U.S. House, Garrett said, has moved from skepticism of foreign assistance to open hostility.
Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida, she said, recently criticized the State Department for misplaced priorities, for investing in global health and climate change over counter-terrorism.
Such Senate Republicans as Lindsay Graham, meanwhile, continue to hold that supporting global health deters terrorism, she said.
"Terrorism thrives where there is hunger and disease."
Real progress against AIDS and malaria requires commitment, realistic goals and sophisticated monitoring, Garrett said.
"Things don't happen overnight."
Reach Mark Andersen at 402-473-7238 or mandersen@journalstar.com

Load-Date: March 10, 2011


End of Document