HEALTH NOTES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 19, 2005 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: HEALTHY & FIT; Pg. H2
Length: 396 words
Byline: FROM NEWS SERVICES
Body


Hepatitis C link to liver cancer is traced
Scientists believe they may have identified the chemical link between hepatitis C and liver cancer. They report that the hepatitis C virus may contain a protein that interferes with a liver cell's mechanism for stopping mutations.
"By knocking out this 'tumor suppresser' and promoting the proliferation of liver cells, this viral protein is setting up the liver for cancer," said Dr. Stanley M. Lemon of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston.
The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says about 85 percent of liver cancer cases in the United States occur in people infected by the hepatitis C virus. Globally, 200 million people suffer from chronic hepatitis C, which can persist in the body for decades after an initial infection.
Study should reassure heart surgery patients
Research at Johns Hopkins University shows that bypass heart surgery that requires a heart pump won't make you stupid. 
Doctors had feared that time on the pump resulted in lower cognitive function -- such as reasoning and remembering -- after the surgery. However, new data suggest that any setbacks are temporary, and full function returns within months.
Cardiopulmonary artery bypass grafting surgery is effective for treating angina and reducing the risk of a heart attack, but it has been feared to cause "pump-related" damage to the cerebral cortex, according to Dr. Guy M. McKhann, professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
The pump is essential to the surgery to keep blood flowing while the heart is turned off.
The study was conducted from 1997 to 2003. At the start of the study, subjects who had had the surgery posted overall lower performance on tests than the heart-healthy group. But by three to 12 months there were no differences, researchers said.
Car crashes worldwide take a heavy toll
Researchers say that traffic accidents worldwide kill nearly 400 times more people than terrorism does.
Researchers compared the number of deaths from international terrorism and car crashes in the 29 member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development between 1994 and 2003.
The organization found that terrorism accounted for 3,064 deaths, while traffic accidents totaled about 390 times more deaths.
The findings were reported in the most recent edition of Injury Prevention.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC - How hepatitis C spreads 

Load-Date: December 19, 2005


End of Document