Hearings may raise interest in terrorism.  More Americans may be concerned, some officials say
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 25, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 541 words
Byline: PAUL RICHTER, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON - The details may not have been altogether new. But here they were, all in one place, packaged under television lights and being dissected by the United States' highest officialdom in front of an American public that has worked up a new appetite for information on the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
For many Americans, hearings this week told for the first time of faulty intelligence, of miscues and of events beyond the government's control. They heard prominent people suggest that somebody had dropped the ball in the war on terrorism.
And, for the first time in 2 1/2 years, it may have begun sinking in, experts said Wednesday.
The hearings "could really raise Americans' concern, and I think it should," said Graham Allison, a former top CIA official.
Over two days, a parade of Cabinet secretaries, intelligence chiefs and other officials revealed what they saw and thought as the country veered toward a catastrophe that transformed the nation's view of its primary national security threat.
Americans heard them calmly but passionately explaining their thinking and defending their decisions. Their testimony was often persuasive but may have provided little comfort about what happened in 2001, or on the government's future capabilities.
A senior Democratic congressional aide said the commission members came across as "restrained … and this will help their credibility" when they put out their final report.
While some experts said they believed that though some of the information has been out before, its presentation in this setting could reshape Americans' opinions of how 9/11 was handled. Interest has been heightened by controversy over the course of the Iraq war and a critical new book by Richard Clarke, the former White House counterterrorism adviser. Clarke, who also worked for three previous presidential administrations, accuses Bush of neglecting the war on terrorism.
Patrick Clawson, deputy director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, said the hearings could have a harmful effect because of the way that Clarke had attacked Bush administration officials.
"This is going to reinforce the perception that civil servants are not really that, but are masking an agenda," said Clawson.
Although the hearings had flashes of partisanship, many observers thought they were less strident than they could have been, especially in an election year.
But former CIA official Allison faulted the commission and its witnesses for not acknowledging how serious the failings of government had actually been.
Allison said that while he supports the administration's aggressive approach to counter terrorism in the Middle East, "the mantra here was 'no mistakes were made. … There was nothing else we could do.'"
In testimony Tuesday, former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and former Defense Secretary William Cohen, both of the Clinton administration, explained how they considered a stronger military response to repeated attacks by al-Qaida but rejected it for fear that it would not have support at home or abroad.
Top Bush administration officials explained how they wanted to do more than the Clinton team's "pinprick" cruise missile barrages - but were still in a policy review when the Sept. 11 attacks took place.

Load-Date: March 26, 2004


End of Document