Hearings only will provide fuel for the bigots
Chicago Daily Herald
March 9, 2011 Wednesday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 604 words
Body


Unlike Moses Herzog, the eponymous character of Saul Bellow's novel "Herzog," I do not feverishly compose mad letters to public figures and sinister government agencies (the IRS, for instance). But I often yell back at the TV set. This happened Sunday when Candy Crowley on CNN asked Rep. Peter King what his hearings into Muslim radicalism are really about. "Good luck, Candy," I yelled, having asked the same question of King's staff just the day before. Here, I am sure, is the answer: The hearings are about Pete King.
King is the chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. On Thursday, he will inaugurate hearings into something or other. Their official title is "The Extent of Radicalization in the American Muslim Community and That Community's Response." The last part — "That Community's Response" — is already clear when it comes to King. The Muslim-American community has taken umbrage and has demonstrated its outrage.
It happens to be an awkward fact that just last month, a University of North Carolina terrorism expert, Charles Kurzman, reported a drop in attempted or actual terrorist activity by American Muslims — 47 perpetrators and suspects in 2009, 20 in 2010. This does not mean that there is no threat, but, when measured against ordinary violent crime, it is slight. In fact, the threat from non-Muslims is much greater, encompassing not only your run-of-the-mill murderers but about 20 domestic terrorist plots, including one where a plane was flown into an IRS building in Austin, Texas. Herzog merely wrote imaginary letters.
King is setting a dangerous precedent. The government has no business examining any peaceful religious group because a handful of adherents have broken the law. If it did, it would be past time to look into the Roman Catholic Church, which clearly was engaged in concealing the sex crimes of priests and others. The organization BishopAccountability.org reports that "perhaps more than 100,000 children" have been sexually abused since 1950 by Catholic clergymen of one sort or another. Nearly 6,000 priests have been accused of abuse in that period — 5.3 percent of the total.
Congress, though, has not investigated the church and you can bet your 401(k) it will not — even though there is abundant evidence of a top-down conspiracy to protect miscreants. The church, though, is politically powerful and, anyway, we have a very fine tradition in this country of government keeping its nose out of religion.
In the case of the Muslim-American community, there is no evidence of any centralized conspiracy involving terrorism or that Muslims are any less appalled and opposed to terrorism than non-Muslims. Whatever (insignificant) information is produced by these hearings will be hugely offset by the comfort they provide anti-Muslim bigots. A political insane asylum has formed in America organized around the mad conviction that President Obama is a Muslim and not therefore a real American.
This is the real damage King does. Inherent in his rhetoric and his insistence on holding his hearings is the insinuation that Islam is not itself American. This, of course, is what some people once thought of Roman Catholicism.
Terrorism remains a threat and there is such a thing as Islamic terrorism — or, to put it another way, terrorism conducted in the name of Islam. In this country, much of the internal threat comes from a very small number of addled young men whose incompetence is often just plain awe-inspiring. They no more represent the American-Muslim community than some randy priest does Peter King. As low as the standard is, Congress has better things to do.

Load-Date: March 9, 2011


End of Document