Hearing on Suit by Reporter Held Captive
The New York Times
February 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 732 words
Byline: By The New York Times 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15
Body


A federal judge took the first step today in awarding damages in a lawsuit filed by Terry Anderson seeking $100 million from the Iranian government for the pain and suffering he experienced during nearly seven years as a hostage in Lebanon.
The hearing before Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson of Federal District Court coincided with efforts to persuade Congress to enact laws allowing victims of terrorism and the victims' families to collect on judgments against countries that sponsor terrorist acts.
"Iran and other sponsors of terrorism must be held accountable for supporting activities that kill, injure, torture and imprison innocent persons," said Mr. Anderson, the former chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press. "No government is above the law when it violates basic human rights."
Mr. Anderson was among 18 Americans taken hostage in Beirut in the 1980's. He was held the longest, spending 2,454 days in captivity before he was freed on Dec. 4, 1991.
Judge Jackson opened the two-day hearing by saying that the government of Iran had not responded to the lawsuit and was in default. Iran did not send a representative to the proceedings despite being notified through diplomatic channels.
The suit, filed last March under a 1996 law that allows legal action against countries that the United States government accuses of sponsoring terrorism, asserts that Mr. Anderson's kidnappers were members of Hezbollah, or Party of God, a "a politico-paramilitary terrorist organization" with ties to Iran. The suit also says that Hezbollah received financing, training and direction from Iran.
"This law was designed to make terrorism expensive," Mr. Anderson said in a break in today's proceedings. "And we are going to make it expensive for Iran."
The Islamic Republic of Iran and its Ministry of Information and Security were named as defendants. The law that allows victims of terrorism to sue foreign countries in American courts requires the State Department to list the country as a sponsor of terrorism. Iran has been on the list since 1984.
Mr. Anderson's case follows others with similar intentions. In March 1998, a federal judge ordered Iran to pay $247.5 million to the family of Alisa M. Flatow of West Orange, N.J., who was studying at a seminary in Jerusalem in 1995 when she was killed in a suicide bus attack for which Islamic Jihad, with ties to Iran, claimed responsibility.
In August 1998, a federal court ordered Iran to pay $65 million in damages for its role in the kidnappings of Joseph J. Cicippio, Frank H. Reed and David P. Jacobsen, three Americans held with Mr. Anderson in Lebanon. They have been unable to collect on the settlements.
Congress passed a measure in October 1998 that called for the State Department and the Department of Treasury to help victims of terrorism locate money to settle judgments. But the legislation included a provision allowing the president to waive implementation in the interest of national security.
Administration officials have voiced concern that the sanctity of American diplomatic property abroad, a right extended to all diplomatic missions under international law, might be compromised if private citizens here seized foreign government property under such court decisions.
At the State Department today, James P. Rubin, a department spokesman, said Iran did not accept the jurisdiction or the awards in Mr. Anderson's case and that the State Department opposed the attachment of diplomatic property to settle claims awarded by a court.
Senators Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, and Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, proposed legislation in 1999 to establish a system for tapping a foreign government's frozen assets that could be used to settle these claims and ease the administration's concern that diplomatic property, like foreign embassies, would be among the assets involved.
"American citizens deserve the right to know that their government stands behind them when acts of terrorism are committed against their families," Mr. Mack said in October when he presented the Justice for Victims of Terrorism Act.
After his release, Mr. Anderson, 52, and his wife, Madeleine Bassil, wrote a book about his ordeal, "Den of Lions." He now teaches journalism at Ohio University and serves on the board of the Committee to Protect Journalists, a nonprofit group that works for press freedom around the world.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Terry Anderson, former chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press, center, talked yesterday to his daughter Sulome and his lawyer, Stuart Newberger, outside federal court in Washington. (Associated Press)
      

Load-Date: February 16, 2000


End of Document