Hearings raise questions on the nature of terrorism; If the threat really comes from within and not from abroad, our strategy should change.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 27, 2009 Friday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2009 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12; OUR VIEWS
Length: 381 words
Body


A little-noted aspect of last week's Senate hearings on the mass killing at Fort Hood were their challenge of the basic assumptions behind the nation's anti-terror strategy for the past eight years.
If, as experts testified before the committee, homegrown terrorism is now supplanting foreign-based terror groups as the major threat to our safety, what does that say about the ''fight them over there so we don't have to fight them over here,'' approach that led, among other things, to the invasion of Iraq?
And if Maj. Nidal Hasan, an American citizen, Army officer and beneficiary of all the good things about American society, can be radicalized from afar without any training or assistance, what does that say about the goal of preventing such groups from building an overseas safe haven, which is at least part of the rationale for the war in Afghanistan?
Some politicians who were early and enthusiastic supporters of both wars are also declaring that the mass killings in Fort Hood were a terrorist attack launched by a radicalized Muslim. Sen. Joe Lieberman, the Connecticut independent who chairs the Homeland Security Committee, said last week that he had seen signs that Hasan was an ''Islamic extremist.''
The committee's ranking Republican, Maine's Susan Collins was more careful, suggesting that intelligence officials may have failed to ''connect the dots,'' between Nidal's communications with radicals and his potential for violence.
There is still much that has to be done investigating Nidal, and no investigation will completely end the debate over whether he was a politically motivated terrorist, like the 9/11 conspirators, or just disturbed and deluded, like Sueng-ho Cho, who killed 32 people in the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007. Nidal's lawyers have announced that he will plead not guilty, and experts suggest he may mount an insanity defense.
But if this and a spate of recent arrests indicate that the real terror threat is domestic and not from foreign organizations outside the country, what we are fighting is more like crime and less like a war, and resources should be focused in this country and not abroad.
That should discredit the notion that war a half a world away can shield us at home, or that any group needs a physical safe haven in a battle of ideas.

Load-Date: November 27, 2009


End of Document