HEAVILY ARMED COPS ESCORT 'JACKAL' TO COURT
 Philadelphia Daily News
August 17, 1994 Wednesday PM EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 06
Length: 516 words
Byline: Terril Jones, Associated Press
Dateline: PARIS
Body


A chained but cocky Carlos the Jackal bantered with France's top terrorism judge today while being arraigned on charges of engineering a deadly bombing in Paris.
The Venezuelan-born Carlos, 44, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, is accused of being a terrorist-for-hire for a variety of groups and eluded Western intelligence agencies for 20 years until his arrest in Sudan. The bombing in Paris was among the lesser of the crimes he is suspected of.
A day after being secretly flown to France, Carlos was escorted into a
closed hearing at the Palais de Justice by five policemen carrying assault rifles and wearing bulletproof vests. Chains stood out against his white pants, beige sweater and brown slip-on shoes.
Witnesses said he casually talked with his guards about guns and then threw out some quips at the entrance of Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere, France's renowned judge of terrorism cases who travels with a bodyguard and carries a concealed pistol.
"Ah, here's the judge, how's it going?" Carlos said to Bruguiere, speaking French.
"And you?" Bruguiere replied.
"Still alive, for a long time to come," answered Carlos, whose death had been rumored numerous times in recent years. Then, to his escorts, he added, "This guy, he's a star."
Initially assigned three court-appointed attorneys, Carlos took on noted lawyer Jacques Verges, who has made a career of defending notorious people, including Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie and Magdalena Kopp, a West German terrorist who reportedly married Carlos after a term in a French prison.
Carlos was charged with masterminding a 1982 bombing just off Paris' Champs Elysees that killed one person and wounded 63.
He will be charged later by a panel of judges with the fatal shooting of two counterintelligence agents in 1975. A French court convicted him in absentia in 1992 and sentenced him to life in prison for those slayings, but under French law he will have to be retried.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, announcing the arrest Monday, said Carlos claims to have killed 83 people around the world. He said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for killing at least 15 people in France and injuring 200.
Pasqua said Sudan informed France on Sunday that Carlos was in custody and offered to turn him over to French authorities.
The leftist newspaper Liberation said today that in return, French intelligence gave the Sudanese government satellite photographs pinpointing positions of the Popular Army for the Liberation of South Sudan, a rebel group.
France also agreed to use its influence to win permission for Sudanese troops to pass through the Central African Republic and attack the rebels from the south, Liberation said. The newspaper did not cite any sources.
Reponding on French radio, Pasqua said France "gave nothing in exchange" for Carlos' extradition.
But a defense attorney, Mourad Oussedik, claimed Sudan's government had been harboring Carlos and betrayed him to France.
"There was no extradition demand," Oussedik said on French radio. "It was a kidnapping following transactions between the French and Sudanese governments."

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document