HELL OF A RED FLAG Old Glory switch shows security gap Crew scaled both towers
Daily News (New York)
July 23, 2014 Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 706 words
Byline: BY THOMAS TRACY, ROCCO PARASCANDOLA and LARRY MCSHANE With Rikki Reyna
Body


THIS TIME, it was an artist or a prankster. Next time - who knows?
Rattled New Yorkers questioned how the NYPD could let a nimble pack of late-night intruders scale the landmark Brooklyn Bridge to hang two enormous, bleached-white American flags.
"Aren't there security cameras everywhere?"
asked an angry Francisco Correa, 29, of Brooklyn. "How did no one see this? This bridge is the key to our city. That shouldn't have happened."
Cops were left scratching their heads and studying videotape after the trespassers reached the top of the iconic span's 276-foot towers early Tuesday without anyone noticing.
They even used aluminum roasting pans fit for a Thanksgiving turkey to cover the floodlights illuminating the flags so they could work under cover of darkness.
"To be clear, we're certainly concerned about it," said John Miller, the NYPD's anti-terrorism czar. "And certainly, as Commissioner (Bill) Bratton
said, we are not happy about it."
"If they had brought a bomb up there, it would have been over," said a high-ranking police source. "If they were able to bring something large enough to cover the lights, then they would have been
able to bring some kind of explosive up there."
The furtive flag swap came within nine months of two security breaches at 1 World Trade Center: A 16-year-old boy who slipped past authorities and four daredevils who skydived from the top.
The 131-year-old bridge is considered a high-profile terrorist target, and it has two marked
NYPD police cars assigned to either side of it.
Security also includes cameras installed at undisclosed points along the bridge - although the video feed didn't set off any alarms in the Tuesday morning darkness.
Citing security concerns, the NYPD would not say
how many cameras are installed on the bridge.
The lights illuminating the Brooklyn side tower
went dark first around 3:30 a.m., covered with
an aluminum pan. The vandals used zip ties to
keep the pan in place.
Thirteen minutes later, the process was repeated
on the soon-darkened Manhattan tower. The coordinated effort meant that it was at least a
two-person job.
When the sun came up, construction workers spotted the white flags lapping in the breeze. Each was a 20-by-11-foot commercially available American lag bleached white.
Miller joked that the culprit was "Betsy Ross' long-lost nephew doing extensive work." The perpetrators likely had experience as climbers, construction workers or both.
Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams, whose ofice offered a $5,000 reward in the case, said there is nothing funny at all about the case.
"If flying a white flag atop the Brooklyn Bridge
is someone's idea of a joke, I'm not laughing," he said.
As the day went on, nobody claimed responsibility for the bizarre banner swap, and the NYPD
acknowledged it was stumped as to a motive.
"There's no particular nexus to terrorism or politics," said Miller. "It might be some kind of art project or statement. But we are not sure what that statement is."
Miller said the size of the pans and the ability of the intruders to get past a locked gate gave "some indication of a good deal of pre-planning."
Cops hoped to track down and interview five people seen on video crossing the bridge at 3:10 a.m.
Construction worker Donald Mitchell, 37, said his first thought was terrorism when he spied the American flags bleached completely white.
"You could still see the stars and stripes," said Mitchell, who was working on the bridge. "My first reaction was, ?This is where you land the plane. X marks the spot.' It was really scary."
The stolen red, white and blue flags hung on the bridge are 12-by-18-foot banners installed by specially trained workers from atop a precarious perch above the East River.
The stolen flags were
hung July 10, the day of
FDNY Lt. Gordon Matthew Ambelas' funeral after he died in a Brooklyn high-rise fire.
"I'm so angry I can't tell you what I want to say," steamed Cesar Pazmino, who started hanging the bridge flags 21 years ago. "It's senseless. Whoever did this should be punished to the fullest extent of the law."
Workers began taking down the white banners around 11 a.m. after police crime scene investigators determined there was no bomb or any notes left with the lags, cops said.
rparascandola@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Somehow, at least two culprits climbed giant cables (circled above) and the 276-foot towers, evaded complicated defenses designed to stop vandals and switched flags on the top of the Brooklyn Bridge without cops noticing early Tuesday. Police take down bleached flag, which vandals raised under cover of darkness by covering light (left) with pan after climbing cables (far l.). NYPD honcho John Miller said the operation, including reaching the top of the Manhattan tower (circled) took a lot of planning. PHOTOS BY ANDERSON/SPLASH NEWS; AP; JAMES KEIVOM/DAILY NEWS; CHASE GUTTMAN; WABC

Load-Date: July 23, 2014


End of Document