Help children cope in the wake of terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
September 16, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Focus; Pg. E2
Length: 1132 words
Byline: KAREN STEPHENS
Body


In Jane Hamilton's 1994 novel, "A Map of the World," a mother says: "I used to kiss my children at night, holding dear their untroubled lives. It was the short time of grace, the time before sorrow would teach them the ways of the world."
That time has arrived for our children. The shame, sorrow and outrage of terrorism have shattered a generation of childhood innocence.
Since Tuesday, humane people have been fighting to comprehend the incomprehensible. And our children are taking it all in - trying to make sense of the insanity, and our reactions to it.
They are turning to loved ones for cues on how to respond. They watch our body language, listen to our tone of voice and notice how gentle or rough our touch is. They notice if they've been forgotten in the mayhem, or if our love for them, their safety and security remain top priority.
As adults reel in disbelief, our children will follow our lead. So, we must do the unimaginable. We must act normal despite grotesque events that have intruded into daily life. And we'll have to do it far longer than just a few weeks.
Even if you've shielded kids from the constant television images, you can bet they're still creating images of their own. A child's fertile imagination spins dramatic visuals for events described on the radio, in the newspaper, in the classroom or play yard, or right around your dinner table.
Those images attack children's sense of security and stability. You see, for young children, seeing is believing. It's hard for them to separate fact from fantasy. With incessant, often repeated news coverage, children form terrifying misperceptions. If we don't tell them otherwise, kids may think multiple terrorist events are continuously happening for days on end. Young children don't understand the concept of "instant replays" or that there was only one World Trade Center.
It's also typical for children to personalize information. Based on what they see and hear about terrorism, they might believe it will affect their own family. No wonder many children don't want moms and dads to go to work. How do they know their parent's office won't be destroyed, too?
Since Tuesday's attacks, stories from early childhood teachers are rolling in. They give us insight on children's perceptions and reactions.
Children have used wooden building blocks to create structures they "know" will keep President Bush safe. Other children have built replicas of the trade center towers, revealing how concerned they are and how closely they're watching images. And, I think, revealing how deeply resilience and optimism flows in American blood. Through their play, children may be saying - or hoping - that life will go on. They are vulnerable, yes, but their generation will not be defeated. I've always respected the inborn wisdom of children, so these things do hold credence with me. But of course, I consider such concerns far too much to bear for ones so young.
As children play, be prepared for sobering questions to pop up. They'll want to know what a hijacker is, or a black box, or a box-cutting knife. A child told a teacher he had terrorists living in his neighborhood. When asked why he thought that, he said because he lived in White Hall Terrace. In his mind, terrace and terrorist sound so similar. Perhaps he thought his neighborhood was the harbor for terrorists that President Bush and the media talk about. How is a child to understand the abstract concept of countries far away? Worse, how are they to come to terms with the idea that groups within our own borders would afflict such wrath on civilians?
If we are to serve them well, we must help children grapple with abstract concepts of good and evil, sanity and insanity, humane behavior and inhumane. Most of us wrap children in a quilt of nothing but good, but that comforting protection has clearly been ripped away. Now, we must respond to parenting challenges we never expected.
The magnitude of recent incidents requires parents and teachers to put proven counseling skills to good use. You've seen them before, but they bear repeating. Spend time together so questions can be asked. Respond to questions calmly in language geared to your child's age and understanding. Don't belittle children for their fear; accept it as a rational reaction to senseless violence. Validate feelings children share about confusion and anger - "Yes, many people are confused over this terrible act. Lots of us are sad for the hurt people, and we're very angry they were hurt."
Maintain routines as much as possible. Routines like reading stories on the couch together help reassure children they are safe. Plan activities to distract children's attention. Turn off the TV and radio when kids are present. If our children are to maintain perspective, we have to limit the unending rehashing of violent attacks. If we allow those images to monopolize our peaceful homes, terrorism's affects are increased.
Let children safely express their feelings through drawing, painting, story or letter writing, puppetry or dress up play. School-age children especially benefit from concrete ways of helping victims. It builds compassion and gives children some sense of control. I've heard of children sending teddy bears to children who lost loved ones; others have started penny drives. Thank-you cards have been sent to rescue workers. How those carefully handwritten notes must touch dispirited hearts as hands dig ceaselessly into 110 stories of rubble.
And, please, don't assume the extra care is only necessary for the short term. For years to come, kids will need your reassurance and guidance. As children grow and mature, they'll revisit and review this mind-searing incident from new perspectives. Advancing development brings new questions. When asked, your children need your time to listen. And they need your honest, heartfelt responses.
More than anything, children need your constructive example to believe in and follow. I hope your example will be faith in the innate, overwhelming goodness of humankind. I hope that faith will be backed up with a consistent, unyielding commitment to eradicating terrorism - in all its forms - wherever and whenever it spews its venom, whether that be in our own homes, our homeland or abroad.
During times of unrelenting stress, children may experience changes in sleep patterns, appetite, bedwetting, thumb sucking, ease of separation from parents, whining, irritability, poor concentration and even aggression. If symptoms don't reduce over time, or in fact increase with time, consider taking them for counseling to help them make sense of what they have been forced to face.
Karen Stephens, M.S., is director of the Illinois State University Child Care Center, and an instructor in ISU's Department of Family and Consumer Sciences.

Load-Date: September 19, 2001


End of Document