Henderson's Kwanzaa celebration focuses on togetherness
Henderson (N.C.) Daily Dispatch
December 28, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Henderson (N.C.) Daily Dispatch
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 777 words
Byline: Miles Bates, Henderson (N.C.) Daily Dispatch
Body


Dec. 28--The ReBuild Communities NC 2018 Kwanzaa Celebration at the RBC African American Cultural Center in Henderson on Thursday night centered on unity.
"So this is our night of unity and this our way of saying this is your house," Edythe Thompson, CEO of Rebuild Durham, said. "We want you to feel free to come and bring your children and give them the history that they're not getting in school. Come and walk through and look at all the different artifacts ..."
The whole house is about remembrance, Charles C. Stephenson Jr., a member of Rebuild Durham's board of directors and its legislative affairs person, said in reference to the building.
Kwanzaa, created in 1966 by Maulana Karenga, a professor of Africana studies, is an African-American and pan-African holiday that celebrates family, community and culture, according to the official Kwanzaa website.The seven-day cultural festival starts Dec. 26 and ends Jan. 1.
During Kwanzaa, families and communities organize activities around the seven principles of Kwanzaa -- the Nguzo Saba -- which are unity, self-determination, collective work and responsibility, cooperative economics, purpose, creativity and faith.
Stephenson said that Kwanzaa isn't a substitution for Christmas, nor is it a religious holiday -- rather, it's cultural. That being said, he said believes the holiday helps to "supplement" the spirit of Christmas because it's bringing people together to talk about the seven principles.
Thursday night saw a big push from Thompson for gathering and working alongside each other.
She said it's been her calling in life to want to "lift up" people. "I just think that it's important that if we don't lift ourselves, then who will?" Thompson asked.
In addition to coming together, Thompson's attention was set on Henderson, learning and a needed sense of family.
"Henderson needs family badly and it's going to have to be some folk that's going to take the lead," she said. "And so, I thought based on where this house is located and what's around it, this is a good place for us to start and let folk know that we're here, we're not going nowhere and we're going to receive what's rightfully ours."
Everyone has to commit themselves to doing something to improve the conditions of this community, Thompson said. If one isn't from the community, then one needs to do something in his or her own community, she added.
She encouraged people to pay attention to the city's website and learn what's happening.
The Rev. Curtis Gatewood, president of Justice Ministration and the keynote speaker, spoke on themes of history and struggle.
During his remarks, he spoke of injustices, including violent displays of racism.
"... throughout our history, we've had to move mountains," Gatewood said. "Mountains of oppression, mountains of slavery..."
Gaps in education and economics and an unwillingness to discuss what created them was an was another important element of his comments.
"People love to talk about the gaps in economics, they love to talk about the gaps in education, they love to talk about the gaps, but they don't want to tell you how the gaps were created," Gatewood said. "There's been so much money invested in creating the gaps, and terrorism to create the gaps."
People "don't mind" talking about a gap because they've already made one believe white supremacy and black inferiority exist, Gatewood said.
Additionally, individuals don't like to talk about the lynchings that occured, Gatewood said. "That was a serious method in which people were using terrorism to again, reinforcing your place to stay in second-class citizenship," Gatewood said.
He also touched on actions moving forward.
"First of all, we have to make sure we not use, or allow our religion to be used to further enslave and miseducate us regardless of your faith," Gatewood said. "Let's not allow it to further miseducate."
The second thing is not to be afraid of controversy, Gatewood said, later pointing out well-regarded figures whom he described as controversial.
"Jesus was controversial," he said. "All the people you see on these walls [which included people such as President Barack Obama] were controversial because when you are trying to speak truth in a place that's teaching you miseducation and ignorance, that's controversy. When you are trying to teach love in a place that is driven by hatred, that's controversy. When you are trying to preach equality and justice in a place that's trying to make you believe that you are inferior, that creates controversy."
___ (c)2018 Henderson Daily Dispatch, N.C. Visit Henderson Daily Dispatch, N.C. at www.hendersondispatch.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 28, 2018


End of Document