Hexagon US Federal Selected by DoD for $500,000 CTTSO Laser Scanner Contract
The Breeze: James Madison University
May 11, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 338 words
Body


CHANTILLY, Va., May 11, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Hexagon US Federal was selected as the single award prime contractor for a Department of Defense Combating Terrorism Technical Support Office laser scanner contract, a four-month contract for over $500,000.
As prime contractor for the CTTSO contract, Hexagon provided testing, installation, training, documentation and assistance on selected robotic platforms.
"We're proud to support CTTSO," said Tammer Olibah, Hexagon US Federal CEO. "This is an exciting moment for Hexagon, as our growing portfolio of solutions and capabilities, including Leica and Sigma Space, allows us to better serve government agencies in realizing critical missions."
The work was implemented by experts from Hexagon's Sigma Space and Leica Geosystems teams, utilizing Leica Geosystems technology. Joining high-performance Hexagon reality capture scanners with remotely operated robots will permit the CTTSO to rapidly gain situational awareness while also mitigating hazard exposure to personnel.
The contract work began in fall 2019 and was completed January 2020. Work took place primarily in Lanham, Maryland.
For further information, please contact:
Beka Wueste, Hexagon US Federal, +1 703.264.5620, rebecca.wueste@hexagonusfederal.com
Hexagon US Federal is part of Hexagon serving the U.S. federal market. Hexagon is a global leader in sensor, software and autonomous solutions. We are putting data to work to boost efficiency, productivity, and quality across industrial, manufacturing, infrastructure, safety, and mobility applications.
Our technologies are shaping urban and production ecosystems to become increasingly connected and autonomous - ensuring a scalable, sustainable future. Learn more at hexagonusfederal.com.
This article originally ran on curated.tncontentexchange.com.
Facebook
Twitter
WhatsApp
SMS
Email
Print
Save
Tags
Hexagon Us Federal
Contract
Combating Terrorism Technical Support Office
Work
Economics
Company
Commerce
Scanner
Laser
Technology
Tammer Olibah
TownNews.com Content Exchange

Load-Date: May 11, 2020


End of Document