Hezbollah poses terrorist threat to U.S. interests, Terrorist group's ties to Iran, Syria make fighting it a tough proposition
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 17, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 488 words
Byline: JOSHMEYER LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON - Hezbollah, a militant Islamic organization backed by Iran and Syria, has issued a new call to arms against Americans in the Middle East, touching off fears of terrorist attacks and debate within the Bush administration over whether to move more aggressively against the group and its key sponsors.
The military wing of Hezbollah, long considered by the United States to be among the world's most dangerous terrorist groups, has focused largely on Israel because of its past occupation of Hezbollah's homeland in Lebanon and other contested territory. But the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq has triggered a spate of anti-American rhetoric from the Shiite organization and its leader, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah.
"The people of the region will receive (America) with rifles, blood, arms, martyrdom and martyrdom operations," Nasrallah said in a speech delivered a week before the war began. His remarks were broadcast on Al-Manar, the group's Beirut-based satellite television station.
"In the past, when the Marines were in Beirut, we screamed, 'Death to America!'" he said. "Today, when the region is being filled with hundreds of thousands of American soldiers, 'Death to America!' was, is and will stay our slogan."
Hezbollah's renewed focus on America has sharpened the long-standing debate among U.S. officials over whether the United States can, and should, go after the organization. Some believe that a showdown has been overdue since 1983, when the group blew up the U.S. Embassy and a Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon. The attacks killed more than 300 people.
But any offensive would be fraught with political, diplomatic and economic risks for the United States, some officials say. Hezbollah's close ties with Iran and Syria - the major power broker in Lebanon - underscore the complexities of pressing the war on terrorism when it involves groups backed by governments, they note.
Though U.S. counter-terrorism officials for decades have regarded Iran in particular as a key player in international terrorism, successive administrations have concluded that they had few viable options in dealing with Tehran, said Roger Cressey, a senior counter-terrorism official with the National Security Council in the Clinton and Bush administrations who recently left the White House.
Testifying before the House last month, J. Cofer Black, the State Department's top counter-terrorism official, said the Bush administration "has looked upon Iran as a serious threat to the United States, as one of, if not the, primary terrorist threat with capabilities to match."
Hezbollah has received as much as $ 100 million annually in recent years from Tehran, as well as weapons, U.S. officials say. In addition, the Damascus government has given Hezbollah weapons and political and logistical support, the officials say. It's ties to Iran and Syria prompted the United States to put both nations on its list of state sponsors of terrorism.

Load-Date: April 18, 2003


End of Document