Hibernians Out of Step
The New York Times
February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk; editorial
Length: 351 words
Body


In the Provisional Irish Republican Army, ''to kneecap'' means to cripple a person for life by pumping bullets in both knees. It's a favored punishment for betrayal by fellow Irish Catholics.
Editorial criticizes Michael Flannery, president of Irish Northern Aid Committee and this year's grand marshal of New York's Saint Patrick's Day Parade, for claiming parade will be 'pro-I.R.A.' event; warns that Hibernians had better 'make very clear whom - and what - they mean to honor', or boycotts and demonstrations may well cripple paradeThe bullets may well be obtained with money collected in America for professedly humanitarian purposes by groups like the Irish Northern Aid Committee.
It is hard to believe anyone intended to celebrate kneecapping when they named Michael Flannery, the president of the committee, as this year's grand marshal of New York's Saint Patrick's Day Parade. Few members of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, which bestowed the honor, have ever witnessed a kneecapping, or any of the 1,200 murders committed by the I.R.A.
The Order seems to have wanted to celebrate only Mr. Flannery's acquittal, last November, on charges of smuggling arms to the Provos. But the 81-year-old Mr. Flannery has been quick to turn a ges-ture of solidarity into a blessing for violence: ''It's definitely going to be a pro-I.R.A. parade.''
Really? Will the wearing of the green on March 17 represent an endorsement of terrorism? To most Americans, Hibernian and otherwise, the venomous doctrines of violence will surely spoil a wonderful annual party.
Ireland's Government, stunned and dismayed, says it will boycott the parade; so will the Irish Tourist Board and Aer Lingus. Cardinal Cooke hasn't decided what to do; neither has Senator Moynihan. Mayor Koch and some other politicians are trying to straddle the green line; they're against violence but all for marching.
It will take more than Michael Flannery to kill the spirit of the day. But the boycotts and arguments already in train may cripple the parade. The Hibernians ought to think again and make very clear whom - and what - they mean to honor.


End of Document