High cost of safety; Editorial: Stimson report highlights the high cost of fighting terror
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 20, 2018 Sunday
2 Edition


Copyright 2018 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 2E
Length: 395 words
Body


COUNTERTERRORISM
In the 15 years following 9/11, the United States spent a whopping $2.8 trillion on counterterrorism funding. A recently released study by the Stimson Center says that between 2002 and 2017, the nation spent an average of $186.6 billion a year fighting terror. That includes spending by Homeland Security agencies, the State Department, and the Pentagon. It also includes efforts to prevent terrorist acts and the radicalization of young people.
 Counterterrorism spending reached its peak in 2008, when the government spent about $280 billion. By 2017, that figure had leveled off to around $175 billion. (Because the different agencies involved use varying definitions and accounting procedures, the group admits its calculations are "imperfect.") But, it raises the point that since 9/11, approximately 100 people have been killed in the U.S. by terrorism. Compare that to the 20,000 deaths from opioid overdoses in 2016 alone. Is that much money justified?
 Maybe not. And yet, according to the Heritage Foundation, the May 2 arrest of 17-year-old Matin Azizi-Yarand for planning a terror attack on a Dallas mall is the 103rd Islamist terror plot uncovered in the U.S. since 9/11. Some of those "plots" involved pathetic losers incapable of planning a birthday party, never mind a mass-casualty assault. Nevertheless, it is impossible to tally how many hundreds or even thousands of lives have been saved because most of those events were thwarted before they happened.
 The Stimson study recommends a five-point plan to better account for spending on counterterrorism. The plan includes creating an all-inclusive, transparent funding report; adopting government-wide definitions for spending and a "clear, usable set of criteria" to show where funds are going; separating counterterrorism spending from war spending; and passing legislation requiring that Congress vote separately when approving any funding "designated as war-related emergency or wartime overseas contingency operations spending before those funds can be obligated."
 The Stimson report raises valid points. It only makes sense to have a single government-wide process of tracking and evaluating spending on anti-terrorism. While adequate funding is absolutely essential to ensure the safety of this country, Americans have every right to know where those trillions of dollars are going.

Graphic

 
Naval Support Activity Bethesda's security team conducts anti-terrorism training drills in March. U.S. Navy Naval Support Activity Bethesda's security team conducts anti-terrorism training drills in March. U.S. Navy

Load-Date: May 20, 2018


End of Document