High court lets secret terror war hearings continue;
Justices refuse to hear challenge to closed deportation proceedings
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 28, 2003 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 566 words
Byline: EUNICE MOSCOSO
Body


Washington --- The Bush administration won a legal victory Tuesday in the war on terrorism as the Supreme Court rejected a challenge to secret deportation hearings for terrorist suspects.
The court declined to review a lower court's ruling on the secret proceedings, which began after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
The case was brought by two New Jersey newspapers, which sued the government after reporters were denied docket information from deportation hearings. They argued that the government shouldn't be allowed to keep the hearings secret without explaining why on a case-by-case basis.
Cox Washington Bureau
The 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in the case last year that the media and the public do not have a First Amendment right of access to such deportation hearings if the government has deemed them critical to terrorism investigations. In such cases, national security concerns take precedence, the appeals court said.
By declining to hear the case "without comment," the Supreme Court left the issue unresolved at a national level. A federal appeals court in Cincinnati has ruled against secret hearings in a similar case.
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft said the New Jersey decision recognized that open deportation hearings would reveal sensitive information about ongoing investigations and "aid terrorists targeting our nation."
The Supreme Court has backed the Bush administration's anti-terrorism measures in other recent decisions.
Earlier this month, the court upheld the government's right to hold hundreds of foreign prisoners at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, without charges or access to lawyers. And in March, the court decided not to hear a case brought by civil liberties lawyers challenging how the government monitors the phone calls and e-mails of terrorism suspects.
The American Civil Liberties Union, while disappointed with the latest Supreme Court decision, said it was encouraged by a government filing in the New Jersey case that said the policy of closed detention hearings was under review and would "likely" be changed.
The Justice Department declined to comment on any review of policies, but the government brief said the department is reviewing the process for designating individuals as "special interest aliens."
Muslim organizations and civil liberties groups have condemned the secret detention of hundreds of mostly Arab and Asian-American men since the Sept. 11 attacks. The United States has deported more than 500 foreigners in connection with the terrorism investigation, Justice Department officials said.
The lawsuit --- North Jersey Media Group v. Ashcroft --- is one of several seeking to test the government's anti-terrorism policies.
Last year, the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Cincinnati ruled against the government on the same issue. The court said the United States could not hold secret deportation hearings for a Lebanese man in Michigan suspected of funneling money to terrorists through an Islamic charity. That decision said that "a government operating in the shadow of secrecy stands in complete opposition to the society envisioned by the framers of our Constitution."
Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University, said the Supreme Court often waits for more lower courts to weigh in on an issue before taking a case. "Some justices may not view this as necessarily ripe."

Load-Date: May 28, 2003


End of Document