High-stakes battle Gary Levinson Lancaster Township
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
January 26, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 401 words
Byline: Lancaster New Era Staff
Series: LETTERS
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Editor, New Era:
Is this really 2007? Or is it 1970?
While thousands of brave Americans are fighting and risking their lives in Afghanistan and Iraq, the legislators in Washington, D.C., the peace activists and many, many fellow citizens are protesting the war, questioning our policies and taking the position that war is wrong.
Yes, war is wrong. However, that simplistic argument does not hold any water when you look at history going all the way back to the dawn of mankind. Those civilizations that were either unwilling or unable to defend themselves and their way of life were destroyed through war, survival of the fittest ... call it whatever you want. Was it wrong? Yes, it was. As I said, war is wrong.
Unfortunately if people do not step forward to protect their way of life, their freedom and their very existence, they will be obliterated.
Is it possible that the war in Iraq is not going well because the enemy has recognized that America is losing its will to fight? Of course they can see that by listening to CNN and surfing the Internet.
Has this happened in recent times in America? Yes it has, as in 1970 or thereabouts, in another time and another war, called Vietnam.
The point I am trying to make is that we have committed our bravest and best to the Middle East to fight a war. This happened after we, our country, was brutally attacked.
Of course we have hundreds, if not thousands, of experts who have told us that going to Iraq had no connection to our war on terrorism. I still find that difficult to believe in light of the numerous acts of blatant terrorism on the part of the late Saddam Hussein and his henchmen! His tentacles were linked to many terrorist networks throughout the Middle East.
In any case, we have committed ourselves to fighting this war. We have lost over 3,000 of our bravest and best. How can anyone, whether they be situated in Washington, D.C., or anywhere else play Monday-morning quarterback when our men and women are fighting the war on terror thousands of miles away?
Everyone in America needs to recognize that the stakes are much greater now for our country to be unified and supportive of our military because, unlike during the Vietnam era domino theory, we have seen what Islamic terrorism can do to our country.
We are making it ever so clear to our enemies that we can be defeated if we are divided in our commitment. Do we really want to take that risk?

Load-Date: January 27, 2007


End of Document