High school is setting for terrorism training Police now prepare for what was once unimaginable

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 01, 2000, Saturday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7B
Length: 551 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


MOYOCK, N.C. - At a mock, 16-room school called R.U. Ready High, police officers from around the country are training for the next Columbine.
They are learning how to respond to school shooting rampages by taking part in elaborate simulations designed to assault their senses and test their judgment under pressure.
Loudspeakers blare the sounds of automatic gunfire, explosions and fire alarms. Actors playing children scream. Sprinklers shower the halls and classrooms. Smoke clouds the building.
"If you don't train for this, you will have chaos on the day it happens," said Gary Jackson, a former Navy SEAL and director of operations and sales for the Blackwater Training Center, a privately run school for law officers and military personnel.
R.U. Ready High opened in September at Blackwater's 5,200-acre preserve on the edge of the Great Dismal Swamp. About 1,000 law officers and military personnel have trained there since, according to Blackwater.
Nationwide, 24 students died last year as a result of school violence, according to Pam Riley, executive director at the Center for the Prevention of School Violence based in Raleigh. Last April, at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., two teenagers killed 12 fellow students and teacher before committing suicide.
The seven-building R.U. High complex is crude, with gravel floors and no desks or chalkboards, but is laid out like a high school, with a school bus, flagpole and bike rack. Walls can be moved to change the layout so that officers do not get too familiar with any one scenario.
During the training, a mock gunman takes control of the school. The officers try to get inside fast, lead frightened students to safety and open a safe path for paramedics before going after the gunman. They search for guns and bombs in places they wouldn't expect to see them, such as in the hands of students.
"The idea was to overload the senses of the officers in a setting they didn't have much knowledge about," said Ron Watson of the National Tactical Officer's Association, a nonprofit organization that helps train law enforcement organizations.
More than a dozen actors from nearby police academies dress as students, some with fake wounds. Officers have to carry out 180-pound dummies representing the seriously wounded.
The officers train with their own weapons to make the experience as real as possible, but they fire "simunition" - a type of paint-ball ammunition. Security cameras record their actions for review later.
Participants also review previous school shootings and hundreds of scenarios. What if there's a sniper on the roof? What if there are bombs in the halls? What if children are boarding school buses when the shooting starts?
"This training is important, because it makes (participants) realize those kids and teachers in there are defenseless, and we're the only ones who can get in there to defend them," said Greg Higdon, an officer with the Special Response Team of the Springfield, Mo., Police Department. He trained at R.U. High in September.
The high school is part of Blackwater's mock city, where military and police officers and corporate employees from all over the world have trained since 1998.
Officers also can train for urban warfare and hostage situations. Most classes last three to five days and cost $ 600 to $ 900.

Load-Date: April 4, 2000


End of Document