HIGH COURT REJECTS EX-HOSTAGES' IRAN SUIT THE PLAINTIFFS CHARGED "COMMERCIAL TERRORISM." THE IRANIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DENIED ANY RESPONSIBILITY.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 10, 1995 Tuesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A06
Length: 534 words
Byline: Lyle Denniston, THE BALTIMORE SUN, Inquirer staff writer Jeff Gelles contributed to this article.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Norristown native Joseph J. Cicippio and another former Beirut hostage failed yesterday in a plea to the U.S. Supreme Court to revive their lawsuit against Iran's government.
Cicippio, who was a captive for 1,907 days, and David Jacobsen, who was held for 523 days, argued in their lawsuit seeking $600 million that the Iranian government itself was responsible for their capture and should pay them damages.
The Iranian government disclaimed any responsibility, telling the justices through a U.S. lawyer that the two hostages had made a "baseless allegation" of official Iranian involvement in their capture.
A lower federal court threw out their lawsuit last summer, and the Supreme Court rejected their appeal yesterday in a brief order. As is its custom when it denies a review, the court gave no explanation.
Under a U.S. law enacted in 1976, foreign governments generally are immune to lawsuits in American courts. Exceptions exist, however, for lawsuits that claim that wrongs were done by a foreign government engaging in commercial actions.
To try to fit their claims within that law, Cicippio and Jacobsen contended that Iran had arranged for their capture as a form of "commercial terrorism," in a campaign to get the U.S. government to unfreeze Iranian assets or to obtain arms secretly from the United States.
They contended that their captors, the militant group Hezbollah in Lebanon, had acted as a hired agent of Iran's government. The lower court that rejected their claims said that hostage-taking by governments could not be considered normal commercial activity "unless one distorts the notion of a marketplace to include a hostage bazaar."
Cicippio last night said the court's ruling was disappointing but not necessarily final in his bid for reparations.
"The door's not closed yet," said Cicippio, reached at his home in Arlington, Va. Cicippio, who is now employed by the Agency for International Development, said a bill proposed by Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.) would strengthen his right to press a claim against Iran.
In other action yesterday, the Supreme Court turned down, for the second time in five years, an attempt to test the constitutionality of laws in force across the nation that make it a crime to interfere with hunters.
At issue in the new case was a Montana law that outlaws efforts to "disturb an individual engaged in the lawful taking of a wild animal with intent to" stop that taking. The law was challenged, on free-speech grounds, by John Lilburn, a Montana anti-hunting activist who twice stood in front of a hunter's aimed rifle to stop the killing of buffalo in the Gallatin National Forest four years ago.
In another order, the court refused to disturb a $7.3 million verdict against Dow Corning Corp. in favor of a Sebastopol, Calif., woman who had had silicone implanted in her breasts and who suffered a tissue disease as a result of the rupture of the gel implants.
Dow Corning argued in an appeal that the scientific testimony used against it at the trial did not satisfy federal court rules for expert evidence. It also challenged as excessive a $6.5 million punitive-damages portion of the verdict.
The court turned down Dow's appeal in an unexplained order.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document