Higher gas tax is both green and smart; It fixes roads - and helps fight terrorism and climate change.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 23, 2007 Monday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 553 words
Body


This is not a trick question: Is the price of gasoline too low? The answer is almost certainly yes. It's way too low considering the grave geopolitical and environmental challenges facing this country and this planet. One step governments should take is to raise taxes on gasoline to more fairly reflect its actual, external cost in the wider economy.
Raising gas taxes would conserve supply, deter excessive driving, reduce harmful carbon emissions, encourage and hasten the market for alternative fuel technologies and remove oil as a favorite weapon of our enemies around the world. Indeed, raising taxes on gasoline and other carbon-based fuels may be the most effective way to fight terrorism. And it may be the smartest downpayment that the nation can make against global warming.
The Minnesota Legislature can begin doing its part by passing a transportation bill that includes a dime-per-gallon gas-tax increase and a local sales-tax option for transit. The money would fill Minnesota's appalling backlog of unbuilt road projects; it would also give metro commuters the transit choices needed to avoid adding to the auto congestion, pollution and oil-dependency problems.
This is all about stewardship. In opposing higher gasoline and transit taxes, the governor and his allies want you to think only about the short term, and mostly about yourself. But thoughtful Minnesotans care deeply about the kind of world they will leave behind. They understand that acting now is the best way to avoid a smoggy, bumper-to-bumper future for their children and grandchildren, and also to begin attenuating the cataclysmic global struggles over petroleum, water and other scarce resources that scientists and other experts expect by midcentury.
Indeed, not raising the gasoline tax would be irresponsible. Not in its 82-year history has the tax's value been lower, as reported last week by the Star Tribune's Conrad deFiebre (see chart). Raising the tax a dime would merely return it to the level of 25 years ago.
One special problem for Minnesota is that its gas-tax structure is out of step with the times. The state Constitution dedicates the tax's proceeds only for state roads, meaning they cannot be "flexed" for transit or other greener transportation strategies.
That must change, obviously, but doing so is a task for 2008 or beyond. For now, the Legislature should pass a solid transportation bill, as it did in 2005, and this time override the governor's veto.
Are gas prices too low? They are if you believe in fixing roads, addressing climate change and fighting terrorism. As Thomas Friedman noted recently in the New York Times Magazine, Americans only now realize that they're financing both U.S. soldiers with tax dollars and their enemies with gasoline purchases. "How stupid is that?" he asked.
IN REAL TERMS, GAS TAX HAS NEVER BEEN LOWER
Inflation-adjusted value of Minnesota gasoline tax in years it was changed
   1925   23 cents
   1929   36 cents
   1937   57 cents
   1949   43 cents
   1963   40 cents
   1967   43 cents
   1975   34 cents
   1980   27 cents
   1981   29 cents
   1983   33 cents
   1984   33 cents
   1988   34 cents
   2007   20 cents
   # Adjusted for the average Consumer Price Index for a given calendar year
Sources: Minnesota Department of Revenue; Bureau of Labor Statistics;
U.S. Department of Labor

Graphic

 
CHART

Load-Date: April 24, 2007


End of Document