High-tech anti-terrorism boat to patrol county shorelines Arundel Patriot commissioned; joins three other vessels in fleet
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
September 25, 2010 Saturday


Copyright 2010 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 439 words
Byline: ERIN COX Staff Writer
Body


The county's newest fire-fighting, crime-busting watercraft starred in a christening ceremony yesterday as officials commissioned it into service.
Steel grey with eight tons of gadgets and gizmos, the Arundel Patriot can detect a bioterrorist attack, fight flames with 1,250 gallons of water per minute, cruise waterways as shallow as four feet and track stranded boats by following radio waves. The boat's crew and arsenal can help a boater suffering from heat exhaustion on the Chesapeake Bay or respond to threats from radiation, chemicals and disease.
"Will keep you forever busy with this vessel," U.S. Coast Guard Capt. Mark P. O'Malley told county fire and police chiefs during the ceremony at Sandy Point State Park.
The half-million dollar aluminum catamaran joins the other three vessels in the public safety fleet patrolling Anne Arundel's 533 miles of shoreline. Fire and police forces will jointly operate the Arundel Patriot.
Public safety officials have waited three years for the boat - ever since the County Council approved the idea to apply for Homeland Security grants to buy it. The state's Department of Natural Resources grant program paid $199,000 of the price tag and a federal government grant paid the remaining $310,000.
"This boat is probably the most high tech boat that we have in the fleet," said Division Chief Michael Cox, a county Fire Department spokesman. The boat will be docked in southern portion of the county and patrol from the Bay Bridge to the Calvert County line.
The Arundel Patriot can even respond to a nuclear attack. Officials said several terrorist targets can be hit from the waters of the Chesapeake, from Fort George G. Meade and NSA in western county, to the Naval Academy, the Bay Bridge, scores of marinas and the Port of Baltimore along the shoreline.
Police officers can conduct surveillance and rescue missions, and fire officers can fight fires in waterfront neighborhoods that lack hydrants.
At the christening ceremony, Cox recalled the history of launching boats into service. In 1,200 A.D., the Vikings would smear the blood of their victims on the bow, but later the Greeks and Romans used fine wine instead, Cox said.
"It's crew, through this ceremony, will be afforded the protection of the sea gods, allowing for fair winds, fair seas and safe voyage," Cox said.
With that, County Executive John R. Leopold took aim at the boat's bow, a bottle of ceremonial champagne in hand.
"You mentioned the sea gods are here," Leopold said. "What about the paramedics?"
Two swings later, Leopold shattered the bottle and welcomed the Arundel Patriot into service.
---
ecox@capitalgazette.com

Load-Date: October 7, 2010


End of Document