HIJACKING UNDERSCORES ALGERIAN TERRORISM RISKS
Business Insurance
January 02, 1995


Copyright 1995 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 17
Length: 634 words
Byline: BY STACY SHAPIRO
Body


LONDON-Aviation insurers have no plans to impose additional war risk insurance premiums for flights in and out of Algeria despite the fatal Christmas hijacking of an Air France Airbus.
French officials last week suspended air and sea passenger services to Algeria after the Air France flight to Paris with 173 passengers was seized by militant Islamic gunmen at the Algiers airport.
Three passengers were killed by the four gunmen at the airport before the French government insisted the Airbus be allowed to fly to Marseille, where it was stormed by French anti-terrorist police. Police killed the four gunmen, and 13 passengers were injured in the rescue. French authorities said last week that the terrorists planned to explode the Airbus over Paris.
Recently, international political risk consultant Control Risks Group Ltd.  warned about the safety of foreigners in Algeria. In a report on business security, Control Risks noted that "only a miracle will save Algeria from descending into civil war in 1995." The report called Algeria "the most extreme example of a political crisis threatening business" (BI, Dec. 26).
Control Risks noted that foreigners have been shot on sight and 71 have been killed in Algeria since September 1993. "Most of the attacks have taken place in and around Algiers, but the assassins, who often wear genuine security force uniforms, strike anywhere against anyone," the report warned.
Despite these warnings and the Air France debacle, aviation underwriters were not planning last week to charge additional war risk premiums for flights to Algeria.
"If Algerians tighten up their regime, then there may not be a surcharge.  If they don't, however, and there is a perceived increase in exposure, then the airline insurance market would consider its position and possibly increase premiums," summed up a Lloyd's aviation underwriter.
Meanwhile, the French government-rather than Air France's war risk insurers-may pay for compensation to victims of the hijacking.
Air France renewed its insurance program Dec. 1 after it switched London reinsurance brokers to Willis Corroon Group P.L.C. from Nicholson Leslie Aviation. The airline-which has suffered three major losses in the past three years totaling $ 292 million-also switched its lead insurer to La Reunion Aerienne in Paris from Assurance France Aviation. London sources claim Air France's premium doubled, but La Reunion Aerienne did not return calls.
The airline's all-risk hull and liability coverage, which includes liability war risk, is reinsured in London, led by Lloyd's aviation underwriter John Westcott. Its hull war risk reinsurance is led by Lloyd's underwriter John Charman.
It was uncertain last week whether the $ 18.6 million Airbus would be a total hull war risk insurance loss following the shootout in the plane.
Air France's liability coverage could pay compensation to the injured passengers and relatives of the three who were killed.
Under the French Terrorism Act of 1986, however, French citizens anywhere in the world and all victims on French soil regardless of nationality are paid compensation for terrorist attacks by a government-funded guaranty fund set up by the act. It is not certain what levels of compensations are provided. But if the fund is liable to pay compensation, Air France's liability insurers may not pay out anything.
The fund may have the right to subrogate against Air France, however, if negligence can be proved in French courts.
Just recently, plaintiffs representing the fund filed a lawsuit against British Airways in France, charging that BA was negligent in landing at Kuwait Airport during the August 1990 invasion by the Iraqis, who seized its passengers as human shields. BA contends it was not negligent because no one told the airline it was unsafe to land in Kuwait.

Graphic

 
French anti-terrorist police rescued 173 passengers by storming the hijacked plane.

Load-Date: January 11, 1995


End of Document