Hijack confronted US and Israel with agonizing choices;
Reagan finds room for US maneuver strictly limited
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 17, 1985, Monday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 1153 words
Byline: By George D. Moffett III and Peter Grier, Staff writers of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: The TWA hijack was still unresolved at time of writing. It once again forced Western democracies to wrestle with how to deal with this form of political warfare. Hijack confronted US and Israel with agonizing choices. Reagan finds room for US maneuver strictly limited
Body


ONCE again, terrorism in the Middle East has raised the issue of how free nations can fight acts of political violence.
The tragic hijacking of Trans World Airlines Flight 847, like the Iranian hostage crisis of 1979-81, has thrown into sharp focus the agonizing choices that face the United States when its citizens are held at gunpoint.
There have been serious constraints on both military and diplomatic responses.
The possibility of US military action was underlined by the movement of US Navy warships closer to Lebanon and the reported positioning of a US commando force in Cyprus, as well as the return of President Reagan to Washington from Camp David to meet with his National Security Council Sunday afternoon.
But a military response was especially difficult in this case. Some of the American hostages had been taken from the aircraft and held elsewhere in Lebanon; the heavily-defended Beirut airport itself was under control of the Amal Shiite Muslim militia.
At the same time, President Reagan Sunday reiterated the policy that the US remains opposed to negotiating with terrorists. This policy is complicated by the fact that the hijackers' principal demands have been directed at Israel, not the US.
In addition, the US has had to rely on third parties, such as Algeria, as its conduit for negotiations with the hijackers.
Following last month's controversial 1,150-for-3 prisoner swap engineered by the Israeli government of Prime Minister Shimon Peres, another wholesale release of Shiite prisoners would almost certainly be unpopular in Israel.
Mideast experts say that by leaning too hard on the Israeli government to make the concession, which may prove necessary to save American lives, the US could jeopardize the Peres government at the very time Peres's own moderate position is considered essential to keeping the fragile Mideast peace process alive.
In any case, the TWA hijacking ''has probably caused more anger and frustration than lots of other ones have,'' says Brian Jenkins, a terrorism expert at the Rand Corporation. ''That could make opting for military force in the future almost irresistable.''
The drama unfolding in Athens, Beirut, and Algiers was the third hijacking last week in the Mideast.
On June 11, Shiite militiamen hijacked a Jordanian Airlines flight, set its passengers free, and blew up the plane. Hours later, a Palestinian who said he was retaliating for the Shiites' action briefly commandeered a Lebanese 707 jet in Cyprus.
Despite this flurry of airborne terrorism, hijackings in general are not as prevalent today as they once were. In 1980 there were 32 successful hijackings, according to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). (''Successful'' means the hijackers gained control of the aircraft.)
Back in the early 1970s the numbers sometimes exceeded 60 a year. But in more recent years the figure has averaged around 20. TWA Flight 847 represents the ninth successful skyjacking in 1985, the ICAO says.
The problem of overall terrorism, however, is getting worse. The total number of terrorist events was up 30 percent last year, according to US State Department figures. In 1984 there were 650 terrorist incidents - an increase from an average of 500 over the past five years. While Western Europe had the most such incidents, terrorism was growing fastest in the Mideast.
Moreover, experts say terrorism has grown increasingly violent, as terror groups use more deadly techniques such as sophisticated car bombs. And the targets of terrorism are changing. Civilians such as businessmen, journalists, and even clergy are increasingly at risk.
''Prominent public figures will remain the focus, but there may be more victims from nonofficial circles,'' says a State Department document on terrorism.
Terrorism is not something that strikes the US at home. Fewer than 1 percent of terror acts worldwide occur in this country. But Americans and US installations abroad are prime terrorist targets. The purpose of attacking these symbols of the United States is to influence US policy, experts say, especially in volatile areas of the third world.
Terrorism against the US in the Mideast, for instance, is more than just random violence, experts say.
''It's a covert military campaign against the presence of the US in the Middle East, a state of undeclared war,'' says Ray S. Cline, a senior associate at the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Frustrated by these trends in terrorism, the Reagan administration has rattled its sword and talked about stronger responses to terrorist acts. In a major speech given last October, Secretary of State George P. Shultz said the US should not only retaliate against acts of terrorism, but should undertake preemptive action against terrorists, even if it means the loss of innocent lives.
''Our responses should go beyond passive defense, to consider means of active prevention, preemption, and retaliation. Our goal must be to prevent and deter future terrorist acts,'' Mr. Shultz said.
But as this weekend's events illustrate, such a policy is easier spoken than implemented.
State Department spokesmen Sunday morning reiterated that the US would neither negotiate with the terrorists nor accede to their demands. The Pentagon would not confirm reports that a Delta Force counterterrorist unit had been dispatched to the area for a possible rescue mission.
Delta Force, based at Fort Bragg, N.C., was activiated in the fall of 1977. Drawing on all branches of the military, Delta specializes in rescuing hostages by force.
As of this writing, the US had taken no military action to free the hostages on TWA 847. Military experts, however, point out that among other things the relatively large number of hijackers in the plane would make any such move difficult.
Until now, US public opinion has been a constraint on the use of military force to fight terrorism, experts note. The loss of even a few innocent lives could have adverse political consequences in the US.
Sunday, a letter said to be signed by 32 people held aboard the airliner appealed to President Reagan to ''negotiate quickly our immediate release'' and to refrain from resuming ''any direct military action on our behalf.''
But according to one expert, this weekend's hijacking could be a watershed in terms of US public opinion on the fight against terrorism. Unlike many other planes previously captured in the Mideast, TWA 847 is full of average Americans coming home from vacation, notes Mr. Jenkins of the Rand Corporation.
In addition, TV newscasts have contained graphic snippets of the radio conversations between air controllers and pilots of the hijacked airliner.
This combination means the event probably has ''affected the American public in a visceral way,'' says Jenkins. As a result, he says, political pressure for military action, particularly some sort of retaliatory or preemptive strike against Shiite targets, may grow.

Graphic

 
Picture, Passengers freed by the hijackers in Algiers board Air France flight for Paris - and home, AP


End of Document