HIJACKING AT SEA;
NEW TARGET, NEW WORRIES FOR HIJACKERS
The New York Times
October 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 556 words
Byline: By COLIN CAMPBELL
Body


Psychologists and other specialists have written many volumes on the human aspects of hijackings, hostage-takings and related events, but they have devoted little attention to the specific environment of ships.
In analyzing the seizure Monday of an Italian cruise liner in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea, authorities on terrorism offered these views:
* To the extent that large ships are a new and unexpected ''container of hostages,'' they plainly suit the needs of some political groups for new stages for attracting world attention.
* A large ship also appears to present hijackers with special problems, such as a greater difficulty in efforts to intimidate and control hundreds of widely dispersed captives.
* The ''Stockholm syndrome,'' in which some hostages eventually start to view their captors sympathetically, might be less likely to occur on board a ship.
* Because of these and other factors, a ship could be more suited to an outside rescue effort than an airliner.
 
Pressure for 'Something New'
Brian M. Jenkins, an expert on terrorism with the Rand Corporation in Santa Monica, Calif., said: ''There's a constant pressure on terrorists to do something new, something novel. A liner falls in that category.''
Mr. Jenkins and others also stressed that ships, rarely targets of terrorism, would be less well guarded against such acts than airliners and embassies. Mr. Jenkins said terrorists tended to attack relatively vulnerable targets, but added they would eventually try any target that provides a ''container of hostages.''
Yonah Alexander, director of the Institute for Studies in International Terrorism with the State University of New York, said it should be ''no surprise'' that a new target has appeared.
''What is novel about this is the magnitude of the attack,'' Dr. Alexander said. ''Obviously this is a drama that attracts a great deal of attention.''
A large ship would appear to pose new problems, also, especially for the hijackers. If they are determined to control virtually everyone on board, rather than merely commandeering the bridge, hundreds of people might have to be watched. But that would make it extremely hard to exert the psychological pressures of threats, violence, arguments and kindness used to make hostages cooperate.
 
In Contrast With Plane
''They wouldn't have that constant, intimidating presence,'' Mr. Jenkins said, contrasting shipboard conditions with those inside even a large airplane. As a result, he said, groups of hostages might be more inclined to plot a revolt, and they could also be less useful as amplifiers of the hijackers' complaints and demands.
Michael Vlahos, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, said he was intrigued by the similarity of the Italian liner's capture and the attacks by Barbary pirates in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
American sailors and seagoing merchants, once taken prisoner by pirates operating out of Algiers, Tripoli and other North African ports, were typically enslaved and held for ransom rather than killed, Dr. Vlahos said.
Some of these early attacks also had a political dimension. The pirates were sometimes aided by European governments that opposed the rise of the American merchant fleet. One typical ransom demand was for advanced Western ships rather than for cash, he said.


End of Document