HIJACKERS IN CUSTODY: A SPECIAL SATISIFACTION FOR ISRAEL AND U.S.
The New York Times
October 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk; ANALYSIS
Length: 1134 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Oct. 11
Body


The affair of the Achille Lauro was only the latest in the cycle of revenge between Palestinians and Israelis.
Still, as these events go, the Achille Lauro hijacking had a happier ending than most. According to Western experts on terrorism, two aspects in particular made the midair interception by United States Navy jets of the four hijackers so obviously satisfying for the Americans and Israelis.
First, there was nothing ambiguous about the criminal nature of the hijacking of the Achille Lauro, which included the murder a crippled American tourist, Leon Klinghoffer, whose body was tossed overboard with his wheelchair.
Second, the interception of the hijackers was based on what American and Israeli terror experts describe as the best means for combating terrorism - not the kind of ferocious retaliation that kills terrorists and civilians alike, but a surgical strike, built on solid intelligence.
 
Precedent Is Set
The operation netted only those linked to the hijacking, and it produced them for what the Italians say will be a murder trial in their own courts of law. The action, Western analysts say, was as important for the precedent it set as it was for its demonstration that Western democracies can combat terrorism without having to discard their values and adopt the attitudes of the terrorists themselves.
Those intent on celebrating, though, may want to do so quickly. No sooner did word spread of the American action than a variety of radical Palestinian spokesmen and unidentified callers telephoned Western news agencies in Beirut and elsewhere, vowing to retaliate for the American retaliation, which was for the Palestinian retaliation on the Achille Lauro, which was for the Israeli retaliation in Tunis, which was for the Palestinian retaliation in Cyprus.
 
Arafat Tactics
The events of the last week also brought into sharp focus the double game that many believe the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, is playing and how easily it can get out of hand, producing results that are devastating for the peace process and the P.L.O. In 1970, when Mr. Arafat was driven out of Jordan to the fringes of Middle Eastern diplomacy, he pursued a two-track approach: a public diplomatic offensive to win wider recognition of the P.L.O. and a private terror campaign directed by his closest aides under the guise of ''Black September.''
Mr. Arafat said at the time that he was innocent of any involvement in Black September, but he reaped the benefits of the attention it focused on the Palestinian cause. Mr. Arafat has apparently tried to use the same tactics today. but instead of employing a fictitious group, he appears to have been using his own elite bodyguards -known as Force 17 - and members of some of the smaller, pro-Arafat P.L.O. factions, such as the Palestine Liberation Front.
 
Arms and Diplomacy
''For Arafat, the armed struggle and diplomacy have never been mutually exclusive,'' said Asher Susser, an expert on the P.L.O. at Tel Aviv University. ''He feels that if the P.L.O. allows itself to give up the armed struggle it will not be taken seriously as a regional factor.''
Unlike the radicals in the P.L.O. who want to use the ''armed struggle'' to utterly destroy the peace process, Mr. Susser added, Mr. Arafat tries to use it as a means to insure his presence in any negotiations. By disavowing any responsibility for this violence he is usually able to neutralize damage to himself from the violence. Unless things go wrong. In this case, Israeli officials and experts on terrorism contend, things went very wrong, exposing what they see as the fallacy of Mr. Arafat's approach.
The Palestinians were discovered by the crew before the ship reached the Israeli port of Ashdod, where the four gunmen had reportedly intended to go ashore and take Israelis hostage. In a panic, they hijacked the Italian cruise ship. This complicated Mr. Arafat's relations with his Italian friends and forced him to step out of the shadows and dispatch his lieutenants to end the affair.
 
Killing Disturbs Israelis
Had the Palestinian gunmen not been under Mr. Arafat's control, it is believed, it is unlikely that the gunmen would have even talked to Mr. Arafat's representatives, let alone surrendered the boat to them. Now, Arab and Israeli analysts say, those who wanted to believe that Mr. Arafat had chosen the path of diplomacy, and that only some unruly P.L.O. elements adhered to the path of violence, will have to reassess their thinking.
The killing of Mr. Klinghoffer was particularly disturbing for Israelis because they believe he was singled out as a Jew. ''You can say all you want about how the P.L.O. is really against Zionists, not Jews, but when the chips are down people are either Jewish or not,'' said an Israeli political philosopher, Shlomo Avineri. ''Incidents like this bring out all of the crazy and justified paranoia in the Israeli public. Nothing could be more damaging to the arguments of those Israelis who believe Israel should and must negotiate with the Palestinians.''
 
Relations With Egypt
P.L.O.-Egyptian relations suffered equally. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt has been working for the last six months, along with King Hussein of Jordan, to portray Yasir Arafat as a legitimate partner for peace talks with Israel and the United States. Mr. Arafat's apparent involvement in the Achille Lauro affair is a major setback for those efforts and has left many Egyptian officals disgusted with the P.L.O., Egyptian sources in Cairo say.
More importantly, because Egypt was involved indirectly in the affair, something of a rift has appeared between Washington and Cairo. It appears that Mr. Mubarak, in his attempts to exonerate Mr. Arafat and quickly put the affair to rest, gave the Americans an account of what had happened to the hijackers that conflicted with information the Americans had obtained independently. In the end, Mr. Mubarak suffered the indignity - before his own people and the entire Arab world - of having American warplanes divert an EgyptAir jetliner to Sicily with the killers on board.
However satisfying the seizure of the hijackers may be for the Americans and Israelis, however, Arab and Israeli experts agree that terrorism and counter-terrorism are useless over the long term in the absence of parallel political initiatives to deal, as much as possible, with the roots of violence. They say this has been a traditional weakness of both the Israeli and Palestinian approaches to seeking security.
Many Western analysts say that all of the ingredients that produced the Achille Lauro affair are still present -in particular the unresolved Palestinian-Israeli conflict. As a result, whatever victories the Americans or Israelis have scored in this round, it is the nature of this conflict that someone will pay for them in the near future.


End of Document