Hindus outside India not oppressed, says Axom Nirman Dol
The Sentinel
December 11, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 383 words
Byline: Staff Reporter
Body


GUWAHATI: Expressing their reaction against Union Home Minister Amit Shah's Statement giving reasons as to why the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) should get passed, Axom Nirman Dol claimed that no Hindus outside India are being oppressed. Hence Amit Shah's statement is vague and carries no meaning.

Addressing a press conference at Guwahati Press Club on Tuesday president of Oxom Nirman Dal Upen Raj Nath Said, "On December 1 Amit Shah said that the Hindus are being tortured and oppressed in Bangladesh and Pakistan, So the Hindu refugees should be provided with Indian Citizenship and for that the CAB should passed. But as per the report that we've no Hindus are oppressed. As per the report by Dhaka Metropolitan Police Commissioner a total of 30,000 Durga Puja were held which have increased to 31,400 in the year 2019."

Nath added, "The World Happiness Index, Global Hunger Index, Economic Freedom Ranking, global Peace Index including Global Terrorism Index and Unemployment rate everything proves that the People of Bangladesh are leading their life happily, be it the Muslims or the Hindus. In World Happiness Index India is in 140th position whereas Bangladesh is in 125th and Pakistan is in 67th rank. The same happens in case of Global Hunger strike too, with Pakistan in 94th, Bangladesh in 88th rank and India in 102nd rank."

Nath claimed, "The unemployment rate of Bangladesh is 4.0% and in India it is 8.8%. Besides this the industrial growth explores even poorer picture that is India with only 1.1% and Bangladesh with 10.2%. So we want to ask the government as to why they're imposing this poisonous CAB that will destroy the Assamese completely. We'll never accept this bill and even if they pass it in the Rajya Sabha the party should be ready to face massive defeat in 2021 election.

Nath Further said, "Besides violating the Indian Constitution, the bill is also violating the League of Nations's Declaration on the rights of Indigenous People . So, we'll continue our fight against CAB. We'll approach the Supreme Court and if needed we'll protest against this bill in the Rashtra Sangha."

Also Read: Slogans against Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) rends the air

Also Watch: Assam is heating up, Lakhs of People take to street to protest against CAB on Saturday, Watch Here

Load-Date: December 11, 2019


End of Document