HIS TINY TERROR. MASS. PHYSICS EXPERT SOUGHT TO BLOW UP THE CAPITOL & PENTAGON USING OWN TOY PLANES
Daily News (New York)
September 29, 2011 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 396 words
Byline: BY JOSEPH STRAW and BILL HUTCHINSON DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body


A MASSACHUSETTS man with a degree in physics was busted yesterday for plotting to blow up the Pentagon and the U.S. Capitol with homemade drones, officials said.
Rezwan Ferdaus planned to fill two remote-control model airplanes with C-4 explosives and hand grenades and direct them into the iconic buildings, a federal complaint says.
The feds said he purchased the model planes, one a replica of a Navy F-4 Phantom jet with a Playboy decal on its tail, using the name of former Yankees great Dave Winfield.
Ferdaus was arrested yesterday after he allegedly obtained 25 pounds of C-4 explosives, three grenades and six automatic AK-47 assault rifles from FBI agents posing as Al Qaeda operatives.
"The conduct alleged today shows that Mr. Ferdaus had long planned to commit violent acts against our country," said U.S. Attorney Carmen Ortiz. "Thanks to the diligence of the FBI and our many other law enforcement partners, that plan was thwarted."
Ferdaus had been under surveillance by the FBI since March.
The Northeastern University physics grad, an American citizen, had vowed to commit violent "jihad" against the United States as far back as early last year, according to a federal complaint.
In one of several secretly recorded phone conversations, he claimed he targeted the Pentagon and Capitol because he wanted to "severely disrupt . . . the head and heart of the snake," according to the complaint.
Ferdaus, of Ashland, Mass., also obtained cell phones modified to act as bomb-detonating devices, the complaint charges. He provided the phones to the undercover FBI agents along with videotaped instructions on how to use them.
When told the phones were used to set off explosives in Iraq that killed three U.S. soldiers and injured others, Ferdaus said, "That was exactly what I wanted," according to the complaint.
Ortiz said the public was never in danger because Ferdaus was being watched closely.
If convicted, he faces up to 15 years in prison.
Rep. Pete King (R-L.I.), chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, praised the arrest of Ferdaus, saying he had been briefed on the investigation in the past several months.
"The fact that Ferdaus is a very well-educated physicist should serve as a reminder to us that the threat of Islamic terrorism transcends socioeconomics and does not only emanate from the poor and underprivileged," King said.
jstraw@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Remote-control models (above and at right) of Navy fighter jets that terrorism suspect Rezwan Ferdaus allegedly owned and hoped to use to bomb the Pentagon and the U.S. Capitol. Photos by WBZ-TV, U.S. attorney's office

Load-Date: September 29, 2011


End of Document