HISCOX BOOSTS TERRORISM CAPACITY  
Business Insurance
February 22, 1999


Copyright 1999 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: International; Pg. 17
Length: 443 words
Byline: EDWIN UNSWORTH  
Body


LONDON -- Despite a slowdown in terrorist attacks in mainland Britain and resulting fall in terrorism insurance rates, the sector recently saw an unexpected rise in insurance capacity.
This month, Hiscox P.L.C. said it is boosting its capacity and increasing its 1999 limits for any one location to L115 million ($193.5 million) from L100 million ($168.3 million) previously.
Hiscox terrorism underwriter Philip Perry said in a statement that the 15% capacity increase will aid brokers by enabling them to ''place large portfolios more easily and offer their clients more flexible cover.''
The reduction in terrorist attacks largely has been attributed to last April's Northern Ireland peace agreement. However, Mr. Perry maintains that despite the agreement, ''there is still terrorism exposure out there, both in the U.K. and abroad.''
The U.K. government recently warned that, despite the Northern Ireland peace talks, the risk of terrorism remains because of the fragility of the agreement and the Irish Republican Army's refusal to decommission its arms.
However, given a marked fall in U.K. terrorism rates this year, several coverage providers are seeking more business abroad. One of these is Wellington Underwriting Agencies Ltd., which has long been writing terrorism coverage.
Wellington recently started offering riot coverage in Indonesia in response to traditional insurers there removing riot risks from their policies because of local political turmoil. Wellington has long offered terrorism and riot coverage in a number of other countries, including Israel, Sri Lanka, Bahrain and Colombia.
Ben Garston, Wellington's senior underwriter, said Wellington continues to write a large book of U.K. terrorism coverage but now does so ''in a very selective manner.''
Most terrorism coverage in mainland Britain is provided by government-backed Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd., which has reduced its rates by 85% for 1999 to reflect the sharp fall in claims.
Commenting on Hiscox's move, Lesley Lucas, Pool Re's chief executive, said it raises the question of whether the alternative terrorism insurance market wants to risk chasing rates down further by boosting capacity.
He said Pool Re already has enough capacity for U.K. terrorism, and so additional capacity has never been required. He added that Pool Re cannot be as competitive as private insurers on pricing because it must provide coverage where it is wanted -- usually in areas of greatest risk -- while private insurers can select their risks and adjust their rates accordingly.
Hiscox said that it hopes to attract broker interest by offering a 20% commission rate. Pool Re usually pays a 2.5% commission.

Graphic

 
A reduction in terrorist attacks, such as this February 1996 bombing in London's Docklands area, has prompted a sharp drop in rates.

Load-Date: February 22, 1999


End of Document