Historical ignorance aids terrorism
University Wire
October 21, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Daily Kent Stater via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 552 words
Byline: By Todd Battistelli, Daily Kent Stater
Dateline: Kent, Ohio
Body


The world looked on in horror at the bombing in Bali, Indonesia, on Oct. 12 that killed at least 187 people. In the aftermath of such tragedy, some media overreaction is understandable. But to suggest, as various news reports have, that this was "the worst terrorist act in Indonesia's history" ignores acts of terror that dwarf the recent attack.
Kent State U.
No doubt the bombing in Bali was an awful act of mass murder. Perhaps it was the worst attack targeted at foreigners, but to call it the worst ever in Indonesia, as The Associated Press did Oct. 13, quietly sweeps hundreds of thousands of murders into the dustbin of history.
In 1965 the reactionary autocrat Suharto wrested control of Indonesia from communist President Sukarno. To secure his power, Suharto began a massive program of purges targeting communists and their supporters. Richard Tanter, professor of International Relations at Japan's Kyoto Seika University, wrote, "Between October 1965 and the end of the following year, the Indonesian armed forces planned, orchestrated and in part carried out the murder of between 200,000 and 1 million Indonesian citizens. Virtually all were unarmed." The Campaign to End Genocide numbers the victims at 500,000 killed, 500,000 imprisoned.
Regardless of the specific numbers, Suharto's reign of terror left Indonesian history bloodstained. Make no mistake: This was terrorism. The club-goer burned to death in Bali and the peasant beaten to death by soldiers both fell victim to violence used against civilians to further ideological ends.
The Indonesian horror of 1965-66 deserved no less the clarion call President Bush sounded in response to the Bali bombing: "We must together challenge and defeat the idea that the wanton killing of innocents advances any cause or supports any aspirations. And, we must call this despicable act by its rightful name, murder."
These are noble sentiments, but our fickle attitude toward terrorism sharply divides rhetoric from reality. Where some see "the wanton killing of innocents," others see a holy calling and, yet others, good geopolitical policy. As an anti-communist, Suharto's politics dovetailed nicely with America's. A little mass murder was apparently a small price to pay to keep another domino from falling.
The use of terror as a weapon existed long before the United States decided to abolish it from the face of the earth. I welcome our commitment to end this brutal practice, but I fear we may already have failed.
We could impose, by brute force, an American peace. Such a victory would be false and tenuous: 6.25 billion people are difficult to police. We will certainly fail if we continue to ignore terrorism when it does not harm us or condone it when it aids our ends.
The profound historical ignorance that allows reporters to gloss over terror in Indonesia isn't just bad news writing. Today we are not locked in a simple contest of good against evil, but mired in the culmination of centuries of violence. Our refusal to face that history prevents our understanding the complex causes and histories of terror around the globe.
No matter what military force we may unleash, without addressing the deeper causes, terrorism will persist. This time we may not be able to turn a blind eye.
(C) 2002 Daily Kent Stater via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document