History shows we're on the correct course against terrorism Hate changes names and faces because it always wilts against democracy.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 14, 2005 Thursday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. D11
Length: 678 words
Byline: By DONALD MEISSNER 
Body


Timed to neutralize a celebration of London's selection as the site of the 2012 Summer Olympics and disrupt the Group of Eight economic summit in Scotland, mass-transit bombings by terrorists in London last week murdered more than 50 and injured hundreds.
News coverage has been too thin; we must witness the senseless murder of innocents to understand our enemy's cruelty. Reaction, however, has been thick. From the right, we hear the clarion call to vigorously fight the enemy. From the left, we hear that the war in Iraq has created more terrorists than it has killed. Headlines blare the obvious question -- Who is winning the war on terrorism? -- and then provide answers in tendentious quotes condemning the Iraq war.
Too many facts, however, are overlooked by clever writers emphasizing their antiwar arguments. An honest appraisal of our current enemy, of world history and even of our tactical missteps only prove that our strategy is correct: We must not back down from this existential threat to our freedom, our nation and our way of life.
Thugs and terrorists -- militants and insurgents, if you must euphemize -- always have had the power to murder, start wars, destroy nations. The bullet that killed Archduke Ferdinand of Austria triggered World War I. In Russia, the Bolsheviks -- a minority party which cleverly named themselves bolshe, or "large" -- violently seized power and slaughtered millions.
Yasser Arafat, the inventor of modern terrorism, co-opted the Arab hatred of Jews and used it to motivate attacks against democratic Israel. Sporting his ever-present, patterned black-and-white kaffiyeh, Arafat condemned his flock to decades of war and terrible living conditions, while he enriched himself with donations sent from around the world.
The IRA, Basque separatists, Tamil Tigers, Red Brigades -- the list of bad actors goes on, with varying degrees of military and political success and failure built on hateful ideologies.
The look of fascists changes over the course of history; a little Hitler mustache would be too easy to spot. Thus, we must heed the words of those who attack free nations. Although they keep their diabolical plots secret, arrogance and vanity propel megalomaniacs to TV screens, Web sites and publishing houses.
Adolf Hitler outlined his plan to exterminate Jews and take the world back to barbarism in "Mein Kampf." Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin published numerous tomes touting the inevitable self-destruction of capitalism and global triumph of communism. Among today's enemies, Islamist extremists use our own technology to perpetrate and broadcast their bloody campaigns against us. It's ironic: Without the Web, cell phones, television, jets and trains, they might be nothing more than isolated hateful shepherds.
There are approximately 1.3 billion Muslims in the world, the vast majority of whom wish harm to no one. It is difficult to get an accurate estimate of the number of Islamist extremists. Boaz Ganor, an expert at Israel's International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism, estimates that there are 100,000 to 200,000 fanatics worldwide capable of slitting your throat or blowing up the train you're riding, with another 10 million to 20 million ardent ideological supporters. The jihadists themselves claim many more souls.
The free world was grossly unprepared for the global war on terrorism, even though it's been active at least since 1983, when a truck bomb destroyed a U.S. military barracks just outside Beirut, killing 241 Marines, sailors and soldiers.
Twenty-two years later, the tenacity and viciousness of this enemy remains on display in London, Madrid, Bali, New York, Washington, Casablanca, Nairobi, Istanbul, Jakarta, Moscow, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Afghanistan and, of course, Israel.
Sept. 11, 2001, slapped us awake from a wishful nap. Whether the perpetrators come sporting little mustaches, kaffiyeh or jeans and a sport shirt, the same battle rages.
---
Donald Meissner founded and runs Donald Meissner Communications, an advertising and public relations firm in St. Louis County.

Notes

 FROM THE RIGHT COMMENTARY A FORUM FOR OTHER VOICES, IDEAS AND OPINIONS 

Graphic

 
<NONE>

Load-Date: July 15, 2005


End of Document