Hobbling the Fight Against Terrorism
The New York Times
December 8, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 38; EDITORIAL
Length: 520 words
Body


Lawmakers from the House and Senate are working on provisions in the military budget bill that would take the most experienced and successful antiterrorism agencies -- the F.B.I. and federal prosecutors -- out of the business of interrogating, charging and trying most terrorism cases, and turn the job over to the military.
These new rules would harm the justice system and national security. They would hinder intelligence-gathering, make it harder to track down terrorists and make other countries less likely to cooperate.
Those are not our conclusions, although we strongly agree. They are the views of James Clapper, the director of national intelligence; Robert Mueller III, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and Lisa Monaco, the assistant attorney general for national security. The defense secretary, Leon Panetta, who used to run the intelligence services, has said that the military doesn't want this responsibility. Lawmakers are ignoring them.
At issue are a series of amendments added by the House and the Senate to the National Defense Authorization Act, the annual military budget bill. They mandate military detention for most terrorism suspects (although they focus especially on Muslims). The House version would bar trying these prisoners in federal court, while the Senate version would make that very unlikely.
This means civilian law enforcement agencies with greater experience would be cut out and intelligence-gathering would be hobbled. Countries would be less likely to turn over prisoners to American authorities if they would land in military detention. Both versions of the bill would make the detention camp in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a permanent symbol of injustice and cruelty around the world. Both leave open the possibility of subjecting American citizens to military detention without charge or trial.
These measures are not just bad policy, they are entirely unnecessary.
Federal authorities have jailed terrorists by the score since Sept. 11, 2001. The military tribunals created by President George W. Bush and modified by President Obama have not managed to try any of the major figures behind the 9/11 attacks, who remain in Guantanamo. Existing law covers capture and detention of prisoners in battle. The military does not want new powers to interrogate and investigate terrorist suspects, especially those arrested in the United States.
President Obama, who has more than shown his mettle in combating terrorism, has allowed conservatives from both parties to entirely dominate the issue of military detention and trial. Now he has finally spoken up and threatened to veto the military budget bill if it ends up looking like it does now.
We hope the House and Senate conferees will strip out the military detention and trial provisions, but we are pessimistic. Government and Congressional officials told us on Tuesday that members of Congress are not taking the veto threat seriously.
Vetoing the military budget would pose political risks for Mr. Obama. Signing provisions like the ones in the House and Senate versions into law would do lasting harm to the country.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 8, 2011


End of Document