Holbrooke Briefs Gilani On Obama's Afghan Visit
RTT News (United States)
March 30, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 374 words
Body


(RTTNews) - United States Pak-Afghan Special Envoy Richard Holbrooke had a tele-conference with Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani during which he briefed the latter on President Barack Obama&apos;s brief visit to Kabul over the weekend.
Holbrooke told the Premier that he was the first leader with whom the U.S. was sharing details of Obama&apos;s Afghan visit, said a brief statement from the Prime Minister&apos;s House.
Obama&apos;s visit to the war-torn country was meant to express solidarity and strengthen the determination of coalition partners to restore peace and stability in the region, Holbrooke said.
The Obama envoy assured that American strategy would always remain in favor of Pakistan, a strategic partner of the U.S. He also promised to pay special attention to the energy needs, particularly electricity, of Pakistan to help boost economic activities.
Washington will release $1 billion to Islamabad by June under the Coalition Support Fund (CSF), he said.
Holbrooke also said Secretary of State Hillary Clinton would visit Pakistan in the near future to review progress in the strategic dialogue between the two countries.
Secretary to the U.S. President, Gen Luther, who also took part in the tele-conference, told Gilani that Obama had greatly appreciated Pakistan&apos;s commitment and contribution towards war against terror.
Gilani on his part reiterated Pakistan&apos;s firm resolve to eliminate the menace of terrorism and extremism in the larger interest of world peace.
Noting that Pakistan expected unhindered support from coalition partners and Friends of Democratic Pakistan, Gilani urged the U.S. to exert influence over coalition partners to honor their pledges made during the Tokyo Conference.
The Premier also sought assistance in waving IMF conditionalities and stressed the need to expand bilateral trade to ensure access for Pakistani goods in the U.S. markets.
In a separate development, Afghan President Hamid Karzai called his Pakistani counterpart Asif Ali Zardari on telephone the same day and the two leaders are reported to have discussed bilateral issues and the war against terrorism.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document