Holder's politics pummel president
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 16, 2010 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Times Publishing Company
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 15
Length: 454 words
Body


Attorney General Eric Holder finally seems to realize Americans are appalled by his decisions to bring five 9/11 terrorists to trial in civilian court in New York City and to give the Nigerian terrorist accused of trying to blow up a commercial airplane on Christmas all of the rights of an American citizen.
Americans don't want to see terrorists use our courtrooms to put on a spectacle to promote their venomous ideology. Americans also believe national security trumps the rights of foreign terrorists who've demonstrated their intent to kill Americans.
Holder's terrorism decisions damaged the Obama administration politically, and the president is looking to develop a more coherent policy for dealing with captured terrorists. Obama may not be able to do anything about the underwear bomber, who has been Mirandized, but he should rectify Holder's Manhattan decision, which has been almost universally condemned.
Holder has heard his president. He told The Washington Post the location or venue for the trial matters little as long as the world is able to observe the process. So Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and the other admitted terrorists may find themselves back in Guantanamo before a military tribunal.
That's quite the turnaround, and one some in the administration worry about. If the president's terrorism policy shifts to trying all foreign terrorists before military courts, then Obama will have taken a step that not even his predecessor took.
This is not the first time Holder's political ideology has stirred controversy. Early last year, he called Americans cowards in their discussion of race. He demoralized the CIA when he gave a special prosecutor the task of investigating CIA employees for their actions during the Bush administration.
Holder dropped a voting rights case against the new Black Panthers, who were accused of intimidating voters on Election Day 2008. And now the terrorism debacle.
On Sunday The New York Times described how the president deferred to Holder. The paper said White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel favored a military trial for the 9/11 detainees. But Holder apparently believed the civilian option was more likely to deliver swift and sure justice.
He seems not to have considered the cost to New York City - some $200 million a year - or the risk to Manhattan, much less the platform he would open to Mohammed and the others. His tin ear did a disservice to the president and the nation.
The president now is left with a political mess and the need for an effective policy for prosecuting captured terrorists. He also looks to need a more thoughtful attorney general.
Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: March 2, 2010


End of Document