Holder draws on his story in civil rights push Holder brings personal history, civil rights commitment to Ferguson's racial crisis FERGUSON POLICE SHOOTING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 20, 2014 Wednesday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 533 words
Byline:  By CONNIE CASS and JESSE J. HOLLAND Associated Press 
Body


WASHINGTON • Eric Holder talks about the nation's civil rights struggles in a way no previous U.S. attorney general could - by telling his own family story.
As he increasingly pushes his Justice Department to protect voting rights and end unfair prison sentences and police brutality, Holder has drawn on personal history to make the case that the nation has much work to do to achieve justice for all. It's a legacy he's likely to draw on when he travels today to Ferguson to supervise the federal investigation of the fatal shooting of a black 18-year-old by a white police officer.
Holder tells how his father, an immigrant from Barbados proudly wearing his World War II uniform, was ejected from a whites-only train car. How his future sister-in-law, escorted by U.S. marshals, integrated the University of Alabama in spite of a governor who stood in the schoolhouse door to block her. How as a college student, he was twice pulled over, his car searched, even though he wasn't speeding.
And Holder recalls that the slaying of black teen Trayvon Martin in 2012 prompted him to sit down with his own 15-year-old son for a talk about the way a young black male must act and speak if confronted by police - the same talk his father had given him decades earlier.
Today, President Barack Obama is sending Holder to Ferguson to bring the full weight of the federal government into the investigation of the death of another young black man, Michael Brown, who was unarmed when a white police officer shot him multiple times Aug. 9.
"It's a powerful message," said William Yeomans, a law school fellow at American University who worked in the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division for more than two decades. "He's the embodiment of law enforcement, and the positive contribution he can make here is to assure the community that the federal government is taking very seriously the quest for justice in this incident."
Holder's department has been strong in going after police misconduct, both through criminal civil rights cases and lawsuits against police departments, Yeomans said.
For much of Holder's early tenure, his public profile was shaped by battles over how to prosecute terrorism cases, the use of armed drones to kill terrorism suspects overseas and his handling of various Obama administration controversies. A 2012 vote in the Republican-controlled House made Holder the first sitting Cabinet member ever held in contempt of Congress over his refusal to hand over without preconditions documents involving Fast and Furious, a gun investigation. More than a dozen Republican lawmakers have called for his impeachment for not prosecuting anyone in the Internal Revenue Service for targeting conservative groups and for his department's probes of journalists linked to news leaks.
But over the last three years, civil rights has moved to the forefront, starting with Holder's opposition to state voter ID laws that make it harder for the poor to cast ballots. He compared Texas' voter ID law to a poll tax, the now-illegal fees imposed across the South for decades to block African-Americans from voting. The Justice Department is now suing Texas and North Carolina over their voting restrictions.

Load-Date: August 20, 2014


End of Document