Holder confirmed as attorney general He takes over a Justice Department that has come under widespread criticism.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 3, 2009 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 603 words
Byline: By Larry Margasak The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - Eric Holder won Senate confirmation Monday as the nation's first African-American attorney general, after supporters from both parties touted his résumé and he easily overcame Republican concerns over his commitment to fight terrorism and his willingness to back the right to keep and bear arms.
The vote was 75-21.
Holder's chief supporter, Sen. Patrick Leahy, said the confirmation was a fulfillment of the dream of civil rights leader the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., that everyone would be judged by the content of their characters.
"Come on the right side of history," said Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
Holder becomes the only black person in President Barack Obama's Cabinet. Three other African-Americans have been named to top administration positions but are not Cabinet secretaries.
Holder was a federal prosecutor, judge and the No. 2 Justice Department official in the administration of President Bill Clinton. Even his critics agreed that Holder was well-qualified, but they questioned his positions and independence.
The debate turned partisan in its first moments, when Leahy expressed anger that a few Republicans demanded a pledge from Holder that he wouldn't prosecute intelligence agents who participated in harsh interrogations.
Leahy singled out Texas Republican John Cornyn as one who wanted to "turn a blind eye to possible lawbreaking before investigating whether it occurred."
"No one should be seeking to trade a vote for such a pledge," Leahy said.
When Cornyn rose to announce his vote against Holder, he did not make such a demand. However, he accused the nominee of changing his once-supportive position - on the need to detain terrorism suspects without all the rights of the Geneva Convention - to one of harshly criticizing counterterrorism policies under President George W. Bush.
Cornyn and Sen. Tom Coburn said Holder was hostile to the right of individuals to own guns, despite a Supreme Court ruling last June affirming the right to have weapons for self-defense in the home.
Holder said at his confirmation hearings: "I understand that the Supreme Court has spoken." But he added that some restrictions on guns could still be legal.
Holder's confirmation will trigger reviews - and changes - to the most controversial Bush administration policies, from interrogation tactics to terrorism trials and warrantless surveillance.
Those are some of the known issues. Even Holder doesn't know what he'll find when he looks at secret memos in the Justice Department Office of Legal Counsel.
Holder also will have to rework a department that under Bush was criticized for injecting politics in hiring career officials and firings of U.S. attorneys. He'll have to decide whether to prosecute Justice Department officials who may have violated the law in some of those policies and tactics.
Holder also could reverse Bush's orders to former aides not to testify before Congress on their private discussions on the U.S. attorney firings.
One of Holder's most intriguing missions will be to review the Office of Legal Counsel, whose lawyers justified the use of controversial interrogation tactics and viewed themselves as attorneys for the White House. Holder also said he would review why career prosecutors in Washington decided not to prosecute the former head of the department's Civil Rights Division.
Holder also will probably review civil liberties issues including warrantless surveillance, and he has said he will re-examine a ruling by former Attorney General Michael Mukasey that immigrants facing deportation do not have a right to government-provided lawyers.

Graphic

 
 Photo - Holder 

Load-Date: February 3, 2009


End of Document