Holder Praises Treaties Between U.S. And EU On Mutual Legal Assistance And Extradition
RTT News (United States)
October 28, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 333 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Attorney General Eric Holder spoke at the EU/US Justice and Home Affairs Ministerial Meeting Wednesday, praising the treaties on mutual legal assistance and extradition signed by the U.S. and the EU.
"These treaties represent a great achievement, both for their practical benefits and in what they symbolize," Holder said. "They give us important new tools to combat crime, including terrorism."
According to Holder, the extradition agreement will modernize the existing bilateral extradition treaties with each of the Member States, in many cases replacing lists of offenses that are deemed extraditable with a dual criminality standard.
The mutual legal assistance agreement, meanwhile, contains provisions for future legal cooperation.
One of these provisions is granting the authority to identify the existence of bank accounts associated with the subjects in the other&apos;s jurisdiction in terrorism and other serious crimes.
Another provision is the authority to conduct joint task forces across national lines directed against terrorism and serious crime cases rather than merely "coordinating" inquiries.
Member States will further be given authority to acquire evidence, including testimony, by means of video conferencing, as well as using data acquired via the agreement for additional serious offenses other than just the one triggering the initial request.
"But beyond their important practical value, these treaties symbolize the joint resolve of Europe and the United States to fight terrorism and transnational crime," Holder said.
"The United States is profoundly grateful that strong cooperation from our international partners has helped us reduce violent crime and prevent another major terrorist attack on American soil," he added. "Our common values and our mutual interest in protecting our citizens strengthen our resolve to deepen our cooperation with Europe."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document