Holder leaves mixed legacy, experts say; His performance on national security called 'disappointing'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 29, 2014 Monday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 7
Length: 592 words
Byline: ERIC TUCKER

The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Highlight: On matters of national security, Attorney General Eric Holder leaving with a mixed record
Body


Attorney General Eric Holder was just months into the job when he announced plans to prosecute the accused mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks and other alleged co-conspirators in a New York courtroom, rather than through the Guantanamo Bay military commission process.
It was an audacious idea, but immediately beset by political opposition and public safety concerns. The Obama administration's eventual decision to walk away from the proposal was a vivid reminder of the complexities of the legal fight against terrorism.
Holder, who announced Thursday that he would step down once a successor is confirmed, took office determined to turn the page from Bush administration policies that authorized harsh interrogation techniques against suspected terrorists. But he will leave with a mixed record of national security.
The department points to hundreds of terrorism-fighting successes during Holder's tenure, including prosecutions of plots to explode a bomb in Times Square and on a Detroit-bound airliner.
But also under his watch, the department authorized targeted drone strikes against Americans abroad, subpoenaed journalists' telephone records in leak investigations and defended in court the government's bulk collection of millions of Americans' telephone records.
It's a complex legacy that I think is somewhat disappointing on national security, said Seton Hall University law professor Jonathan Hafetz, a former senior attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union.
Hafetz said he believes Holder, attorney general since the start of Obama's presidency in 2009, had overall been too supportive of executive power and insufficiently protective of civil liberties.
Stephen Vladeck, an American University law school professor, credited the attorney general for overseeing terrorism prosecutions. But in a national security world where much is classified, Vladeck said, the visible stuff doesn't look as good as the stuff we don't see.
When Holder took over, he signaled a new direction from the previous Republican administration. During Senate hearings on his nomination, Holder defined waterboarding as torture. He later announced an investigation into CIA interrogation methods of terrorist detainees; that three-year inquiry ended without criminal charges.
He similarly pushed a shift away from the military commission system the Bush administration enacted to prosecute suspected terrorists at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba. In November 2009, the attorney general announced that the Justice Department would seek to prosecute five detainees, including professed Sept. 11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, in federal court in New York and pursue the death penalty.
Critics immediately argued the federal courts were ill-equipped for such a trial and expressed alarm that terrorists would be brought to American soil. The White House in 2011 shelved the idea, which was seen as a step toward closing the Guantanamo detention facility.
Civil liberties advocates who appreciated Holder's efforts to afford legal protections for suspected terrorists were frustrated when he later defended the administration's legal justification to kill American-born Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen. The ACLU, in a statement on Holder's departure, cited the case as among those where we've had profound disagreements with Holder.
Vladeck said it's challenging from the outside to fully assess Holder's national security record.
The public's perspective, I think, may be very different from the attorney general's perspective. He knows all the things that never made the front pages.

Load-Date: September 29, 2014


End of Document