Holder, in New York City, Calls Terror Trials Safe
The New York Times
April 2, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 671 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. made a high-profile visit to New York City on Tuesday, meeting with federal prosecutors who last week won the conviction of a former top adviser to Osama bin Laden and forcefully reiterating, at a news conference, his view that the case had ''proven beyond any doubt'' that terrorism trials can ''safely occur'' in the city.
Mr. Holder, who in 2010 dropped a hotly contested plan to try five alleged conspirators in the Sept. 11 attacks -- including Khalid Shaikh Mohammed -- in Manhattan, said at the news conference that the decision on how best to seek convictions against terrorism defendants ''must always be based on prosecutorial considerations and never on political ones.''
He said the trial of Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, 48, the most senior adviser to Bin Laden to be tried in civilian court in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001, ''further demonstrated the reality that bringing terrorists swiftly to justice is fully within the capabilities'' of the civilian courts.
Mr. Holder noted that Mr. Abu Ghaith had been convicted little more than a year after he was brought to the United States, and that he was convicted on all three counts he faced after about six hours of deliberations. ''It is hard to imagine this case being presented with greater efficiency or greater speed,'' Mr. Holder said.
Much of what Mr. Holder said at the news conference was similar to statements he released after the verdict last Wednesday. But his decision to appear publicly with Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, whose office handled the case, seemed intended to underscore the strength of his view.
Mr. Holder's decision to prosecute Mr. Abu Ghaith in civilian court last year was sharply criticized by some members of Congress, including Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican from South Carolina. After the verdict, Mr. Graham said that he still believed Mr. Abu Ghaith should have been held by the military for intelligence purposes.
''He was a treasure trove of potential information, and we blew it,'' Senator Graham said last week. ''We lost an opportunity here with this guy.''
At his news conference, Mr. Holder re-emphasized a statement he made last Wednesday that it would be ''good for our justice system and for our nation if last week's verdict can finally help to put to rest this long debate that we have had.''
In the three-week trial, Mr. Abu Ghaith, a son-in-law of Bin Laden, was convicted of conspiracy to kill Americans and providing material support to terrorists and conspiring to do so.
Prosecutors said that he acted as a spokesman for Bin Laden after Sept. 11. He could face up to life in prison on the lead count when he is sentenced by Judge Lewis A. Kaplan on Sept. 8.
At the news conference, Mr. Holder was asked whether Mr. Mohammed might still be brought to New York for trial. Mr. Mohammed is detained at the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, with no prospect for a trial anytime soon.
Mr. Holder said no, but defended his original determination to try Mr. Mohammed in federal court, announced in November 2009. That decision, he said, was based on recommendations from the United States attorney's offices in Manhattan and for the Eastern District of Virginia.
''I think the decision that I announced at that time was a correct one,'' Mr. Holder said. ''Many of the problems that we're now seeing in the military commissions were predicted in the papers that I reviewed, and helped shape my decision.'' But, he added, ''this is not a decision that we are going to revisit.''
Mr. Holder said that the civilian court system was ''both tried and tested'' and that ''we will continue to rely on it.''
This month another major terrorism trial is to be held in Manhattan -- that of an Islamic preacher, Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, who was extradited to the United States from Britain in 2012. And in November, three suspected Qaeda operatives, including Nazih Abdul-Hamed al-Ruqai, who was captured in Tripoli, Libya, last fall, are to be tried in the same court.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/nyregion/terror-trial-proves-civilian-courts-are-safe-holder-says-in-visit-to-manhattan.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., right, with Preet Bharara, the Manhattan federal prosecutor. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)            

Load-Date: April 2, 2014


End of Document