HOLDER JUSTIFIES THE KILLING OF U.S. TERRORISM SUSPECTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
March 6, 2012 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 498 words
Byline: Charlie Savage, The New York Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. asserted Monday that it is lawful for the government to kill U.S. citizens if officials deem them to be al-Qaida operational leaders planning attacks on the United States and if capturing them alive is not feasible.
"Given the nature of how terrorists act and where they tend to hide, it may not always be feasible to capture a United States citizen terrorist who presents an imminent threat of violent attack," Mr. Holder said in a speech at Northwestern University's law school. "In that case, our government has the clear authority to defend the United States with lethal force."
While Mr. Holder is not the first administration official to address the targeted killing of citizens -- the Pentagon's general counsel, Jeh Johnson, did so last month at Yale Law School -- it was notable for the nation's top law enforcement official to declare that it is constitutional for the government to kill citizens without any judicial review under certain circumstances.
Mr. Holder's remarks about the targeted killing of U.S. citizens were a centerpiece of a speech describing legal principles behind the Obama administration's counterterrorism policies.
"Some have argued that the president is required to get permission from a federal court before taking action against a United States citizen who is a senior operational leader of al-Qaida or associated forces," Mr. Holder said. "This is simply not accurate. 'Due process' and 'judicial process' are not one and the same, particularly when it comes to national security. The Constitution guarantees due process, not judicial process."
Mr. Holder's speech has been planned since last fall, when questions were first raised about the Obama administration's legal justification for the targeted killing of Anwar al-Awlaki, a New Mexico-born radical Muslim cleric who died in a U.S. drone strike last September in Yemen. The administration has rejected calls to release a secret Justice Department Office of Legal Counsel memorandum, which signed off on killing Awlaki. Mr. Holder's speech was designed to offer the public some explanation of the government's reasoning.
Still, the speech contained no footnotes or specific legal citations, and it fell far short of the level of detail contained in the memo -- or in an account of its contents The New York Times published in October, based on descriptions by people who had read it.
The administration has declined to confirm that the memo exists. The Times filed a lawsuit late last year under the Freedom of Information Act asking a judge to order the Justice Department to make it public. In February, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a broader suit, seeking both the memo and the evidence against Awlaki.
Justice Department filings last month against Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a Nigerian who tried to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner on Dec. 25, 2009, offered a detailed account, based on his interrogations, of Awlaki's alleged involvement.

Load-Date: March 7, 2012


End of Document