Holder Won't Rule Out 9/11 Trial in New York
The New York Times
April 15, 2010 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 630 words
Byline: By CHARLIE SAVAGE
Body


WASHINGTON -- Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said Wednesday that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and his accused co-conspirators in the Sept. 11 attacks may yet face trial in a federal court in the Southern District of New York, if not in Lower Manhattan.
  A trial in New York is ''not off the table,'' Mr. Holder said, and the Obama administration may decide ''in a number of weeks.''
  Still, in his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Mr. Holder said the administration was taking ''into consideration the concerns that have been raised by local officials, and by the community in New York City,'' about the cost and disruptiveness of security arrangements that would be needed if the case were to be prosecuted in a Manhattan courtroom. And he did not rule out moving the case to a military commission.
  ''The Southern District of New York, for instance, is a much larger place than simply Manhattan,'' Mr. Holder said. ''There's also the possibility of trying the case in other venues beyond New York.''
  Mr. Holder's remarks drew criticism from the ranking Republican on the panel, Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who said, ''I don't think the people of New York want this trial anywhere in their state or their city, or the Southern District.'' Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, told Mr. Holder there was an ''overwhelming consensus'' in New York that the trial ''should not be held there.'' Mr. Schumer later released a statement saying: ''We know the administration is not going to hold the trial in New York. They should just say it already.''
  Mr. Holder said in November that he had decided to hold the Sept. 11 trial at the federal courthouse in Manhattan. But two months later, the White House pulled that decision back for reconsideration after Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg reversed his prior support.
  Mr. Holder's appearance before the Judiciary Committee on Wednesday was his first since those events. The hearing was dominated by issues related to terrorism detainees including Mr. Holder's reaffirmation that the administration still intended to close the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
  But the dominant topic was where to prosecute those terrorism suspects who will be tried. Republicans generally argued for more extensive use of military commissions, while many Democrats argued for allowing the executive branch to retain the flexibility to use civilian trials.
  Among the Democrats, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California noted that the Bush administration had used civilian trials extensively to prosecute terrorism suspects. Ms. Feinstein accused Republican critics who have been seeking to eliminate that option of politicizing national security issues in a ''reprehensible'' fashion.
  ''I've come to the conclusion that a lot of the attacks are just to diminish you, and I don't think you should buy into that at all,'' she told Mr. Holder. ''I think you should remain strong.'' 
  But Mr. Sessions, who told Mr. Holder that the Justice Department's handling of terrorism trial issues had ''shaken my confidence in your leadership,'' argued that military commissions were a far better option.
  Mr. Sessions also argued that the possibility of a civilian trial meant that if Osama bin Laden were to be captured, his interrogators would have to warn him of his rights to remain silent and to have a defense lawyer. 
  But Mr. Holder said that in the ''unlikely'' event that Mr. bin Laden was captured alive, it would not be necessary to read him his rights. Such warnings, he said, are necessary only when prosecutors intend to use a prisoner's statements in custody as evidence in court -- a step that would not be necessary with Mr. bin Laden because there is already ample evidence to convict him in the 2001 attacks.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX WONG/GETTY IMAGES)                     

Load-Date: April 15, 2010


End of Document