HOLD BACK NOTHING IN AVENGING TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
September 19, 2001 Wednesday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2001 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. A6; Column
Length: 545 words
Byline: Kevin Hermening
Body

Negotiation, diplomacy, compromise and capitulation are the answers of the uninformed. The uninformed do not realize that terrorists are simply anarchists. They offer no solutions to the world's problems, no better ways of operating a government, no improvements to humanity's standards of living or ways of life.Hermening, a financial planner in Mosinee, was a Marine Corps sergeant in Tehran, Iran, in 1979 when the U.S. embassy was seized by Iranian militants. He and the other 51 hostages were held for 444 days.
In fact, because of the pure linking of church and state among Islamic fundamentalists, there is great resentment of the Western world's freedom and tolerance, and huge hatred at how democratic society has been able to strike a healthy balance between the law of man and the law of God in the function of civil government.
While the rescue and cleanup efforts continue, it is time to begin discussing our nation's response to this national tragedy.
Among the only acceptable and appropriate responses:
* The immediate and unequivocal deportation of every illegal alien and immigrant, with a focused effort to remove those of Middle Eastern descent, and especially those who reacted with glee at the horror of Sept. 11. (If you don't have permission to be here, get the hell out!)
* Stepped-up security efforts in our air transportation system, including the placing of armed U.S. marshals aboard every commercial airplane in America, the norm in the 1970s.
* The erection of security fences along the entire U.S. border, with electronic and personnel monitoring to prevent tampering and illegal entry.
* A prompt and massive military response to include the total physical destruction of the capitals of the following nations -- Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Libya, Sudan, and Yemen (unless they agree unequivocally to support our efforts to kill Osama bin Laden). Every military response must be considered, including using nuclear means.
We must also root out every known terrorist group and cell, abroad and domestically, including the infiltration of mosques across America. We must unmask their financial backers.
There can be no negotiating or diplomacy -- they are wasted activities! There can be no safe haven, anywhere. During the interrogation of any suspect in this case, there should be a suspension all civil rights and the reading of Miranda rights, and include representatives of Israel's Mossad intelligence forces.
After the annihilation of each country's capitals, we can make them the same kind of financial offers made to the leaders of Japan and Germany after World War II: Cooperate with us on the establishment of democratic governments, and we will assist you in every way possible; don't cooperate, and your people will perpetually suffer.
For more than 30 years, we have heard how dependent our nation is on foreign oil. Perhaps now is the time to guarantee the United States the free flow of crude oil by outright occupation of enough land in the Middle East to assure our nation that we can continue our way of life.
For 25 years, Americans have been tiptoeing around the threat of international terrorism. Its roots are elsewhere, but its backers are here. It is time to eliminate the threat, and make our children feel safe once again.

Graphic

 
Photo of Kevin Hermening

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document