Homeland security director to speak in Washington D.C.
Colorado Springs Business Journal (Colorado Springs, CO)
May 3, 2010 Monday


Copyright 2010 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 313 words
Byline: Rebecca Tonn
Body


The UCCS interim director of homeland security will speak May 6 at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., about legal issues that impact national security.
Kurt Johnson was one of nine national legal experts selected to introduce the manuscript, "Legal Issues in the Struggle Against Terror," edited by University of Virginia School of Law professors John Norton Moore and Robert F. Turner, to the press club.
The volume aims to provide legal scholars, policy makers and others with information about legal issues in the current armed conflict. The manuscript contains 19 chapters that address various aspects of the ongoing struggle against terror, including threats of nuclear and biological terrorism, cyber terrorism and protecting privacy while sharing information with allies and within the U.S. government.
Johnson's chapter, "The Relations Between Military and Civilian Authorities within the United States," provides insights on the challenges that the U.S. military faces with the homeland defense mission. Johnson co-authored the chapter with Kevin Cieply, associate professor, John Marshall Law School, Atlanta, and Lt. Col. Jeanne Meyer, U.S. Air Force, legal adviser to U.S. forces in Iraq.
"I often heard the phrase 'everything has changed' after the 9/11 attacks," Johnson said. "Yet our Constitution, and most domestic and international law concerning the conduct of war, remain intact and unchanged. This book tackles how to meet our new and unconventional enemies within the bounds of that conventional law. "
Before joining the UCCS staff, Johnson was the senior legal adviser for North American Aerospace Defense Command and U.S. Northern Command. He is a retired U.S. Navy captain.
The Center for Homeland Security is one of four centers within the National Institute of Science, Space and Security Centers at UCCS.
For more information, visit www.nisssc.org.

Load-Date: May 18, 2010


End of Document