Homegrown terrorists a growing problem Officials say radicals using Internet to reach, train converts
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 8, 2006, Friday


Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P9A
Length: 587 words
Byline: RICHARD B. SCHMITT, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON - Five years after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, federal law-enforcement and intelligence officials are struggling to adapt to an increasingly worrisome threat: homegrown terrorists in the United States and abroad who are not directly connected to al-Qaida or other recognized terrorist groups.
The concern is driven by recent arrests of terrorism suspects accused of plotting mayhem in countries as diverse as Germany and Denmark, as well as an alleged Canadian-based plot that involved U.S. citizens.
While they say they have not discounted the continuing grave threat that even a splintered al-Qaida network poses, U.S. officials said that the enemy from within is posing a new and challenging danger.
Both U.S. Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales and FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III remarked on the subject in interviews this week marking the fifth anniversary of the attacks on New York's World Trade Center twin towers and the Pentagon.
"When you are talking about people that live and work in neighborhoods in this country that receive training over the Internet, that are radicalized over the Internet . . . it presents different challenges for the law-enforcement community to try to identify them," Gonzales said Tuesday. "What we are seeing is a rising threat of homegrown terrorists . . . not just in this country but all over the world."
Gonzales addressed the issue again Thursday during a speech in New York in which he called for greater cooperation between federal authorities and state and local crime-fighters. He said terrorist groups such as al-Qaida were "finding disaffected souls in neighborhoods, mosques, prisons and universities all over the world, including our own back yards."
Mueller said Wednesday in a briefing with reporters that the bureau has "certainly several hundred" individuals under investigation in the United States as part of terrorism-related intelligence and criminal probes. He said the bureau also was devoting resources to understanding the "radicalization" process - how people come to embrace extremist views.
"One cannot dismiss the potency still of al-Qaida to undertake attacks. But, by the same token, there also are those groups of individuals, as we have seen in various countries, that are motivated by radical Islamist ideology to undertake actions on their own," Mueller said.
Among other cases, he cited the arrests in Denmark earlier this week of nine men - including an ethnic Dane - suspected of gathering explosives for a terrorist plot.
The FBI's deputy director, John Pistole, said during the same briefing that most of the subjects of the investigations were being examined for financial ties to terrorist groups rather than as operatives. "These are not bomb throwers, for the most part," Pistole said. "These are people who are out there raising money."
The ability to reach potential converts over the Internet is enabling terrorists in countries thought to be immune from attack, experts said. For example, until the August arrests in Berlin of two Lebanese men accused of plotting to bomb two trains, many Germans did not consider their country a high-profile target - in part because of their government's opposition to the Iraq war.
"I think what really disturbs (U.S. officials) is to see growing numbers of people who do not fit any profiling model - they are not from the Middle East, they are not converted to any religion," said Evan Kohlmann, a terrorism expert who has advised the Justice Department in several terrorism prosecutions.

Load-Date: September 8, 2006


End of Document