HOMELAND SECURITY CHIEF POWERS RESIGNS CRITICS CALLED FOR HIS FIRING OVER ANTI-TERROR CONTRACT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 2, 2010 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE; Pg. A-1
Length: 698 words
Byline: Tom Barnes, Post-Gazette Harrisburg Bureau
Body


HARRISBURG -- Critics of state Homeland Security Director James F. Powers Jr. got what they wanted Friday, when he announced he is leaving state government after four years.
The American Civil Liberties Union, state Sen. Jim Ferlo, D-Highland Park, Pittsburgh Councilman Doug Shields and groups that opposed Marcellus Shale drilling had lambasted Mr. Powers over the past two weeks because of a so-called anti-terrorism contract he agreed to.
Mr. Ferlo urged Gov. Ed Rendell to fire Mr. Powers after word got out two weeks ago about a $103,000 contract he'd signed with a 6-year-old Israeli/American company called the Institute of Terrorism Research and Response.
The contract led the institute to track and monitor meetings, rallies and protests held by various groups around the state, including a Pittsburgh City Council meeting on Marcellus Shale drilling, protests by environmental activists against natural gas drilling, anti-tax protests, school funding rallies and gay/lesbian parades.
The institute would find out where the protests were taking place and who was leading them and relay the information to state Homeland Security officials and law enforcement officials in affected towns, with some information also going to gas industry officials.
The ACLU and other critics claimed the institute was "spying" on legal meetings and gatherings, and urged that Mr. Powers be fired for violating people's constitutional right of free speech and assembly.
Mr. Rendell was sharply critical of the contract, which he canceled, calling it a severe lapse in judgment and a waste of money. But Mr. Rendell refused to fire Mr. Powers and said blame for the ill-conceived contract shouldn't be placed on just one person.
In announcing Mr. Powers' resignation Friday, Mr. Rendell said the director made the decision to resign on his own. He praised Mr. Powers for serving the U.S. during a 30-year career with the Army, some of it spent with Special Forces.
Mr. Powers said he was resigning "with deep regret." A few days ago he had apologized for any unintended consequences of the contract with the anti-terrorism institute, and said he hadn't meant to infringe on anyone's rights. He said he was trying to protect public safety by keeping a watch out for potential terrorist attacks.
He said all his actions during his four years with Homeland Security were meant to foster "the security and well-being of the commonwealth citizenry -- our greatest resource."
Mr. Powers said that giving information and tools to municipal officials "to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from incidents resulting from all hazards (terrorism attacks, major disasters and other emergencies) has been and should remain the primary goal of commonwealth preparedness strategies; it will also remain our greatest challenge."
Mr. Ferlo said he thinks Mr. Powers' departure is "absolutely" good for the state.
Mr. Ferlo said he thought that both Mr. Powers and Robert French, director of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, should be fired. But Mr. French is remaining in his job.
As for the ITRR contract, the senator said, "It was a sham, certainly not a justifiable use of state funds. The information violated people's civil rights and liberties."
Sen. Lisa Baker, R-Luzerne, whose Senate panel held a hearing Monday into the contract, said Mr. Powers' decision to leave was "the right one."
"Given the troubling revelations about the security contract and his continuing defense of it, his position was untenable," she said.
Mr. Shields said he's glad about Mr. Powers' exit but said he still needs to answer more questions about the institute, which, according to its website, has offices in Philadelphia and Jerusalem.
"Before he goes on his merry way, there should be a complete disclosure about this business between him and the institute," Mr. Shields said. "How did he meet this institute? What was their relationship? And what was his relationship with the oil and gas industry?"
Gas drilling protesters were upset that some of the "anti-terrorism" information about their protests was forwarded to gas company officials.
Mr. Powers was being paid $106,602 a year. His resignation is effective Friday.

Notes

Bureau Chief Tom Barnes: tbarnes@post-gazette.com or 1-717-787-4254./

Graphic

 
PHOTO: James Powers

Load-Date: October 5, 2010


End of Document