Homeland Opportunity
The New York Times
June 26, 2011 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 652 words
Byline: By SCOTT SHANE
Scott Shane is a national security reporter in the Washington /bureau of The Times.
Body


JIHAD JOE
Americans Who Go to War in the Name of Islam
By J. M. Berger
265 pp. Potomac Books. $29.95
Mention Fort Hood or Times Square, and there's a fair chance Americans will think not of soldiers in Texas or neon in Manhattan but of terrorism. Since 2009, a flurry of homegrown plots has alarmed counterterrorism officials and prompted a reassessment of the widely accepted notion that American Muslims are especially resistant to the siren call of Al Qaeda.
J. M. Berger's ''Jihad Joe,'' a sober, factual account of the Americans who have been lured to the cause of religious violence, offers a useful reminder that this phenomenon is nothing new, long predating the Sept. 11 attacks. At least two Americans were at the siege of Mecca by extremists in 1979, often viewed as the beginning of modern violent jihad. One was present at the creation of Al Qaeda in 1988, according to Berger, a journalist and terrorism researcher who runs the Web site Intelwire.com.
Americans fought with the mujahedeen against the Soviet Army in Afghanistan in the 1980s and with the Bosnian Muslims against the Serbs in the Balkans in the 1990s. Both were popular causes in the United States, but the Afghan jihad would give birth to Al Qaeda, and many Qaeda members would fight in Bosnia.
Meanwhile, a small network of American Muslim militants began to consider the United States as a target, assisting with the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center and the foiled plot the same year directed at the United Nations and other landmarks. ''Jihad Joe'' describes how a handful of zealots gradually shifted their focus from Bosnia and other objectives overseas to the United States.
Especially striking is the story of Ali Mohamed, the former Egyptian Army officer who, before moving to America, was recruited by Ayman al-Zawahri, the eventual second in command of Al Qaeda. After being rebuffed in his attempt to infiltrate the C.I.A., Mohamed enlisted in the United States Army in 1986 and soon became a trainer for elite Special Operations troops at Fort Bragg.
Sgt. Mohamed, who spoke English, French and Hebrew in addition to Arabic, hardly bothered to hide his views, stating in a military training film that as a Muslim he was obligated to impose Islamic law everywhere. When the F.B.I. finally searched his California home in 1998, they found Qaeda manuals and intelligence reports, coded letters and instructions on making explosives, Berger says.
As he notes, the Americans attracted to jihad in recent years are generally far less formidable -- amateurs with no military background, few technical skills and scant knowledge of Islam, though there are exceptions. Perhaps the most significant is Anwar al-Awlaki, the Yemeni-American cleric who became a remarkable recruiter for the jihadi cause before joining the Qaeda branch in Yemen. The book's account of Awlaki characteristically avoids sensationalism and does not overstate the limited evidence for his possible assistance to the 9/11 hijackers.
Most of ''Jihad Joe'' is a useful compilation of what has been reported elsewhere in the press or in trial testimony, supplemented by interviews or documents Berger obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. Most original is his description of the rising significance of the Web and his assessment of the ''jihobbyists'' who dabble in online militancy and sometimes progress to violence.
At a time when some politicians and pundits blur the line between Islam and terrorism, Berger, who knows this subject far better than the demagogues, sharply cautions against vilifying Muslim Americans. ''Extreme and indiscriminate anti-Muslim rhetoric helps to validate the worldview of our enemies -- the premise that America's wars are indeed wars against Islam,'' Berger writes. ''You cannot tell someone, 'You are my enemy,' and then blame them for believing you.''
It is a timely warning from an expert who has not lost his /perspective.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Anwar al-Awlaki in a 2010 video. (PHOTOGRAPH FROM REUTERS)                                      

Load-Date: June 26, 2011


End of Document