Hometown briefs
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
September 9, 2005 Friday
City Edition


Copyright 2005 Lincoln Journal Star, All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 3
Length: 426 words
Dateline: Lincoln, NE 
Body


PUBLIC INVITED TO CLOSING OF PEACE PARK ON SUNDAY
Prairie Peace Park will permanently close Sunday.
The public is invited to the closing ceremony from 5 to 6:30 p.m. Sunday. Groups will begin removing exhibits Monday.
The park will be open from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. today and Saturday, and 1 to 8 p.m. Sunday.
UNL PLANS SEPT. 11 MEMORIAL EVENT
The University of Nebraska-Lincoln will conduct a  Sept. 11 memorial event at 8 p.m. Sunday at the Union Plaza north of the Nebraska Union, 14th and R streets on the UNL City Campus.
Members of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln faculty, military representatives and students will light candles, speak and join in a public remembrance.
The event is free and open to the public.
The University Program Council and the Association of Students of the University of Nebraska are endorsing the event planned by two Foundation for the Defense of Democracies fellows at UNL, Josh Roos and Sarah Demmel.
Roos is a senior at UNL studying psychology. Demmel, also a senior, is studying economics and international studies. Both students won a yearlong fellowship through the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, a nonpartisan nonprofit think tank in Washington, D.C., advocating against terrorism.
The fellowship included a two-week graduate-level seminar studying terrorism in Israel during this past summer. As Roos and Demmel studied the issues of terrorism, they realized the importance of remembering Sept. 11 in order to understand the gravity of the issues at hand.
UNITED WAY KICKS OFF COMMUNITY CAMPAIGN
United Way kicked off its 2005 community campaign with a breakfast event at The Cornhusker hotel Thursday.
The campaign starts with 30 Pacesetter companies showing their commitment to United Way by raising $1.5 million which represents 30 percent of the $5,050,000 campaign goal.
"If we can increase the dollars given to these three areas, we will have given our children a better opportunity for the future," said Rich Vierk, 2005 campaign chair.
Hunger and homelessness, child outreach and domestic violence are three areas that United Way will continue to focus on during this 2005 "what matters â?¦ in Lincoln campaign."
Medicare drug program information to be given
Information about the new Medicare prescription drug program will be provided from 7 to 9 p.m. at the Monday meeting of the Alzheimer's Association Support Group.
There also will be time for the caregivers of persons with Alzheimer's disease and related disorders. For more information, contact Teresa Stitcher Fritz at 420-2540 or toll free, (800) 272-3900.

Load-Date: September 13, 2005


End of Document