Homeland Security expands PSA campaign in seven states, including New York
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
December 14, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 561 words
Byline: Todd Etshman
Body


The Department of Homeland Security is expanding its “If You See Something, Say Something” public awareness campaign to Spanish-speaking radio and television stations in seven states, including New York. The announcement was made at a White House roundtable meeting with Hispanic law enforcement groups earlier this week.
The Spanish language public service announcements encourage people to report suspicious activity to law enforcement. The campaign was originally implemented by the New York City Metropolitan Transportation Authority and is now licensed to DHS to encourage the public and frontline employees to identify and report indicators of terrorism, crime and other threats to law enforcement and/or transportation authorities.
The public awareness campaign was launched in English in July 2010 and is in use in 9,000 federal buildings, the aviation industry, the National Football League and Walmart.
In announcing the PSA expansion, the DHS said reports based solely on race, ethnicity, national origin or religious affiliation would not be considered suspicious and the public should only report specific behavior such as an unattended backpack in a public place or someone trying to break into a restricted area.
Only reports that document behavior reasonably indicative of criminal activity related to terrorism will be shared with federal partners.
“One way we have promoted the ‘If you See Something, Say Something’ campaign is by airing PSAs on television and radio encouraging individuals to report suspicious activity-a suspicious bag or package, someone who is acting in a suspicious manner, or a vehicle that seems out of place-to authorities,” DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano said in her blog after the meeting on Monday. “We want to reach as many people as possible with these messages because every person and every community has a role to play.”
In counties around Rochester where farm workers and fruit pickers work, obtaining the trust and cooperation may require more than a short PSA. Due to previous initiatives such as Secure Communities, many legal and non-legal immigrants in the United States and counties surrounding the Rochester area are reluctant to approach law enforcement. They fear being caught up in immigration proceedings against them or their family members.
Peter Mares, manager of La Casa, a transitional housing facility for migrant farm workers in Sodus, said the Homeland Security PSA might work in New York City, but is unlikely to work there.
“They can’t afford to [report suspicious activity] here,” he said. “I know people that have been robbed and they don’t even report it.”
Mares said farm workers fear they could end up in a detention center for a minor traffic offense.
“The fear these people have is huge,” said Sodus documentary filmmaker Nancy Ghertner. “They have an innate fear of the police and their kids walk around with their heads down. It affects everyone.”
“These people are definitely afraid to contact any authority regarding any crime,” Mares said.
In an October speech at St. John Fisher College, Albany Law School Professor Paul Finkelman noted the upstate New York farm worker community’s distrust of law enforcement.
The National Latino Police Officers Association and the Hispanic American Police Command Officers Association supported expansion of the campaign to Spanish-speaking radio and television.

Load-Date: December 21, 2011


End of Document