HOMELAND SECURITY FUNDS COVER NATURAL DISASTERS, TOO
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
March 10, 2009 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A11
Length: 372 words
Byline: Patricia Simms
Body


The proposed 2009 Wisconsin Homeland Security strategy was developed specifically for hazards in Wisconsin, said Lori Getter, spokeswoman for Wisconsin Office of Emergency Management.
The draft says flooding and tornadoes, severe winter storms and wildfires, are the most frequent and damaging natural hazards here.
"Major floods have occurred in eight of the 10 years," the draft says. "With an average of 21 tornadoes per year, Wisconsin ranks 17th in frequency and number of fatalities." The plan puts damage estimates for the June 2008 flooding at an estimated $926 million "and climbing."
What does this have to do with terrorism? Ryan Sugden, spokesman for the Office of Justice Assistance, said Wisconsin is taking an "all-hazards" approach rather than focusing solely on anti-terrorism. "We have invested Homeland Security dollars to build the capacity of local agencies to respond to major incidents, whether natural or man-made," he said.
The Homeland Security Strategy draft is available online at http://homelandsecurity.wi.gov.
The agency's alphabet soup
Don't try reviewing the proposed 2009 Wisconsin Homeland Security strategy without the one-page cheat sheet on acronyms and the eight pages of definitions.
The 36 acronyms run from AAR (After Action Report) and ATTF (Anti-Terrorism Task Force) through CSPV (Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence) and OPS (Office of Preparedness and Security) to SNS (Strategic National Stockpile), TCL (Target Capabilities List), TLO (Terrorism Liaison Officer), and UASI (Urban Area Security Initiative).
For more, the Homeland Security Council recommends a visit to www.llis.gov, the national network of Lessons Learned Information Sharing and Best Practices. Unfortunately, "access to the system is restricted to emergency response providers and homeland security officials."
Deciphering bureaucrat-speak
One of the goals included in the proposed strategy is the following: "Continue to work closely with our federal partners to attain additional funding and leverage existing homeland security funds in hardening critical infrastructure sites through active patrol and actual structural hardening."
What does this mean? "Beefing up security," said Wisconsin spokeswoman Lori Getter.

Load-Date: March 11, 2009


End of Document