Homeland Security rep talks of terrorism
Newton Daily News, Iowa
April 15, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Newton Daily News, Iowa
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 472 words
Byline: John Jennings, Newton Daily News, Iowa
Body


Apr. 15--Philip Pitzen knows the many ways businesses can leave themselves vulnerable to a violent outside attack. The protective security adviser for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has experienced firsthand the security lapses by businesses that leave them open to disruption. Pitzen talked to the Jasper County Local Emergency Planning Committee meeting Wednesday morning.
"You're not going to have ninjas striking in the dark of night in Newton," Pitzen said. "But there are reasons why you need to be prepared."
Pitzen cited the theoretical case of the fellow in the red 4-wheel-drive pick-up. He's not going to come in through the front door, because everybody knows him, and the front is well-monitored. Instead, he heads for the back door, or the loading dock, because he knows those entrances are less secure.
"He stops at the back door, shoves a gun in his belt and he has been hearing something about his wife, and he's going to get to the bottom of it," Pitzen said.
Businesses need to stop and use some common sense to assess their vulnerability to attack. He said it is very easy now to just go online and buy a Fed Ex shirt and a hand cart and go shopping. Back doors to businesses should be locked, and loading docks should be monitored at all times.
"If your business has a public entrance, it needs to be staffed," Pitzen said.
Disciplinary processes at work are critical as well, he said. If employees perceive that they are being treated differently or unfairly, it could lead to ill feelings and violent actions. Human resource departments are an important tool to ensure business safety.
Pitzen said he advises businesses and organizations about the safety and vulnerability of their offices and workplaces. Although the face of terrorism is changing, there are about two dozen sites in Iowa that are on Homeland Security's top tier of potential terrorist targets.
"We all know about 9-11 but now we're seeing the lone wolves acting on their own," he said.
About 50 or 60 plots have been foiled by law enforcement agencies in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001, Pitzen said. He urged citizens to report suspicious activities to the authorities, and not to feel embarrassed if what you see turns out to be nothing of consequence.
"Awareness makes us safer, but the threat continues," he said.
John Jennings can be contacted at 792-3121 ext. 425 or via e-mail at jjennings@newtondailynews.com
To see more of the Newton Daily News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.newtondailynews.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, Newton Daily News, Iowa Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document