Homeland Security nominee contrasts sharply with Ridge
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 12, 2005 Wednesday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A01
Length: 1065 words
Byline: By PHILIP DINE Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The face and even the functioning of the Homeland Security Department are likely to change as a result of President George W. Bush's choice Tuesday of Michael Chertoff to replace outgoing Secretary Tom Ridge.
Bush called Chertoff, who helped devise the administration's legal response to fighting terrorism as a Justice Department official, "a brilliant thinker."
Chertoff, 51, a New Jersey native and the son of a rabbi, said he was "deeply honored" by his nomination. He was the president's second choice, after former New York City Police Commissioner Bernard Kerik withdrew amid revelations about his personal life.
The contrasts between Chertoff and Ridge -- the first and only secretary the department has had -- could scarcely be sharper.
Ridge was a public figure, elected to Congress and as a governor, and was frequently touted for a national political ticket. Chertoff has been a consummate behind-the-scenes player, active in the legal struggle against terrorism but virtually unknown beyond the lawyers' circle.
Ridge is affable, outgoing and often spontaneous; Chertoff is private, driven and highly disciplined.
Ridge is a politically moderate bridge-builder; Chertoff is strongly conservative. To theextent that he has a public persona, it stems from his role in the Whitewater investigation of then-President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton -- an inquiry many Democrats saw as a witch hunt.
"He's smart, he's honest, he has an intense type of personality. He's definitely conservative, but he treats people who disagree with him with respect," said Juliette Kayyem, a Harvard University legal expert on counterterrorism. She led a task force on the legal strategies of the war on terrorism, on which Chertoff served.
Chertoff is highly regarded for his acumen by those who work in the field of homeland security and law enforcement, Kayyem said.
"Everyone loved Ridge, but I don't think a lot of people respected him," she said. "Everyone respects Chertoff. I don't think a lot of people love him -- and I don't think he cares."
Ridge spent much time working on relations with local first responders, reassuring the public and assessing the threat level, while also helping get the department off the ground.
Given Chertoff's background as an aggressive prosecutor and his personality, he probably will be more aggressive and take the battle to the terrorists, said James Carafano, homeland security expert at the Heritage Foundation and a 25-year Army veteran.
"We've focused too much on how we're going to protect every little train station and airplane, and how to respond after the next 9/11," Carafano said. "There's a lot more that can and should be done in terms of stopping terrorism in the first place, and I think the bigger bang for the buck is in domestic counterterrorism, in intelligence and in early warning."
That will require closer ties between the Homeland Security Department and the Justice Department, including the FBI, "and the fact that Chertoff came from the Justice Department and knows that community well is really going to help," Carafano said. By many accounts, Ridge and outgoing Attorney General John Ashcroft have not worked well together. 
Most observers agree that Chertoff, previously confirmed by the Senate for both judicial and executive branch posts, will be readily approved again. In fact, his detractors say that was the main reason Bush chose him, after the fiasco with Kerik.
The biggest knock against Chertoff is that he brings scant management experience to perhaps the most challenging managerial task the federal government has seen in decades.
"I think we have to be honest. He's not really qualified to be the secretary of homeland security," said P.J. Crowley, director of the homeland security program at the Center for American Progress and former National Security Council member.
As secretary, Chertoff would oversee what many term a "merger-in-process," helping meld 22 diverse and sometimes competing agencies and their 180,000 employees. Among his specific tasks in the near future would be implementing the planned tightening of border and port security and overseeing changes in the department's personnel system.
"He brings nothing to the job that would suggest he's up to that challenge," Crowley said.
Paul Light, a Brookings Institution expert on homeland security who testified to Congress on the formation of the Homeland Security Department, dismissed Bush's praise of Chertoff as a "practical organizer" and "skilled manager."
"This guy is as smart as they come, but let's be serious here," Light said. "What you need at the top of the agency are people who know how to make things run, so he's going to have to find himself some pretty serious senior managers."
Funding for homeland security will be an issue for Chertoff, with the administration bent on changes in Social Security and with the rising costs of the Iraq war, said Dave Heyman, who runs the homeland security program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
But while Ridge had a stronger political background, Chertoff knows the Washington scene better, Kayyem said. "He'll get his own team of serious D.C. 9/11-type people. Ridge came in with his Pennsylvania team, which I think hurt him incredibly," she said.
Greg Nojeim of the American Civil Liberties Union's Washington office said he worries that civil liberties will suffer under Chertoff. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., is expected to raise questions about Chertoff's role in crafting the administration's legal war on terrorism.
Chertoff differs from Bush's other second-term nominees in not being a White House insider or longtime Bush confidant and not having a compelling personal story. That would be good for the Cabinet overall, said Sen. Jim Talent, R-Mo.
"Every Cabinet should be a balance," Talent said. "You want people who come from the president's inner circle, but you also want people who don't. Chertoff is a guy who developed his own career."
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Michael Chertoff
Age: 51, born Nov. 28, 1953 Education: Bachelor's degree from Harvard University, 1975; law degree from Harvard University, 1978 Experience: Judge on the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 2003-present; headed the Justice Department's criminal division, 2001-03; federal prosecutor in New Jersey, 1990-94 Family: Married, two children

Graphic

 
photo
 PHOTO - (Michael)  Chertoff Helped craft legal strategy against terrorism   

Load-Date: January 12, 2005


End of Document