HOMEGROWN SENSE
Daily News (New York)
August 5, 2011 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 32
Length: 375 words
Body


In the real world, the threat of homegrown radical Islamist terrorism is serious. And in the real world, the vast majority of U.S. Muslims have no desire to hijack American democracy.
Two leaders playing against political type have made clear these two compatible facts.
In unveiling what was billed as a national strategy to counter radicalization, President Obama made no bones that American Muslims can be susceptible to violent indoctrination. That's a fact too many on the far left remain in denial about.
While some liberals shy from saying Islamist terror is a primary threat, Obama said: "Al Qaeda and its affiliates have attempted to recruit and radicalize people to terrorism here in the United States, as we have seen in several plots and attacks."
Even Republican Homeland Security Committee Chairman Pete King, who has been criticized by Democrats for holding hearings on homegrown Islam-inspired violence, said he welcomed Obama's identification of Al Qaeda as the "preeminent" terror threat facing the nation.
Meanwhile, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie demolished another delusion: That hardworking, mainstream Muslim Americans are to be viewed with suspicion simply because of their heritage.
At issue: Christie's appointment of a lawyer named Sohail Mohammed to the state bench.
Mohammed is a Muslim. And, like many other accomplished attorneys, he represented individuals detained in the immediate aftermath of 9/11.
One critic accused Mohammed of being "a longtime mouthpiece for radical Islamists." Another said Christie was "in bed with the enemy." Another said New Jersey took "its first step toward becoming the Sharia State." Christie hit back:
"Sharia law has nothing to do with this at all. It's crazy. . . . The guy's an American citizen who has been an admitted lawyer to practice in the State of New Jersey, swearing an oath to uphold the laws of New Jersey, the constitution of the state of New Jersey and the Constitution of the United States of America . . . This sharia law business is crap. It's just crazy. And I'm tired of dealing with the crazies. It's just unnecessary to be accusing this guy of things just because of his religious backround."
The cool breeze of sanity: When the political weather swelters, it sure feels good.

Load-Date: August 5, 2011


End of Document