Hong Kong International Airport Resumes Flights After Days of Chaos and Cancellations
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
August 19, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 364 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Some of the protesters apologized Wednesday for the disruption at the airport.
More than 300 flights were cancelled Tuesday and Monday out of the Hong Kong airport after thousands of pro-democracy protesters packed into the main terminal.
Hong Kong's Airport Authority said on Wednesday it had obtained "an interim injunction to restrain persons from unlawfully and willfully obstructing or interfering" with airport operations.
Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell tweeted late Monday, "the people of Hong Kong are bravely standing up to the Chinese Communist Party as Beijing tries to encroach on their autonomy and Freedom".
China has refused port visits to Hong Kong by two US warships amid continued trade tensions and diplomatic spats between the two sides over pro-democracy protests in the Asian financial hub.
Signs had appeared that China was stepping up preparations to mobilize mainland forces to quell the weeks-long uprising in Hong Kong.
Dwayne Johnson 'The Rock' Marries Longtime Bae Lauren Hashian
Dwayne Johnson and Lauren Hashian , who met each other in 2007, share two daughters - Tiana , aged 1, and Jasmine , aged 3. Congrats goes out to the happy couple! "I just refer to her as my wife all the time", Rock stated.
A senior Chinese official said "sprouts of terrorism" were emerging in Hong Kong, given instances of violent attacks against police officers.
On Tuesday, President Trump tweeted, "Intelligence has informed us that the Chinese Government is moving troops to the Border with Hong Kong".
"Extreme political ideas have found frequent expression in Hong Kong, with some even raising "Hong Kong independence" slogans recently".
Swire Pacific said that rule of law is the cornerstone of Hong Kong's flourishing economy and people's peaceful life, so "We must act now to stop the violence and preserve stability, peace and prosperity of Hong Kong".
People online have been closely watching what Beijing might do next after China this week condemned some protesters for using risky tools to attack police and said the clashes showed "sprouts of terrorism".
Some reactions on China's social media platforms called for Beijing to intervene while many others urged calm.

Load-Date: August 20, 2019


End of Document