Hong Kong protesters shut down airport
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 13, 2019 Tuesday


Copyright 2019 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 446 words
Byline: YANAN WANG and CHRISTOPHER BODEEN The Associated Press
Body


BY YANAN WANG
and CHRISTOPHER BODEEN
The Associated Press
HONG KONG - One of the world's busiest airports canceled all flights after thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators crowded into Hong Kong's main terminal Monday, while the central government in Beijing issued an ominous characterization of the protest movement as something approaching "terrorism."
The extreme action by the largely leaderless movement seemed calculated to prompt a stern response from Beijing, and Communist Party leader Xi Jinping's administration responded within hours.
No new violence was reported by Monday evening, although the city remained on edge after more than two months of near-daily and increasingly bloody confrontations between protesters and police.
The demonstrations that have drawn more than 1 million people at times call for democratic reforms and an independent inquiry into police conduct, with both protesters and police adopting ever-more extreme tactics.
In Beijing, the Cabinet's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office issued a statement saying the situation in Hong Kong was "beginning to show the sprouts of terrorism" and constituted an "existential threat" to the population.
At the airport, a flight attendant protesting on his day off, who gave only his surname, Lau, to avoid repercussions from his employer, said heavy-handed police tactics had alienated some people.
"The police have told a lot of lies to Hong Kong people. We cannot believe them anymore. We have to come here to protest," Lau said. China has reportedly threatened to bar air crews taking part in protests.
Another protester, who identified herself only as Bea, said she took the day off from work to express her outrage because "I feel that I have to do something. ... It's just too sad to see what has happened. The police action has gone totally nonsensical."
In an interview in Berlin, Chinese dissident artist Ai Weiwei said China's leadership can now only resort to force, since it has failed in its quest to win hearts and minds in Hong Kong.
Ai, who has lived in Berlin since 2015, said U.S. President Donald Trump's characterization of the protests as "riots" and as an issue between Hong Kong and China seems to have only encouraged the authorities.
The U.S. "should be supporting freedom, and democracy, and freedom of speech - for a major power to give that kind of signal to another, authoritarian society is very improper and it will cost more life and more blood," he said.
"Hong Kong people will not be the loser, because they're on the right side of history," he said.
Copyright 2019 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Load-Date: August 13, 2019


End of Document