Hong Kong media tycoon Jimmy Lai charged under security law
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 12, 2020 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 536 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Hong Kong media outlets are reporting that pro-democracy activist and media tycoon Jimmy Lai has been indicted for allegedly violating Beijing's new national security law.
Lai, his younger son Ian Lai Yiu-yan and Royston Chow Tat-kuen - a senior executive at Lai's media company Next Digital - were arrested in August by national security police on suspicion of colluding with foreign forces, one of four crimes covered by the new law.
He is the most high-profile person to be charged under the law, which was imposed by Beijing in June.
He is scheduled to appear in court on December 12, and could face a maximum punishment of life imprisonment.
Authorities in Hong Kong and Beijing say it is vital to plug gaping holes in national security defences exposed by months of sometimes violent anti-government and anti-China protests that rocked the global financial hub over the previous year.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying on Friday slammed the United States' crackdown on Chinese companies as groundless, urging the latter to stop abusing the concept of "national security". That time he was detained on suspicion of fraud.
The legislation outlaws secession, subversion, terrorism and collision with foreign forces to intervene in Hong Kong's internal affairs.
According to a Bloomberg report, Haze Fan was seen being escorted from her apartment building by plain clothes security officials on Monday, shortly after she had been in contact with one of her editors. The outspoken critic of Beijing faces the prospect of extradition to China and life in prison under the sweeping national security law the country imposed last summer.
FKA twigs Accuses Shia LaBeouf of Sexual Battery and Assault in Lawsuit
He then began strangling her with his hands, whispering, "if you don't stop you are going to lose me", according to the suit. In today's lawsuit, FKA Twigs , born Tahliah Barnett, lays out a slew of horrific allegations .
Bloomberg said it has been seeking information about Fan's whereabouts from the Chinese government and from China's embassy in Washington.
Ms Fan has worked for Bloomberg since 2017 and previously worked for CNBC, CBS News, Al Jazeera and Reuters, Bloomberg reported.
A longtime public supporter of democracy in both Hong Kong and mainland China, the Guangdong Province native has been a frequent target of Beijing's ire.
The spokesperson added that the US side often cites so-called "national security threats" as a baseless excuse to put pressure on Chinese companies with no evidence.
"China has chose to take action against USA executive officials, congressmen, non-governmental organization personnel and their immediate family members who have performed badly on Hong Kong-related issues, " foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said, according to the South China Morning Post.
In July 2019, Lai met with U.S. Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo at the White House to discuss Hong Kong's political situation.
He was also arrested in February and April on charges of taking part in unauthorised protests. In addition, he faces charges for his involvement in an unauthorized June vigil commemorating the anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown.

Load-Date: December 12, 2020


End of Document