Hope amid the terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 18, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 8A; EDITORIAL
Length: 471 words
Body


The Middle East's greatest hopes are forever intertwined with its worst  fears, and the region's noblest acts of heroism are never far removed from the  most depraved acts of cowardice. That was never more apparent than in the past  few days, when historic steps toward a true peace between Israel and its Arab  neighbors were marred by the deadly consequences of a terrorist kidnapping.
The awarding of this year's Nobel Peace Prize to Palestinian leader Yasser  Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Israeli Foreign Minister  Shimon Peres was a recognition of the important progress that already has been  made toward Israeli-Palestinian peace. This week's signing of a treaty, ending  46 years of formal hostilities between Israel and Jordan, is a breakthrough  that could lead to an even broader regional accord.
MIDEAST
Yet, nothing comes simply or easily in the Middle East.
The awarding of the peace prize was marred by the controversy surrounding  the decision to honor Arafat, who often has seemed to embody the worst  elements of the region's dual nature. Those who objected to the choice of  Arafat are ignoring the history of the prize, which often has been used to  honor those who were able to rise above their past sins in an effort to  achieve a greater good.
Arafat's sins are a matter of record. His habitual untrustworthiness and  refusal to renounce terrorism as a political weapon frustrated the cause of  peace for decades. Ultimately, though, Arafat's individual act of courage and  statesmanship created the conditions Rabin and Peres needed to pursue an  accord with the Palestinians.
Arafat is still in the process of proving his commitment to the peace  process, but his response to the extremist Hamas group's kidnapping of Israeli  Cpl. Nachshon Waxman won over some of his skeptics. Palestinian authorities  scoured the Gaza Strip in what turned out to be a misplaced effort to locate  Waxman's kidnappers. Israeli officials had to be reassured by Arafat's  willingness to risk Hamas' wrath in an effort to enforce the law in the area  now under Palestinian control.
Arafat, Rabin and Peres all were quick to express their intention to keep  the peace process on track despite the bloody end to the kidnapping drama.  Jordan's King Hussein also refused to allow another gruesome act of terrorism  to defer his own decision to make peace with Israel. Hamas and other terrorist  organizations will continue to stop at nothing in an effort to perpetuate the  Arab world's extended state of hostility with Israel, but Hussein, Arafat and  other Arab peacemakers should not be diverted. By helping their people begin  to enjoy the fruits of peace, they will assure that the great majority of  Palestinians and other Arabs in the region will finally reject the politics of  terror and victimization. 

Load-Date: October 19, 1994


End of Document