Hopes of extending terrorism insurance fade;
Industry supports bill that would provide government guarantees, but legislation might be running out of time
Indianapolis Business Journal
October 18, 2004


Copyright 2004 IBJ Corporation
Section: FOCUS; Insurance & Benefits; Vol. 25; No. 32; Pg. 21
Length: 856 words
Byline: SCOTT OLSON SOLSON@IBJ.COM  
Body


Time is running out on advocates who want federal lawmakers to extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act for two more years before it expires at the end of 2005.
Legislators passed the act in 2002 following the 9/11 hijackings to provide a federal guarantee against losses resulting from another terrorist attack. The strikes on the World Trade Center and Pentagon resulted in $ 21 billion in insurance losses, the costliest catastrophe since at least 1970, according to New Jersey-based Insurance Services Office Inc.
Supporters lobbied lawmakers to pass the legislation before adjourning in advance of the Nov. 2 election. The bill didn't receive a vote, and now they're holding out hope an extension will be ratified when representatives and senators reconvene for a quick lame-duck session later in November.
Obviously, there's a slimmer chance than there was [two weeks] ago, but we're still pushing for it, said Scott Duncan, spokesman for the Washington, D.C.-based Property Casualty Insurance Association of America. I think it's clear that there were some people who had reservations about it.
One such group, the Washington, D.C.-based Consumer Federation of America, argues that commercial insurers have about $ 142 billion in surplus and can provide terrorism coverage without taxpayer assistance.
A coalition of terrorism insurance carriers and policyholders, however, contends passage will ensure the coverage remains affordable and available to the nation's business owners. An extension would provide a federal backstop for insurers that might have problems paying benefits in the event of another terrorist strike.
Because terrorism [in America] is this new phenomenon, it's impossible to price the risk, Duncan said. There's no way to understand cost or when [an attack] will happen again.
The House of Representatives' Financial Services Committee passed the House's version of the bill Sept. 29 to extend the law through 2007. U.S. Rep. Julia Carson, D-Indianapolis, is a member of the House committee who voted in favor of the extension.
I want businesses in Indiana to be able to afford a terrorism insurance, she said. My gut feeling is that, because there are so many businesses around the country, it will be passed.
Carson's comments to IBJ came before legislators left Washington.
Without an extension, insurers argue, terrorism insurance will be more expensive. Insurance companies write policies on a multiyear basis. A five-year policy starting in 2005, for instance, would be more costly for a large property owner without the guarantee of an extension, Duncan said.
To be considered an act of terrorism, according to the bill, an event must cause at least $ 5 million in damage. Participating insurance companies are responsible for paying deductibles before federal assistance becomes available. The deductible is based on a percentage of earned premiums beginning in 2002, and reaches 15 percent in 2005. For losses above a company's deductible, the federal government will cover 90 percent.
Even with federal support, the insurance industry's share of risk is substantial, according to the Insurance Information Institute in New York. Assuming that another terrorist attack amounts to $ 30 billion in commercial property and Worker's Compensation losses, the industry loss would still be $ 20 billion in 2005, according to the institute.
The bill to extend the act has broad support. The National Governors Association, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners and a group known as the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism, which represents a wide range of businesses and organizations, are among the groups urging passage of the legislation.
Twenty-one governors, including Gov. Joe Kernan, endorsed a letter sent Oct. 1 to House and Senate leaders urging them to make the extension a priority.
a we believe that this issue is of such grave importance to the health and well-being of the economy that it needs to be dealt with in what brief time remains, the governors wrote.
The Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism includes such national organizations as the locally based NCAA, the American Bankers Association and the Edison Electric Institute.
A member of EEI, Columbus, Ohio-based American Electric Power, which supplies electricity to residents in northeast Indiana, has one of the largest fleets of power plants in the nation.
Scott Smith, a senior vice president and chief risk officer at AEP, said the utility supports the extension of TRIA, although terrorism insurance rates have dropped to a more reasonable level.
I think it's a very effective program, Smith said. Any risk manager with hard assets sitting on the ground finds it a very important piece of his or her overall insurance program, because it's a very cost-effective way of filling in the gaps of the third-party or commercial [insurance] market.
The Building Owners and Managers Association also supports passage. Jeff Norris, legislative chairman for the Indianapolis chapter, said time is of the essence.
Right now, it's kind of this nebulous cloud out there, he said.A

Load-Date: October 27, 2004


End of Document