HOPEFUL EXCEPTION CLINTON WAIVES AN ANTI-TERRORISM RULE FOR GERRY ADAMS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
FEBRUARY 1, 1994, TUESDAY,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; EDITORIAL
Length: 480 words
Body


Thanks to a waiver granted by the Clinton administration, the head of the Irish Republican Army's political wing will come to New York today to attend a conference on the future of Northern Ireland. In granting a 48-hour visa to Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the administration did the right thing -- but partly for the wrong reason.
That wrong reason was a desire to placate members of Congress who pressed the administration to admit Mr. Adams. The 40 members who requested that the visa be granted included prominent Irish-American politicians, such as Sens. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts and Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, who had supported excluding Mr. Adams in the past.
Fortunately, the administration's decision can be justified apart from domestic politics.
On eight previous occasions Mr. Adams was denied entry to this country under a policy aimed at representatives of terrorist organizations. What made this situation different, the Clinton administration explained, was that Mr. Adams -- without quite renouncing the ''armed struggle'' against British rule in Northern Ireland -- has spoken in recent days of his desire ''to see an end to the IRA and an end to all other organizations engaged in armed actions.''
But as with the decision by the United States and Israel to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Adams' words about ending violence were less important than a broader political context. After secret contacts with Britain, the IRA and its political supporters are giving serious consideration to a British-Irish proposal that they lay down their arms in exchange for a role in political negotiations on the future of Northern Ireland.
That would be a momentous development, not least because it would amount to an acceptance by the IRA of the principle -- already endorsed by the British and Irish governments -- that the British connection to Northern Ireland will not be severed except by the choice of a majority of the province's population. In the meantime, the British and Irish governments recognize that both ''identities'' in the North -- Protestant and Catholic, loyalist and republican -- must receive political expression.
If the IRA is willing to sign on to such a complex compromise, it's appropriate for Washington to take account of that breakthrough, just as London and Dublin have done. The obvious analogy is to the increased recognition Yasser Arafat has received since the PLO's agreement with Israel on a framework for resolving their conflict.
Yet just as no one is forgetting the innocent lives lost as a result of Palestinian terrorism, Mr. Adams' rehabilitation can't wipe away the equally innocent blood shed by the IRA. There is some truth in the cynical saw that yesterday's terrorist is today's statesman; but it is of small comfort for those who are no longer around to witness the transformation.

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document