Hoping a Photo Can Crack The Central Park Blast Case
The New York Times
July 5, 2018 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 595 words
Byline: By RICK ROJAS
Body


Two years ago, an explosion rocked Central Park and alarmed New York City during a three-day Fourth of July weekend. The police initially figured that it had been a mishap involving fireworks left in a remote corner of the park. Later, though, investigators discovered that the explosive material was a compound familiar in terrorist bombing attacks.
Yet how it ended up in the park remains a mystery. 
  Hoping to attract fresh leads in the lagging investigation, the police this week released a photograph of a bag for ''tropical crackers'' from a bakery that was found at the scene.
  On the morning of July 3, 2016, the police said, an 18-year-old man visiting from Virginia stepped on the explosive material, setting off the explosion in a secluded area of Central Park, close to the Fifth Avenue and 60th Street entrance. The man, Connor Golden, had set up a tightrope about a foot off the ground with friends when he stepped on the unseen explosive material. His leg was so wounded that doctors had to amputate it below the knee.
  ''It's a very distinctive bag and our hope is that it is the distinctiveness that will help jog people's memories,'' his father, Kevin Golden, said in an interview on Wednesday. ''We're encouraged by that,'' he added of the development, ''especially with a case where it seems like the trail has run a bit cold.''
  The bag was a 14-ounce package for ''tropical crackers'' from La Unica bakery; there are at least two bakeries with that name near New York City, though the bag's origin is unclear. There is also a $40,000 reward in the case, and law enforcement officials are also still asking for photographs and videos taken by park visitors from around the time of the blast.
  The explosion, which happened at midday on a Sunday, jolted the city and created a situation that only intensified after false reports spread that the police were closing and clearing out Central Park. That day, police officials said that investigators did not believe it was connected to terrorism and described the explosive as an ''experiment with fireworks.''
  But officials later said that investigators found at the scene a compound like one that had been used in improvised explosive devices, but it lacked other elements of a bomb, like a trigger or shrapnel.
  A year after the explosion, the police commissioner, James P. O'Neill, said in a statement that the department was using ''every investigative tool'' to find out who left the explosive material in the park. The police renewed their request for anyone with information to step forward. ''No detail is too small,'' Mr. O'Neill said.
  Mr. Golden, now less than a week from his 21st birthday, was visiting with friends from the University of Miami while on summer vacation. His family has expressed concern over the Police Department's handling of the case, believing it should have been treated as a terrorism investigation.
  Kevin Golden said that the family has petitioned the F.B.I. to take over, but they have gotten no response. His wife has also started looking into leads that she found over social media, which she forwarded to investigators. ''It seems like those have not panned out,'' he said.
  But Mr. Golden said that his son, who now wears a prosthesis, was focused on moving ahead. He does not ski and windsurf as he did before, his father said, but he is increasingly active. While on break from school, he has been working as a canoe guide in the Boundary Waters, in Northern Minnesota. ''So far, so good,'' Mr. Golden said of the summer job.
  Follow Rick Rojas on Twitter: @rar

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/04/nyregion/central-park-explosion-investigation.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Connor Golden was 18 in 2016 when he was injured by an explosion in Central Park and had his leg amputated below the knee. The police released this image of a bag found at the scene that day. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDRES KUDACKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 NEW YORK POLICE DEPARTMENT)       

Load-Date: July 5, 2018


End of Document