Horrible to see fall of Twin Towers
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 8, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 3
Length: 428 words
Byline: Chris Weber Central Alternative High School
Body


Editor's note: Students at Central Alternative High School are conducting in-depth research on the impact and significance of global terrorism.
During the next several weeks, the Telegraph Herald will publish essays written by the students as part of their project that will culminate in a public seminar on global terrorism this spring.
On Sept. 11, 2001, in New York City it was a beautiful day. There was not a cloud in the sky, or a care in the world. It was just a normal day when people were going to work. The unthinkable happened. Two airliners were hijacked and crashed into the World Trade Center Twin Towers, exploding on impact. This was a horrible sight, considering that these towers were two of the most recognizable buildings in the world.
The towers were designed in the 1960s by Japanese-American architect Minoru Yamasaki, and a brilliant young engineer, Leslie E. Robertson. The towers were the career masterpieces of these two men.
Robertson explained what challenges he and his design team faced when it came to drawing up plans for a new skyscraper in New York City:
"We were constructing a building which put up high in the air a huge amount of rentable space - much more so than any building in the past or indeed any building today. In order to do that, we had to re-think the whole process of design."
The towers were built up from prefabricated welded steel sections, which all had to arrive on site in exactly the correct order to ensure perfect building procedures, and were designed with the entire load-bearing vertical supports in the exterior walls. The interior central core carried the elevator system of 99 lifts per tower. This design was called the "tube structure."
The initial collisions of the aircraft did tremendous damage to the buildings, but they still stood at the time of the impact. The reason for that was without a doubt because of the super strong exterior tube construction. However, there was one part of the design that made the tube structure strong, as long as it was not damaged.
The supports for the 110 floors were the weak link that ultimately brought both of the towers down. When the planes crashed into the towers, fireproof material was blasted away from those trusses. The metal didn't melt, but lost its strength in the 2,000-degree fire. As the floor sections collapsed under the weight, the building's tube structure was doomed.
This day in our nation's history was disastrous. It was a day that no one will ever forget. Hopefully, after this event, our country will start taking charge of our nation's defense.

Load-Date: March 8, 2008


End of Document