Hospitals Spend Millions In Terrorism Preparations 
 The New York Times
February 20, 2003 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 633 words
Byline:  By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA
Body


Post-9/11 vigilance has placed wide-ranging burdens on New York's hospitals, from adding guards to building germ decontamination units -- more than $200 million in expenses so far, and a similar amount is expected this year, according to a new report by a hospital lobbying group.
     The hospitals, already in poor financial trim, are bearing nearly all the costs themselves, even as the state and federal governments are cutting back their financial support. Leaders of the lobbying group, the Greater New York Hospital Association, said that in producing the report, they were, in part, playing to audiences in Albany and Washington and, in particular, hoping to influence what is taking shape as a bitter fight over the state budget. 
 "While the state and federal governments have been talking about preparedness a lot, they've been talking about it, but they haven't been willing to pay for it," said Kenneth E. Raske, the group's president. "They're emphasizing homeland security, but they're undermining the first line of defense, the hospitals, and that's a contradiction we want to bring to people's attention."
A spokesman for Gov. George E. Pataki replied that times were tough for everyone involved, not least the state, which faces a deficit of about $11.5 billion. "Federal, state and local governments, as well as private-sector facilities such as hospitals, are all incurring costs as we work to ensure preparedness for potential terror attacks," said the spokesman, Joseph Conway.
The hospital association's report, based on a survey of 54 hospitals, estimated that, to improve their readiness for terrorist attacks, the more than 200 hospitals in the state spent $218 million from Sept. 11, 2001, to the end of last year and planned to spend $269 million more this year. 
Trauma centers and teaching hospitals, which are concentrated in New York City, spent far more than other hospitals. The average spent already by a hospital in the city is $2.5 million, the report said, or about six times as much as those around the rest of the state.
Last year the federal government gave New York metropolitan area hospitals $140 million to compensate them for costs directly related to the World Trade Center attack, like treating injured people. But hospital officials say that so far, they have received no aid for emergency preparations. The federal government has provided $7 million for such costs in the state, but it has not reached the hospitals yet.
So far, the hospitals have picked up about 95 percent of those expenses from their own budgets, the hospital association says, and most of the rest has come from donations by foundations and individuals. Most of the spending has been based on recommendations by government agencies like the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
In October, Washington cut Medicare payments to teaching hospitals, a move that cost New York City's hospitals $140 million.
Last year, the state significantly increased Medicaid payments to hospitals, most of which went toward raises for workers -- most of whom were represented by the politically powerful health care union 1199/S.E.I.U. Critics called it a politically motivated deal that the state could ill afford.
This year, Mr. Pataki has proposed a budget that cuts Medicaid payments and increases taxes for those same hospitals. The hospital association estimates the cost to hospitals at $658 million a year, three-quarters of that for hospitals in New York City.
Among the most expensive new preparations hospitals have made are installing chemical and biological decontamination units, creating "negative air pressure" areas so that contaminants cannot escape, making more robust backup computer systems, more aggressive investigation and reporting of unusual disease cases, and staff training. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 20, 2003


End of Document