HOSTAGES IN LEBANON;
HUSSEIN CALL HIJACKERS THE 'SCUM OF THE EARTH'
The New York Times
June 20, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 813 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan, June 19
Body


King Hussein of Jordan today condemned the hijacking of the T.W.A. jetliner and other acts of air piracy by Shiite Moslems as a betrayal of Islam and the Arab people. He called for ''collective action by all civilized nations to stop such dastardly acts of terrorism.''
In a letter to President Reagan and in a subsequent interview, the King denounced the Shiite hijackers of T.W.A. Flight 847 as the ''scum of the earth'' whose crimes had touched off ''revulsion and anger'' among Jordanians, Palestinians and the majority of the Arab and Islamic world.
In the interview, he urged Arab and Western nations to band together to isolate countries and groups that support or condone terrorism.
Jordan's King Hussein, in letter to Pres Reagan and subsequent interview, condemns hijacking of TWA jet in Beirut and other acts of air piracy by Shiite Moslems as betrayal of Islam and Arab people; calls for 'collective action by all civilized nations' to stop such terrorist acts; singles out Greece for special criticism, saying it has long permitted 'terrorists to roam its streets and its airports' (M)
King Hussein, echoing President Reagan's views in his news conference Tuesday night, singled out Greece for special criticism. The Greek Government had long permitted ''terrorists to roam its streets and its airports,'' he said. Jordan and its citizens have been repeatedly threatened and attacked in recent months because of Greece's lack of concern about terrorism, he said, citing several incidents.
 
Unusually Harsh Language
Secretary of State George P. Shultz said in testimony on Capitol Hill today that the hijacking had also been condemned by Syria, Tunisia, Egypt and Iraq. But King Hussein's letter and declaration today were the first public condemnation of the hijacking by an Arab leader. It was unusually harsh for the King, generally known for his restraint in language and action.
King Hussein said he sent the two-page letter condemning the hijackings to President Reagan after calling Mr. Reagan Tuesday night to offer his sympathy and support for the United States in its hostage ordeal. President Reagan had telephoned him last week to express his ''sorrow and concern'' over a hijacking, also by a Shiite group, of a Royal Jordanian airplane eight days ago in Beirut, the King said. The crew and passengers of the Alia flight had been released, but the Boeing 727 plane was blown up on the runway.
In his letter, the King also denounced the monthlong Shiite assault on Palestinian settlements in Lebanon. In the interview, he assailed Arab countries ''that have been condoning or assisting these genocidal acts on the camps and the air terrorism.'' Asked whether he believed that Syria was partly responsible, he replied, ''I'm afraid Syria has had a hand.''
 
Calls Reagan 'My Friend'
The letter to Mr. Reagan, whom he addressed as ''My friend,'' did not contain any recommendations or calls for action, but it reflected the King's strongly emotional response to recent events.
''These crimes are crimes perpetrated by those who have become the scum of the earth against life and every human decency, values and code of honor,'' the King wrote.
He knew this view was shared, he asserted, by ''my countrymen, as well as our Palestinian brethren and their sole legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the overwhelming majority within our Arab and Muslim world,'' the King's letter continued.
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., who returned to Amman on Tuesday, met with King Hussein Tuesday and today. But he declined through aides to be interviewed about the hijacking. His aides also said that no statement on the hijacking would be forthcoming from Mr. Arafat.
 
Call for Arab Summit Meeting
In the interview, King Hussein called for an Arab summit meeting to stop what he called the ''genocidal slaughter in the camps and terrorism in our region.'' He suggested that the hijackings of the Jordanian aircraft and that of the T.W.A. flight might have been carried out to divert international attention and Arab outrage from the murder of Palestinians inside the camps.
It was premature to discuss what steps Jordan would be willing to take to stop hijackings and terrorism, he said. He stressed that security on all Alia flights, already regarded as tight, had been substantially increased since the hijacking. ''There will be no more hijackings of Alia flights,'' the King said.
Asked whether a boycott of Athens Airport would be an appropriate response to Greece's lax security, King Hussein replied: ''Perhaps, but the key is that whatever action Jordan takes should be collective. It does no good for a state like Jordan, or any single state, to act alone.''
He also criticized Italy's Palermo Airport for permitting the hijacked Alia flight to take off for Beirut after Italian officials had pledged that the plane would be kept on the ground.


End of Document