HOSTAGES IN LEBANON: POTENTIAL FOR MILITARY ACTION;
TRANSCRIPT OF STATEMENT BY SPEAKES ON ATTACKS IN SALVADOR AND FRANKFURT
The New York Times
June 21, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk; TEXT
Length: 932 words
Body


Following is a transcript of a statement in Washington by Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network:
Last night, senseless terrorism again took its toll on Americans, this time in El Salvador.
Of the 15 killed and 13 wounded, two were U.S. businessmen and four were unarmed off-duty marines not in uniform. They also killed 9 and injured 13 other innocent Salvadoran and Guatemalan men and women.
This atrocity, like the bombing early yesterday in Frankfurt, Germany, is further evidence that the war which terrorists are waging is not only directed against the United States.
Transcript of statement by White House spokesman Larry Speakes, paraphrasing Pres Reagan's remarks on terrorism (M)
It is a war against all of civilized society. This is a war in which innocent civilians are targets. This is a war in which innocent civilians are intentional victims and our servicemen have become specific targets. This cannot continue.  We must act against those who have so little regard for human life and the values we cherish. And we must do so in concert with other nations who are democratic institutions and hold basic disdain for violence and the use of force.
 
Piracy and Tyranny
We of the Western world must act together as we did over a century ago to wipe out piracy from the seas and as we did 45 years ago against the threat of tyranny.
In response to the death of our marines and private citizens in El Salvador, the President today has directed the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, with the help of our intelligence services, to immediately provide whatever assistance is necessary to President Duarte's Government in order to find and to punish the terrorists who perpetrated this act.
To this end, the President today has directed that the United States expedite the delivery of security assistance items on order by the Salvadoran Government and be prepared to use the emergency authorities of the President to furnish the Salvadoran armed forces with additional military assets which will help them prosecute their campaign against the Communist guerrillas.
Their hope that terrorism will weaken our resolve or support for the revitalization of democracy in El Salvador is futile. If other U.S. military assets can be effective in this regard, then this Government will provide them.
 
A New Role for Bush
The President expects the Congress to support these measures and will be consulting with the appropriate legislative committees of the Congress on what additional steps can be taken in El Salvador and elsewhere to end the external support for Salvadoran terrorists that they receive from Nicaragua and the Communist bloc.
The President today is also appointing the Vice President to take the lead within the U.S. Government and, with our allies, to determine what actions, military and otherwise, we and our similarly threatened friends can take to end this increasingly violent and indiscriminate but purposeful affront to humanity.
As a first priority the President is asking the Vice President to focus on this matter during his visit to European capitals next week.
Upon his return, the Vice President is to convene a Government-wide task force to develop recommendations for the President's decision on how all available U.S. resources can best be brought to bear in dealing with this problem.
 
Reasoned Responses
Finally, the President wishes the American people to know that what we do in this circumstance must not be done in pointless anger. These events call for reasoned responses to lawless actions by those who do not abide by the norms of civilized society.
As for the President, he believes that our actions must be appropriate and proportionate to the criminal acts which have been taken against our citizens. Those who are responsible for such lawlessness and those who support it must know the consequences of their actions will never be capitulation to terrorist demands. We are both a nation of peace and a people of justice. By our very nature, we are slow to anger and magnanimous in helping those in less fortunate circumstances. But we also have our limits. And our limits have been reached.
We cannot allow our people to be placed at risk simply because they are blessed in being citizens of this great republic.
 
Background on Statement
Now for a little background on this statement.
It was developed as a result of a meeting this morning that the President had with his national security advisers. The meeting took place in the Situation Room. It lasted from 10:10 until 11:15, an hour and five minutes.
It was attended by the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the C.I.A. Director, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Attorney General, the foreign policy adviser, Mr. McFarlane, and the Chief of Staff, Mr. Regan.
The meeting focused on international terrorism, both in San Salvador from last night and the terrorist actions that have taken place in the recent days in Germany and in the Middle East.
The purpose of the statement is to underscore the strong feeling that the U.S. must do more to counter terrorism. This is, first of all, improving our cooperation with other governments and, second, to better marshal U.S. forces.
The planning will take place in the next, in the coming days and weeks and it will be under the direction of the Vice President.
As usual, we will continue to consult with Congress on these matters, both in the supply of military, additional equipment for El Salvador, as well as any other steps that we might take.


End of Document