HOSTAGES IN LEBANON: THE PRESIDENT SPEAKS OUT;
REGAN STANDS FIRM ON HIS REFUSAL TO ASK ISRAELIS TO RELEASE PRISONERS
The New York Times
June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 918 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CHICAGO HEIGHTS, Ill., June 28
Body


President Reagan, in his first public remarks on the hostage crisis in five days, reaffirmed today that he would not ask Israel to free more than 700 mainly Shiite detainees to gain the release of the American hostages.
''I only know that none of us, any country, can afford to pay terrorists for crimes that they're committing because that will only lead to more crimes,'' Mr. Reagan said in response to a reporter's question. Mr. Reagan made his remarks before reports that the hostages were to be transferred to Syria were made public tonight.
Mr. Reagan, who came to this suburban community 30 miles south of Chicago to promote his tax plan, found his remarks on taxes overshadowed by the hostage crisis.
 
'Doing Everything We Can'
Mr. Reagan addressed residents and city leaders here, then held a hastily arranged 30-minute private meeting with families of the American hostages from the area. Mr. Reagan held similar gatherings recently with families in Indianapolis and Dallas.
Pres Reagan, in first public remarks on hostage crisis in five days, reaffirms, during address to Chicago Heights, Illinois residents and officials, that he will not ask Israel to free Shiite detainees to gain release of American hostages; photos (M)
He told them, according to a White House statement, that ''we're doing everything we can to secure the safe and early return'' of the hostages.
He made it clear that in his reference to hostages in Lebanon, he was including the seven Americans who have disappeared in that country in separate incidents over the last 15 months.
''We're constantly looking for ways to do more,'' the statement quoted Mr. Reagan as saying. ''We're praying every day.''
Those at the meeting included 29 family members, among them 6 people who were passengers on the Trans World Airlines Flight 847 who were held hostage and then released. The group also included relatives of the Rev. Lawrence Martin Jenco, a Roman Catholic priest who was kidnapped in January, apparently by Moslem militants.
According to the statement, one of the family members, many of whom were from the Algonquin, Ill., area, about 70 miles from here, told Mr. Reagan at the end of the meeting:
''Mr. President, my father is there and I want you to know I support your policies. God bless you.''
 
Hijackers' Principal Demand
The hijackers in Beirut had demanded that Israel free 735 Lebanese and Palestinian detainees in exchange for the 39 Americans who were taken prisoner after the T.W.A. jet was hijacked June 14 on a flight from Athens to Rome. The prisoners in Israel were seized in southern Lebanon on suspicion of terrorism but have not been charged. Some have been in custody for nearly two years.
Mr. Reagan again ruled out a link of American hostages and the prisoners in Israel. He noted that he had said several times that Israel had been planning before the hijacking to release the detainees.
''Israel had always intended to release them and had made that very clear,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''So a linkage that has tied it to our hostages is something that never should have happened.''
In his remarks today, Mr. Reagan also explained his decision to include the seven Americans missing in Beirut as part of any arrangment to free the 39 T.W.A. hostages.
''I don't think anything that attempts to get people back who have been kidnapped by thugs, murderers and barbarians is wrong to do,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''We're going to do everything we can to get all of the Americans back.''
 
News Blackout Maintained
Mr. Reagan's remarks were his first on the hostage crisis since Sunday.
The President declined to comment on reports of a rush of activities surrounding the standoff. When asked if he would make a deal, he said, ''No, we won't.''
Mr. Reagan started his speech with a strongly worded statement on terrorism, which he called an outrage. he said there is ''no safety in silence or neutrality,'' but again declined to discuss retaliation.
''When terrorism strikes, civilization itself is under attack,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''No nation is immune. There's no safety in silence or neutrality. If we permit terrorism to succeed anywhere, it will spread like a cancer, eating away at civilized societies and sowing fear and chaos everywhere.
''This barbarism is abhorrent. And all of those who support it, encourage it and profit from it are abhorrent. They are barbarians.''
 
'The Scourge of Piracy'
Mr. Reagan also equated modern-day terrorism with what he said in a different age was ''the blood scourge of piracy.''
''It was a long fight against a great but diffuse evil,'' he said. ''But it was won in the end because civilized nations refused to succumb and missed no opportunity to stamp it out.
''In our time, it's terrorism that must be overcome. We cannot accept these repeated and vicious attacks against our nation and its citizens. Terrorists, and those who support them, must, and will, be held to account.''
In his remarks on taxation, which he made in an outdoor event at Bloom High School, Mr. Reagan called on the audience of several thousand to work for his tax plan this year.
''The opponents of our fair share plan have on strategy to filibuster it to death - to delay, put off, procrastinate,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''They'll think of a million excuses for inaction.
''They'll study and debate and meet in committee,'' he said, ''they'll nibble at it all summer and then try to bury it deep in the bowels of the next session of Congress.''
The Federal tax system is a ''disgrace,'' he said, adding that ''it is unworthy of us.''

Graphic

 
Photo of unidentified relatives of hostages in Beirut arriving at high school in Chicago Heights, Ill. (NYT/Paul Hosefros)


End of Document