Hostage-Protection Act No Bar to Terrorism
The New York Times
November 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 399 words
Body


To the Editor:
In ''What We Need Is a Hostage Protection Act'' (letter, Nov. 13), Eric Shaw proposes that Congress enact a hostage-protection bill, which would provide insurance to American victims of international terrorism. However, the aims Mr. Shaw believes may be served by such a measure would actually be undermined if it were ever put into effect.
To begin, Mr. Shaw believes that a hostage-insurance program would better the relationship between the Government and the distraught families of the victims during the crisis. But by allowing insurance to cover the Government's liability to these families, the Government might lose incentive to take every possible precaution to insure the safety of victims, knowing that it would no longer have to bear the cost burden for their wrongful deaths.
Consequently, the families would have even more reason to worry, and they would exert even greater pressure on the Government to extricate hostages, no matter what the political costs. And as Mr. Shaw concedes, this activity could have grave implications for the manner in which the crisis is resolved.
Mr. Shaw also argues that a hostage-insurance act could reduce the number of lawsuits against transportation companies for negligence in failing to provide adequate security against such attacks. However, if these companies are not held liable for their actions, what incentive will they have to improve security?
Worldwide terrorism might be even more greatly reduced if transportation companies were held strictly liable for any acts of terrorism that occur on their crafts. Indeed, this might result in increased insurance costs for the company, which would eventually be passed on to the consumer in terms of higher prices.
Mr. Shaw believes that a hostage-protection bill would assure hostages of government support, and signal to the world at large that the United States is concerned with protecting its citizens. But all this policy would do is to discourage efforts to deter international terrorism and allow the United States to ''buy'' out of its responsibility to insure the safe return of hostages to their families.
Worst of all, it conveys the notion that we have accepted that terrorism is here to stay and that we must deal with it in the best way we can, instead of attempting to combat it forthrightly and to eradicate it altogether. CAROLYN ELEFANT Ithaca, N.Y., Nov. 13, 1985


End of Document