HOSTAGES IN LEBANON: BUSH'S THOGHTS ON TERRORISM;
BUSH SAYS AIR-INDIA CRASH SHAKES WORLD'S CONSCIENCE
The New York Times
June 25, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 458 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: ROME, June 24
Body


Vice President Bush said today that the crash of an Air-India jetliner had ''shaken the conscience of the world.''
Speaking at a news conference after meeting with Italian leaders and the Pope, he strongly reaffirmed the refusal of the United States to ask Israel to release prisoners in exchange for the freedom of 40 American hijacking hostages being held in Lebanon.
Mr. Bush said he did not know the cause of the crash that killed 329 people aboard the Indian airliner off Ireland on Sunday, but he noted that there had been threats against Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India recently.
Vice Pres Bush, in Rome to meet with Italian leaders and Pope, says crash of Air-India jetliner had 'shaken the conscience of the world'; strongly reaffirms refusal of United States to ask Israel to release prisoners in exchange for freedom of 40 American hijacking hostages; photo (M)
''I do know that there have been threats and suggestions by elements hostile to the Prime Minister that some action would be taken,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Whether that had anything to do with this Indian flight we really don't know. I must say it went through my mind, as it went through everybody else's mind.
''I would hate to think that anyone was so depraved that they would take 300 and some innocent lives to attempt to settle some grievance. But that incident has shaken the conscience of the world. It has made a tremendous personal impact on me.''
Two extremist Sikh groups have said they were responsible for planting a bomb on the plane.
 
Italy Promises Cooperation
Mr. Bush, who discussed fighting terrorism with Prime Minister Bettino Craxi and Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti, said the Italians had assured him of ''utmost cooperation'' in the effort.
President Reagan announced last week that Mr. Bush would lead a Government task force to study what steps the United States could take against terrorism and to coordinate cooperation with American allies.
''What's called for is a redoubling of international efforts to safeguard innocent people against this kind of terror,'' Mr. Bush said. He called for an increase in intelligence sharing and improved airport security procedures.
He also said that Israel's release of 31 Lebanese prisoners, mostly Shiite Moslems, had nothing to do with demands by the hijackers of the T.W.A. plane and that the United States would not ask Israel to free other prisoners.
''We are not in the posture now, have been nor will be in the posture of knuckling under to demands,'' he said. ''That has not changed.''
''This linkage says to a hijacker: 'All you have to do is grab an American citizen somewhere and you'll fulfill an unreasonable demand,' '' he said. ''That linkage will never be sanctified by the United States Government.''


End of Document