HOSTAGES IN LEBANON;
EGYPT'S LEADER URGES WASHINGTON NOT TO USE FORCE IN HOSTAGE CRISIS
The New York Times
June 26, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 693 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CAIRO, June 25
Body


President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt today condemned the Beirut airline hijacking and other acts of terrorism, but urged the United States not to resort to military action to free the hostages or to retaliate.
''I could tell you that any violence that is going to take place will lead to more violence,'' Mr. Mubarak told reporters when asked about the stationing of American warships off the coast of Lebanon following the hijacking.
President Mubarak, pressed further about whether he thought it would be a mistake for the United States to retaliate militarily, replied: ''I think there is no need for that, because it will not solve the problem at all.''
He denounced the seizure of the T.W.A. Boeing 727 and the detention of some 40 American passengers in questions after a major speech that attacked Islamic fundamentalism. Though he did not mention fundamentalist forces by name, Mr. Mubarak said he would not tolerate ''agitation and marches'' under ''slogans that appear good on the surface but have all kinds of evil underneath.''
Pres Hosni Mubarak of Egypt condemns Beirut airline hijacking and other acts of terrorism, but urges United States not to resort to military action to free hostages or to retaliate (M)'Ignorance or Arrogance'
''I warn and warn and warn again,'' Mr. Mubarak said, ''we should not hesitate for a moment to resist firmly any people who, out of ignorance or arrogance, believe they can impose on the nation by force their views, lusts, or ambitions.''
''If the people fail to confront attacks on their democracy, security and stability, I shall take my own decisions,'' he said. ''Any violations will be met with deterrent legal action,'' he added, without elaboration.
The speech and responses to reporters' questions were among the toughest in tone that Mr. Mubarak has recently made on the issues of terrorism, internal subversion and other threats to Egyptian security.
Egyptian officials said today that the speech was prompted by the widespread praise Mr. Mubarak has received for successfully banning a proposed fundamentalist march on his government offices to demand immediate establishment of Islamic law, or Sharia, in Egypt.
 
Fundamentalist March Postponed
On June 14, some 5,000 fundamentalists assembled at a mosque in downtown Cairo postponed their march after the police ringed the mosque to prevent the demonstration. An Egyptian court upheld the ban the next day.
The condemnation of the hijacking of the T.W.A. plane was President Mubarak's first personal declaration on the hostage episode, now in its 12th day. The Egyptian Government condemned it last Wednesday, but the statement denouncing the action cited only an unidentified Foreign Ministry source.
Mr. Mubarak declined to say whether he thought Israel should release more than 700 prisoners, mainly Lebanese Shiites, being held in Israeli prisons, as the hijackers have demanded in exchange for the 40 American passengers in and near Beirut.
 
'A Peaceful End'
''I am not in the full picture to say this or that,'' Mr. Mubarak said. ''I hope there will be a peaceful end to this crisis.''
His noncommittal statement on this question contrasted sharply with editorials in the semiofficial press, which have repeatedly urged Israel to free the prisoners. Several have equated the holding of the 40 American hostages with Israel's detention of the Lebanese.
An editorial today in Al Ahram, Egypt's leading semiofficial Arabic daily, which closely mirrors Government thinking, said that the best way to combat terrorism was to solve the underlying tensions causing it, such as the plight of the Palestinians.
The newspaper praised the scheduled departure on Wednesday of a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation for France and then Italy to discuss a possible international peace conference on the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Meanwhile, an American civil aviation team arrived in Cairo today to review with Egyptian counterparts measures to insure the safety of American flights from Cairo Airport, generally regarded as among the world's safest. The team, sent by the Federal Aviation Administration, is touring several international airports to check on security procedures.

Graphic

 
photo of Shiite Moslem hijackers guarding T.W.A. jetliner


End of Document