Hostage terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 8, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: VIEWS; Pg. 26
Length: 1225 words
Byline: DAN O'SHEA

Special to The Tampa Tribune
Highlight: terrorism
Body


Victory is gained not by the number killed but by the number frightened is an ancient Arab proverb. 
It succinctly describes the maxim of the Islamic hostage terrorism on display in the Middle East, Africa and now coming to Western shores -   from Boko Haram kidnapping 260 school girls last year in Nigeria, to the Sydney hostage standoff in December and the Paris hostage crisis last month, to the latest barbaric propaganda video released showing the burning of captive Jordanian pilot that shocked and captivated the world this past week.
Why do these terrorist groups go to such extremes? Simple answer: Hostage-taking is how terrorists negotiate with the West, as the Islamic State is seeing the prophecy fulfilled.
Hostage terrorism can be defined as non-state terrorist groups that use the criminal act of abducting and holding individuals against their will to announce their agenda, raise their profile, garner recruits to their cause and disrupt and  degrade the political will  of their adversary.  Their hostages are propaganda fodder used for the purpose of making public demands, increasing global awareness of their cause, raising funds by extorting ransoms, engineering prisoner swaps and forcing concessions from nation states.
Front and center in the hostage terrorism theater of the macabre is the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. ISIS is orchestrating this spectacle of kidnappings, beheadings and now burnings to its advantage because hostage terrorism works. They have captured the attention of the entire world's news outlets, which is exactly what it wants. The Islamic State will continue to seek more hostages and will continue to exploit its  remaining 20 hostages, including an unidentified American aid worker, for future savage snuff films to capture the world's attention.
So how has America and the West confronted this malicious evil?  Most Western nations, including many of our strongest NATO allies, the French, Italians and Germans, have paid out multimillion-dollar ransoms to save the life of citizens held by the likes of the Islamic State and al-Qaida affiliates in the Middle East, Africa and Asia. Contrary to widespread public opinion - that the United States does not negotiate with terrorists - that has never been official U.S. policy.
Until recently, our policy was: The U.S. Government will make no concessions to individuals or groups holding official or private U.S. citizens hostage. The United States will use every appropriate resource to gain the safe return of U.S. citizens who are held hostage. At the same time, it is U.S. Government policy to deny hostage takers the benefits of ransom, prisoner releases, policy changes, or other acts of concession, according to the U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual.
The rational for this hardline stance was that making concessions to kidnappers only encourages more kidnappings.
That policy was based on some hard-earned historical lessons. America had a mixed record dealing with this form of terrorism dating back to the 1979 overthrow of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and the subsequent 444-day Iran hostage crisis. President Carter lost the 1980 election in large part to the failed rescue attempt. President Reagan almost faced impeachment over the failed Iran-Contra fiasco that traded arms for American hostages, only to have more citizens taken in what Secretary of State George Shultz called the Hostage Bazaar. 
Both previous Democratic and Republican administrations found hostage rescues very difficult to execute successfully, and direct negotiations can prove disastrous. The lesson learned was don't negotiate and launch hostage rescue missions as a last resort.  
Following the attacks of 9/11, the U.S. and our closest allies, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, largely followed that strict protocol, refusing to make concessions to terrorists masquerading as kidnappers. 
A decade ago, the al-Qaida kidnapping crisis in Iraq was launched with the gruesome Nick Berg beheading video that shocked the world. Over the summer of 2004, kidnappings of foreigners and Iraqis alike became the cottage industry that destroyed the fabric of daily Iraqi life and nearly fractured the international coalition fighting the insurgency in Iraq.
The relentless kidnapping headlines and subsequent beheading videos continued to air until a signature incident.  Margaret Hassan, an Irish-born, Iraqi-married humanitarian who ran CARE International, was known as the Mother Theresa of Baghdad for her tireless work in Iraq's worst slums. She was kidnapped in October and murdered a few weeks later by the same ideology on display in Iraq and Syria today. Although her execution video was deemed too barbaric for even Al Jazeera to air publicly, the reports of her death resulted in worldwide condemnation, especially in the Arab world. 
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of al-Qaida in Iraq who had been personally leading  the beheading campaign, was famously admonished by AQ's current leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, to stop publicly killing women, children and fellow Muslims. What AQ leadership knew then, as ISIS knows now, is that the strategic campaign is really a war of messaging and struggle for the soul of who speaks for Islam and the desired end-state of a modern caliphate. After Hassan, the kidnappings continued, but the video propaganda of hostage executions largely ended.
The previous kidnapping crisis in the region was addressed after a hard campaign of sticking to our no concessions policy, approving risky hostage rescue missions and ,equally important, winning the propaganda war. It was Iraqis themselves - the principal targets of kidnapping rings - who turned on AQ by partnering with the international coalition to help us wipe out the threat.
From a high of 94 foreigners kidnapped in April 2004 and an average of 40 to 50 kidnappings per month in the summer of 2004, the numbers eventually dropped off dramatically over the next two years. Only one foreigner was kidnapped in March and one in April 2006, 10 total in 2008, and no foreigners were reported taken hostage in 2010.
So what brought hostage terrorism back? In a word, strategic messaging by both the West and radical Islamic groups such as the Islamic State. Despite repeated claims by our administration that it was on the path to defeat, the jayvee team has established an Islamic caliphate covering territory from Raqqa, Syria, to the outskirts of Baghdad. Coalition airstrikes have kept the advance of ISIS in check, but they continue to consolidate their gains in formerly Iraqi cities of Mosul and Fallujah. 
The one area ISIS continues to put America and the Coalition on the defensive without any offensive counter is hostage terrorism. A criminal tactic that came roaring back from being exterminated only a few years ago is now front and center in its campaign.
The previous moral high ground the U.S. held about making no concessions to terrorists was shattered on May 31, 2014, when President Obama announced from the Rose Garden that U.S. Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl had been released in exchange for the five ranking Taliban commanders in Guantanamo Bay.
From the most strategic platform possible, the leader of the free world announced from the White House that, yes, the U.S. negotiates with terrorists and will make concessions to terrorism.

Load-Date: February 8, 2015


End of Document