Hot line launched to fight terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
February 6, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 301 words
Byline: Matthew Kemeny
Body


SPRINGFIELD - Veterinarians have joined the fight against terror.
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals is setting up a telephone hot-line to report possible biological terrorism against animals.
"Clearly we hope that those diseases in foreign animals never get introduced into the state of Illinois, but if they do, the residents of the state are going to want to know what's in place to contain it," said veterinarian Steve Hanson of Champaign, who is vice president of the Illinois ASPCA. "This is a very important potential containment alert system."
$165,000 price tag
Hanson believes taxpayers won't mind the $165,000 price tag once they realize how it can help. Veterinarians will staff the hot-line around the clock; a toll-free number has not yet been assigned for the hot-line.
The money will come from a $42 million federal grant to fight terrorism. A lot of the money has been used to prepare for a smallpox attack. Paperwork for the program is incomplete; Hanson expects it will ready sometime this spring.
"If somebody were to disperse an agent or chemical out in the open, certainly animals could be affected as well as people," said Connie Austin, director of infectious diseases for the Illinois Department of Public Health.
Jim Fraley, livestock program director at the Bloomington-based Illinois Farm Bureau, said very few diseases can be transferred from animals to people.
The three most common threats are foot-and-mouth disease, brucellosis and tuberculosis. Brucellosis affects the reproductive system; it and tuberculosis can be transferred to people.
Brian Wilkinson, professor of microbiology at Illinois State University, has never heard of biological weapons used as a threat to the animal population, but said there could be some danger to crops or farm animals.

Load-Date: February 6, 2003


End of Document