Hotel contracts allow more escape clauses; Terrorism, war cause for cancellation
Crain's New York Business
April 7, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 22
Length: 718 words
Byline: matthew flamm
Body


The Marx Hotels Group is only a year and a half old, but the hotelier has already encountered the new state of affairs in the meetings and conventions business at its Syracuse, N.Y., property. Recently, a large medical supply company, which was booking 150 rooms for four nights at the end of March, insisted on inserting a new force majeure cancellation provision into its contract.
''They were bringing in people from all over the world and didn't want to be held to all the penalty clauses,'' says Marc Shapiro, president of the Manhattan-based company. ''We realized we were going to have to work through it.''
The two parties ended up agreeing to a clause that forgave cancellation and attrition penalties if the United States went to war and the country was placed on a heightened travel alert.
Interest in such force majeure clauses-which refer to unavoidable catastrophes that interrupt the expected course of events-has never been so intense.
Both planners and venues have been studying the finer points of these cancellation and attrition provisions since Sept. 11, when hotels faced huge numbers of no-shows and groups found themselves held accountable for canceled meetings.
While force majeure clauses have always been part of most boilerplate contracts, planners are now insisting on more exacting language. The new provisions make direct reference to the topics on everyone's mind: war and terrorism.
''We had a force majeure provision rewritten about 18 months ago, and it covers us for terrorism and even threats of terrorism,'' says Ron Zobel, director of hotel relations for Travel Technology Group, which books rooms for Norwalk, Conn.-based Reed Exhibitions. ''A contract has to have my wording, or I don't sign.''
Hotels have less to lose
With hotel occupancy rates far below the peak levels of 2000, meeting planners are finding hotels increasingly flexible on negotiating the cancellation and attrition clauses.
''They don't have that much to lose,'' says Sean Hennessey, director of hospitality consulting with PricewaterhouseCoopers. ''Chances are the hotels wouldn't have been able to sell most of the rooms anyway.''
That isn't to say that negotiating the provisions in a contract is a simple matter.
''Everybody has been struggling with what are the reasons for terminating a meeting,'' says Joan Eisenstodt, president of her eponymous meetings consulting firm in Washington, D.C. ''For example, is it an act of war when it isn't declared by Congress?''
Another common issue being negotiated is whether a group would be liable for a meeting that could have been held, but was considered inadvisable. ''Would you want people coming to a meeting where their only concern is, 'Will I be able to get out of here?' '' asks Ms. Eisenstodt.
Courts may decide
Jack Withiam, counsel for George Little Management, a trade show company in White Plains, says the courts may have to decide whether events such as those in Iraq justify canceling a meeting in Chicago. ''Circumstances will have to be interpreted depending on the extent of what happened, and proximity to the event you're holding,'' he says.
Mark Roysner, a lawyer in Los Angeles who advises trade show firms, says that compromise solutions are available. A planner can ask that attendance provisions be waived, if the hosting group agrees to share some of the risk.
Currently, some hotels are testing policies that would simplify matters. InterContinental Hotels & Resorts decided to eliminate all cancellation and attrition fees-though, so far, only for meetings that were booked at its hotels in the Americas between Feb. 1 and April 30 and were scheduled to take place between February and the end of this year.
''There's so much inherent risk and anxiety associated with booking meetings, which is why they aren't being scheduled,'' says Jeff Senior, brand vice president, the Americas, InterContinental Hotels & Resorts. ''We want to take that anxiety away.''
Since the policy went into effect, about 170 meetings have been booked, representing more than 16,000 room nights-a 10% increase in bookings compared with the same period last year, according to an InterContinental spokeswoman.
Even so, the policy may not be extended.
''We haven't made a decision,'' Mr. Senior says. ''But I anticipate we'll go back to more traditional policies.''

Graphic

 
MARC SHAPIRO, of Marx Hotels, has become more flexible with contracts for groups.

Load-Date: April 11, 2003


End of Document