House passes anti-terrorism bill, drops wiretap provision
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 3, 1996, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 440 words
Body


SUMMARY: The GOP legislation is approved overwhelmingly after Democrats reluctantly sign on to the plan, which they say is inadequate.
WASHINGTON - Prodded by the TWA explosion and Olympics bombing, the House overwhelmingly passed a GOP anti-terrorism bill Friday providing for new airport security measures, but excluding President Clinton's proposals to expand wiretapping authority.
Most Democrats, who generally denounced the bill as grossly lacking, reluctantly cast their votes for it, and it prevailed, 389-22.
An Associated Press report
Rep. Joseph Scarborough, R-Pensacola, was the only member of the Florida delegation to vote against the measure. Rep. C.W. Bill Young, R-Indian Rocks Beach, did not vote.
House Republicans added a last-minute concession: a provision for a study of whether chemical markers should be placed in black and smokeless powders, which are commonly used in making bombs. Clinton had pushed for a study of the markers, called taggants, but ran into stiff opposition this week from some Republicans.
The Senate put off action on the measure until after Congress returns from its monthlong recess beginning this weekend. The delay came when the Democrats objected to taking up the House version unless it could be amended, and Republicans balked at that.
The rejected wiretap provisions were part of a more comprehensive, bipartisan package negotiated this week by House and Senate leaders and administration officials that was inspired by the TWA explosion and the Olympics bombing. Thursday night, they gave up trying to enact a broader package before the recess.
Clinton said he was disappointed by the bill that resulted from House deliberations and suggested that Democrats may use the issue against Republicans in November's elections. "I think it is legitimate for those who believe more should be done to continue to press for more to be done," the president said.
For his part, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., attacked the administration's terrorism policy. "Right now they do not have a strategy, either domestically or overseas," he said.
Clinton's proposed study of taggants was excluded from the Republicans' earlier bill introduced by Rep. Christopher Cox, R-Calif., early Friday. The new version gives the administration a one-year study but says it must be done outside the government. Democrats had insisted on a Treasury Department study.
The bill also includes airport security provisions such as background investigations for airport personnel and assignment of FBI agents to high-risk airports, especially those with international flights. Bomb-sniffing dogs would be used at the largest airports.

Load-Date: August 4, 1996


End of Document