House Panel Close to Approving Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension
CongressNow
July 24, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 476 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


A House Financial Services panel today is close to approving a 10-year extension of a federal terrorism risk insurance program, despite Republican efforts to shorten it.
The House Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises is considering a bill (H.R. 2761) sponsored by Rep. Michael Capuano (D-Mass.) that updates the terrorism risk insurance program created in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
The program provides reinsurance coverage for insurance companies following a declared terrorism event. Established in 2002, the program was reauthorized in 2005 and is scheduled to expire in December 2007.
The new bill eliminates the distinction between domestic and foreign attacks; adds group life insurance coverage; decreases the trigger for insurers to $50 million; and adds a retroactive "reset" provision that would lower the deductible and triggers for geographical areas that previously had been severely affected by a terrorist attack.
The panel rejected by voice vote an attempt by Rep. Deborah Pryce (R-Ohio), the ranking member of the subcommittee, to decrease the bill's extension of the terrorism risk insurance program. The committee will vote on two other Republican proposals to provide shorter extensions later today.
Pryce's amendment would have extended conventional terrorism risk coverage for six years rather than 10, but would have increased the coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical, radiological risks to 15 years.
Pryce said the six-year extension of the program would make it necessary for Congress to reauthorize the program just after an independent commission created by the bill, submitted its report evaluating the availability of terrorism risk insurance in the private sector.
"One year after the commission's report is perfect to look at it again," Pryce said.
Later the panel will vote on an amendment by Rep. Scott Garrett (R-N.J.) that to shorten the TRIA extension to two years. The panel will also vote on an amendment by Rep. Adam Putnam (R-Fla.) to initially limit the programs extension to five years. However, it would provide for an automatic two-year extension if the commission recommends it.
House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.) said he favors a long-term extension of the program to provide certainty for construction companies seeking to build in certain parts of the country. Frank said without a long-term extension of the program, companies can't obtain the financing they need for longer projects.
The committee is also expected to adopt a substitute amendment by Rep. Paul Kanjorski (D-Pa.), chairman of the subcommittee, that among other changes, would delay the bill's mandate for insurers to offer coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical, and radiological attacks. Coverage would not be required until 2009.

Load-Date: November 14, 2007


End of Document