House Financial Services Prepares for Contentious Debate Today Over Terrorism Insurance
CongressNow
July 31, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 563 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


Differences over how long to extend a federal terrorism insurance program could spark a contentious debate at a House Financial Services Committee markup this afternoon.
The bill (H.R. 2761), sponsored by Rep. Michael Capuano (D-Mass.), would provide reinsurance coverage for insurance companies following a declared terrorism event. Established in 2002, the program was reauthorized in 2005 and is scheduled to expire in December 2007.
Capuano's bill updates the terrorism risk insurance program established in 2002 by eliminating the distinction between domestic and foreign attacks, adding group life insurance coverage and decreasing the trigger for insurers to $5 million. It would give the program a ten-year extension.
Lawmakers have long been debating how long to extend the program, with many Republicans advocating two and three-year extensions and other Democrat and GOP Members backing much longer terms. Multiple amendments are likely to be proposed at today's markup that would either extend or shorten the program extension.
Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.) is expected to offer an amendment that would extend the program for 15 years. Supporters of a longer-term extension say that it would correct a market failure caused by the threat of terrorism. They argue that the existence of too many variables - including weapons, methods, targets and timing - make it difficult if not impossible for insurers to assess the scale of risk from terrorism before an attack.
When the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises, approved the measure last week, it gave voice-vote approval to an amendment by Rep. Richard Baker (R-La.) that would effectively lower the trigger for terrorism-related events for all states to $5 million. As originally drafted, the bill set the trigger at $50 million, but contained a retroactive "reset" provision that would lower the deductible and triggers for geographical areas that had previously been severely affected by a terrorist attack. Baker was concerned the reset provision gave an unfair advantage to New York City. 
Other modifications to the bill made during the subcommittee markup, would delay the bill's mandate for insurers to offer coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological, or NBCR, attacks. Such coverage would not be required until 2009. The amended bill also would provide a 3.5 percent deductible for insurers, but it would increase by 0.5 percent per year over the life of the program.
Industry groups, including the National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies and the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America have been lobbying against mandatory NBCR coverage.
Nancy Grover, a spokeswoman for NAMIC, called the delay "encouraging" but ultimately her group would like to see the provision removed from the bill, and have the commission created by the bill study the issue and make recommendations.
"It indicates Congress is willing to work with us and take into consideration the concerns of smaller insurers," Grover said.
House consideration of the measure is not expected before the August recess. The Senate has not yet introduced its version of the bill, but Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Chairman Christopher Dodd (D-Conn.) has been advocating for a more permanent solution to provide insurance against terrorist attacks.

Load-Date: November 14, 2007


End of Document