HOUSE DEFEATS EFFORT TO PUNISH TURKEY BY WITHHOLDING AID;
 CONGRESS MOVES CLOSER TO APPROVING $80 BILLION FOR WAR, TERRORISM FIGHT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 4, 2003 Friday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A12
Length: 497 words
Byline: Alan Fram The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The House beat back Thursday an effort by conservatives to lash out at Turkey as Congress moved toward passage of legislation providing President George W. Bush with almost $80 billion for the war with Iraq and various anti-terrorism efforts.
House and Senate passage of the similar measures by strong bipartisan margins was all but certain, underscoring lawmakers' resolve to back U.S. forces in the field. Although lawmakers reined in Bush's request to control most of the funds, approval would give him a welcome victory on Capitol Hill, a week after the Senate voted to cut in half his plan for new tax cuts.
Both bills contained more than $62 billion for the Pentagon, more than $4 billion for securing potential terrorist targets at home and roughly $8 billion for aid to countries supporting U.S. efforts overseas. Included was money for replacing satellite-guided munitions, setting up a tribunal to try Iraqi President Saddam Hussein on allegations of committing war crimes and letting state and local agencies bolster security at home.
All the money would come from enlarging federal deficits, which could approach $400 billion this year and next.
Although victory loomed, the administration found itself having to lobby legislators at both ends of the Capitol to control their anger at U.S. allies who have opposed the war effort. The White House says it is reluctant to antagonize any countries that may play a postwar role in Iraq for reconstruction, humanitarian aid or peacekeeping, or in other counterterrorism fights.
The push seemed to bear fruit when the House voted 315-110 to reject an attempt by conservatives to kill the aid for Turkey, which refused to serve as a gateway to northern Iraq for an American invasion force.
"The message should be, 'Don't tread on me,'" said Rep. Randy Cunningham, R-Calif., chief sponsor of the plan to kill the aid. "Someone that is responsible for killing my friends and American soldiers, I just don't feel they should be rewarded."
Earlier, Sen. John Ensign, R-Nev., abruptly withdrew an amendment - under administration pressure - that would have barred any of the plan's nearly $2.5 billion for rebuilding Iraq from going to French and German companies. Those countries vociferously opposed the U.S. attack.
The bills also offered money to help financially beleaguered U.S. airlines - $3.2 billion in the House bill, $2.7 billion in the Senate's. The administration wants to reduce those amounts.
Bush has asked Congress to send him a final version of the legislation b y next Friday, a deadline that House and Senate leaders say they believe they will meet.
Democrats in the Congress continued their drive to bolster the domestic security initiatives in the bill, a theme they have used repeatedly in recent weeks as a way to criticize the White House. In the House, Republicans used a parliamentary maneuver to prevent a direct vote on a $2.5 billion proposal that Democrats wanted for police, firefighters and other first responders.

Notes

AMERICA AT WAR; THE HOME FRONT

Load-Date: April 4, 2003


End of Document