House OKs terrorism bill
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 19, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World, Pg. a 2
Length: 366 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Legislation on its way to President Clinton would speed the execution of death-row inmates by restricting state prisoners' right to federal appeals.
The measure is part of an anti-terrorism bill passed, 293-133, by the House on the eve of today's first anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing. The Senate approved the bill, 91-8, Wednesday, and President Clinton is expected to sign it next week.
Among the new powers to combat domestic terrorism, the measure would allow deportation of alien terrorists without disclosing classified evidence against them, prevent fund raising in the United States for terrorists and require chemical labels in plastic explosives so they can be traced.
Perhaps the most controversial provisions, however, are the limits on inmates' federal appeals. The measure would set time limits for filing such appeals and might restrict federal judges' power to review state court rulings.
Critics say that will prevent thousands of inmates, including those not on death row, from getting a fair hearing on valid appeals.
"There will be many injustices which will not be corrected," said Stephen Bright of the Southern Center for Human Rights. "We'll see a lot of people in this country executed despite fundamental violations of the Constitution and despite innocence."
The measure would fundamentally change state inmates' ability to challenge their convictions in federal court by seeking a writ of habeas corpus - Latin for "you have the body" - requiring that a prisoner be brought into court to determine if he or she is being legally held.
Lawmakers and prosecutors complain that inmates have abused that right, spending a decade or more on death row while pursuing various legal strategies.
Senate Judiciary Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, has said the provisions generally will allow death sentences to be carried out within two years of final state court action.
About 3,000 inmates are now on death row nationwide, and those executed between 1977 and 1994 spent an average of eight years awaiting execution, said Richard Dieter of the Death Penalty Information Center. About 40 percent of federal appeals by death-row inmates result in overturning a conviction or sentence.

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document