House to Consider Proposal to Bar Indefinite Detention After Arrests on U.S. Soil
The New York Times
May 18, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 844 words
Byline: By CHARLIE SAVAGE
Body


WASHINGTON -- The House is preparing to vote again on an unresolved legal controversy: whether the military may imprison terrorism suspects captured on United States soil without trial. The renewed debate comes as a federal judge has enjoined the government from enforcing a statute codifying the government's powers of indefinite detention.
Lawmakers are considering amendments to the National Defense Authorization Act. One of them, sponsored by Representative Adam Smith of Washington, a Democrat, and Representative Justin Amash of Michigan, a Republican, would scale back a highly contested provision about indefinite detention created in last year's version of the law, by saying it does not apply to domestic arrests.
The provision created last year expressed Congressional approval for the idea that the executive branch was implicitly given the power to detain, without trial, suspected members of Al Qaeda, its allies and their supporters when Congress in 2001 authorized the use of military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks.
That provision was hotly contested because it made no exception for United States citizens or for people arrested on American soil. Lawmakers could not agree on whether that authority already existed or should exist. Ultimately, they decided to leave the matter unclear, adding a line saying that the provision did not change the scope of detention authority granted in 2001 -- whatever that was.
It is uncertain whether there is enough support to enact the Smith-Amash amendment, which would also have to clear the Senate. The debate last year prompted an ideologically diverse outcry against the possibility of using indefinite detention on American soil, fueled in part by Tea Party conservatives. And this week a court ruling called the indefinite detention provision into question.
When President Obama signed last year's National Defense Authorization Act, he said his administration would use only the criminal justice system to handle terrorism cases that arose on United States soil. A group of writers and activists later sued the government, saying they were afraid that their activities would make them subject to indefinite detention.
On Wednesday, Judge Katherine B. Forrest of the Southern District of New York issued a preliminary injunction blocking the government from enforcing the provision. She said the vagueness of the statute -- including what counts as the kind of ''support'' that could lead someone to be detained -- probably violated First and Fifth Amendment rights.
The plaintiffs included Chris Hedges, a journalist who writes extensively about terrorism issues and interacts with terrorists as part of his reporting. Other plaintiffs included the dissident thinker Noam Chomsky and several supporters of WikiLeaks.
Judge Forrest, whom Mr. Obama appointed last year, noted that Justice Department lawyers repeatedly declined to say that the plaintiffs' conduct would not make them subject to being detained. Her ruling was celebrated by civil liberties advocates as an unexpected victory for individual rights in an era in which courts have largely acquiesced to sweeping claims of national security powers by the government.
But it also drew a puzzled reaction from some legal specialists, who argued that the practical effect of the injunction was uncertain. They said it was not clear what it meant to enjoin the enforcement of a statute in which Congress offered its interpretation of another statute, the 2001 use-of-force authorization.
Judge Forrest also said her preliminary injunction was ''pending further proceedings in this court or remedial action by Congress mooting the need for such further proceedings.'' The timing of her decision aligned closely with a renewed push in the House to impose explicit limits on the government's power to use indefinite detention in cases that arise on domestic soil.
The amendment offered by Mr. Smith and Mr. Amash, which might come up for a vote on Friday amid a large number of other proposals, would say that people arrested in the United States, citizens or otherwise, cannot be put in indefinite military detention. Mr. Smith and Mr. Amash have argued that the Constitution requires that anyone arrested on United States soil get a full and regular trial.
Other lawmakers have argued that people who join Al Qaeda -- even United States citizens -- can be held as wartime prisoners, regardless of where they were captured. In early jostling ahead of the full debate, some critics of the amendment -- including Representative Tom Rooney, Republican of Florida -- contended that terrorists should not be given extra rights ''if they manage to sneak into our country.''
The Bush administration held two people arrested on domestic soil as ''enemy combatants'' -- one a citizen -- but both were transferred back to the civilian criminal justice system before the Supreme Court ruled on the issue. In a separate case, the court approved holding another American citizen as a wartime detainee after he was captured on the Afghan battlefield.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 18, 2012


End of Document