House waters down anti-terrorism bill
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 14, 1996, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 453 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In an election-year triumph for the National Rifle Association, the House voted Wednesday to curtail new grants of power to the federal government in legislation designed to fight crime and terrorism.
On a bipartisan vote of 246-171, lawmakers made it tougher than proposed for government attorneys to obtain convictions in some firearms cases. The same vote stripped a provision making it easier for prosecutors to use improperly obtained wiretap evidence in certain court cases.
An Associated Press Report
Also deleted was a provision permitting the government to designate certain organizations as terrorist and to deny entrance visas to their representatives.
In Florida's delegation, voting in favor of the amendment were Republicans Michael Bilirakis, Mark Foley, Tillie Fowler, Porter Goss, John Mica, Dan Miller, Joseph Scarborough, Clay Shaw, David Weldon, C.W. Bill Young and Democrat Karen Thurman.
Voting against the measure were Republicans Charles Canady, Lincoln Diaz-Balart, Bill McCollum, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Cliff Stearns, and Democrats Corrine Brown, Peter Deutsch, Sam Gibbons, Alcee Hastings, Harry Johnston, Carrie Meek and Pete Peterson.
"We do not need to grant our government any vast new powers," said Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga.
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, seemed incensed at the prevailing mood on the House floor. "I heard a dear friend of mine, a great Republican, say, "I trust Hamas more than I trust my own government,' " Hyde said in a reference to the terrorist group that has claimed responsibility for the recent wave of suicide bombings in Israel.
Ironically, the vote came as President Clinton was in the Middle East for an anti-terrorism summit, and the administration immediately registered its objections.
"I am extremely disappointed at today's congressional action," Attorney General Janet Reno said. "It bars changes in law that would have made it possible to trace terrorists' phone calls in a way that is now permitted in organized crime investigations. It guts provisions for the swift expulsion of foreign terrorists and barriers to fundraising to support terrorism overseas."
Among other groups, the NRA lobbied hard for the changes, writing lawmakers on March 11 that it would "report the vote … to our members as critical to their constitutional rights."
Republican leaders confidently predicted approval of the measure today. That would pave the way for negotiations with the Senate, and presumably the White House, on a final compromise.
The measure is a blend of anti-crime provisions originally passed last year by the House as part of the "Contract with America," as well as steps to fight terrorism requested by the administration last year.

Notes

WASHINGTON

Load-Date: March 16, 1996


End of Document