House Subpanel Approves 10-Year Extension of Terrorism Risk Insurance
CongressNow
July 24, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 1027 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


The House Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises today approved a 10-year extension of a terrorism risk insurance program, despite Republican efforts to shorten its duration. The panel voted 26-17 to report the measure favorably to the full committee, which is expected to mark up the bill next week.
As amended, the bill (H.R. 2761), sponsored by Rep. Michael Capuano (D-Mass.), updates the terrorism risk insurance program established in 2002 by eliminating the distinction between domestic and foreign attacks, adding group life insurance coverage and decreasing the trigger for insurers to $5 million.
The panel rejected three separate Republican amendments thought sought to decrease the bill's extension of the terrorism risk insurance program.
Rep. Deborah Pryce (R-Ohio) offered an amendment that would have extended conventional terrorism risk coverage for six years rather than 10, but would have increased the coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological risks to 15 years. 
Pryce said that the six-year extension of the program would make it necessary for Congress to reauthorize the program just after the commission created by the bill submitted its report evaluating the availability of terrorism risk insurance in the private sector.
"One year after the commission's report is perfect to look at it again," Pryce said.
However, Rep. Gary Ackerman (D-N.Y.) questioned the timing envisioned by Pryce, saying, "It seems to me that it would be easier for terrorist to get his hands on conventional weapons rather than nuclear, biological, chemical, or radiological ones," Ackerman said.
The panel voted 14-29, to defeat an amendment by Rep. Scott Garrett (R-N.J.) that would have shortened the TRIA extension to two years. A similar amendment by Rep. Adam Putnam (R-Fla.) that would have provided an initial five-year extension of the program, was also rejected, 18-25. Putnam's amendment also would have automatically reauthorized the program for an additional two years following the recommendation of the commission to extend the program further.
House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.) rejected the notion that a long-term reauthorization of the program means that Congress can't revisit the subject before the program expires. 
"The notion that we can't change something   is simply wrong," Frank said.
The panel gave its voice-vote approval to an amendment by Rep. Richard Baker (R-La.) that would effectively lower the trigger for terrorism-related events for all states to $5 million. As originally drafted, the bill set the trigger at $50 million, but contained a retroactive "reset" provision that would lower the deductibles and triggers for geographical areas that had previously been severely affected by a terrorist attack. Baker was concerned that the reset provision gave an unfair advantage to New York City.
"There ought not to be a segmentation in the market," Baker said.
Rep. Paul Kanjorski (D-Pa.), the subcommittee chairman, said he had concerns with the reset provision creating a "grossly unfair" atmosphere, but he questioned lowering the overall trigger to $5 million.
"You guys want to give everything away," Kanjorski said. "Do you really think we want to go back to $5 million?"
The committee approved, by voice vote, Kanjorski's substitute amendment, that among other changes would delay the bill's mandate for insurers to offer coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological, or NBCR, attacks. Such coverage would not be required until 2009.
Kanjorski's amendment also would provide a 3.5 percent deductible for insurers, but it would increase by 0.5 percent per year over the life of the program.
An amendment by Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-Minn.), that would have required the Treasury Secretary to recoup the federal share of payments for losses in connection with acts of terrorism from states receiving those funds, was also defeated by a vote of 19-24. According to Kanjorski, the bill's underlying language gives the Treasury Secretary the discretion to recoup funds paid out in excess of $27.5 billion.
Bachmann argued that those who benefit most from the program should pay back taxpayers over time.
Frank said adoption of the amendment would add "financial injury to physical injury."
"I don't think we're bailing out people who were bombed by terrorist," Frank said. "I think that when we are talking about the costs inflicted by murderous opponents of our system of government, that that costs ought to be borne by all of us that benefit from that system of government."
Rep. Donald Manzullo (R-Ill.), the ranking member of the House Small Business Committee, offered an amendment to Kanjorski's substitute that would allow the states to exempt small insurers from the mandatory provision to offer NBCR coverage, if providing such coverage would severely reduce the availability of other types of coverage. Smaller insurers also could be exempt if offering such coverage would risk impairing the insurer. Manzullo argued that it is neither "wise nor solvent" to force small insurers to provide NBCR coverage.
Capuano said that he supports the general concept of Manzullo's amendment, but he added that he thought it would broaden the burden of the other insurers left to offer the coverage.
Rep. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) argued that the vague nature of the amendment's language would make it hard for state regulators to deduce not only impairment, but risk of impairment.
Manzullo withdrew his amendment after Kanjorski offered to work with him on the proposal before the full committee marks up the bill next week.
Rep. Kenny Marchant (R-Texas) offered, but later withdrew, an amendment that would have allowed smaller insurers to partner with their others to provide NBCR coverage as a way of satisfying the NBCR coverage mandate.
The committee did adopt by voice vote an amendment by Rep. Gary Ackerman (D-N.Y.) that would allow the Homeland Security Secretary, along with the Treasury Secretary, the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, to certify what events would be classified as acts of conventional and NBCR terrorism.

Load-Date: November 14, 2007


End of Document