House revises Senate's version of backstop; Chamber could vote this week on measure to extend terrorism reinsurance program for seven years
Business Insurance
December 10, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 482 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The House of Representatives could vote this week on a bill that would extend the federal terrorism insurance backstop for seven years.
The measure is an amended version of the bill passed by the Senate in November. The amended House bill adopts the Senate's seven-year extension rather than the 15-year extension called for in the original House bill. It adds provisions from the original House bill that would extend the program's coverage to include group life insurance and to add a so-called ``reset'' provision to the program. The reset would provide lower deductibles for insurance companies that agree to write terrorism coverage for areas that had previously suffered terrorist attacks. The Senate bill contained neither of these provisions.
The House measure also lowers the amount of terrorist losses required to trigger the backstop under most circumstances to $50 million from the $100 million level in the Senate bill. It does not, however, include any mandate that insurers must offer coverage for losses stemming from nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological attacks, a provision that appeared in the original House bill.
But even if the House passes the amended bill, the question of whether the backstop will be extended beyond its scheduled Dec. 31 expiration date remains. The White House has threatened to veto any measure that substantially resembles the original House bill. The administration has said that it could, however, support the Senate measure.
The president of an insurer group that backs the extension greeted the amended House bill, which was pushed by House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank, D-Mass., with a degree of optimism.
The National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos. ``is encouraged that Chairman Frank is advocating a terrorism insurance backstop program that includes both a lower trigger level and does not include mandatory make-available coverage for weapons of mass destruction,'' said NAMIC President Charles Chamness in a statement.
``We anticipate the House and Senate will resolve their few remaining differences before the current legislation expires on Dec. 31, as we know they understand the urgency of adopting a program,'' he said.
Another extension backer said he was ``worried about the perfect becoming the enemy of the good,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp at the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington.
``The Senate bill is better than good.'' Extending the current program by seven years ``will be an astonishing accomplishment,'' he said.
``Had Chairman Frank not managed this legislation as he did this year, I'm not sure we would have such an excellent option in front of us,'' he said. ``Congress has a great opportunity to pass a bill that is universally supported by the business community, a real notch on the belt. It would be horrible if this opportunity passes us by,'' Mr. Wood said.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., was praised by an insurer group for his work on the terrorism backstop bill.
Art Credit: Landov

Load-Date: December 18, 2007


End of Document