House Arrest for Pakistani Man With Suspected Terrorism Links
The New York Times
September 22, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 333 words
Byline: By WAQAR GILLANI and SABRINA TAVERNISE; Waqar Gillani reported from Sialkot, and Sabrina Tavernise from Mingora, Pakistan.
Dateline: SIALKOT, Pakistan 
Body


Pakistani authorities placed a religious leader with suspected links to last year's terrorist attacks in India under house arrest early Monday, a senior police official said. 
  The leader, Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, whose Muslim charity, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, serves as a front for the banned militant group Lashkar-e-Taiba, was informed late Sunday night that he was not to move from his house in Lahore, said Chaudry Muhammed Shafiq, the city's senior police superintendent. India and the United States have accused Lashkar-e-Taiba of carrying out the attacks last November in Mumbai, India, that left at least 163 people dead.
  Police officials in Faisalabad, a city in central Pakistan, charged Mr. Saeed last week with hate speech against the state, which falls under a terrorism statute, and Sunday's order of house arrest was the first legal move against him in those cases. 
  Several police officers have been posted at Mr. Saeed's home, Mr. Shafiq said in a telephone interview. A spokesman for Mr. Saeed, Yahya Mujahid, confirmed that Mr. Saeed had been restricted to his house in Lahore.  
  Mr. Mujahid said Mr. Saeed's supporters would oppose the house arrest in the courts, and he criticized the government for what he said was capitulation to the American and Indian authorities. 
  Mr. Saeed, a Pakistani citizen who is believed by the United States and India to have been a ringleader of the Mumbai attacks, has never been prosecuted in Pakistan. He was placed under house arrest last November, shortly after the attacks, but that detention order expired this spring. The Pakistani courts released him, saying the government had never presented any evidence against him. 
  Lashkar-e-Taiba was nurtured by Pakistan's intelligence agency for years, and India believes it still protects people involved with the organization. It is not clear whether the current house arrest order will ultimately result in Mr. Saeed's detention or whether the government will produce any evidence to push its case. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, at center in white, in June. He is thought to have links to last year's terrorist attacks in India.(PHOTOGRAPH BY K. M. CHAUDARY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   

Load-Date: September 22, 2009


End of Document