House Rules Tees Up Terrorism Risk Insurance Debate for Wednesday
CongressNow
September 18, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 1052 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


House floor debate on a bill to extend terrorism risk insurance (H.R. 2761) will begin Wednesday under a structured rule approved by the House Rules Committee today. The bill, approved in August by the House Financial Services Committee, would extend the program for 15 years and would require insurers to provide coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological events beginning in 2009.
The rule - approved by a vote of 8-3 - includes a self-executing amendment being pushed by House leaders to satisfy "pay-as-you-go" budget rules, in response to a Congressional Budget Office score of the bill.
The CBO estimate revealed that a 15-year reauthorization of the terrorism insurance program would cost the federal government $3.7 billion over a five-period period and $10.4 billion over a 10-year period.
On Monday evening, the panel took testimony but did not report a rule on the bill. After much discussion on a self-executing amendment that would have required a Congressional vote to release funds in the event of a terrorist attack, the panel decided to postpone reporting a rule on the measure. The provision would expedite a floor vote on the issue, bypassing committee action.
"We didn't report out last night in hopes that there could have been some sort of agreement reached on this," said Rep. David Dreier (R-Calif.), ranking member on Rules. Dreier said he hoped there would have been some modification to the language.
"I don't have any doubt that if we have another attack, Congress is going to act," House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.) said.
Dreier called the self-executing language "a convoluted provision" that undermines the jurisdictions of the Rules, Judiciary, and Budget Committees. "This does provide a waiver of PAYGO."
Dreier offered a motion to exclude language from the amendment that he said amounts to a PAYGO waiver. His motion was defeated, 3-8.
Frank, who admits that he is not a "great supporter of PAYGO," said he would have rather have waived the budgetary rule. Frank said the language "satisfies CBO, but almost nobody else."
Rep. Pete Sessions (R-Texas) offered a motion to include in the rule an amendment by Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.) that would require any costs associated with the terrorism risk insurance bill to be offset by spending cuts. It was defeated by a vote of 3-8.
The rule does make in order a manager's amendment by Frank that would clarify the certification process for nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological acts of terrorism and apply the reset mechanism to the NBCR deductible, among other technical changes.
Also made in order under the rule was an amendment by Rep. Steve Pearce (R-N.M.) that would raise the deductible - which under the bill starts at five percent of $1 billion - by one percent each year, rather than at .5 percent as drafted in the bill.
Republicans offered several motions to make in order GOP amendments submitted to the panel for consideration. The panel rejected, 2-9, a motion by Dreier to grant an open rule for consideration of the bill, which would have allowed lawmakers to offer any germane amendments on the floor.
Rep. Lincoln Diaz-Balart (R-Fla.) offered a motion to include in the rule an amendment by Rep. Ginny Brown-Waite (R-Fla.) that would have extended the provisions of the terrorism risk insurance program to cover losses caused by natural disasters for states that have established a reinsurance fund. His motion was rejected, 3-8. Frank said on Monday that the issue would be dealt with in an upcoming House Financial Services markup.
The Rules Committee also rejected, 3-8, a motion by Sessions that would have made in order an amendment by Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas) to require insurance companies to pay an annual, non-refundable premium determined by the Treasury Secretary based on a percentage of a company's direct earned premiums in order to be eligible for terrorism risk insurance participation for that year. Those premiums would have been kept in a reserve fund to cover the costs of a certified terrorist attack exceeding the industry retention level.
In its Statement of Administration Policy, the White House said it may veto the bill if it passes the House in its current form. The White House favors phasing out the program in favor of a private market for terrorism insurance. 
The only acceptable extension of the terrorism risk insurance program, the administration says, would offer a temporary and short-term extension, providing no expansion and an increase in private-sector retentions.
"Unfortunately, H.R. 2761 effectively makes TRIA permanent, increases the role of the federal government and expands the scope of coverage well beyond the point where it is needed," the statement said. "TRIA was intended to provide a temporary mechanism to allow the marketplace to adapt in the short run after economic dislocations resulting from" the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. "Instead the program should be phased out in the near future."
Frank scoffed at the administration's veto threat.
"These people believe in market solutions in the way they believe in unicorns: They believe in it when it doesn't exist," Frank said.
Separately, the panel also reported by voice vote a same-day rule for consideration of legislation on Food and Drug Administration user fees. The rule would allow the legislation to be considered on the floor the same day it's considered in the Rules Committee. 
Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Chairman Edward Kennedy (D-Mass.) told CongressNow today that he believes lawmakers can reach a deal to reauthorize prescription drug and medical device user fees within a day. FDA user fees - which pay for vital drug-review services - are set to expire if they are not reauthorized by Sept. 30. The Bush administration has warned that if a deal on user fees is not reached by Sept. 21, the FDA would need to lay off nearly 2,000 employees.
Negotiators are finalizing the last details of the drug safety bill and believe that an agreement should come as early as the end of today, an aide to Kennedy said. While Kennedy would not address details about what the final issues are, he believes that Congress can avoid a sunset of the existing Food and Drug Administration legislation if a deal can be reached within the next 24 hours.

Load-Date: November 22, 2007


End of Document