House OKs CIA torture ban , Bush, GOP leaders say move deprives U.S.; of tool for anti-terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 14, 2007, Friday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 772 words
Byline: JOBY WARRICK and WALTER PINCUS, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON - The House approved legislation that would bar the CIA from using waterboarding and other harsh interrogation tactics, drawing an immediate veto threat from the White House and setting up another political showdown over what constitutes torture.
The measure, approved by a largely party-line vote of 222 to 199, would require U.S. intelligence agencies to follow Army rules adopted last year that explicitly forbid waterboarding and require interrogators to adhere to a strict interpretation of the Geneva Conventions on the treatment of prisoners of war. The rules, required by Congress for all Defense Department personnel, also ban sexual humiliation, "mock" executions and the use of attack dogs, and prohibit the withholding of food and medical care.
The passage of the bill, which must still win Senate approval, fulfills a promise by House Democratic leaders to seek a ban on interrogation practices that have prompted the condemnation of human rights groups and many governments around the world. It comes amid a furor over the CIA's announcement a week ago that it destroyed in 2005 videotapes that showed the use of harsh interrogation tactics on two terrorism suspects.
The White House vowed to veto the measure. Limiting the CIA to interrogation techniques authorized by the Army Field Manual "would prevent the United States from conducting lawful interrogations of senior al Qaida terrorists to obtain intelligence needed to protect Americans from attack," the Office of Management and Budget said in a statement.
Key Republicans also opposed the measure. Rep. Peter Hoekstra, R-Mich., the House intelligence committee's ranking GOP member, said applying the unclassified Army Field Manual to all interrogations would give terrorist groups full knowledge of U.S. interrogation techniques.
"Too many details on the counterterrorism programs that have kept America safe since 9 / 11 have already been illegally leaked," Hoekstra said. "Congress should not be in the business of voluntarily giving al-Qaida or any of our adversaries our playbook."
The proposed prohibition on waterboarding is part of a House-Senate compromise on the Intelligence Authorization Act, which contains a budget for U.S. intelligence agencies and sets out intelligence priorities. The sprawling legislation would provide more money for linguists and analysts, require periodic reports on the nuclear programs of Iran and North Korea, and establish a new intelligence inspector general empowered to audit the activities of the 16 U.S. intelligence agencies.
"With the passage of this bill, the House is back in the business of conducting oversight of the intelligence community," said Rep. Silvestre Reyes, D-Texas, chairman of the House intelligence committee.
The CIA declined to comment on the bill's ban on waterboarding, an interrogation technique simulating drowning that the agency says it abandoned in 2003. CIA Director Michael Hayden has maintained that the agency's interrogation program has been small - involving fewer than 100 detainees since 2002 - and fully legal. He has also contended that the use of harsh interrogation techniques has provided leads on al-Qaida's operations and has foiled terrorist plots.
The House action Thursday drew praise from human rights groups that have been advocating for years that the CIA and other government agencies follow the military's rules for detentions and interrogations around the world. The Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 made the Army Field Manual applicable to all Defense Department employees, but it left a loophole allowing the CIA to use aggressive techniques barred by that document.
Jennifer Daskal, senior counterterrorism counsel for Human Rights Watch, said the recent CIA admission that it had destroyed videotapes of its interrogations of high-value suspects is one reason why the legislation is so important.
"It's unlikely the tapes would have been destroyed unless the CIA believed that they showed something that they needed to hide: interrogators engaging in practices that most of the world would consider torture," Daskal said.
Retired Army Gen. Paul Kern, one of the lead investigators of the abuse at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, said he thinks that having two separate sets of standards for interrogation - one for the CIA and another for the military - has created problems of credibility and accountability. Kern, who signed a letter along with 27 other retired general officers asking the intelligence committees to hold the CIA to the military's rules, endorsed the standards set by the military.
"We ought to have one set of standards, period," Kern said.
30

Load-Date: December 14, 2007


End of Document