HOUSE TARGETS ECOLOGY 'TERRORISTS';
MEASURE PASSES BUT CRITICS SAY IT'S VAGUE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 17, 2005 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE,
Length: 357 words
Byline: TOM BARNES, POST-GAZETTE HARRISBURG BUREAU
Dateline: HARRISBURG
Body


The state House approved a measure yesterday to impose harsh penalties against "eco-terrorists," even though legislators sharply disagreed on what types of activity constituted eco-terrorism.
 The bill, sponsored by Rep. Robert Godshall, R-Montgomery, was approved 168-16 and sent to the Senate for further action.
 The bill would establish a variety of offenses with a range of penalties from summary and misdemeanor offenses to a first- degree felony with a maximum penalty of 40 years in jail, a $100,000 fine and restitution.
Godshall contended that some environmental protesters, including those who protest what goes on inside drug-testing labs or research activity at veterinary schools, have gone too far, threatening to harm buildings and even scientists engaged in lawful activity.
 Other environmental protesters could include those who battle against logging operations or extremists who have destroyed sport utility vehicles at some car dealers or burned down luxury homes built in wooded areas.
 Godshall said one extremist group called the Environmental Liberation Front has said it "would no longer hesitate to pick up a gun" to protect the environment.
 Rep. Kathy Manderino, D-Philadelphia, said veterinary and agricultural schools have been targeted by such protesters, who have even threatened violence against professors and researchers and their homes.
 But critics of the bill, including Rep. Greg Vitali, D-Delaware, said someone who protests the treatment of puppies at a pet store could be seen as an "eco-terrorist" under the bill.
 "It's too broad," he said. "If a protester at a pigeon shoot picks up a wounded pigeon from private property he could be convicted of eco-terrorism under this."
 Rep. Daylin Leach, D-Montgomery, tried to change the title of the offense to "eco-intimidation" but failed. He said he feared the bill could be used to inhibit the free speech rights of some protesters.
 The eco-terrorism bill was part of a larger package of "anti-terrorism" bills unveiled by House Republicans yesterday. The package would create new types of crimes, stiffen criminal penalties and provide funding for firefighters.

Notes

Harrisburg Bureau Chief Tom Barnes can be reached at tbarnes@post-gazette.com or 1-717-787-4254.  

Load-Date: March 17, 2005


End of Document