HOUSE TO VOTE TODAY ON TERRORISM BILL
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 24, 2001 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 363 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Police would be able to secretly search the homes of suspects, tap all of their cell and home phones and track their use of the Internet under anti-terrorism legislation nearing final approval in the House.
"This legislation is not perfect, and the process is not one that all will embrace," said House Judiciary Committee Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., R-Wis. "However, these are difficult times that require steadfast leadership and an expeditious response. This legislation is desperately needed."
Lawmakers reached a compromise last week between the House and Senate versions of President Bush's measure, which would expand the FBI's wiretapping and electronic surveillance authority, impose stronger penalties on those who harbor or finance terrorists and increase punishment of terrorists.
Rep. Robert C. Scott, D-Va., said the bill is "not just limited to terrorism. Had it been limited to terrorism, this bill could have passed three or four weeks ago without much discussion."
House leaders said the bill will be voted on today, wed> with the Senate expected to take up the bill later this week. The plan is to get it to Bush for a possible signing Friday at the White House.
Among the compromises, the Justice Department gave up on its demands that the new laws immediately become permanent, a major loss for the Bush administration. House leaders said it was unlikely they would pass the bill without an expiration date.
The administration ultimately decided that having the wiretapping and electronic surveillance portion of the terrorism legislation expire at the end of 2005 was better than having no new laws at all.
The Republican-controlled House gave up its insistence that money-laundering legislation be passed separately and not with the anti-terrorism bill. Senate leaders repeatedly threatened to scuttle the bill if the money-laundering provisions were deleted.
In other action, the House:
*required registration of all researchers using biological agents or toxins, and it made unregistered possession a felony, regardless of intent; and
*passed legislation to make it easier for students called up to active duty in the military to pay off their college loans.

Load-Date: October 26, 2001


End of Document