HOUSE LEADERS AGREE ON ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 2, 2001 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 894 words
Byline: From Wire Reports
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senior members of the House Judiciary Committee reached bipartisan agreement yesterday on anti-terrorism legislation.
The measure strengthens the hand of investigators and stiffens criminal penalties but falls short of several recommendations made by Attorney General John Ashcroft in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks.
The compromise would make it easier for investigators to gain court permission for electronic surveillance of suspected terrorists.
Another provision would extend the amount of time the government may detain an alien suspected of terrorism without filing charges, from the current two days to seven.
But the standard that would be set for these electronic surveillances would still be more stringent than the Justice Department sought. And Ashcroft had proposed there be no limitation on the length of detention in cases involving aliens suspected of terrorism.
Judiciary Committee Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., R-Wis., and the ranking Democrat, Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, reached a compromise on the legislation.
"It's inadequate," said Laura W. Murphy, director of the ACLU's national office in Washington, D.C. "The potential for abuse is still great here."
Sensenbrenner and Conyers rejected proposals that would have enabled law enforcement to seize the assets of suspected terrorists, conduct criminal property searches without notifying suspects, access a greater range of student records and cooperate with foreign governments to conduct electronic surveillance of U.S. citizens both here and abroad.
A senior Bush administration official said last night that the proposal was encouraging because it demonstrated bipartisan support for many White House proposals.
But the official said some of the elements were troubling, especially a "sunset" feature that would force the expiration of the expanded wiretap powers in two years unless explicitly renewed by Congress.
The 122-page House legislation, dubbed the "Patriot Act," is to be considered tomorrow by the committee and next week by the entire House.
David Carle, spokesman for Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., said Senate Democrats and Republicans "negotiated through the weekend and are close to an agreement over here."
The administration also sought to back away from Ashcroft's warning of Sunday that new terrorist attacks were likely.
White House press secretary Ari Fleischer suggested that while there was grave concern about the possibility of new terrorist strikes in the United States, there were no specific or credible threats.
Law enforcement officials said that Ashcroft's comments might have reflected a relative inexperience with raw intelligence reports which are based on information that can be frightening to read but is often misleading or inaccurate.
ANTI-TERRORISM - President Bush cited progress on anti-terrorism efforts, ranging from frozen accounts to international pledges of support to the capture of a man who had just finished serving time for an unrelated hijacking.
"Slowly but surely, the results are coming in," Bush said.
The president made a trip yesterday to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and listed some fruits of the administration's intense focus on terrorism. Authorities have blocked $6 million in bank accounts linked to terrorist activity, Bush said, and have frozen 50 accounts, 30 of them in the United States.
Osama bin Laden, suspected of masterminding the Sept. 11 attacks, heads a terror network known as al-Qaeda. Bush said a global web of shared intelligence is gradually yielding identities and hiding places of al-Qaeda members. One hundred fifty people have been detained, and Bush promised more arrests.
Another piece of evidence possibly linking bin Laden to the investigation reportedly came from bin Laden himself.
Foreign intelligence officials say they intercepted a telephone call between bin Laden and Al-Kalifa bin Laden, the woman who raised him, just two days before the attacks, according to a report by NBC.
"In two days you're going to hear big news and you're not going to hear from me for a while," said bin Laden, according to the news report. The Justice Department declined to comment on the report.
MILITARY - Bush said 29,000 troops have been deployed, as well as an amphibious group and several hundred aircraft. About 17,000 military reservists have been called to active duty, and thousands of National Guard troops are working under state authority, he said.
Bush's war on terrorism gained a fourth aircraft carrier yesterday - but the USS Kitty Hawk will serve as a floating base for other forces, defense officials said.
U.N. ADDRESS - New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, in an impassioned speech to the United Nations, said there was no room for neutrality in the global fight against terrorism and no need for more studies or vague directives.
"Recognize," Giuliani said, "that there is no room for neutrality on the issue of terrorism. You're either with civilization or you're with terrorism."
Giuliani said he believes the increase in terrorism and terrorist groups over the past 15 years is a response to the spread of freedom and democracy to many nations.
"Our freedom threatens them, because they know that if our ideas of freedom gain a foothold among their people it will destroy their power. So they strike out against us to keep those ideas from reaching their people."

Load-Date: October 4, 2001


End of Document