House OKs terrorism insurance;
It killed a measure to overhaul bankruptcy law, and it also extended unemployment benefits.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
November 15, 2002 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A18
Length: 905 words
Byline: By Jodi Enda; Inquirer Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a flurry of last-minute action, the House voted yesterday to create a terrorism-insurance program and scuttled legislation that would have overhauled federal bankruptcy law.
The House also approved, on a voice vote, legislation extending a welfare law and unemployment benefits and restoring Medicare payments to doctors.
A bill authorizing more federal aid to improve security at the nation's ports was approved by the House on a voice vote. The Senate approved the port bill on a 95-0 vote earlier yesterday.
Under the terrorism-insurance bill, which was approved on a voice vote, the government would cover up to $90 billion annually in insurance claims from future terrorist attacks. It is expected to be cleared by the Senate and sent to President Bush, who said the $100 billion measure would stimulate the economy by protecting insurers against enormous claims from attacks.
After the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, insurance companies said that without such federal protection, they would no longer be able to insure large structures such as skyscrapers and shopping malls.
"This legislation will put hard-hats back to work, create construction jobs, improve the legal process and protect taxpayers," White House spokesman Scott McClellan said as the House prepared to vote on the bill. Passage, he said, "would create hundreds of thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in new investment, and help with economic security."
Under the three-year bill, the government would cover 90 percent of terrorism claims after losses surpassed $10 billion in 2003, an amount that would increase to $15 billion in 2005. Covered losses would be capped at $100 billion by the government. If losses were more than that, Congress would have to decide anew what to do.
The measure does not cover last year's terrorist attacks, which generated an estimated $40 billion in insured claims that insurers had to cover.
This was the second time the House had taken up a terrorism-insurance bill. An earlier House bill, which passed last year, prohibited punitive damages in most terrorism-related civil suits. The Democratic-controlled Senate did not restrict such awards.
Initially, Bush blamed Senate Democrats for failing to pass the legislation. But last month, the White House struck a deal with Senate Democrats, which, to the dismay of House conservatives, eliminated the ban on punitive damages.
The vote came during the lame-duck - or postelection - session of Congress.
Bankruptcy legislation. The bankruptcy bill's rejection by the House was a stinging defeat for GOP leaders. The measure, which was backed primarily by banking and credit-card companies, would have made it more difficult for people to erase their debts.
Although most of the bill's support came from Republicans, abortion opponents among the GOP balked because the bill would have prevented antiabortion protesters from declaring bankruptcy to escape court fines if they had knowingly broken the law by blocking access to abortion clinics.
"What we're dealing with today, with all due respect, is McCarthyism," said Rep. Christopher H. Smith (R. N.J.), one of Congress' leading opponents of abortion. Smith said civil rights leaders, including the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., knowingly broke the law with acts of civil disobedience.
"Pro-lifers are treated differently," he said.
Democratic opponents said the bill would have endangered working Americans who are struggling with the economic slump.
The measure never came to a full vote, as 87 Republicans, 155 Democrats and one independent blocked its consideration. The vote was 243-172.
The bill is effectively dead, though lawmakers are likely to try to forge a new version when they return next year.
Unemploymentand welfare. The House voted last night to extend unemployment benefits through January in states with high rates of joblessness. The Senate passed a more generous unemployment package that would extend benefits through March, raising the possibility of an end-of-the-session snag between the two houses.
The House bill also included the provision to extend the 1996 welfare law through March 31 to give lawmakers time to pass legislation renewing it.
The provision on Medicare payments for doctors is intended to correct what they say is a faulty formula that has caused them to lose billions of dollars.
Port security.The House and the Senate passed the bill intended to increase security at the nation's 361 seaports. It would create new antiterrorism teams, a sea marshal program, and new standards to protect shipping containers. The bill would give more than $100 million to the Customs Service.
Sen. Bob Graham (D., Fla.), a cosponsor of the bill, said the legislation would help make seaports safer, but he complained that the funding was inadequate. Since Sept. 11, Graham has warned that ports are very vulnerable to terrorists.
The bill was deadlocked for several months because of disagreements between the Senate and House over funding. Graham said the bill still lacked secure funding.
"We are providing the basic architecture of the security," he said. "But the challenge to provide the plumbing and the electrical systems that will bring this architecture to life have yet to be faced. While our bill is a step in the right direction, we must fully commit to our seaports, as we have to our airports, which includes a steady stream of funding."
Contact Jodi Enda at 202-383-6051 or jenda@krwashington.com  

Load-Date: November 15, 2002


End of Document