HOUSE TURNS ITS BACK ON HURRICANE RISK
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 22, 2007 Saturday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 16A
Length: 310 words
Body


If the U.S. House of Representatives can justify being a backstop for the commercial insurance industry in the event of another terrorist attack, it can do the same for hurricane risk. The House made that comparison unavoidable when it voted 312-110 on Wednesday to expand and make permanent a temporary program to cover extraordinary property and casualty insurance losses linked to terrorism. The original legislation grew out of the 9/11 attacks when developers of large office buildings, particularly in big cities that were considered likely targets of terrorism, had to put off projects because they couldn't get insurance.
That dilemma sounds familiar to property owners in Florida and along the Gulf Coast - only substitute the word hurricanes for acts of terror. The private insurance market for wind policies has nearly collapsed since four major hurricanes hit Florida in 2004 and Katrina devastated the Gulf Coast in 2005. Yet the House has turned its back on any national responsibility for natural catastrophes (other than the existing flood insurance program).
It is distasteful to play victims off each other for scarce resources, but what is the difference between survivors of a natural disaster and of a terrorist attack? In both cases, the financial loses are potentially so great that private insurers have been scared off or the cost of coverage has become unaffordable. Without federal action, the state of Florida has taken on more of the financial risk of hurricanes, so much so that one day the state's solvency could be put in jeopardy.
No one knows for certain where the next disaster will strike, be it from terrorism, extreme weather or geological upheaval. It is safe to say that as Americans, we're all in it together. So if Congress decides is it responsible for one kind of catastrophic risk, it should consider the others as well.

Load-Date: September 22, 2007


End of Document