House, Senate differences won't kill TRIA; Lawmakers seek to map long-term solution, but disagree on best route
Business Insurance
December 5, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1331 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-U.S. House and Senate conferees should be able to resolve a key difference between two bills designed to extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, say proponents of TRIA extension.
The difference is the way in which the bills approach providing a long-term answer to the question of how best to provide terrorism insurance.
TRIA, which provides a federal backstop for insurers facing catastrophic losses, is slated to expire on Dec. 31. Both bills would extend TRIA through 2007. Proponents acknowledge, though, that an extension beyond 2007 is doubtful, so they say finding a long-term alternative is critical.
The Senate's Terrorism Risk Insurance Act-S.467-calls for the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to ``perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of the insurance for terrorism risk,'' including group life coverage and coverage for chemical, nuclear, biological and radiological events. The bill, which the Senate approved last month, further directs the group to submit a report on its findings to the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs and House Financial Services committees by Sept. 30, 2006.
The House's Terrorism Risk Insurance Act-H.R. 4314-calls for the establishment of a broader commission that would have to report by Dec. 31, 2006, on ``whether there is a need for a federal terrorism risk insurance program and, if so, shall make a specific detailed recommendation for the replacement of the program, including specific, detailed recommendations for the creation of a terrorism reinsurance facility or facilities or single or multiple pooling arrangements or both.'' The bill spells out exactly who would sit on the Commission on Terrorism Risk-including one representative of policyholders. That bill, as amended, won the Financial Services Committee's approval on Nov. 14 and is expected to reach the House floor this week.
That it will do so is not guaranteed, though. Late last week, rumors arose that the House Judiciary Committee could exert jurisdiction over the bill because of the bill's potential tort implications. That would slow its progress and perhaps delay its consideration until 2006. In the meantime, TRIA would expire on Dec. 31, leading to market dislocations.
``Bringing in tort reform issues on TRIA is an act designed to eliminate the chances for TRIA extension, and I'm confident that House leaders will appropriately address that position,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp-government affairs for the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington. ``There's no bill with tort reform provisions in it that will ever be accepted in a conference setting with the Senate.''
If that is avoided and the House approves its TRIA extension bill, House and Senate conferees would have to iron out differences between the measures, which are considerable but not insurmountable, say observers. The differing approaches to studying the long-term issues surrounding terrorism insurance should be resolved with relative dispatch, say some TRIA advocates.
``Everybody wants to negotiate renewals that have terrorism coverage intact on Jan. 1,'' said the CIAB's Mr. Wood. ``That's been everyone's priority. However, it is very difficult for me to envision that two years from now we'll successfully petition Congress for yet another extension. There needs to be some sort of pathway toward a permanent and private solution,'' he said.
``It's not too difficult to see how you could reconcile those two approaches. But, arguably, it is the most important long-term issue. If all we get is TRIA with more industry participation and it ends in two years, then this entire effort is just a stopgap. We like the construct in the House, but there's every reason to believe'' the House and Senate can work out their differences, Mr. Wood said.
``Either or both bills could get you to a long-term solution. We're just very pleased that both the House and the Senate have acted and acted very responsibly to create bills that can work in the marketplace,'' said Carl Parks, senior vp-government affairs in the Washington office of the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America.
``We're trying diligently not to pick favorites between the two bills, but on that particular provision, PCI has worked very hard on finding a long-term solution all along,'' he said. ``We're very supportive of the House provision that creates what we would say is a bridge to a long-term solution. Either bill could produce that, but the House seems to be more of an umbilical cord to a real long-term solution.''
``I think they can be ironed out,'' said Leigh Ann Pusey, senior vp-government affairs for the American Insurance Assn. in Washington. ``The good news is both bills recognize the need to explore a long-term solution. The House bill has a little more detail to that.''
David Winston, senior vp-federal affairs for the National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos. in Washington, agreed that the differences could be overcome. ``Clearly, there has to be long-term public/private partnership. At the end of the day, there will be a resolution of the two approaches, and it's certainly not a deal killer,'' he said.
Risk managers like the commission idea as well but want more buyer representation.
``I'd like to see a little more representation of the policyholder community, maybe a little more balance there,'' said Bradley R. Wood, senior vp-risk management for Marriott International Inc. in Bethesda, Md. ``You've got one slot here for policyholders,'' he noted.
``It's an opportunity for government to dispel the notion that it's an insurer bailout by ensuring that there's the appropriate balance of policyholder interest on the commission,'' said Marriott's Mr. Wood.
Terry Fleming, a member of the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.'s board of directors with responsibility for external affairs, said, ``We would prefer a risk manager be named'' to the commission. This could be done by either replacing the policyholder spot with one specifically for a risk manager or adding an additional position to be filled by a risk manager, explained Mr. Fleming, who is also director-division of risk management for Montgomery County, Md., in Rockville.
One prominent extension advocate holds that the House approach is the only acceptable way to go.
``It's a step back for the Senate,'' said Ronald R. Robinson, chair of the Chicago-based Defense Research Institute's TRIA subcommittee and a partner in the Los Angeles law firm of Berkes Crane Robinson & Seal L.L.P. ``The original S.467 had a much broader mandate for the presidential working group, and they stepped back from that.''
Mr. Robinson recently joined Don Goodrich, chair of the Families of Sept. 11 organization, in sending a letter to leaders in both houses of Congress urging that a final TRIA extension bill contain the House bill's commission rather than the narrower Senate proposal.
``The real crux of the matter is the full participation and the forward-looking recommendations,'' Mr. Robinson said in an interview last week. ``The commission is a fair attempt to include all of the stakeholders.''
Another attorney specializing in insurance and reinsurance agreed.
``I think its critical to have something in place as a backstop for the extraordinary catastrophic exposure of terrorism in the United States now, so I would view a long-term solution to include some government backup at an appropriate exposure, rather than a short-term temporary solution that will leave these types of risks basically uninsured over the long term,'' said Christopher Kende, who is vice chair of the reinsurance practice group at Cozen O'Connor in New York. ``I don't think the industry is capable of absorbing these types of losses. We've been incredibly lucky that nothing horrible has happened. I would prefer the commission and a solution that would improve government backup at an appropriate level based on an in-depth study by a broad-based commission.''

Load-Date: December 9, 2005


End of Document