House panel sets vote for TRIA extension bill; Prospects in Senate uncertain
Business Insurance
September 20, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 998 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The House Financial Services Committee next week will mark up legislation that would extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act for two years, boosting hopes that the law will be reauthorized this year.
TRIA's reauthorization would be welcome news for risk managers, businesses and insurers. Those groups have been urging lawmakers this year to extend the law-currently slated to expire on Dec. 31, 2005-to prevent dislocations in the insurance marketplace.
But even if the full House approves the Terrorism Insurance Backstop Extension Act-H.R. 4634-extension advocates realize that they still face an uphill battle in the Senate, due in part to lawmakers' desire to adjourn early next month.
TRIA, enacted in late 2002, created a federal terrorism insurance backstop that would help cover insurers' losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks. A sunset provision was included, though, as lawmakers hoped a private market for terrorism would emerge by the end of 2005.
H.R. 4634, introduced by Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Texas, would extend TRIA through the end of 2007 (BI, June 28). Among other things, the bill would increase the deductible that participating insurers must pay and would increase the size of the aggregate industry retention to $17.5 billion in 2006 and $20 billion in 2007, up from the $15 billion currently set for 2005.
The decision by House Financial Services Committee Chairman Mike Oxley, R-Ohio, to mark up the bill on Sept. 29 came one day after the release of a report that says failure to extend TRIA could have a dire impact on the U.S. economy. A spokeswoman for Rep. Oxley said that the committee chairman is inclined to extend TRIA's federal backstop to group life insurers, as well.
Analysis Group Inc., a national economic research and consulting firm, prepared the report for the property/casualty insurance industry. The study projects that even if there is not another terrorist attack, allowing TRIA to expire as currently scheduled could reduce the U.S. gross domestic product by as much as $53 billion over three years.
''Absent TRIA, increased terrorism insurance premiums raise the cost of doing business, creating a drag on the economy,'' according to the report.
The study also holds that failure to extend TRIA could also result in the creation of 326,000 fewer jobs than would be expected if TRIA remained in place.
TRIA's lapse would prompt insurers to adopt terrorism exclusions or other limitations on coverage wherever permitted to do so by regulators, the report notes. Where regulators would not allow exclusions, insurers would leave certain lines of business or geographic areas. And even where terrorism insurance is offered, insurers will more cautiously manage their total exposures within defined geographic areas, further reducing capacity, the report notes, adding that the price for terrorism coverage ''may well increase, possibility significantly.''
The American Insurance Assn., the Financial Services Roundtable, the National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos., the National Council on Compensation Insurance, the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America, and the Reinsurance Assn. of America commissioned the study.
Both the report and Rep. Oxley's announcement drew praise from risk management and insurance groups, which have called for TRIA reauthorization this year because negotiations on policies that will renew next year and extend into 2006 are already underway. Not knowing whether TRIA will be in place makes the pricing of such policies difficult and could affect the availability of coverage, they say.
''When TRIA was first introduced in Congress, RIMS suggested that in order to be fully effective, TRIA must be a six-year program,'' said Janice Ochenkowski, vp-external affairs for the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
''We fully concur with the findings of the Analysis Group report, and believe that the extension of TRIA is long overdue. Failure to limit insurers' exposure to catastrophic terrorism losses can have wide ranging implications for the stability of the U.S. and the global economy. We urge Congress to pass TRIA extension legislation without delay and support efforts to establish a long-term solution to this important issue,'' said Ms. Ochenkowski, who is also senior vp at Chicago-based Jones Lang LaSalle.
''In passing the first TRIA bill, Congress took away the uncertainty in the marketplace,'' said Lisa McGreevey, executive vp-external affairs for the Financial Services Roundtable in Washington. ''We're at a situation now where the private sector has not been able to fill in the gap for the same reason as the first time around-there are still a lot of unknowns as to how to price the risk.''
''TRIA extension has picked up significant momentum in the past few weeks,'' said Julie Rochman, a senior vp at the AIA. ''The chorus of policyholders around the country speaking out on this issue has grown and become too loud to ignore.''
''It's been a difficult uphill climb all along, but if you look at where we've come in three months on this issue, certainly if we can move this out of the House and continue the strong efforts we're making in the Senate, there's every possibility of getting this done in this Congress,'' said Carl Parks, senior vp-federal government relations in Washington for the PCI.
Joel Wood, senior vp at the Washington-based Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers, said that based on the remarks of a key Senate advocate of extending TRIA-Sen. Robert Bennett, R-Utah-he believes chances of Senate action this year are under 50% but that Rep. Oxley's decision ''does provide momentum.''
Mr. Wood said that the Senate Banking Committee will hold a hearing on a wide range of insurance issues this week, a hearing at which the CIAB will focus on TRIA reauthorization.
The hearing could be crucial, he said. Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, R-Ala., ''has not announced a position one way or the other, and he becomes critical,'' he said.

Graphic

 
Janice Ochenkowski, Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.

Load-Date: September 22, 2004


End of Document