HOUSE DEMOCRAT ASKS A PULLOUT
The New York Times
January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 304 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7
Body


Representative Robert T. Matsui, chosen by the House leadership to give the weekly Democratic radio address, called today for the immediate withdrawal of United States troops from Lebanon, saying President Reagan's ''ill conceived'' policies had ''turned deadly.''
''It is time to bring our marines home from Lebanon,'' the California Democrat said. ''Not tomorrow. Not at some vague distant date. But now.''
Mr. Matsui, a member of Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.'s monitoring group on Lebanon, went further in advocating an immediate withdrawal than had Mr. O'Neill, after meeting with the group last Tuesday.
Mr. O'Neill had said that ''patience in Congress with Administration policies in Lebanon is wearing very thin'' and that ''maintaining the status quo position of our marines in Lebanon is unacceptable.'' But he also said Democrats wanted to give Mr. Reagan an opportunity to undertake new diplomatic efforts before trying to force his hand.
 
'Fully Aware of My Position'
In an interview today after his radio address, Mr. Matsui said the Speaker was ''fully aware of my position for an immediate pullout when he asked me to speak.'' Mr. Matsui agreed that his own statement had gone farther than Mr. O'Neill's, but said he did not know whether the Speaker now agreed with him.  ''I can't speak for him,'' Mr. Matsui said, referring to Mr. O'Neill. Efforts to reach Mr. O'Neill or members of his staff today proved unsuccessful.
Mr. Matsui said he believed that Lebanon would be made ''the top priority'' when the Congressional session opens.
''The first step toward peace is to bring our men home and defuse the hostilities in Lebanon by changing the American profile from one of a marine with an M-16 to a diplomat with a real mission,'' Mr. Matsui said in his address, terming the Marines a ''lightening rod for terrorism.''


End of Document