HOUSE TRIMS NEW U.S. CRIME, TERRORISM POWERS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
March 14, 1996, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 661 words
Byline: DAVID ESPO ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In an election-year triumph for the National Rifle Association, the House voted Wednesday to curtail new grants of power to the federal government in legislation designed to fight crime and terrorism.
On a 246-171 vote, lawmakers made it tougher than originally proposed for government attorneys to obtain convictions in some firearms cases. The same vote also stripped out a provision making it easier for prosecutors to use improperly obtained wiretap evidence in certain court cases.
Also deleted was a provision permitting the government to designate certain organizations as terrorist and to deny entrance visas to their representatives.
''We do not need to grant our government any vast new powers,'' Rep. Bob Barr, a conservative 22)000 . 0000.03*22freshman Republican from Georgia, argued as he led the fight to revise the measure. He said some provisions in the bill duplicated existing law, while others were unwise.
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, seemed incensed at the prevailing mood on the House floor. ''I heard a dear friend of mine, a great Republican, say, 'I trust Hamas more than I trust my own government,' Hyde said in a reference to the terrorist group that has claimed responsibility for the recent wave of suicide bombings in Israel.
He did not identify the other lawmaker by name.
''I am extremely disappointed at today's congressional action,'' Attorney General Janet Reno said in a written statement. ''It bars changes in law that would have made it possible to trace terrorists' phone calls in a way that is now 22)000 . 0000.00*22permitted in organized crime investigations. It guts provisions for the swift expulsion of foreign terrorists and barriers to fund-raising to support terrorism overseas.''
Among other groups, the NRA lobbied hard for the changes, writing lawmakers on March 11 that it would ''report the voteto our 22)000 . 0000.00*22members as critical to their constitutional rights.''
The vote also underscored the profound suspicion with which many GOP conservatives view the federal government.
Republican leaders confidently predicted approval of the measure today. That would pave the way for negotiations with the Senate, and presumably the White House, on a final compromise.
The measure is a blend of anti-crime provisions originally passed last year by the House as part of the ''Contract With America,'' as well as steps to fight terrorism requested by the administration last year in the wake of the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City.
It limits the rights of state prisoners to file appeals in federal courts, a provision sponsors say will curtail protracted delays in the carrying out of the death penalty. It also requires criminals to 22)000 . 0000.00*22pay restitution to their victims and makes it easier for the government to deport criminal aliens.
House GOP leaders had originally hoped to bring the anti-terrorism legislation to the floor last year, but were thwarted when Barr and others objected to some of its provisions.
Hyde spent months trying to negotiate a compromise with Barr, dropping a provision permitting the military to help fight certain types of terrorism, for example. By late last year, the two men signed a letter to other lawmakers urging support for a revised bill.
A few weeks ago, however, Barr changed his mind.
Hyde attributed the vote to a ''strange bizarre marriage'' between the NRA and the American Civil Liberties Union, and in fact, those two groups joined others in signing a letter to lawmakers last December expressing numerous objections to the bill. Wisconsin votes
Here is how the Wisconsin delegation voted on the amendment to the crime bill approved Wednesday on a 246-171 vote.
Voting for the measure were Republicans Scott Klug, Mark Neumann, Thomas Petri, Toby Roth and F. James Sensenbrenner and Democrat David Obey. Voting against the measure were Republican Steve Gunderson and Democrats Thomas Barrett and Gerald Kleczka.

Load-Date: March 15, 1996


End of Document