HOUSES OF WORSHIP HERE TAKE PRECAUTIONS AGAINST TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 26, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 490 words
Byline: Victor Volland Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Most Jewish synagogues and temples here and some churches and mosques are taking security precautions against possible terrorist attack as the war in the Persian Gulf continues.  ''We have tightened security considerably,'' said Rabbi Jeffrey B. Stiffman of Shaare Emeth Temple in Creve Coeur.  ''We're locking doors in the congregation, and we're watching people who come in. We're very careful with the mail, of course,'' Stiffman said. He said plainclothes security people kept watch on all public events and school sessions.  ''Unfortunately, the Jewish community has experienced similar scares over the years. We have a permanent game plan on security that is automatically put into effect when a crisis focuses world attention on Israel and the Jews,'' said James Bennett, associate rabbi at Shaare Emeth.  Rabbi Robert Sternberg of the St. Louis Jewish Community Relations Council said most congregations subscribed to an Anti-Defamation League guide that spells out reasonable precautions to forestall terrorism. The precautions include hiring private security guards, installing electronic surveillance devices and working closely with police to monitor buildings and property.  ''In times like these, every institution and agency needs to take precautions,'' he said. ''You shouldn't just single out the Jewish community as being at risk. This is everybody's concern.'' Sternberg said that so far there had been no incidents or threats vagainst Jewish people in St. Louis.  Mohammed Noor Abdullah, spiritual leader of the Islamic Center of Greater St. Louis, said virtually all such centers in the country were taking special security precautions because of a ''possible backlash'' against Muslims of all nationalities.
Abdullah said he knew of no threats made against the relatively few Muslims here; about 2,000 Muslims live here, most of them from the Indian subcontinent. The Islamic Center's congregation has only a few members from the Middle East, including Syria, Egypt and Saudi Arabia but not Iraq, he said.  The Islamic Center in Kansas City has received telephone threats since the war started, said its president, Abdul Rahman Raja. He declined to say what security precautions had been taken.  ''We are concerned for our congregation because there have been verbal threats,'' Raja said. ''Naturally, when there is a crisis we look toward those resources that will help us stay away from the limelight. We are a minority, but we are also Americans. I want to make clear that Saddam Hussein is not the leader of the Muslims.'' The Rev. John Ronquest, pastor of the Old Cathedral downtown, said the church had been urged by the National Park Service to report any suspicious packages left in pews. The historic Catholic church is next to the Gateway Arch and attracts many tourists.  ''We don't anticipate any trouble, but you never know,'' Ronquest said.  Some information for this story was provided by The Associated Press

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document