House votes to extend terror backstop; Administration threatens veto of expanded program, but compromise expected
Business Insurance
September 24, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 967 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Supporters of the federal backstop for terrorism coverage are optimistic the program will be extended despite Bush administration opposition to lawmakers' current expansion plan.
That's because the version of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act that passed the House of Representatives last week by a vote of 312 to 110 is seen as highly unlikely to be the final version of the measure.
One key variable is that the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee has yet to unveil its own backstop legislation. When the program was last extended in late 2005, the basis for the extension was a Senate measure that ignored a more extensive House extension bill and scaled the existing program back in a way that won administration support.
Observers expect a similar outcome this year, given the significant expansion of the program called for in the House measure.
In addition to calling for a 15-year extension of the program-currently slated to expire on Dec. 31-the House bill would add group life to the list of insurance lines covered by the backstop. The measure would also expand the program by allowing the backstop to respond to acts of both domestic and foreign-initiated terrorism and by requiring insurers to offer coverage for acts of nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological terrorism.
Veto threat
The Office of Management and Budget issued a policy statement last week saying that senior administration officials would recommend that the president veto the bill if it remains in its current form. The administration believes that the backstop should be steadily scaled back and that the private insurance market should handle terrorism risk.
What may ultimately be more important than the threat of a veto will be what emerges from the Senate, say extension backers.
``I don't have any expectation that the final bill will look like the current House bill,'' said Bradley R. Wood, senior vp-risk management for Marriott International Inc. in Bethesda, Md. Mr. Wood said ``it's likely we're going to see an `as is' bill for a shorter duration of time'' than the House's 15-year extension. Mr. Wood is a prominent proponent of extending the program.
``A significant amount of positioning has occurred this week,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp at the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington. ``There is neither any surprise to the administration's veto threat, nor surprise that the House passed what is largely an expansive program. Somewhere between those two poles there's a resolution that will work for clients,'' he said.
``We had a strong bipartisan vote and a lot of support,'' both in Congress and within the business community, said Leigh Ann Pusey, chief operating officer of the American Insurance Assn. in Washington.
Regarding the veto threat, she noted that the administration has ``historically had concerns about expansion of this program and the long duration of this program, so it's not a surprise'' administration officials would raise objections, Ms. Pusey said.
``We have a good bill in the House, but we have a long way to go. We believe that Congress will produce a bill with strong bipartisan support and it will be signed by the White House by Dec. 31.''
``We're pleased with the passage of the bill,'' said Janice Ochenkowski, president of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. in New York. She said that the margin of passage-including 88 Republicans voting for the bill-``means that both parties worked very hard to resolve some issues.''
``We're hopeful we can move forward onto the next step, which is the Senate,'' said Ms. Ochenkowski, who is also managing director at Jones Lang LaSalle Inc. in Chicago.
Cost debated
The CIAB's Mr. Wood noted that the House bill ``hit a speed bump'' after a Congressional Budget Office report held that extending the backstop would cost the government $8.4 billion over 10 years, based on its estimates of terrorist activity.
As a result, the bill ran into the so-called pay-go rule adopted by Congress. That rule requires that any funding authorization bill with a price tag be offset by either new revenues or spending cuts, said Mr. Wood. To get around that requirement, lawmakers added a provision that would require a second vote by Congress to release federal terrorism insurance funds. That could raise uncertainty over whether the backstop could be tapped as intended after a major terrorist attack.
``It is a concern, but I am not lying awake in the bed staring at the ceiling, worrying about it,'' he said. He said Democratic leaders have made clear that the provision would not be part of a final bill.
Lloyd Dixon, a senior economist with RAND Corp. in Santa Monica, Calif., took issue with the CBO estimate. The analysis did not take into account how the backstop would reduce other government expenses in the aftermath of an attack, he said during a discussion of the backstop program at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Washington the day after the House vote. He added that the analysis also used the lowest possible recoupment rate the federal government could ask from insurers that received funds from the backstop.
Time is of the essence for supporters of the backstop, said CIAB's Mr. Wood. ``The industry and policyholders have a sense of urgency, but I think skeptics may have little incentive for an early resolution.''
TRIREA highlights
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act, which passed the House last week, would:
* Extend the federal terrorism insurance backstop for 15 years.
* Cover acts of domestic terrorism.
* Require insurers to 'make available' coverage for nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological terrorism risks.
* Cover group life insurance in the backstop.
Source: The Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act of 2007

Load-Date: September 28, 2007


End of Document