House blocks call for probe of Pelosi CIA claims
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 22, 2009, Friday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 471 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - House Democrats defeated a Republican push to investigate House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's claims that the CIA misled her in 2002 about whether waterboarding had been used against terrorism suspects.
The House voted 252-172 to block the measure that would have created a bipartisan congressional panel. Rep. Rob Bishop, R-Utah, sponsored the resolution.
"This is partisan politics and an attempt by the Republicans to distract from the real issue of creating jobs and making progress on health care, energy and education," said Pelosi spokesman Nadeam Elshami.
Pelosi was not present at the time of the vote. Republicans called for the vote on Thursday, while she was giving a commencement speech at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Earlier this month, Pelosi told reporters that she had not been told that waterboarding had been used against terrorism suspects, even though it had been.
President Barack Obama and human rights groups have said waterboarding, which simulates drowning, is torture.
"To have this charge out there and not have it resolved I think is damaging to our intelligence efforts, and certainly will have a chilling effect on our intelligence professionals around the world," said House Republican Leader John Boehner of Ohio.
Former Vice President Dick Cheney also stepped into the debate.
In a speech at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, Cheney said Pelosi and other lawmakers had been briefed on the interrogation techniques on "numerous occasions."
"In my long experience in Washington, few matters have inspired so much contrived indignation and phony moralizing as the interrogation methods applied to a few captured terrorists," Cheney said.
Pelosi has asked the CIA to declassify information supporting her claims.
The CIA has sent lawmakers its notes and memos on 40 congressional briefings on the interrogation techniques. But that document has been found to include several errors.
CIA Director Leon Panetta acknowledged in a May 6 letter to House Intelligence Committee Chairman Silvestre Reyes, D-Texas, that the CIA's list may not be completely accurate.
"In the end, you and the committee will have to determine whether this information is an accurate summary of what actually happened," Panetta wrote.
Democrats are pointing out that Republicans too have accused the CIA of misleading them on intelligence matters. Boehner himself called into question the soundness of the intelligence community when it determined in 2007 that Tehran had halted its nuclear weapons program.
Boehner told reporters on Thursday that it was an unfair comparison because he never accused the men and women of the intelligence community of misleading Congress.
Boehner defended harsh interrogations.
"I don't believe the enhanced interrogation techniques were wrong," he said.
AP-ES-05-21-09 1307EDT

Load-Date: May 22, 2009


End of Document