HOUSE OKS TERRORISM INSURANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 11, 2014 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-9
Length: 477 words
Body


WASHINGTON ? The House Wednesday passed long-sought legislation to renew a government program that's credited with reviving the market for insurance against terrorist attacks after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
But the measure, despite passing by a 417-7 vote, has run into trouble in the Senate because of opposition to an unrelated item involving a rewrite of a provision of the 2010 Dodd-Frank overhaul of financial services regulations.
Street gang crackdown
LOS ANGELES ? Twenty five members of an East Los Angeles street gang were arrested and five more were being tracked as fugitives as hundreds of agents swarmed the city's Eastside on Wednesday in an operation that authorities said was aimed at weakening a gang that has been rooted in the community for decades, authorities said.
Authorities said the gang has been active in the Boyle Heights neighborhood for 50 years and described the raid as a "day of accountability."
Windows 10 fall debut
SEATTLE ? Microsoft Corp expects to have its new Windows 10 operating system on the market by autumn 2015, slightly later than previous comments had suggested.
Chief Operating Officer Kevin Turner told Japanese news service Nikkei on Wednesday that the new system would be released "early next fall."
Letterman's swan song
NEW YORK ? More than 32 years of late-night talk will pass into history May 20, with CBS's announcement Wednesday that David Letterman will host his final "Late Show" on that day.
If Mr. Letterman, 67, makes all of his scheduled broadcasts until then, CBS said he will have hosted 6,028 versions of the "Late Show" and its NBC predecessor, "Late Night." Mr. Letterman moved to CBS in 1993.
Delivery in midflight
LOS ANGELES ? A woman and her baby are doing well after an unexpected midair birth on a Phoenix-bound plane over California shocked passengers and crew members, Southwest Airlines officials said Wednesday.
Southwest Flight 623 started its trip from San Francisco to Phoenix on Tuesday with 111 passengers but landed with 112 after the woman gave birth and the plane was rerouted to Los Angeles, airline spokeswoman Emily Samuels said. The airline did not identify the woman,
Also in the nation ?
Pablo Vega Cuevas, 40, the alleged head of the Chicago-area branch of a Mexican drug cartel faces federal charges for a plot that involved carrying heroin and cocaine from Mexico to the United States in passenger buses, prosecutors said Wednesday. ? Michigan State University students on Wednesday protested at the East Lansing campus a decision to keep George Will as a commencement speaker Saturday after he wrote a column disparaging victims of campus sexual assault. ? The body of Luke Somers, an American held by an al-Qaida unit in Yemen who was killed on Saturday when U.S. special forces tried to rescue him, was flown to the United States on Wednesday, a U.S. defense official said.

Load-Date: December 12, 2014


End of Document