HOUSE, SENATE ANTI-TERRORISM BILLS ADVANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 4, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,; THE WAR ON TERROR
Length: 454 words
Byline: ROBERT PEAR AND NEIL A. LEWIS, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


By a 36-0 vote, the House Judiciary Committee approved a bill last night that would give law enforcement officials broad new authority to investigate suspected terrorists.
 House Republican leaders said they intended to take the legislation to the House floor next week, one month after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Members of both parties said they expected the bill to gain easy approval.
Although the vote last night was unanimous, it followed two weeks of impassioned debate, during which members of both parties struggled to strike a balance between aiding law enforcement and protecting the rights of citizens and immigrants.
 Judiciary Committee Chairman James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., hailed the vote. "This shows that, with respect to conflicting viewpoints and a bipartisan approach, the legislative process works," he said. "We are all the winners. The terrorists are the losers."
 The House bill was drafted by Sensenbrenner and the committee's senior Democrat, Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, in consultation with the Bush administration.
 The House bill would expand law enforcement officials' powers to wiretap phones of terrorist suspects as well as monitor their e-mail traffic. The bipartisan legislation would also let officials detain foreigners suspected of involvement in terrorism for up to seven days, after which they would have to be released if not charged with a crime.
 At the same time, the Senate remained locked in negotiations with the White House on its version of an anti-terrorism package.
 Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., yesterday said it was likely that when an agreement was reached, the Senate bill would be taken directly to the Senate floor, bypassing several usual procedural steps in the Judiciary Committee that could delay its consideration. "Based on conversations we've had over the last eight hours, I would say that there is a strong likelihood that the bill will be able to go to the floor next week," he told reporters.
 Daschle described yesterday's negotiations as proceeding well -- in contrast to Tuesday, when Democrats and Republicans began feuding in ways that had not been seen since before the Sept. 11 attacks.
 Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., warned Tuesday that there could be another terrorist attack and that Democrats would be vulnerable to charges that they failed to respond quickly enough.
 Democratic leaders said staff aides would negotiate most of last night and an accord with the White House was possible by today or tomorrow. The dispute centered on language governing conditions under which law enforcement authorities could share data from investigations and even grand juries with other federal government arms.

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document