HOUSE GIVES ITS OK TO MEASURE COVERING TERRORISM INSURANCE;
 PHONE CALLS FROM BUSH GOT LEGISLATION MOVING AGAIN;
 PUNITIVE DAMAGE CAP IS OUT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 15, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A4
Length: 511 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The government would cover up to $90 billion annually in insurance claims from any future terrorist attacks under a compromise bill that began advancing through Congress on Thursday.
The terrorism insurance bill cleared the House by voice vote after telephone calls by President George W. Bush to Republican leaders in recent days broke a yearlong logjam. Bush says the bill would invigorate the drooping economy. To gain crucial Democratic support, he had to accept no limits on punitive damages, which many Republicans consider a boon to trial lawyers usually allied with Democrats.
"This legislation will put hardhats back to work, create construction jobs, improve the legal process and protect taxpayers," White House spokesman Scott McClellan said.
Shortly before the House swung into action, the Senate approved a bill aimed at thwarting terrorism at the country's 361 seaports, which are considered especially vulnerable to such attacks. Senators voted 95-0 for legislation requiring ports to develop security plans, although the measure lacked most of the hundreds of millions or more that such safeguards would cost.
The activity came as the lame-duck 107th Congress tried to complete a last batch of bills.
Passage was expected for legislation extending the welfare law and jobless benefits, increasing Medicare payments to doctors and giving military personnel fresh tax cuts.
The terrorism plan would put the government in the insurance business for the next three years. During this time, taxpayers would have to cover up to 90 percent of insured losses from major attacks, with the insurance industry covering up to the first $15 billion in annual claims.
The measure does not cover last year's terrorist attacks, which generated an estimated $40 billion in claims that insurers had to cover.
When the legislation stalled just before last week's elections, Bush used it as a campaign issue and criticized the Democratic-controlled Senate for not completing a bill that would stimulate the economy.
But in fact House GOP bargainers failed to agree to a compromise between the White House and House and Senate negotiators because of its lack of limits on punitive damages - the same deal that was moving through Congress on Thursday.
A rare coalition of liberals and conservatives opposed the terrorism measure. Participants ranging from Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, to the Consumer Federation of America said the measure was too generous.
"It requires American taxpayers to engage in an egregious form of national self-flagellation: American taxpayers are punished for the evil acts of foreign enemies," said another opponent, House Judiciary Committee Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis.
Bush says the measure will aid the economy by allowing the resumption of thousands of building projects stalled by lack of such insurance. Supporters have said the bill could free up $15 billion in construction and real estate business and 300,000 jobs - figures that opponents say are overblown.
The insurance and real estate industry have been lobbying for passage of the bill.

Load-Date: November 15, 2002


End of Document