House panel defeats anti-terrorism bills;
 Lawmakers say measures were too broad
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 12, 2002 Tuesday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2002 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE HANDLE; Pg.B2
Length: 610 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


Two key pieces of Idaho Attorney General Al Lance's anti-terrorism campaign
 were defeated Monday in a House committee.
 Committee members branded the bills an overreaction to the Sept. 11
 terrorist attacks, saying they were overly broad and targeted acts well beyond
 what most would consider terrorism. The measures would have imposed prison
 terms of up to 10 years and fines of up to $50,000 for false threats, and for
 damaging canals, dams or energy facilities.
 Rep. Bill Sali, R-Meridian, an attorney, said the false threats bill, SB
 1346A, would have imposed those harsh felony penalties on a teenager who
 pulled the fire alarm at his high school.
''I think when we're asked to do this kind of thing, Osama bin Laden and
 his ilk are winning," Sali said. ''This is not the right direction."
 Rep. Jim Clark, R-Hayden, agreed.
 ''It over-reached," he said. ''It tried to encompass every possible act
 within one bill. It wasn't well done - wasn't well-written at all."
 Clark and other House Judiciary Committee members had the same criticisms
 of SB 1347A, which would have imposed similar felony penalties for anyone who
 damaged a dam, canal, bridge, reservoir, or other water structure used for
 mining, manufacturing or agriculture. The bill also would have imposed the
 felony penalties for anyone who caused severe damage to an energy facility.
 ''It looks to me like this applies to every irrigation ditch in the whole
 state," said Sali.
 Rep. Todd Hammond, R-Rexburg, said, ''It just seems like we're creating
 something we don't need and putting people away for 10 years."
 Deputy Attorney General Michael Henderson noted that the committee was
 considering the bills on the six-month anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist
 attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.
 In the wake of those attacks, Lance reviewed Idaho laws to see ''if there
 was anything we needed to do … in order to deal with possible terrorist
 threats and other similar criminal acts," Henderson told the committee.
 The result was an array of legislative proposals, including a failed bid to
 allow judges to shut down state records that by law are open to the public. In
 Idaho criminal laws, Lance proposed the false threat and water and energy
 facility bills, plus one other regarding electronic communications that the
 committee approved on Monday, and another defining terrorist acts and setting
 felony penalties for them. That final bill will be up for consideration in the
 Judiciary Committee on Wednesday.
 ''We've attempted to draft legislation that we thought was tailored to the
 types of threats that we've seen," Henderson said after the committee's
 decision. ''I think that there were some understandable concerns about the
 reach of the legislation, but I think we drafted the legislation
 appropriately."
 The false threats bill originally addressed only threats of spreading
 hazardous or explosive substances, such as the mailing of powder falsely
 claimed to be anthrax. It was amended in the Senate to also cover false
 threats of fire or radioactivity.
 ''That's one of the frustrations you encounter in dealing with the two
 houses," Henderson said.
 As amended, Henderson said the bill probably could be applied to a teenager
 who pulled the school fire alarm.
 ''We didn't have that in mind, but it's possible that the act of pulling a
 fire alarm could be seen as a false report of a fire," he said.
 Henderson said he's worried that without the false threats bill, Idaho may
 be left with ''a large number of acts that most people would regard as
 criminal, that law enforcement won't be able to respond to now. I hope we'll
 be able to work with the Legislature in the future to address that."

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached at (208) 336-2854 or by e-mail at bzrussell@rmci.net.  

Load-Date: March 15, 2002


End of Document