House Panel Studies Sharing Of Intelligence
The New York Times
April 20, 2005 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 451 words
Byline: By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 19 
Body


Senior Justice Department officials resisted calls on Tuesday for stronger judicial checks on the government's use of foreign intelligence information, as Congress continued its debate over federal antiterror powers.
 At the fourth in a lengthy series of Congressional hearings on the future of the sweeping law known as the USA Patriot Act, civil right advocates and some House Democrats called for stricter safeguards on the sharing of intelligence information to prevent abuses and government ''fishing expeditions.'' 
  In particular, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union urged Congress to require that prosecutors notify a judge whenever they share information from a criminal investigation with intelligence agencies and explain their reasons for doing so. 
 The lawyer, Timothy H. Edgar, said that although greater sharing of government intelligence since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, had helped deter terrorism, it had also created the danger of abuses that could ''chill legitimate political, religious and academic activities.''
 The Patriot Act authorized much wider sharing of sensitive information from terrorism and espionage cases between criminal prosecutors and intelligence agencies, effectively eliminating a ''wall'' that officials said had hindered antiterrorism efforts before the Sept. 11 attacks.
 At the hearing before a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, Justice Department officials pointed on Tuesday to the improved flow of information as one of the government's critical advances since the attacks and urged Congress to make permanent the part of the law that expanded such information-sharing. That provision and more than a dozen others are set to expire at the end of the year unless Congress renews them.
 ''Prior to 9/11, we tied ourselves in knots with misunderstood legal and bureaucratic guidelines that had the effect of constricting the flow of essential information within the United States government,'' said Barry Sabin, head of the terrorism section at the Justice Department. ''We dare not and must not let this happen again.''
 Mr. Sabin and Maureen A. Baginski, who oversees intelligence operations at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, told the panel that it would be a mistake for Congress to require the notification of a judge or impose other restrictions that could slow or hinder the flow of information. 
 Several Democrats on the panel said they were bothered by the idea that government agents could gather and disseminate intelligence information from wiretaps, surveillance and other means as part of a foreign intelligence investigation without having to show probable cause that a crime had been committed.                      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 20, 2005


End of Document