HOUSE DEMS: TERRORISM BILL PASSED 'A MERE SHADOW'
 Philadelphia Daily News
AUGUST 3, 1996 Saturday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 04
Length: 379 words
Byline: Marcy Gordon, Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Prodded by the TWA explosion and Olympics bombing, the House yesterday overwhelmingly passed a GOP anti-terrorism bill providing for new airport security measures.
But the bill excludes President Clinton's proposals to expand wiretapping authority.
Democrats, who generally denounced the bill as grossly inadequate, reluctantly cast their votes for it, and it prevailed, 389-22.
House Republicans added a last-minute concession: a provision for a study of whether chemical markers should be placed in black and smokeless powders, which are commonly used in making bombs. Clinton had pushed for a study of the markers, called taggants, but ran into stiff opposition this week from some Republicans.
The Senate put off action on the measure until after Congress returns from its monthlong recess beginning this weekend. The delay came when the Democrats objected to taking up the House version unless it could be amended, and Republicans balked at that.
"This is something that we're going to have to continue to work on," said Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss. He said he personally believed that some expansion of wiretap authority may be appropriate.
The rejected wiretap provisions were part of a more comprehensive, bipartisan package negotiated this week by House and Senate leaders and administration officials that was inspired by the TWA explosion and the Olympics bombing. Thursday night, they gave up trying to enact a broader package before the recess.
Clinton said he was disappointed by the bill that resulted from House deliberations and suggested that Democrats may use the issue against Republicans in November's elections. "I think it is legitimate for those who believe more should be done to continue to press for more to be done," the president said.
For his part, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., attacked the administration's terrorism policy. "Right now they do not have a strategy, either domestically or overseas," he said.
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., a negotiator of the broader package, described the new House measure as a sham, "a mere shadow of what law enforcement had asked for."
"What we have here is an act at best of deception and at worst of cowardice," Schumer told his colleagues. He said House GOP leaders "caved in" to the gun lobby.

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document