HOUSE PANEL DELETES WIRETAP PROVISIONS IN TERRORISM BILL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 2, 1995, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 595 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In an attempt to revive an anti-terrorism bill that has been stalled since summer, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., agreed Friday to delete a provision expanding the government's wiretapping authority.
The deletion was sought by conservative Republicans who, although usually supporters of strengthening law enforcement, opposed increasing the government's power.
The anti-terrorism measure arose from the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City in April. The bill passed the Senate in June by a 91-8 vote.
But in the House, liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans have delayed the measure, saying they are concerned it could erode civil liberties.
Besides the wiretap provisions, which President Bill Clinton had described as essential tools for federal law enforcement's fight against terrorism, the deletions include a provision allowing deployment of the armed forces in emergencies involving chemical or biological weapons.
Also omitted would be the House bill's new definition of terrorism that includes use of firearms, which particularly raised the ire of Republican gun-control opponents.
"They've taken a strong bill and weakened it because of pressure from some extremists," said Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y.
He said the revisions were made to placate groups such as armed private militias and "radicals in the pro-gun lobby." Schumer, the senior Democrat on the House Judiciary subcommittee on crime, recently accused the House GOP opponents of conducting "secret, backroom negotiations" on the bill. Sloppy Bookkeeping
Members of the House and their employees have misused credit cards, exceeded caps on office expenses and perhaps failed to pay for catered events, the House inspector general reported Friday.
But there is no evidence of fraud, he added.
John W. Lainhart IV, reporting this week on an audit to be finished by year's end, blamed sloppy bookkeeping for many of the problems.
In the only concrete step taken so far, Lainhart said that the official credit cards of 43 House members and their staffers, including 13 current members or employees, were canceled by the credit card company because their accounts were more than 120 days past due.
The past-due amounts averaged about $ 4,000 as of Oct. 28, Lainhart told the House Oversight Committee in a report submitted this week. However, one former House member owes more than $ 16,000, which skews the average, he noted. The charges were incurred during the 1993 and 1994 congressional sessions, he said.
He refused to identify any member of Congress or staffer involved in the audit.
Each House member receives a card to be used only for travel-related expenses, and the member then decides which members of his staff gets the card. The contract between the credit card company and the House lets the company cancel cards with accounts more than 120 days past due.
The audit found 26 members and 51 staffers with apparent personal charges on their official credit cards, but there was no evidence the House paid any of those bills.
In addition, more than 700 charges were not for travel-related expenses, Lainhart found. This did not violate House rules but did violate the charge card agreement.
The audit found five lawmakers had exceeded their office allowances as of the end of last year. Three have since reconciled the accounts.
Describing a bookkeeping system that was in disarray during Democratic control of the House, Lainhart said he still was trying to resolve 134 potential duplicate payments to the offices of 88 members, totaling $ 22, 814.

Load-Date: December 2, 1995


End of Document