HOUSE OKS BILL TO FIGHT TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 25, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 659 words
Byline: JOHN LANCASTER, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Six weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks, the House yesterday approved the final version of a bill that would expand the ability of law enforcement and intelligence agencies to tap phones, monitor Internet traffic and conduct other forms of surveillance in pursuit of terrorists.
 The Senate is expected to take up the House-passed bill today, and it could be on President Bush's desk in time for a White House signing ceremony tomorrow, congressional aides said.
 The differences between the House and Senate versions had been reconciled in advance of yesterday's vote.
 In passing the bill 356-66, the House gave Attorney General John Ashcroft most of what he asked for in draft legislation submitted to Congress last month. The bill would make it easier for law enforcement and intelligence agencies to share information and updates surveillance laws to take account of new communication methods such as e-mail and disposable cell phones.
The legislation galloped through Congress in record time, skirting normal committee procedures and alarming civil liberties advocates, who say lawmakers are being stampeded into far-reaching measures they'll someday regret.
 The only member of the Western Pennsylvania delegation to vote against the measure was Rep. William Coyne, D-Oakland
 Supporters of the legislation insist that they've been careful to avoid any constitutional pitfalls.
 "I think this is the most dramatic modernization of prosecutorial and police powers that Congress has ever passed," House Judiciary Committee Chairman James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., said. "I have been in elected public office for almost 33 years … and this is the most difficult thing I have ever done, balancing the need for modern law enforcement and prosecutorial powers with civil liberties."
 Lawmakers denied the administration's most controversial request, which would have allowed the indefinite jailing of noncitizens without charges if they were suspected of involvement of terrorism. The compromise House-Senate version would limit to seven days the length of time an alien could be held without immigration or criminal charges being filed.
 But in general, the legislation closely tracks the administration's request. It includes a number of relatively noncontroversial items, such as tougher criminal penalties for terrorists and beefed-up security along the U.S.-Canadian border. It also incorporates new powers long sought by prosecutors and law enforcement but resisted by Congress on civil liberties grounds.
 It would, for example, allow "roving wiretaps" in intelligence investigations covering multiple telephones; expand electronic surveillance powers to allow easier monitoring of e-mail and Internet traffic; and, perhaps most important, permit agencies such as the FBI to easily share grand jury and wiretap information with intelligence agencies.
 Justice Department officials complain that current requirements for judicial approval could cause unacceptable delays in the face of an imminent terrorist attack.
 Civil liberties advocates contend the surveillance powers are so broadly defined that innocent Americans could be caught up in the antiterrorist dragnet. They also say that many of the new tools could be used by prosecutors in criminal cases unrelated to terrorism.
 As the bill is written, said Laura Murphy, chief lobbyist for the American Civil Liberties Union, "It's very difficult to challenge the gathering of information about you, and, in some cases, you're not even going to know that it's gathered about you, and the fact that it's shared with so many agencies."
 The Senate worked closely with the administration in drafting the bill, and, in the end, it was the Senate version, or something very close to it, that passed the House yesterday morning.
 Senate negotiators did yield to House leaders on one critical point: Key provisions relating to electronic surveillance will expire after four years, after which they would have to be renewed.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR ACTION IN WASHINGTON

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Kenneth Lambert/Associated Press: Amy Lee, staff assistant to Rep. Gary Ackerman, D-N.Y., keeps a presence in the congressman's makeshift "office" outside the Capitol yesterday. Ackerman's office is in the Rayburn office building that remains closed during the sweep for anthrax contamination.

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document