HOUSE PASSES $343 BILLION DEFENSE BILL WITH DIVERSION ;
 MONEY IS SUBTRACTED FROM MISSILE DEFENSE, ADDED TO TERRORISM BATTLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 26, 2001 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 449 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The House overwhelmingly approved a $343 billion defense bill late Tuesday after diverting some money from President George W. Bush's missile defense program to counterterrorism efforts. But the Senate's work got bogged down over objections by two senators.
The 398-17 House vote followed bipartisan agreement to cut some funds from the missile defense program while boosting the money to fight terrorism by $400 million, for a total of about $6 billion. Bush had requested $8.3 billion for missile defense.
Rep. Bob Stump, R-Ariz., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, called the extra anti-terrorism money "an initial down payment until the president can better assess the long-term needs."
Bush praised the House action, calling it a "vital step to ensure our nation's security."
Rep. Ike Skelton of Missouri, senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, credited a new bipartisan spirit in Congress since terrorists attacked the country. He said a "very spirited debate" over missile defens e had been expected. "Then America was struck with an abominable act that demanded a united response," he said.
Meanwhile, two Republican senators were seeking to push measures that much of the Senate did not want included in the legislation.
"We can't continue to deliberate and to object and to delay," Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said as he strode to the floor Tuesday night and ruled out more votes for the evening. "I'll be patient, but patience wears thin. We have a lot of work to do."
Assistant Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said the bill contains provisions that would help reservists and National Guard members now being called to duty.
"This bill is going to go down as a result of nothing to do with this bill?" he asked angrily, saying 98 percent of the Senate wants to move the bill.
The Senate stumbled over attempts by Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., to add the energy bill to the defense measure, and by Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, to let private contractors compete with prison industries for defense contracts.
Earlier in the day, the Senate endorsed Bush's base-closings initiative, 53-47, as Democrats strongly opposed an effort to remove the provision from the defense bill.
The $343 billion measure, the total Bush requested, would authorize money for the military efforts of the Defense and Energy departments for the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1.
Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., was a leading voice for the base-closing provision.
He said the vote would determine whether bases would be kept open even if they aren't needed or "whether we're going to have … the most efficient military machine to fight this long, protracted struggle" against terrorism.

Load-Date: September 26, 2001


End of Document