House committee votes to cap funding for war on terrorism
Air Force Times
November 26, 2001 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2001 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: GEN; Pg. 1126
Length: 574 words
Byline: By Rick Maze; Times staff writer
Body


The House Appropriations   Committee agreed Nov. 14 with   President Bush that there should   be limits to federal spending -   even in a national emergency.
On three votes, mainly along   party lines, the committee held   emergency funding for the war on   terrorism to $40 billion.
With Republicans backing   Bush and Democrats favoring   more spending, the committee   defeated amendments to bust the   $40 billion cap and spend an   extra $6.5 billion on the military,   $7.1 billion on homeland security   and $9.7 billion on recovery efforts in New York.
The military amendment,   sponsored by Rep. John Murtha,   D-Pa., was rejected by voice vote.   The homeland security measure,   sponsored by Rep. David Obey,   D-Wis., and the New York measure, sponsored by Rep. John   Sweeney, R-N.Y., failed on identical 34-31 votes, with Sweeney   and Rep. James Walsh, R-N.Y.,   the only lawmakers to break   party ranks.
The committee agreed to attach an emergency spending   measure to the $317 billion defense appropriations bill for   2002. The amendment covers   $20 billion of the planned $40   billion in emergency spending for   the war on terrorism. When the   whole $40 billion is counted, the   Defense Department will get a   total of about $20.8 billion.
While the emergency spending   is substantial, it falls far short of   the list of $67 billion in unfunded   priorities drawn up by the services and sent to the White   House by Defense Secretary   Donald Rumsfeld, said Rep.   Norm Dicks, D-Wash.
"These are things that Rumsfeld and DoD think they need   now," Dicks said.
Left unfunded, for example, are   extra security precautions for   stateside and overseas military   bases, extra communications   equipment for special-operations   teams and extra cash to speed up   renovation of the Pentagon.
Murtha's amendment includes   $2 billion for intelligence-related   items, $1 billion for special operations, $1 billion for defense   against chemical and biological   weapons attacks and $800 million for Pentagon renovation.
The $800 million, on top of $1.1   billion already in the emergency   spending plan, would have cut   four years off the planned 12- year Pentagon renovation project, which will fortify the building against attack.
In urging Republicans to resist   extra spending, Rep. Tom DeLay,   R-Texas, the House majority   whip, said Rumsfeld's request   didn't faze him. "The last time I   looked, Secretary Rumsfeld   worked for the commander in   chief," DeLay said.
If Bush says $40 billion is   enough, with slightly more than   half going to the Pentagon,   DeLay said Republicans should   trust the president.
But Dicks still was concerned.   "We are in a war and our country   is vulnerable," he said. "The Department of Defense is asking for   $67 billion, and we are only coming up with $20 billion."
Many bases are vulnerable to   attacks because they are on or   near major roads, said Rep. John   Olver, D-Mass., senior Democrat   on the military construction appropriations subcommittee.
"We need barriers, we need   gates, we need protective buffer   space," Olver said.
DeLay, however, was unmoved.   He said White House officials   have assured him they are spending money on counterterrorism   programs and improving national   security as fast as they can.
Administration officials, DeLay   said, "have all the money they   can feasibly spend in the next few   months. They are pushing money   out the door."

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document