HOUSE OKS POST-TERRORISM PLAN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 23, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 532 words
Byline: Christopher Lee/ Washington Post/ The Associated Press Contributed To This Report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The House passed a measure Thursday to ensure Congress can continue its work if many lawmakers perish in a terrorist attack. But opponents warned that the bill would not prevent a power vacuum at a time when the country could least afford one.
The legislation, approved 306 to 97, would require states to hold special elections within 45 days after the House speaker certifies that at least 100 of the chamber's 435 members have been killed in a catastrophic event. (Under House rules, the speaker designates a list of temporary successors for his post in the event he is unable to serve. )
A Senate panel is considering legislation to provide for the continuity of its operations if many of its members are incapacitated. The House bill represents the first legislative step taken by Congress to ensure its institutional survival since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, illustrated for many members their vulnerability to a devastating strike. Many lawmakers believe the Capitol was the intended target of hijackers aboard United Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania.
"We face a grim new reality today, said Rep. Doc Hastings, R-Wash., "the reality that so many vacancies might suddenly occur in the House that our ability to function and to be confident that the decisions made in this chamber reflect the broad desires of the American people … could be severely impaired."
The fear is that the loss of many lawmakers could leave the House or Senate without a quorum and unable to conduct important business, such as authorizing military force and approving spending. If only a few survived, the legitimacy of their actions could be questioned. Members of both parties agree on the problem, but ideas for solutions divide largely along partisan lines.
Most Republicans insist that any legislative fix maintain the constitutional requirement that all members of the House be elected, which they say makes the chamber uniquely reflective of the will of the people and best-suited to make decisions in a crisis. (In contrast, a governor can appoint a replacement if a senator dies.)
Many Democrats say that approach, while laudable in theory, could leave the House paralyzed for more than a month while it awaits the election of new members. It also, on the other hand, allows too short a time for some states to prepare for elections, they say. So some lawmakers favor changing the Constitution to allow for the appointment of temporary replacements of deceased members until elections could be held.
Rep. Brian Baird, D-Wash., who has proposed a constitutional amendment to allow governors to appoint temporary replacements, said the bill approved Thursday could lead to "chaos."
Republicans said a constitutional amendment requires a two-thirds majority in both chambers and ratification by three-fourths of state legislatures, a process that could take years to complete.
How they voted
Reps. Jerry Costello, D-Belleville, and John Shimkus, R-Collinsville, voted yes.
Rep. William Lacy Clay Jr., D-St. Louis, voted no. Reps. Todd Akin, R-Town and Country, and JoAnn Emerson, R-Cape Girardeau, voted yes. Reps. Richard Gephardt, D-St. Louis County, and Kenny Hulshof, R-Columbia, did not vote.

Load-Date: April 23, 2004


End of Document