HOUSE PASSES ANTI-TERRORISM LEGISLATION BUT PUTS 5-YEAR CAP ON SOME MEASURES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 13, 2001 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 460 words
Byline: Jesse J. Holland The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* The House and Senate versions of the bill would extend the FBI's wiretapping authority and increase punishment for terrorists.
The House approved on Friday a package of anti-terrorist legislation pushed by the Senate and White House. The bill increases the government's power to spy on, detain and punish terrorism suspects.
But before passage, the House insisted on changing the Senate package to put a five-year cap on the most intrusive measures, including roving wiretaps. House members registered misgivings about the loss of civil liberties involved.
The House also dumped a Senate money-laundering provision. That part is moving separately through the House.
The chairman of the House Judiciary Chairman, Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., said he hoped the Senate would accept the House's changes and send the bill to President George W. Bush.
Bush said he was pleased with the House passage, on a 337-79 vote.
Even so, delays loom. "We will not support a counterterrorism bill that does not have money-laundering provisions in it," said Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D.
The Senate had approved its own version 96-1 late Thursday.
Both the House and Senate versions would expand the FBI's wiretapping authority, impose stronger penalties for harboring or financing terrorists and increase punishment of terrorists.
But members of the House Judiciary Committee were unwilling to give police some of the powers that the Senate did - for example, an OK for secret "sneak-and-peek" searches of suspects' homes.
Until Friday, the House version also had put the burden on the government to prove that an alien suspect was a terrorist, instead of making the suspect prove he was innocent. Also dropped was an earlier House insistence that in terrorism investigations, police get a court order before seizing business and phone records.
With the Senate gone for the weekend, some House Democrats urged the chamber to put off a vote until Monday so members could carefully read the 175-page bill.
Differences probably will have to be worked out among House, Senate and White House negotiators. But key lawmakers promised to avoid a repeat of the year it took to finish anti-terrorism legislation after the Oklahoma City bombing of 1995.
Airport security bill stalls
House Republicans continued to balk at legislation that Bush had requested for improving security at airports and aboard airliners.
The Senate passed legislation Thursday making baggage screeners at major airports federal employees. Some House GOP leaders oppose the idea but admit they have fewer votes than those who support it.
Administration officials had agreed earlier to the Senate approach. But on Friday, White House officials changed their minds and said they wanted the Senate to reconsider.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS

Load-Date: October 13, 2001


End of Document