HOUSE, SENATE AGREE ON ANTI-TERRORISM LAWS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 18, 2001 Thursday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 358 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


New authority wanted by President Bush to wiretap and eavesdrop on suspected terrorists, including secret police searches of their homes and records, would expire in four years in a compromise negotiated yesterday, according to congressional sources.
The White House had sought unfettered and permanent authority for so-called roving wiretaps to monitor telephone and computer communications of terrorism suspects no matter where they take place, but encountered stiff opposition from civil rights and privacy advocates in both parties.
House and Senate negotiators agreed yesterday afternoon to the compromise sunset date of Dec. 31, 2005, for the expanded authority to expire, said four top congressional aides, all speaking on condition of anonymity.
"It's a done deal," said one GOP House aide. Three Senate aides, one Republican and two Democrats, confirmed the deal.
Before departing on a trip to Asia, President Bush met yesterday morning with leaders in both parties and urged them to come to a speedy agreement on anti-terrorism legislation containing the new law enforcement measures. The bill had been stalled for more than a month, primarily for the new electronic surveillance authority.
The GOP-controlled House originally wanted a three-year expiration date, and then changed it to five years after discussion with the White House. The Democrat-controlled Senate did not include any expiration date in its legislation, but many Democrats said they supported the idea.
Lawmakers have been trying to reconcile the differences between the House and Senate versions of the anti-terrorism legislation since Monday, despite the anthrax scares in the Capitol complex.
"Good progress was made on that this afternoon," Senate Republican Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., said yesterday evening.
It was not immediately known when the bill would make it to the House and Senate floors. Because of the anthrax scare, the House will not be in session again until Tuesday at the earliest.
The anti-terrorism expiration date means that Congress will have to renew the wiretapping and electronic surveillance portion of the anti-terrorism package or they will expire.

Load-Date: October 20, 2001


End of Document