House Votes to Extend Terrorism Insurance Aid 
The New York Times
December 8, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 273 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7 
Body


The House of Representatives on Wednesday voted overwhelmingly in favor of extending a federal program that guarantees that the government will cover some losses from terrorist attacks, a measure that insurers and property owners call critical to the economy.
  Separate legislation has been approved by the Senate, so negotiators from both chambers must now hammer out a compromise bill. The program, enacted after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, is scheduled to expire Dec. 31, unless extended.
 The House vote was 371 to 49.
  Both the House and Senate bills would extend for two years the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. It created a federal program requiring insurers to make terrorism insurance available and, in return, providing a guarantee that the federal government would reimburse insurers for losses over certain thresholds.
  Insurers and property owners want an extension, saying little has changed since 2001 -- the insurance industry still cannot judge the chance of attack and so is wary about offering terrorism insurance without some kind of backstop.
  The White House, however, wants to narrow the program, and almost all of the no votes in the House were cast by Republicans.
  Both the Senate and House bills cut the program in part by raising the level of losses that would lead to federal aid. 
  The level in the first year of the extension would be $50 million, up from $5 million, and would rise to $100 million the second year.
  The Bush administration said on Wednesday that it opposed the House version because some provisions expanded rather than narrowed the program. The White House backs the Senate version.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 8, 2005


End of Document