How France links Iran to terror
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
July 31, 1987, Friday


Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 1
Length: 930 words
Byline: William Echikson, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Highlight: Investigation played role in rupture of relations
Body


The dossiers remain top secret. Compiled by the Direction de la Surveillance du Territoire (DST), the French version of the FBI, they were reportedly written in a cold, bureaucratic style. But their conclusion, which has been made public, was explosive: Iran is responsible for the wave of bombings in Paris last autumn.
Although some terrorism experts question the DST's evidence, no one doubts the impact of its conclusion. Analysts and diplomats say the DST dossiers played a decisive role in convincing the French government to break relations with Tehran July 17. Since then, embassy staffs of both countries have been confined by their host governments to their respective missions, and the French have ordered an aircraft battle group to the Persian Gulf. (Paris says standoff doesn't affect fate of Iranians living in France. Story, Page 15.)
The story begins Feb. 17: A young Tunisian walked into a police office in the Loire Valley and said he knew who had terrorized Paris last fall. The DST, which ran the investigation, gave him the cover name Lofti and struck a deal. If he would expose the terrorists, he would earn $150,000 and asylum in the United States.
Until then, the DST believed a left-wing Maronite Christian group from Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Faction, was responsible for the terror. Lofti would change the DST's mind.
''The DST was convinced it had found a rare bird,'' says Pierre Pean, an investigative reporter for the Paris daily Liberation. Mr. Pean details Lofti's biography: Born in Tunis, the Sunni Muslim adopted Shiite fundamentalist Islam. In 1979, he traveled to Qom, Iran's holy city, where he was indoctrinated in religion and terrorism. In 1984, he moved to France.
''His mission was to convert Muslim immigrants in France to Shiism for an annual salary of $30,000,'' says Charles Villeneuve, author of ''The Secret History of Terrorism.'' More than religion was involved in the conversion. Mr. Villeneuve says Lofti was recruiting converts to study terrorism in Qom.
But sometime during his mission Lofti began to doubt. The DST speculates he may have been influenced by an anti-Khomeini Iranian group - or even Iraq.
''Was he playing a dangerous game to benefit Iraq or one to help an Iranian clan?'' Pean asks. ''Only one thing is sure: On returning at the end of 1986 from a stay in Qom, Lofti decided to turn against his masters and become a double agent.''
The investigation now moved quickly. Lofti revealed the name of his contact with the terrorist band that allegedly committed the September attacks: a Tunisian student named Ali Fouad Salah, who also studied at Qom.
According to Pean, Lofti let DST wiretap conversations, which revealed members of the entire terrorist group along with information about how they receive their arms. On March 22, DST arrested Mr. Salah and seven other terrorists.
Investigating magistrate Gilles Boulouque, one of the small group of judges leading France's fight against terrorism, moved to follow up more leads.
Boulouque knew that the terrorists frequented a Koran school in the working-class suburb of Kremlin-Bicetre and an Islamic library run by a pro-Iranian Lebanese named Mohamed Mouhadjer. Wiretaps linked Mr. Mouhadjer to the Iranian Embassy, specifically to Wahid Gordji.
DST suspect Mr. Gordji was involved in passing on instructions and possibly financing the terror wave. A BMW possibly used by the terrorists to escape from the bombing of the crowded Tati department store was also traced through Mouhadjer to Gordji.
Boulouque then made the fateful decision: He subpoenaed Gordji to his offices at the Palace of Justice. The Iranians refused, and Gordji hid in their Paris Embassy. In Tehran, the Revolutionary Guards surrounded the French Embassy.
As the crisis continues, holes are beginning to appear in the French evidence. Witnesses now say Gordji's BMW was a different model and color from the one reportedly used at Tati. Gordji's relationship with Mouhadjer also remains inconclusive. Mouhadjer certainly was a friend of Salah's, but that is not enough to prove he was a terrorist. Judge Boulouque has not been able to charge him with terrorism, only for ''associating with criminals.''
''Gordji supplied books to his bookstore, books imported from Iran,'' says Francoise Morette, Mouhadjer's lawyer. What more normal function for an Iranian official? Indeed, a terrorist expert who spoke on background continues to suspect the Lebanese Christian Abdallah family of directing the Paris terrorism. He pointed to one of the few undisputed facts available in the investigation: During the March 1986 attack on a Champs Elysees restaurant, an Abdallah colleague was killed.
''That's not a coincidence,'' the expert said. He speculated that the Abdallahs may have struck up an alliance of convenience with Hizbullah, the radical Muslim Lebanese group. Salah, Mouhadjer, and the others arrested in March were Hizbullah members.
Iran helped to create but does not necessarily dictate orders to Hizbullah. So it is not clear that ''Iran controlled this operation,'' the expert says.
Meanwhile, the investigation continues. Only Lofti, the informant, seems finished with his case. According to Pean, he received his money, and on June 19 took a direct flight to the United States.
''Lofti's confession left its traces,'' Pean concludes. It ''detailed the wheels of Iranian-sponsored terrorism and constituted the backbone of the DST's dossier, a dossier which when it reached the office of Jacques Chirac certainly had much to do with his new 'toughness' towards Khomeini's Iran.''

Graphic

 
Picture 1, Iranian guards at French Embassy in Tehran watch nurse who holds Embassy official's child,; Picture 2, French police at Iran's Embassy in Paris, AP


End of Document