How TRIA is implemented key to its scope; Cover for chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear attack must be ensured
Business Insurance
January 19, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 10
Length: 799 words
Byline: Mark E. Miller
Body


The president and Congress believe that one of the more significant terrorist threats we face as a nation is the threat of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear attack. So-called ''CBRN terrorism'' is being taken quite seriously by the Department of Homeland Security and others in the federal government, with billions of dollars being spent to counter the threat.
The insurance implications of a CBRN attack are substantial. The presence of a small amount of a biological agent such as anthrax, or the spread of radiation from a radiological-or ''dirty''-bomb could injure persons, destroy property and trigger business interruption losses. To protect against such threats, many policyholders paid additional premiums for terrorism insurance provided for under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002. Unfortunately, it is unclear whether all of these policyholders obtained the full breadth and scope of coverage afforded under the new law, as many insurers appear to have taken the position that the TRIA coverage they offer does not cover CBRN exposures.
TRIA is quite clear as to what types of losses it covers and what type of terrorism insurance must be provided by insurers subject to mandatory participation in the program.
Coverage provided under TRIA flows from its definitions of ''insured loss,'' and ''act of terrorism.'' Under the law, an ''insured loss'' includes ''any loss resulting from an act of terrorism that is covered by primary property and casualty insurance, including business interruption coverage.'' Coverage applies when the secretary of treasury, the secretary of state and the attorney general together certify that an act of terrorism carried out on behalf of a foreign interest has occurred. To be certified, such terrorism must, among other things, be ''a violent act or act that is dangerous to (i) human life; (ii) property; or (iii) infrastructure.'' There are no limitations excluding CBRN risks from coverage, and it appears that a significant CBRN attack on U.S. soil would undoubtedly be certified as an act of terrorism by the federal government.
The obligation of property/casualty insurers to provide coverage under the new law is provided in the act's ''mandatory participation'' section, which states that an insurer participating in the program:
* ''Shall make available in all of its property and casualty insurance policies...coverage for insured losses''; and
* ''Shall make available property and casualty insurance coverage for insured losses that does not differ materially from the terms, amounts and other coverage limitations applicable to losses arising from events other than acts of terrorism.''
Under the law, insurers must offer coverage for all ''insured losses,'' which includes any certified act of terrorism, including those that relate to CBRN attacks.
The most common method of implementing TRIA is to offer policyholders an endorsement that deletes newly inserted terrorism exclusions from the policy. This endorsement states-as do most endorsements-that all other terms and conditions of the policy remain unchanged. A problem arises because most policies contain broadly worded boilerplate nuclear, biological, chemical and environmental exclusions that do not explicitly except TRIA-related losses. Under these policies, where the policyholder paid additional premium for TRIA coverage, an insurer could argue after the fact that coverage is not provided for CBRN terrorist activities, even though such activities are covered under the federal program and have been certified as covered by the government.
The correct way to implement TRIA coverage is to endorse the policy to say that it is amended to cover all acts of terrorism certified by the government and covered under TRIA. That way, if the government certifies a terrorist act, coverage would be provided-period. Anything short of this creates unnecessary confusion and leaves coverage for CBRN attacks subject to unnecessary difficulty in adjustment. For this reason, many policyholders have sought to negotiate full TRIA coverage before accepting a faulty TRIA endorsement.
If an insurer is unwilling to provide full TRIA coverage, policyholders have three potential recourses. They can:
* Switch to another insurer;
* Leave things as they are and fight the battle later if a loss occurs; or
* Take an active role in correcting the problem now by raising inequities-either individually or collectively-with the Treasury Department, which is actively monitoring the implementation of the ''make available'' requirements of TRIA.
Undoubtedly, the approach taken by individual policyholders will vary, but inaction may prove not to be the best approach.
Mark E. Miller is a shareholder in the Washington office of the international law firm of Greenberg Traurig L.L.P.

Load-Date: January 21, 2004


End of Document