How To View Geminids Meteor Shower In Perth
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 15, 2020 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE; Pg. 1
Length: 440 words
Byline: Elijah Vega
Body


A photo of the moon before dawn, December 11, 2020, just two days before a moonless night and the biggest meteor shower of the Year.
On a clear night, meteors can be seen starting around 9 p.m. and continuing through the early morning hours, with the peak between 12-4 a.m. Another important thing to note is that the Geminid meteor shower is more visible in the Northern Hemisphere than the Southern Hemisphere.
Why is the Geminid meteor shower considered to be the best of the year? Themeteors are bold and quick, and the enthusiasts can count as many as 50meteors per hours near the peak.
The Geminids Meteor Shower is believed to originate from the Gemini constellation, from where it gets the name.
Meteor showers occur annually as the Earth moves through the path of debris leaving theasteroid 3200 Python, known as Geminites.
The Geminids will be followed by the Ursids meteor shower, which will be visible from December 17 to December 26 in the northern hemisphere. That could make it tough to see the faintestmeteors. However, once in a while, thismeteor shower over-performs.
So when can observers look for themeteor activity?
U.S. removes Sudan from state sponsors of terrorism list
Sudan paid a negotiated $335 million settlement to victims of al-Qaeda attacks on United States embassies in 1998. It cut Sudan off from financial assistance and investment, and from the global banking system.
However, he pointed out that since Karachi is heavily polluted by light, it gets hard to capture thesemeteor showers on camera, but they were seen from the naked eye by constantly staring at the vast sky. "The Ursids are associated with the 8P/Tuttlecomet". "When in truth, it's hundreds of miles away", Cooke said, noting that the illusion leads people to think a odd rock near where they think they saw a shooting star may be a meteorite. However, if the sky is clear, then those who have missed the spectacular view will be able to witness it in the early hours of this evening (i.e., Monday evening).
You don't need any special equipment, like telescopes or binoculars.
"Find the darkest place you can, and give your eyes about 30 minutes to adapt to the dark", says NASA.
"When you see a meteorite, a shooting star, when you see a shooting star in the sky, you think it's landed over the next hill or just down the road".
This time in India, Geminids are clearly visible in the night sky during 10 pm to 6 am.
To see maximum number ofmeteors, go to a dark sky as far away from lights as reasonably possible. However, the best time to watch the Geminids is about 2.00 am in the local time zone, reported Space.com.
Our journalism needs your support.

Load-Date: December 15, 2020


End of Document