How far is too far?
The Tiger: Clemson University
September 13, 2013 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 382 words
Body


Since I started taking my economics class this semester, I haven't been able to stop thinking about opportunity cost. What opportunity am I losing when I spend five dollars? What opportunity am I losing if I go to class? I can't help but notice the massive protest in Berlin, Germany about the National Security Agency and their watchful surveillance tactics. Beside the fact that Berliners enjoy protesting, according to my German friend, could they be right about the protesting causing such a stir? Over recent months, the NSA uproar has died down with talk of Syria, Anthony Weiner and a whole plethora of not-so wonderful news. The debate, though, still rages on. Are we willing to give up our freedoms for more security?
At the heart of the NSA debate is the fear of terrorism. Some people are afraid to give up traditions and freedoms while others are not. So, what is the opportunity cost of having a supposed safer environment instead of freedom?
"The threat of terrorism activates, in some citizens, the inherent need for security and order, even at the expense of dearly held liberties. For these people, such a trade-off is acceptable. A mindset of, 'I have nothing to hide, so I'm ok with this kind of surveillance so long as the government is after the people that wish to do us harm,'" Kyle Smith, a senior political science major, said.
For myself, I find that the opportunity to have more freedom outweighs those who have more restrictions. First, power can go to people's heads. You may start with individuals, but over time it may evolve into something bigger. For example, when you are eating the Smokin' Pig or tailgate food, how many times do you say just one more? I know I say that all the time, but even though you tell yourself to stop, you just can't. Furthermore, I worry about our willingness to give something up so easily. It's simple enough to say, "I believe you" and give up your rights, but that seems a good bit like settling.
Finally, by withholding information, you are granted the power to produce information, which in itself can be a scary thought. I do not want to give up the opportunity to feel secure in what I am doing just because someone says it will help me feel safer. Maybe I am a skeptic, but I have not been given a whole lot of reason to trust.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document