HOW TO TURN MOZAMBIQUE TOWARD MOSCOW
The New York Times
November 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 370 words
Body


To the Editor:
Your Nov. 13 news article about Mozambique assumes a false premise, which, if corrected, leads one to question the wisdom of U.S. policy in southern Africa: You say that in the view of Western diplomats in Mozambique, ''the country's sole political party has shifted somewhat from the staunch pro-Soviet line on which it took power in 1975.''
On the contrary, since independence, socialist Mozambique has repeatedly solicited American aid and investment, and it is not and never has been aligned with the Soviet Union.
Your Nov. 13 news article about Mozambique assumes a false premise, which, if corrected, leads one to question the wisdom of U.S. policy in southern Africa: You say that in the view of Western diplomats in Mozambique, ''the country's sole political party has shifted somewhat from the staunch pro-Soviet line on which it took power in 1975.''
The Government of Mozambique has consistently maintained friendly but strict relations with Moscow. The level of Soviet technical assistance to Mozambique is modest. And Frelimo, the ruling party, has steadfastly refused to grant naval base facilities to the Soviets, even though Moscow is the only available source of military power to deter stepped-up raids from South Africa.
While fueling the insurgency by the Mozambique National Resistance, Pretoria acts without fear of retribution from Washington, given the Administration's ''constructive engagement'' approach to the white redoubt (''a friendly country that has stood behind us in every war we fought,'' according to President Reagan).
In 1976, Secretary of State Kissinger promised to give a $10 million grant to Mozambique, but the Senate balked on the grounds that the country is Communist and that assistance would contribute to terrorism. In addition to barring development assistance (though not food aid), the U.S. voted against loans to Mozambique by the African Development Bank.
The Congressional ban is still in effect, making it difficult for an embattled Mozambique to avoid entanglements with the Soviet Union, which Frelimo would continue to spurn, the United States willing.
JAMES H. MITTELMAN, Director of International Studies Program, City College, New York, Nov. 15, 1982


End of Document