HOW OTHERS SEE REAGAN - AN EDITORIAL SAMPLER
The New York Times
February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 2032 words
Body


BRITAIN
The Sunday Times (independent) - ''President Reagan celebrates his assumption of the Presidency by a polemic in which he describes the Soviets as cheats and liars. General Haig, entering upon his high office, accuses them of terrorism. Defense Secretary Weinberger treats the neutron 'bomb' as something to be brandished at a press conference.
''It all sounds tough, but abuse and bombast are not toughness.  They are simply abuse and bombast and they achieve nothing.  Europeans, who have the strongest reasons for wanting a firm American stand against the U.S.S.R., are dismayed. On this basis there will be no firmly united American-European front.''
New Statesman (liberal) - ''Since his election, Reagan has given the impression of being rather uninterested in the job for which he had worked so hard… Reagan and his people have expressed many...beliefs which inspire the inhabitants of yesterdayland. They include the notions that pesky foreigners understand only the stick not the carrot, that 'human rights' means appeasement, that almost everything wrong in America is the fault of the Federal Government…
Newspapers in other countries evaluate President Reagan and new administration
''How long will the fantasies of yesterdayland continue to inspire the 40th President? Hard to say.'' Sunday Telegraph (conservative) - ''Repeatedly during the last few days in Washington, watching Reagan on the box, I have found myself having the same kind of reaction -skepticism giving way almost at once to agreement. Because he speaks so very casually, always in a conversational rather than declamatory tone of voice, one tends at first to underestimate the quality of the thought. But time and time again one has to confess that the man has been talking sense; is, in a word, right.''
FRANCE
Le Point (conservative) - ''Draped in its imperial dignity, Moscow is talking loudly. We should not be afraid: It is routine. It is meant to test the nerves of Reagan and Haig. Khrushchev did the same with Kennedy at first, before coming to terms.
''True, the situation is not the same, since the balance of strength is swinging away from the West. But there comes a time to say no. 'There are more important things than peace,' General Haig has said. He was expressing a terrible truth, but also a conviction that is indispensable to peace itself. The day that the Kremlin takes Haig's words seriously, the peace of the world will be better guaranteed.''
Le Matin (Socialist) - ''If the new Administration wants to test the loyalty of its allies by measuring their agreement with the muscular policy it plans to introduce in Central America, particularly in El Salvador, it is likely to be both disappointed and misunderstood.''
WEST GERMANY
Die Zeit (independent) - ''Shortly after the Presidential elections, an intelligent American diplomat advised the Europeans that the best thing they could do would be to turn a deaf ear on what the new U.S. Administration will say in the coming six months.  This was wise advice...for nothing would be more foolish than a European-American squabble over the rhetoric of the Reagan team.
''On the other hand, it cannot be denied that neither the U.S.  President, nor Secretary of State Haig, nor Defense Secretary Weinberger makes it easy for the allies to turn a deaf ear on his utterances…
''A relaxation of a hard stand might occur in respect to the selfwilled and strange definition of terrorism… Reagan's toast to (South Korean President) Chun (Doo Hwan) was the most embarrassing statement emanating from a U.S. President since Carter's praise of the Shah as a lighthouse of stability.''
Die Welt (conservative) - ''Reagan brings a strategic perspective that (Carter) only learned at great cost (if ever). The attack on international terrorism and its political helpers is workable in a coalition; the battle for human rights could have been too, if Carter had been able to bring the intellectual authority to establish priorities. Instead of that, he looked for splinters in the eyes of the South Americans instead of referring to the main girders which were the basis of everything.''
JAPAN
Asahi (liberal) - ''Publicly denouncing the Soviet Union before attempting to hold negotiations can hardly be called a constructive approach. Its only probable effect will be to make it more difficult for the two nations to get together.
''Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union believe that a nuclear war must be avoided, so that they have no other way but to negotiate sooner or later in an attempt to find some peaceful modus vivendi.''
Japan Times (conservative) - ''The Reagan Administration cannot afford to make light of demand-side economics in spite of the shift of emphasis to savings, investment and production. The promised income tax reductions, while they may set a limit on the long-term growth of government, will fuel private consumer spending instead of translating into added savings in the short term. U.S. consumer behavior, with respect to spending and saving, cannot possibly change significantly overnight.''
SOVIET UNION
Novoye Vremya - ''The whole world waited for the new leaders of the United States to make their first statements after taking over the reins. What did they say?
''That there are things more important than peace. That detente is a one-way street leading to Communist domination of the world. That national liberation movements, which have led to independence and United Nations membership for more than 100 states in the postwar period, are in effect forces of international terrorism acting under the tutelage of the Kremlin. That Moscow must change its 'conduct,' abandon friends and allies… And perhaps start believing in life beyond the grave, since the new American President regards this as vital to his system of values.''
Tass - ''Seeking to justify its breach of commitments, the Reagan Administration states that it is ready to carry on with Strategic Arms Limitation Talks but only on one condition - in 'linkage' with other problems and world events and with the Soviet Union's conduct in the international arena… This is an attempt to lead the talks into a blind alley, since piling up all problems in one heap would make it impossible to solve any of them.''
ISRAEL
Haaretz (independent) - ''It is hard to disagree with the findings of the new United States President that the Soviet Union encourages and abets international terror, treats detente as a one-way street and allows itself to lie and cheat in order to further its world rule… The Soviet Union and the P.L.O. have become grand masters in the art of lying, abetted not a little by the readiness of wide liberal circles to accept their formulations in order to avoid facing awkward decisions about totalitarianism, terror and the combination of the two. Frank talk from Washington...will perhaps help those, including Europeans, who want to stand up against the phenomenon.''
LEBANON
An Nahar (independent) - ''Mr. Reagan's acceptance of the existing settlements (on the West Bank) constitutes an encouragement for Israel to expand them and build new ones. It is an invitation to the Palestinians to continue their dependence on violence. It is an invitation to the Arabs to adopt rejectionist policies. It is an invitation to Egypt to continue to suffer from desperation and disappointment.''
INDIA
National Herald (pro-Prime Minister Gandhi, whose father founded it) - ''Mr. Reagan has belied the hopes of those who thought that responsibilities of office would make him view things in a proper perspective. His first press conference shows that this onetime swashbuckling Hollywood film artiste has not changed… Mr. Reagan is raking up issues at a time when sparks of the cold war are too visible to be ignored and inflation is crippling the economies of the majority of countries. This is no time for adventurism.''
The Indian Express (anti-Mrs. Gandhi, generally supported President Carter) - ''The words he (Mr. Reagan) has used to describe the character of the Soviet leadership are so provocative as to make it virtually impossible for his Administration to have a meaningful dialogue with Moscow on renegotiating SALT… Even John Foster Dulles, who conceived American foreign policy as a mission to redeem the world from Communism, never descended to this kind of jingoist rhetoric… The fundamentalist attitude to Communist powers may also jeopardize Washington's relationship with China, which has been among the few outstanding achievements of American foreign policy in three decades. The world is only left the hope that even a Ronald Reagan will change, once he faces the hard facts of world politics.''
MEXICO
Razones (independent) - ''During his confirmation hearings, Haig confessed his lack of knowledge about events in Central America and El Salvador. But now he states categorically that the Soviet Union is behind the problems in the area… Whatever Cuban and Nicaraguan aid there may be for the Salvadoran guerrillas, that intervention is giving Reagan's Washington the excuse it needs to show American voters its 'hard line' against the Soviet Union, even it means prolonging the butchery in El Salvador.''
ARGENTINA
Conviccion (pro-Government) - ''Ronald Reagan has had the valor to directly confront international terrorism and denounce the Soviet Union as being its principal promoter… In relation to us, we have noted that Mr. Reagan - proving the absurdity of Carter's policies - has listened to the Pentagon, which proposed a massive increase in military aid and technical advice for Latin America aimed at stopping the growing Soviet threat in the Western Hemisphere. This is, without question, political realism.''
SOUTH AFRICA
The Citizen (pro-Government) - ''His (President Reagan's) is an awesome task. He succeeds probably the weakest and most ineffective American leader for decades. He will have to return his country to its former position as the only power capable of opposing Soviet expansionism. He must regain the confidence of his people, who have by and large lost faith in the Presidency. He must restore the trust of America's allies in her willingness to stand up for friends and not take the easy road of expediency…
''We believe he can do this.'' Die Transvaler (pro-Government) - ''American foreign policy (under President Reagan) will probably be more practically interest-oriented in approach… It would, nevertheless, be foolish to think that what America considers to be in its interest will always agree with South Africa's interest. The almost ideological impatience with which Carter sought change in South Africa will disappear. However, it is very unlikely that a search for change as such will disappear.''
NIGERIA
The Weekly Star (owned by the government of Enugu state) - ''Listening to the American President, one is left with the revolting impression that once again we are returning to the era of confrontations. Here is the President of a superpower calling the leaders of another superpower liars and cheats. Perhaps the tough and scathing language was aimed at impressing American citizens and allies, but the Soviets, nevertheless, are going to interpret it in its raw and rough form.''
CAMEROON
Radio Cameroon (official radio) - In presenting the new draft budget, President Reagan announced a cut in aid to foreign countries and an increase in the defense budget. With this, we are a long way from the promises of Candidate Reagan…
''But in a way, one can understand the American President. Carter left behind him a country insulted by Iranians, overtaken militarily by the Soviet Union and economically weak - in brief, a country that has lost confidence in itself.''
KENYA
The Standard (independent) - ''It is clear that President Reagan's Government will not finance Communist or Communist-leaning states in the third world…
''Reagan's policy toward the third world can not, however, be judged in simplistic black-and-white terms. There are gray areas - situations which will call for deeper assessment and flexibility.
''In such cases, President Reagan will have to rise up to his inauguration promise for America: 'to again be the exemplar for freedom and a beacon of hope for those who do not have freedom.' ''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Ronald Reagan cartoons


End of Document