HOW THEY VOTED: MAINE'S CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION, JULY 17-23, 2009; Congress votes on defense, N. Korea
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
July 25, 2009 Saturday
All Editions


Copyright 2009 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A9
Length: 1143 words
Body


House votes
Democratic Reps. Mike Michaud and Chellie Pingree
Vote 1: Management of wild horses and burros: The House approved the Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act (HR 1018), sponsored by Rep. Nick Rahall, D-W.Va., to reform Bureau of Land Management practices for managing herds of wild horses and burros on public and private land. Proponents said the bill "will save the taxpayers money while saving tens of thousands of wild horses and burros from slaughter." Opponents called it "a $700 million welfare program for wild horses and burros" that will add to the U.S. debt and failed to address the struggling economy. The vote, on July 17, was 239 yeas to 185 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 2: National environmental research parks: The House approved a bill (HR 2729) sponsored by Rep. Ben Lujan, D-N.M., to authorize the Energy Department to develop a series of National Environmental Research Parks. Proponents said the bill would create "a clearly defined source of support" for the parks, which were "a critical resource to the national and the global environmental research community." Opponents criticized the designation of the Hanford nuclear site as a park and expressed concern about rushing through permanent decisions on Hanford lands without local comment. The vote, on July 21, was 330 yeas to 96 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 3: Natural gas vehicle development: The House approved a bill (HR 1622) sponsored by Rep. John Sullivan, R-Okla., to authorize a five-year Energy Department program for developing natural gas vehicles. Proponents said natural gas would be "the bridge fuel for decreasing our dependence on foreign sources of oil and putting our nation on a path to energy security" by promoting its use in cars. The vote, on July 21, was 393 yeas to 35 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 4: Low-income housing improvements: The House approved the Frank Melville Supportive Housing Investment Act (HR 1675), sponsored by Rep. Christopher Murphy, D-Conn., to expand section 811 Housing and Urban Development funding for supportive housing for disabled people. Proponents said the bill would repair the program's flaws and would allow for federal funds to be used to leverage additional funding to build more housing units for low-income, disabled individuals and would ease the process of issuing housing vouchers. The vote, on July 22, was 376 yeas to 51 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 5: Pay-As-You-Go Act: The House approved the Statutory Pay-As-You Go Act (HR 2920), sponsored by Rep. Steny Hoyer, D-Md., to make changes to pay-as-you-go budget requirements for Congress. Proponents said the bill will "put us once again on the road to fiscal responsibility" by containing the deficit and helping the U.S. stop digging itself into a hole of debt. Opponents said "it would not reduce spending or reduce the deficit" and would strip Congress of authority over spending and give more authority to the executive branch. The vote, on July 22, was 265 yeas to 166 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 6: Transportation and housing: The House passed the Transportation, Housing and Urban Development Act (HR 3288) sponsored by Rep. John Olver, D-Mass., that set appropriations for the Transportation and Housing and Urban Development departments and their related agencies for fiscal year 2010. Proponents said the legislation would invest $123 billion in resources, providing for building healthy communities with environmentally sustainable solutions, maintaining services in rural communities, supporting vulnerable populations, investing in the national infrastructure and ensuring transportation safety. Opponents expressed concern about earmarks contained in the legislation that would cause the government to "hemorrhage money" into unnecessary areas, such as maintaining bike paths. The vote, on July 23, was 256 yeas to 168 nays.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Senate votes
Republican Sens. Olympia Snowe and Susan Collins
Vote 1: Defense authorization: The Senate passed the National Defense Authorization Act (S 1390) sponsored by Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., that set appropriations for the Defense Department's and Energy Department's military activities such as construction and personnel requirements for a total of $680 billion for fiscal year 2010. Additionally, the bill contains provisions to aid in the management of federal agencies and to help recruit, train and retain civilian employees working in the Defense Department. Proponents said the bill contains "many important provisions that will improve the quality of life of our men and women in uniform, provide needed support and assistance to our troops on the battlefields in Iraq and Afghanistan, make the investments we need to meet the challenges of the 21st century, and require needed reforms in the management of the Department of Defense." The vote, on July 23, was 87 yeas to 7 nays.
YEAS: Collins, Snowe
Vote 2: Production of military aircraft: The Senate approved an amendment sponsored by Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., to the National Defense Authorization Act (S 1390) to strike $1.75 billion of funding for production of the F-22A aircraft from the legislation. Proponents said Defense Department officials made a "strong and clear" recommendation to end production and transition to production of the next generation F-35 aircraft. Opponents said ending production would "put this country at a high risk from a national security standpoint" and would represent a retreat on U.S. air superiority. The vote, on July 21, was 58 yeas to 40 nays.
NAYS: Collins, Snowe
Vote 3: Sanctions on North Korea: The Senate approved an amendment sponsored by Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., to the National Defense Authorization Act (S 1390) to express the sense of the Senate in support of sanctions against North Korea and a review of re-listing the country as a state sponsor of terrorism. Proponents said the amendment would seek "an assessment of whether those sanctions are going to advance our interests." Opponents said the Senate should "call a spade a spade in this situation" and define North Korea as a sponsor of terrorism. The vote, on July 22, was 66 yeas to 31 nays.
YEAS: Collins, Snowe
Vote 4: North Korea and Terrorism: The Senate rejected an amendment sponsored by Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., to the National Defense Authorization Act (S 1390) that would have expressed the sense of the Senate in support of re-designating North Korea as a state sponsor of terrorism. Proponents said the amendment would serve as "a message of hope to those in the North Korean gulags." Opponents called the designation "a completely inappropriate measure by the Senate at this time," and said the Senate lacked the intelligence findings to support that designation. The vote, on July 22, was 43 yeas to 54 nays.
YEAS: Collins, Snowe
Compiled by Targeted News Service for the Bangor Daily News.

Load-Date: July 27, 2009


End of Document