HOW NOT TO DETER ANTI-ABORTION TERRORISM
The New York Times
January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 291 words
Body


To the Editor:
It is disheartening and puzzling that President Reagan and the F.B.I. have steadfastly refused to treat the bombing of women's health centers where abortions are performed with the urgency such terrorism demands.
Now the Administration has further exacerbated this situation with the warning that such facilities should be on guard for possible bombings, particularly on Jan. 22, the anniversary of the Supreme Court decision which legalized abortion (news story Jan. 11).
Such a warning is misdirected and insufficient. Instead of warning the perpetrators of these acts that the full weight of the law and Government resources will be brought to bear if such violence continues, the Administration puts the onus of responsibility on the potential victims.
In addition, rather than seeing to it that appropriate Federal agencies are required to fully protect the clinics, the Administration ironically, if unwittingly, emphasizes a strategy that could help the terrorists accomplish their aim of closing them down.  The National Council of Jewish Women has always supported the rights of all groups to express their views and influence policy through legally sanctioned action, such as education and peaceful demonstration, no matter what the issue. Though we disagree with those who seek to change the current legal status of abortion, we certainly respect their right to discuss and organize openly for their view.  We believe that the terrorist acts of some anti-abortion activists are not only attacks on facilities where abortions are performed but on the democratic system, which allows all of us a voice for majority and minority opinions.
 
BARBARA A. MANDEL National President National Council of Jewish Women New York, Jan. 15, 1985


End of Document