HOW THEY VOTED: MAINE'S CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION, FEB. 4-10, 2011; House considers Patriot Act extensions
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
February 12, 2011 Saturday
All Editions


Copyright 2011 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A5
Length: 660 words
Body


House votes
Democratic Reps. Mike Michaud and Chellie Pingree
Vote 1: Extending anti-terrorism measures: The House has rejected a bill (HR 514) sponsored by Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., that would have extended until Dec. 8 expiring provisions of the PATRIOT Act and intelligence reform legislation that authorized roving wiretaps and accessing business records that involved intelligence and terrorism investigations, as well as actions taken against so-called "lone wolf" terrorists not associated with specific terrorist groups. Sensenbrenner said the extension would "keep these critical national security tools in place" until Congress permanently reauthorizes them later in 2011. An opponent, Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y., said an extension should not be approved until new members of the House have had sufficient time to consider the provisions. The vote, on Feb. 8, was 277 yeas to 148 nays, with a two-thirds majority required for approval.
NAYS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 2: Naming federal courthouse in Arizona: The House has passed the John M. Roll United States Courthouse Designation Act (S 188), sponsored by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz. The bill would designate the federal courthouse in Yuma, Ariz., as the John M. Roll United States Courthouse. A supporter, Rep. Benjamin Quayle, R-Ariz., said naming the courthouse after Roll, a federal judge who was killed in the Jan. 8 shootings in Tucson, "will help ensure that his exceptional legacy and final act of heroism will never be forgotten." The vote, on Feb. 9, was unanimous with 429 yeas.
YEAS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 3: Returning overpayments into U.N. fund: The House has rejected the United Nations Tax Equalization Refund Act (HR 519), sponsored by Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R-Fla. The bill would have directed the U.N. to return $179 million of U.S. overpayments into the U.N.'s tax equalization fund as of the close of 2009. Ros-Lehtinen said the bill would return the funds to taxpayers and avoid $100 million of U.S. expenses to improve security around the U.N. headquarters in New York City. Rep. Howard Berman, D-Calif., said the bill would produce no cost savings and "jeopardizes critical security upgrades at the United Nations headquarters" by reneging on the U.S. responsibility to improve security. The vote, on Feb. 9, was 259 yeas to 169 nays, with a two-thirds majority required for approval.
NAYS: Michaud, Pingree
Vote 4: Extension of Patriot Act provisions: The House has passed a resolution (HRes 79) sponsored by Rep. David Dreier, R-Calif., providing for consideration of a bill (HR 514), that would extenduntil Dec. 8 expiring provisions of the PATRIOT Act and intelligence reform legislation that authorized roving wiretaps and accessing business records that involved intelligence and terrorism investigations, as well as actions taken against so-called "lone wolf" terrorists not associated with specific terrorist groups. Dreier said the extension was needed "to ensure that we do not suddenly create glaring loopholes in our national security." An opponent, Rep. Jared Polis, D-Colo., said the bill needed reforms to better secure civil liberties, and he criticized House leadership for failing to hold hearings and allow enough time for debate on the floor before a vote. The vote, on Feb. 10, was 248 yeas to 176 nays.
NAYS: Michaud, Pingree
Senate votes
Republican Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe
Vote 1: Aeronautics research at NASA: The Senate has passed an amendment sponsored by Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., to the FAA Air Transportation Modernization and Safety Improvement Act (S223). The amendment would strike a section from the bill to authorize an aeronautics advisory committee to consider stripping NASA of responsibility for civil aeronautics research and development. Nelson said aeronautics research was a core part of NASA's mission. The vote, on Feb. 8, was 96 yeas to 1 nay.
YEAS: Collins, Snowe
Compiled by Targeted News Service for the Bangor Daily News.

Load-Date: February 14, 2011


End of Document