HOW CAN RURAL AREAS RESPOND TO TERRORISM?
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 21, 2003 Friday One Star Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 404 words
Byline: Lawrence Latane III, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Lawrence Latane III at (804) 333-3461 or llatane@timesdispatch.com  
Dateline: COLONIAL BEACH
Body


The FBI man's beeper failed last night at a symposium on homeland security - illustrative, perhaps, of the obstacles that confront the fight against terrorism in rural Virginia.
William Hansen, of the FBI's hazardous-materials response unit, said he could count on better reception once he got a few miles west of town.
But the question troubling Westmoreland County Supervisor Wayne DiRosario, who organized the event, was where can rural communities find the money and manpower to prepare for a possible chemical, nuclear or biological attack.
Roughly an hour's drive from Washington and Richmond and about three hours from Hampton Roads, the summer resort town of Colonial Beach would be an unlikely target for terrorists, speakers assured the approximately 30 people who attended the symposium.
Yet the town and the surrounding region of the Northern Neck and Middle Peninsula could feel the aftermath of any attacks to neighboring urban regions, speakers said.
"There's a little more than duct tape involved," said Reuben Varghese, medical director of the Three Rivers Health District, which serves a 10-county region that includes Colonial Beach.
He said it is possible that the area's many commuters who work in the Washington region could bring infectious diseases back home without knowing it until it was too late. A person does not exhibit smallpox symptoms until an average of 12 days after exposure, Varghese said.
Even then, doctors at far-flung practices and medical clinics might misdiagnose the initial aches and pains as the flu.
"Will we recognize a disease that has not been seen in 50 years in the U.S?" Varghese asked.
He said the creation of a rural medical-response system might help small towns and rural counties prepare for the threat of a terrorist attack.
Richmond, Hampton Roads and Northern Virginia have gotten grants to plan urban medical-response systems, he said. "Something similar to a rural medical-response system is a logical next step."
One example of the challenges the Three Rivers Health District faces: It would take five days to inoculate all 134,524 people in his district in the event of a smallpox outbreak, Varghese said. That is assuming that an average of 27,000 people could be inoculated each day.
Handling that many people would take a public-transportation system, which the region lacks, and hundreds of health-care workers. Varghese's staff consists of one doctor and 10 nurses.

Load-Date: March 22, 2003


End of Document