How Lincoln finessed security; What Bush has done in the war on terrorism echoes Lincoln's moves during the Civil War.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 1, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A11
Length: 792 words
Body


Jonathan Zimmerman
teaches history at New York University and lives in Narberth
Like most of my friends and colleagues, I'm outraged by President Bush's assault on basic civil liberties during the so-called war on terrorism. We cite Thomas Jefferson on the rights of man, James Madison on checks and balances, and most of all Benjamin Franklin on the dangers of compromising these values: "Those who would give up an essential liberty for temporary security deserve neither liberty nor security."
But here are two words that you never hear us say: Abraham Lincoln.
That's because Lincoln's own wartime decisions raise the really tough issue that most Democrats continue to evade: When should we give up some liberties in the name of security?
Consider Lincoln's predicament in April 1861, at the outset of the Civil War. Eleven slave-holding states had already seceded. Four so-called border states - Maryland, Kentucky, Missouri and Delaware - remained in the Union, even though all of them still practiced slavery.
To win the war, Lincoln had to make sure these states did not secede as well. Together, they would have added 45 percent to the white population of the Confederate States and would have nearly doubled the Confederacy's capacity to manufacture guns, ammunition, and the other tools of war.
The most critical state was Maryland, of course, because it encircled the District of Columbia on three sides. On the fourth side lay Virginia, which had already left the Union. If Maryland seceded, too, Lincoln would find his own national capital surrounded by the enemy.
There were clear pockets of secessionist sentiment in Maryland's biggest city, Baltimore, where many homes flew Confederate flags after the war began. So rather than risk losing the city - and, quite possibly, the war - Lincoln sent army officials into Baltimore to arrest alleged secessionists and jail them at Fort McHenry.
A few months later, as the Maryland state legislature was preparing to vote on secession, Lincoln had 31 of the lawmakers imprisoned on suspicion of Confederate sympathies. They stayed in jail until the next state election, to make sure that pro-Union candidates won.
No charges. No evidence. No trial. Sound familiar?
One of the people imprisoned in Baltimore, John Merryman, sued for his freedom in federal circuit court. The court ruled that Lincoln had no right to jail Merryman without cause, because the Constitution gave Congress - not the president - exclusive right to suspend basic liberties in times of war.
Lincoln's response? Go to hell. His primary job was to win the war, Lincoln argued, and he needed every possible weapon to do so. He refused to obey the opinion, which would have freed hundreds of Confederate partisans.
Almost everything President Bush has done in the war on terrorism echoes Lincoln's actions during the War between the States. In the name of national security, the Bush administration has jailed suspected terrorists without showing cause. It has denied them the right to counsel and other basic liberties. It has conducted warrantless eavesdrops on phone calls and e-mails. And it has insisted that the White House - not Congress - has the right to do all of this, on its own.
As in the Civil War, meanwhile, the Supreme Court has sought to rein in the president. Most recently, it ruled that the White House could not establish secret military commissions without congressional authority.
But let's be clear: Franklin was wrong. Lincoln was right. Sometimes, there are dangers that are so immediate - and terrifying - that we do need to sacrifice some freedoms to stop them. The Civil War was one of those times.
Is the war on terrorism another? Not yet. Whatever the threat of terror today, it doesn't come close to the danger that Confederates posed to the Union in 1861. Until Bush can explain exactly why we need his extra-legal measures, we should all stand in opposition to them.
At the same time, though, liberals need to start thinking - and talking - about when we, too, would give up some liberties to save the Union. A rash of suicide bombers, striking several American cities at the same time? A "dirty bomb" or other nuclear explosion? A smallpox or anthrax attack?
You might reply that our liberties define our nation; if we abandon them, we give up on America itself. But Lincoln said otherwise - and lucky for us. By sacrificing a bit of freedom for suspected Confederate sympathizers, he helped win freedom for nearly four million enslaved African Americans.
I think it was worth it. And I bet you do, too. Until we Democrats can specify when and how we'd take the same harsh measures that Lincoln did, we don't deserve to sit under his mantle. Or to run the country.
Contact Jonathan Zimmerman at jlzimm@aol.com.

Load-Date: August 1, 2006


End of Document