How do you plan for terrorism?
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 29, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 640 words
Byline: William Raspberry
Body


WASHINGTON - I don't have a plan.  I know Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge says everyone should have one, and I think Ridge really does want me to be safe in the event of a major terrorist attack.
Last week would have been a good time to start working on a plan. My children were home for Thanksgiving, and we surely could have set aside a few minutes between turkey and football to make at least a rudimentary plan.
But this is as far as we got: If we're separated when the terrorists strike, and if the local phone service is not working, we'll all call Aunt Jackie in Fort Wayne, Ind. She doesn't know this yet, but her job will be to relay messages among us, reassuring each of us that the others are OK. Or not. The assumptions are (1) that while we might not be able to phone each other, even on our cell phones, we will be able to get long distance, and (2) the terrorists won't hit Fort Wayne.
I'm sure I should have a better, more detailed plan than that. But, may the secretary forgive me, I cling to my old-fashioned notion that there are some things you can't get ready for. I believed that when the threat was nuclear attack by the Soviet Union, and I believe it now when the threat is terrorism. Don't get me wrong. I'm as afraid of terrorists as you are. I just don't think there's much planning I can do to make myself safer against them.
I may as well spill the whole thing: I never laid in my supply of duct tape and plastic, never sealed off a "safe room" at my house. I read the instructions, back when they were issued, but I kept thinking: What is the likelihood that I'll be at home when the terrorists hit? What are the odds that if I hear something weird going on outside I'll herd my family into the safe room instead of going out to see what the devil is going on? How long do I stay in the safe room? Is there any chance that the manufacturers of duct tape are major Republican contributors?
Oh, and Ridge says we should talk to our children about terrorism and how to prepare for it. Well, my kids are all grown-ups, so this doesn't apply to them, but isn't talking to young children about terrorist threats less likely to make them feel safer than to frighten them silly?
I remember back in the 1980s, when half of adult America watched the movie "The Day After," and Brown University students hung "We Are Scared" banners out their dorm windows, and young children had nightmares about the bomb. I wondered at the time: What was the point of scaring everybody?
In the case of the bomb, I suppose the point was to convince the Soviets of our determination not to be blackmailed. If we behaved as though nuclear war was unthinkable, how could they take seriously our nuclear deterrence capability? So we built bomb shelters and stocked apartment house basements with saltines and water (Eisenhower) and had the Federal Emergency Management Agency plot escape routes out of the cities (Reagan). With this latest one (Bush) I don't know what the point is. All I know is we're supposed to make ourselves a plan.
Several plans, actually, since the plan for biological terrorism won't be much help against suicidal airline hijackers or dirty bombs.
What, by the way, would have been the plan if we had known al-Qaida was determined, on a date unknown, to hijack several planes and fly them into tall buildings? Would we have emptied all the buildings? Closed down commercial aviation? Interned all the Arabs? Had everybody call Aunt Jackie?
And what do we do now, when we know neither the time, the place nor the method of the presumed attack? Even if you believe (as I do) that an attack is more likely than not, how do you get ready for it?
Figure it out for yourselves. Just go to www.Ready.gov, and let Tom Ridge walk you through it. I'm going back to the football game.
Raspberry is a columnist for The Washington Post.

Load-Date: November 30, 2004


End of Document