HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN TERRORISM TO KIDS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 25, 1991, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 519 words
Byline: Robert Maynard OAKLAND, Calif.
Body


My pastor and I were remembering our childhood milestones. He grew up in Alabama, and I in New York City. We were born only nine days apart and have found that the geographic distance between our birthplaces matters less than the closeness of our ages. We remember so many global events in similar ways.  War, we agreed the other day, has dogged us. We were shaped by the images of World War II, which began when we were 4 years old and ended when we were barely 8. Soon came Korea, then Vietnam and now the Persian Gulf. Four wars make us feel as if there never has been a sustained time of peace in our lives.  ''The fourth war,'' he was saying the other day, ''is the hardest of them all.'' Hard because we both have three children, two sons and a daughter each.  War is very hard to think about and talk about when you have young, vulnerable children.  It helps to have someone in these times who can understand the complex and contradictory feelings that go with this latest war. I was telling him about my youngest. The other day, he asked his mother and me if President Bush planned to ''nuke'' Saddam Hussein.  We told him why we thought nuclear war was unthinkable. We talked about radiation and mass destruction. It was not a long conversation. The little guy didn't want to hear too much about the consequences of nuclear war.
It all seemed like too much for him. We try to answer all his questions honestly, but we also try to keep our answers short.  Later, though, I felt the need to talk with my friend and pastor about dealing with war as an everyday reality. It is one thing, I told him, to have grown up with the images of war and with air-raid drills. It is another to try to nurture your children through a period such as this.  ''When you feel deeply about children,'' he was saying not long ago, ''you don't want them to go through certain things, even though you had to go through them yourself. I'd give anything not to have my children go through all this violence and uncertainty. And yet, I know they will come through it.  We certainly did.'' For sure, I said, but this is different. The youngest asked about terrorism the other day. When might the Iraqis do something to San Francisco? he asked.  What might they do? He wanted his big sister to come home from Detroit. His cure for almost every conceivable ache, pain or trauma is a visit from his big sister.  This time, though, the little guy stopped it mid-sentence. He was not sure, all of a sudden, that he wanted his sister to come home. He had heard of the intensified airport security. He remembered Pan Am 103 and the explosion over Scotland. Perhaps, he said in a too-small voice, this is not the best time for his big sister to travel.  How, I asked my clerical friend, do you deal with that aspect of modern warfare? Bombs can go off in airplanes, missiles can hit civilian targets with little warning, and it takes little imagination for a small child to have big fears. What, in such circumstances, can we do for our children? ''Be there,'' the pastor said in a small voice of his own.  opyright 1991 Universal Press Syndicate

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document