HOW MUCH ARE YOU WILLING TO GIVE UP FOR SAFETY?  
Crain's Detroit Business
August 05, 1996


Copyright 1996 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: News; Pg. 10
Length: 397 words
Byline: Keith Crain
Body


If you happened to have had the misfortune of living in North Korea, China or the former Soviet Union, the one thing you never had to worry about was terrorism. The less personal freedom a society offers its citizens, the less risk there is of terrorism or even simple acts of civil disobedience. Those things simply don't happen in countries that remove most of the rights of the population.
The easiest targets for terrorism are countries that give their citizens the most freedom. That would seem to place the United States at the top of any list of nations vulnerable to terrorism from external and internal sources.
Chances are pretty good that it's just going to get worse. In the past couple of years, we've seen some pretty ugly acts of terrorism in our country. Whether it's the savage bombing in Oklahoma, the World Trade Center bombing in New York City, the suspected bombing of TWA Flight 800 or the pipe bomb in Atlanta, each was possible because our country allows such broad freedoms for its citizens and visitors.
No one seriously would consider swapping their personal freedoms with the restrictions of life in North Korea just to avoid terrorism. But there's a lot of ground between the freedoms we enjoy here and a dictator state.
Sooner or later, the perpetrators of these recent acts of terrorism will be identified and brought to justice.
What's the motive for these acts of violence? One objective must be the removal of our freedoms. That, perhaps, is the worst possible result of these activities. The reaction to terrorism almost always creates proposals to remove some freedoms we previously enjoyed - for the good of our nation, in the name of anti-terrorism.
Think of the rights and privileges we may be willing to curb to lessen the possibility of terrorism. How long have we all been willing to put up with screening of our personal baggage on airline flights after the first rash of hijackings years ago? Who would object to trace elements being placed in explosives to make them more difficult to disguise?
We must be careful that we don't overreact to plans designed to enhance our safety that also would curtail our liberty. The compromises we choose in coming months are going to be difficult and even dangerous. I don't know the answers, but I do know that we want our freedom and our safety. And chances are that maintaining both will become impossible.

Load-Date: August 8, 1996


End of Document