How does DoD know it's winning war on terror?; Pentagon seeks benchmarks to measure success
Federal Times
March 21, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: DOD REPORT; Pg. 10
Length: 1372 words
Byline: By CHRISTIAN LOWE
Body


More than a year ago, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld revealed that he did not know whether the billions of dollars and hundreds of U.S. lives were being spent well in Afghanistan and Iraq.
"Today, we lack metrics to know if we are winning or losing the global war on terror," Rumsfeld wrote to top Defense Department officials in October 2003. "Is our current situation such that the harder we work, the behinder we get?"
Nearly 17 months later, Pentagon officials are still largely in the dark.
There are positive signs: elections in Iraq and Saudi Arabia, declining casualty rates among U.S. troops, the occasional arrest of high-level terrorists. And the Joint Chiefs of Staff has crafted benchmarks that allow battle commanders to judge their regional strategies.
But Defense officials still lack formal measures of effectiveness that allow them to chart their worldwide battle against terror. That makes it difficult to plot the next move - or to say whether such a war is winnable.
The quest for a set of measurements is being handled by the office of Douglas Feith, undersecretary of Defense for policy, Pentagon officials say. His office would not say how DoD intends to answer Rumsfeld's request for ways to measure whether America is winning or losing the war on terror.
Senior Defense officials and analysts say some things are getting clearer. They have come to see the war on terrorism as a war of ideas as much as one of kinetics, in which changing minds and managing perceptions is as important as killing or capturing terrorists. Success must be measured not by body counts and arrests, but in the overall trend toward democracy in the region, a steady decline in hateful rhetoric and a sharp drop in the effectiveness of terrorist attacks.
"Effective coalition combat operations against our enemies remain vital, yet military activity alone is insufficient for victory," said Gen. John Abizaid, head of U.S. Central Command, in a prepared statement before the Senate Armed Services Committee March 1. "We are focused on the creation of a secure and stable Iraq and Afghanistan, to provide assistance that allows Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to help themselves . . . and effectively synchronize all elements of U.S. national power to assist moderate Muslims in their fight against extremists."
Search for specifics
Nevertheless, the search is on for a barometer that can determine the day-to-day success or failure in combating extremist movements and eroding the influence of terror.
Spearheaded by the Pentagon's office of Advanced Systems and Concepts, a group of DoD and civilian officials has been struggling to forge a consensus on so-called "measures of effectiveness" in the global war on terrorism. Its work on developing these benchmarks is an offshoot of a larger project sponsored by the Pentagon to explore new tactics for fighting the global war on terrorism.
The measures of effectiveness helped form a framework for evaluating how well alternative tactics to the war on terrorism would work.
"Our tasking was to come up with some good alternative ideas, and the fact that the ability to measure how you were doing was a good idea was one of the initial things that came out of the game," said Gary Anderson, a frequent DoD consultant who ran a series of Pentagon-sponsored war games that examined alternative strategies to waging America's war on terrorism.
"We decided to see what would be the long-term indications that you were succeeding."
His group, dubbed the Defense Adaptive Red Team, began to develop a series of alternative strategies for fighting terrorism in September. A final report from the group is still in the works, and this is the first time the team's conclusions have come to light.
The Pentagon-sponsored team concluded that the war on terrorism is essentially a global insurgency, where separate groups that share a radical Islamic ideology are waging a campaign against the ideologies of the United States and its allies. Therefore, Anderson's team argued, U.S. strategy should incorporate many of the same methods used to counter classic insurgencies, including covert military and police actions; political and economic reform; and winning hearts and minds.
But the United States should be careful using the term global war on terrorism, because using the word "war" to describe the nation's anti-terror campaign may prejudice the tactics toward more martial options.
"Kinetic measures of casualties and body counts never has worked and probably never will work because if you don't know how big the terrorist organization was to begin with, you really don't know how much progress you've made," Anderson said.
Absent body counts and prisoner lists, Anderson's team came up with a series of broader trends that would allow policy-makers to see how well their strategies are working to defeat terrorism:
. Terrorist attacks that take place on U.S. territory show a continuous decline.
. The number of states in the Arab and Islamic worlds with representative or inclusive governments that oppose terrorism is increasing.
. Roughly 90 percent of Islamic clergy are preaching against terrorism.
. The majority of Arab language media are editorializing against the use of terrorism and giving negative reportage to acts of terrorism.
. Arab and Muslim opinion polls are increasingly favorable.
. Groups previously identified as terrorists that have chosen to adopt nonviolent means are increasing.
"I look at what we've been doing from the strategic level," Anderson said. "We wanted something that if the president got up in front of the American people and said . . . here's what we're shooting for - if we can do these things in the next five or 10 years, we think we're doing pretty good."
Measuring progress
With the recent elections in Afghanistan, the Palestinian territories and Iraq, and upcoming municipal elections in Saudi Arabia, presidential elections in Egypt and parliamentary elections in Lebanon, Anderson's group sees a trend toward representative governments in a region associated with terrorist movements - a key measurement of success.
The nonpartisan Freedom House, a Washington-based democratic advocacy and research group, wrote in its latest "Freedom in the World" survey that there has been an overall gain in freedom around the globe since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. East Central Europe, East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa have posted the most gains, while key countries in the Middle East, including Jordan, Morocco and the United Arab Emirates, have had overall setbacks.
The number and effectiveness of terrorist strikes worldwide as a measure of success is equally mixed. Though there have been no attacks in the United States since 9/11, the State Department's latest statistics show worldwide terrorist incidents rose from 198 in 2002 to 208 in 2003.
Terrorism caused 725 deaths in 2003, 100 fewer than in the previous year - but wounded 3,546, up nearly 45 percent.
So, is the United States winning the war on terrorism? When might it declare victory?
A noted strategist and former Army War College director is skeptical that an accurate answer can be found using specific benchmarks.
"What people are looking for is ammunition to make a convincing argument that our policy is right," said retired Maj. Gen. Robert Scales in a March 3 interview. "The problem is not that we are unable to predict performance in this war, the problem is that we're not able to convince other people of our progress in the war. This is a marketing ploy."
Looking for measurements of success in the war on terrorism is fruitless, Scales said. The quest shows the business pedigrees of many of the Pentagon's senior civilians, former corporate leaders conditioned to gauge their companies' progress by comparing profits and losses. The war against radical Islam cannot conform to such objective standards, he said.
"Using [measures of effectiveness] is a wonderful exercise for keeping people employed," Scales said. "But in terms of understanding the conflict, in terms of being able to predict performance and success or failure, that is a very subjective, very intuitive type of judgment. And it cannot by its very nature - because it deals with human nature - be quantified, even estimated."

Notes

1 PHOTO.

Load-Date: March 29, 2005


End of Document