How Terrorism Effects Study Abroad
Campus Carrier: Berry College
May 15, 2016 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 566 words
Body


How Terrorism Effects Study Abroad
Summer is the most popular time for students to study abroad, but recent attacks and threats are a growing concern.
Leigh Hadaway, COM 250 Reporter
ROME, Ga. - As students wrap up spring semester, many students look forward to studying abroad over the summer. With the recent terrorist attacks occurring in Europe and the Middle East, there are new discussions on the effects that terrorist attacks have on studying abroad.
According to Sarah Egerer, director of International Programs at Berry College, 160-170 Berry students study abroad every year. The most popular time of the year to study abroad is during the summer, with Western Europe being the most popular region. 
Gracelyn Jones, a freshman Environmental Science major at Berry, is interested in studying abroad next summer. She discussed the benefits of studying abroad.
"Living with people that have different customs and traditions than I am accustomed to will broaden my horizons and potentially teach me new things about myself," Jones said. 
Egerer said that because lately there have been more terrorist attacks in countries that are more familiar to students such as Belgium, terrorism seems like a greater threat. She said that these concerns are taken seriously and that there are precautions are set in place. 
Students must sign up with the state department before studying abroad. The U.S. Embassy in the country they are studying keeps students updated with announcements and travel warnings. Students must also have insurance that includes evacuation. Egerer said that faculty advisors must provide a meeting place with students to be able to account for everyone. 
"We put together plans and we work with providers where we have contingencies in place, where if something should happen, we know we can keep students safe," Egerer said. 
These precautions are not only in place for terrorist attacks, but for other crimes as well. 
"I think it is important to consider terrorism, but don't discount more frequent occurrences such as petty theft," Egerer said. "Car accidents are also the biggest killer of citizens abroad."
Dr. Curt Hersey, assistant professor of Communication at Berry College, is leading a study abroad group to Austria this summer.
"Any international threats you have to think about when you're planning one of these things," Hersey said. "We have to think in terms of not just terrorism, but any unrest or problems."
Although there has been more discussion around terrorist attacks, terrorism has not effected study abroad enrollment. Egerer said that since the 9/11 bombings, study abroad enrollment continues to increase. Hersey said that there have been no concerns from students or parents about the risks of terrorism.
"Safety is my number one priority for the students and for us," Hersey said. "But if you look at Austria, the crime in Austria is less than most major US cities. In terms of risk, its riskier to take students to New York than it is to Austria."
In regards to terrorism, Hersey said that although it is something to be aware of, it should not prevent students from studying abroad or interfere with their educational experience.
"You have to put these kinds of things into context," Hersey said. "You have to balance being aware and keeping safety number one while also encouraging students to get out of their comfort zone and experience international culture."

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Document