HSBC Shares Fall to 25-Year Low on China Fears, Banks Report
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 21, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MARKETS; Pg. 1
Length: 487 words
Byline: Jean Garcia
Body


Shares in another Hong Kong-listed bank, Standard Chartered, also tumbled nearly four percent after it was mentioned in the report.
HSBC Holdings Plc plunged listed below its monetary crisis low set more than a years earlier as pressures install on a number of fronts, consisting of a possible hazard to its China growth strategies and increased analysis of cash laundering controls.
Another financial scandal came out in the public domain as the recently leaked FinCEN Files show how multiple big banks were involved in moving around $2 trillion in illicit funds across the globe between 1999 and 2017.
The International Consortium of Investigative Journalism obtained a top-secretSuspicious Activity Reports or SARs prepared by Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), which mentions these transactions.
Suspicious bank transactions of Indians are red-flagged to the top USA regulator -Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) -for suspected money laundering, terrorism, drug dealing or financial fraud, Indian Express reported on Monday.
StanChart STAN.L dropped as much as 4.6% in London to its lowest since 1998, against the backdrop of a broader selloff in the market with the STOXX European banks index .SX7P down 4.8%.
In a statement to Reuters on Sunday, HSBC said "all of the information provided by the ICIJ is historical".
US$13000 fine for breaking virus rules in England
Another 4,422 new Covid-19 cases were recorded overnight, marking the highest daily rise in infections since May 8. Now people who have symptoms or test positive are asked to self-isolate for 10 days.
In a statement, Deutsche Bank said that the ICIJ's revelations were "well known" to its regulators.
A cache of over 2,000suspicious activity reports (SARs) was filed with the authorities by banks who suspected wrongdoing; it reportedly contains allegations that a number of top United Kingdom lenders allowed dirty money into their accounts.
"It confirms what we already knew - that there are huge numbers of SARs being filed with relatively low numbers of cases brought through to prosecution", said Etelka Bogardi, a Hong Kong-based financial services regulatory partner at law firm Norton Rose Fulbright.
Manafort was convicted in 2018 on tax fraud, bank fraud, and failure to report foreign bank accounts. The private bank was allegedly involved in most of the suspicious transactions, ICIJ report shows.
Staff at major banks often used Google searches to learn who was behind large transactions, it said.
They were involved in facilitating laundering for funds related to criminal organizations and sanctioned entities with major lapses in know your customer and anti-money laundering provisions.
The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists cited leaked official United States documents that said the bank "kept profiting from powerful and unsafe players" in the past two decades.

Load-Date: September 21, 2020


End of Document