HUAC? IN '81? TODAY?
The New York Times
February 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 837 words
Byline: By Don Edwards
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Most Americans probably have little or no recollection of the dark decades of the House Un-American Activities Committee.  For them, it must be difficult to understand the dread many of us feel when we learned of the re-establishment in the Senate Judiciary Committee of an internal-security subcommittee and of possible action in the House of Representatives to reconstitute HUAC.
From 1938 to 1975, HUAC, later called the House Committee on Internal Security, traveled like a carnival throughout the country.  House rule No. 11 defined HUAC's duties as the investigation of ''un-American activities'' and of ''the extent, character and objects of un-American propaganda activities.'' What the committee actually did was break up families, turn friends into enemies, and destroy reputations and lives, while demonstrating that the United States Government could take on characteristics that are usually associated with our totalitarian adversaries.
Don Edwards Op-Ed comment fears effects of reinstituting House Committee on Internal Security or HUAC
When I was elected to Congress, in November 1962, votes against appropriations for HUAC would trigger reams of protesting letters from constituents as well as attacks on one's patriotism. That in January 1975, the
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Don Edwards, Democrat of California, is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights.
House voted to eliminate HUAC and assign its jurisdiction to the Judiciary Committee was a tribute to years of devoted opposition of constitutional experts - members of Congress such as the late William Fitz Ryan, the Rev. Robert F. Drinan, Robert W. Kastenmeier, Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Bella S. Abzug, and Phillip Burton.
Today, a Republican majority controls the Senate and a bipartisan conservative coalition is feeling its muscle in the House. Keeping an eye on ''subversives'' appears to be a major item on the agenda of the new Senate majority, at least in the Judiciary Committee.
Citizens who see nothing wrong with keeping ''suspicious'' people under the surveillance of a committee of elected legislators do not understand the implications of establishing Congressional internalsecurity committees.
The Constitution wisely provides a system of checks and balances for the distribution of power among the three branches of Government. The legitimate functions of the Congress are to enact laws and to oversee their execution by the executive department. If a person or an organization is suspected of violating laws, it is the responsibility of the executive branch to investigate the alleged violation and of the judiciary to conduct the trial.
But what HUAC did - and would do again if reconstituted - was usurp the investigative powers of the executive department and the adjudicatory authority of the judiciary.
As a committee in Congress, HUAC would have might and power without equal. When it leveled its guns at a ''suspicious'' or ''oddball'' or ''possibly subversive'' citizen, the damage could well be irreparable.
It is because of guarantees of procedure (the right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, the right to a lawyer, the right to public trial by jury, the right to confront and crossexamine witnesses, the compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in one's favor), not because of the goodness of our leaders, that people's rights are safeguarded.
Few of these safeguards apply in a Congressional hearing where the entire procedure, which might be televised, would amount to a trial in which the nation sat as a jury. In the glare of Klieg lights, legislative functions are forgotten: The committee sits as a kangaroo court and tries the victims for their loyalty, their political beliefs, or their different life styles.
The irony of this rush to turn back the clock is that the issue itself is such a fraud. Terrorism is decreasing, not increasing, in the United States. The Federal Bureau of Investigation has requested steadily decreasing funding for its antiterrorism program, attributing this ''to the continuing downward trend in domestic terrorist activity which (requires) a decreased level of investigative effort.''
The few organizations engaged in sporadic terrorism are under investigation by the F.B.I., and espionage and sabotage are being dealt with properly in accordance with Federal laws and the Constitution.
Sadly - alarmingly - momentum appears to be on the side of those who savor the bad old days. The Senate Judiciary Committee has already created a new Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism. In the House, a vote to resurrect HUAC could occur in March or April.
In the spring of 1976, Congress sent several rooms full of House Un-American Activities Committee/House Committee on Internal Security files to the National Archives, to be sealed for at least 50 years.  In the spring of 1981, will we move those miles of records - rumor, gossip, innuendo, yellowing clippings - back to Capital Hill?

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document