Huawei worked on a facial recognition tool to surveil Uighurs
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 10, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 1
Length: 365 words
Byline: Sidney Guerrero
Body


"I announce that I am putting an end immediately to my partnership linking me with this company", Griezmann, a 2018 World Cup victor with France, wrote in a statement on Instagram on Thursday.
The United Nations estimates that more than a million ethnic Uighurs and other Muslims have been detained in China's Xinjiang province.
"Huawei is obviously saddened by the decision of Mr.Griezmann to end his relationship with the company", the Chinese multinational organisation said in a statement toGoal. Beijing has consistently denied mistreatment and says the camps are created to stamp out terrorism and improve employment opportunities.
Griezmann's decision followed a report here in the Washington Post on December 8 that alleged thatHuawei had tested software capable of sending automated alerts when surveillance cameras recognised members of the mainly Muslim minority Uighur group.
Huawei worked on a facial recognition system to snoop on people fromChina's Uighur community, which also had an "Uighur alarm" - to detect a person's ethnicity, and alert authorities upon spotting a person from the Uighur community, a report from video surveillance researchers IPVM claimed. According to documents uncovered by IPVM, the system was built usingHuawei cloud infrastructure and tools built by Chinese artificial intelligence firm Megvii. We do not provide custom algorithms or applications.
Who Is Dr. Rochelle Walensky? Meet Biden's CDC Director Pick
If his name sounds familiar, it's because Murthy previously held the post from 2014 to 2017 under the Obama-Biden administration. Walensky responds to Biden's selection by saying that she is deeply honored to be selected for the lead position at the CDC.
AHuawei spokesperson told the BBC that "the language used in the document" referred to in the report was "completely unacceptable".
IPVM also clarified that it wasn't clear whetherHuawei and Megvii ever actually deployed the software.
A Megvii spokesman also acknowledged that the document discovered by IPVM is genuine but said that the "company's systems are not created to target or label ethnic groups".
China responded furiously, with state TV pulling an Arsenal fixture from TV schedules.

Load-Date: December 11, 2020


End of Document