HUGE MARINE BRIGADE WOULD COUNTER TERRORISM PENTAGON CONFRONTING DEFENSE OF HOME FRONT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 3, 2001 Wednesday
ONE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: MISCELLANEOUS,
Length: 761 words
Byline: THOMAS E. RICKS, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As the U.S. military moves ships, warplanes and Special Forces units overseas for the looming battle against Osama bin Laden and his allies, the Pentagon is confronting the broader question of how to reorganize the armed forces for the other side of that campaign: defending the continental United States.
 Under a proposal sent to the Pentagon leadership Friday, the Marine Corps would establish a new, brigade-sized counterterrorism unit that would be larger than any such unit in the military. It would be able to pour more than 1,000 specially trained troops into missions both overseas and at home, Marine officials said.
 The plan is the first stage of what is likely to become a significant restructuring of the U.S. armed forces in the aftermath of this month's terrorist attacks as the Pentagon seeks to improve its ability not only to fight terrorists abroad but also to defend the country against assaults at home.
The Army is considering creation of a new command for homeland defense. The Air Force is mulling whether it will have to permanently provide personnel and airplanes to help the Air National Guard carry out the combat air patrols being flown over New York, Washington and other American cities.
 The Navy might be asked to occasionally deploy Aegis cruisers to provide antiaircraft defenses along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, as it did immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington.
 The campaign against terrorism has inverted the traditional division of labor within the military in which conventional forces focus on fighting wars while smaller, specialized units carry out missions such as fighting terrorists. President Bush alluded to this change Friday, saying that, "It is very hard to fight … a guerrilla war with conventional forces." He declined to discuss details but said, "Make no mistake about it -- we're in hot pursuit" of terrorists."
 Special Forces troops are expected to carry out many of the ground missions in the war against Saudi exile Osama bin Laden and his followers, Defense Department officials said, while conventional forces will pick up some of the anti-terrorism effort.
 Homeland defense has not been a worry for the armed forces since the height of the Cold War, when more than 250 Army batteries of Nike nuclear-tipped guided-missiles ringed Washington and other U.S. cities.
 The biggest changes are probably in store for the ground forces, officials said. According to one proposal, the Army's new command for homeland defense would report directly to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, one official said.
 The Air Force also is going to have to consider whether to commit active-duty forces to helping the Air National Guard execute combat air patrols over the continental United States, an official said.
 The change that appears farthest along is the Marines' proposal to create a big, new anti-terrorism unit.
 He said that if Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld approves the concept, which the Marines think could happen this weekend, the Corps would immediately begin setting up the new unit.
 The unit would be headquartered at Camp Lejeune, N.C., and would be built around an existing infantry battalion.
 It also would include three other existing Marine organizations trained in security-related missions -- the Marine Corps Security Force Battalion, which has two elite companies that provide anti-terrorism security to deployed Navy ships; the Marine Security Guard Battalion, which provides internal security at U.S. embassies; and its small Chemical/Biological Incident Response Force, which was created several years ago in response to worries about terrorism.
 To carry out those units' current missions and also take on the new mission of responding quickly to major terrorist attacks, the Marines would have to increase the size of those units, the official said.
 Also, he said, the Marine Corps would need to spend about $21 million to supplement the infantry battalion's equipment, buying additional communications gear as well more night-vision devices, the official said. Giving the unit specialized training and maintaining the extra gear would cost about $10 million a year, he said.
 Once fully outfitted and trained, the unit would be able to deploy a company within 24 hours, and the full brigade within 72, he said.
 The new Marine brigade would not be included in the Pentagon's lengthy review of how to change the military to meet new threats, called the Quadrennial Defense Review, which will be released this week. That report was largely completed before the attacks.

Load-Date: October 3, 2001


End of Document