Hughes reaches out to Muslim group
 Philadelphia Inquirer
September 3, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 277 words
Byline: By Tara Burghart; Associated Press
Dateline: ROSEMONT, Ill.
Body


Karen Hughes, one of President Bush's closest advisers, told a gathering of American Muslims yesterday that part of her new State Department job was to help amplify the voices of groups such as theirs that condemn terrorism and religious extremism.
The Islamic Society of North America had invited Bush to its convention.
He sent Hughes, recently confirmed as undersecretary of state for public diplomacy. Her tasks include improving the U.S. image in Muslim countries.
"We need to foster a sense of common interest and common values among Americans and people of different faiths and different cultures," she said at a news conference. "Frankly, who better to do that than many of our American Muslims themselves, who have friends and families and roots in countries across our world."
The Indiana-based ISNA is an umbrella association of U.S. and Canadian Muslim groups and mosques. Its convention comes a month after U.S. Muslim scholars issued a fatwa, or religious edict, condemning terrorism after deadly attacks in London and Egypt.
"The fatwasays that there is no justification in Islam for terrorism. Those are words the entire world needs to hear," Hughes said.
ISNA yesterday unveiled a brochure outlining the Islamic position against terrorism and religious extremism. It states that terrorism "is the epitome of injustice because it targets innocent people."
Kareem Irfan led the committee that produced the brochure and will launch other initiatives to promote what ISNA calls "balanced Islam." Despite "crystal-clear statements stating the position of Islam and Muslims" against terrorism, there remain "inklings of doubt from segments of society," he said.

Load-Date: September 3, 2005


End of Document