Human rights presentations cover trafficking and war
City College News: Minneapolis Community & Technical College
November 17, 2014 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 745 words
Body


By Trevor Squire
News Editor
The final lectures of the Hubert H. Humphery Fellowship Programs' human rights and culture presentations were Nov. 13 in the Helland Center. The lecture series hosted six different speakers throughout the fall semester who spoke about culture and human rights in their respective countries.
The final day of lectures hosted two speakers, Aneeta Aahooja of Pakistan and Vanessa Fusco of Brazil. Both Aahooja and Fusco focused on children's rights in these developing countries.
Fusco coordinates a group of government officials in charge of tracking down cyber crime offenders to prosecute them. Brazil is one of the more prosperous nations of South America, hosting the FIFA World Cup this past summer and is also the host nation of the upcoming 2016 Olympics in Rio De Janeiro.
But behind Brazil's sandy beaches was controversy that stirred this summer with the displacement of an estimated 250,000 people to make room for soccer stadiums and the tourists that would follow. With one million tourists visiting Brazil for the World Cup, an eye-opening market begins to emerge at the sites of these major events.
Child sex trafficking is a black market industry that is prominent in Brazil. Time Magazine spoke with a former pimp who had convinced parents to sell their daughters for $5,000-$10,000.
"The Ministry of Tourism has provoked tourists to think we have beautiful women," Fusco said. "We instigate the sex tourism, the government has the responsibility to do that and they don't."
Authorities tried to limit the child prostitution, but with reports of alleged muggings and even rape proved counterproductive in the poverty-stricken slums. Sex trafficking has yet to be diminished in a nation where tourism continues to grow, and the innovation of the internet has allowed human trafficking to become more and more common in the depths of the darknet.
Aahooja is a child protection officer and opened her lecture with a brief summary of Pakistan's diverse culture and landscape. Weddings are often extravagant celebrations full of color that last days in Pakistan as the celebrations and union between two families. Pakistan is also is rich in natural resources and has the seventh largest military in the world when counting active forces.
Split into regions, Pakistan's diverse population and landscape is home to different sects of Islam, but majorily Sunni. The mountainous country makes it difficult for some areas to receive resources from the more developed regions.
In poverty stricken areas children are forced into picking cotton or working at garbage dumps. Small fingers make it easier to pick at the cotton and collecting valuable scrap.
"In 2020, 52 percent of our population will be the youth. What future are we giving for our nation if our children aren't getting an education." Aahooja said.
Often associated with terrorism after 9/11 and the harboring of extremist groups throughout the mountainous country, Pakistani citizens have been victim of drone attacks from the United States. Schools, hospitals, and other resources have been destroyed. Every citizen has or knows someone affected by these attacks with 19,000 civilian casualties the past ten years.
Pakistan is a pseudo-democracy with an elected prime minister, but some control is given to the military. Soldiers and police officers fight to relinquish the state of extremist, but still conceived as a terrorist state drones continue to fall on unsuspecting Pakistani citizens.
"Our soldiers and police officers are sacrificing themselves; at any time, they can be hit," Aahooja said. "Being a friend in the fight against terrorism, this is the price we are paying."
Fellowship member Athar Waheed has witnessed several terrorist attacks.
As a member of the Humphrey Fellowship program, Pakistan Superintendent of Police Athar Waheed had witnessed several attacks.
"I saw the killing of three children and a woman," Waheed said. "Almost 22 people were killed in that terrorist act."
"That changed my mind. Previously I was getting my masters in criminology but that evening changed my life, I decided to work for the forgotten ones, the victims of terrorism."
Waheed has been attending the lectures and collaborating with experts in fighting problems in developing countries.
"We exchange the culture and want to make students learn about the different countries in the developing world, while also learning the skills and knowledge offered here in the United States," he said.

Load-Date: February 4, 2019


End of Document