Human Rights in Wartime
The Forward
October 20, 2006


Copyright 2006 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A8
Length: 842 words
Body


Liberals and human rights activists are loudly decrying the  new anti-terrorism measure signed into law this week by  President Bush as a historic assault on the American tradition  of justice and fair play  one of the worst civil liberties measures  ever enacted in American history, in the words of the American  Civil Liberties Union. As an expression of sentiment, the protest  is one we're inclined to sympathize with. As historical analysis,  however, the protest is seriously flawed.
The new law  passed by solid majorities in both houses  of Congress, with substantial Democratic support  does indeed  contain grave assaults on basic American moral and constitutional  values, and it could make our nation less safe rather than more so.  By permitting the continued operation of secret overseas prisons, by  establishing constitutionally suspect military tribunals, by suspending  habeas corpus  the right to appear in court and challenge one's  detention  for terrorism suspects, the law betrays some of this  nation's core founding principles. By sanctioning the mistreatment  of enemy prisoners, the law provocatively lowers the bar on international  rules of war, something that directly endangers American  troops in harm's way around the world.
But to call the law a historic watershed in American judicial  misbehavior does history an injustice. This is a nation that was  founded by slave owners, that betrayed and destroyed its native  peoples, that closed its doors and turned its back on the Jews of  Europe during World War II. At the same time, this nation has faced  up to many of its worst flaws and attempted to rise above them. Our  encounter with freedom is an ongoing struggle for self-definition and  understanding. To call any one measure a watershed is frivolous.
What is egregious about the new anti-terrorism law is not the  way in which it departs from America's legal traditions, but the  way in which it continues them. It is, in fact, the latest  and by  no means the worst  in a long line of assaults on the Constitution  that have been enacted by Congress and various administrations  during times of foreign threat. The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798,  Abraham Lincoln's nationwide suspension of habeas corpus in 1862,  the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918, Franklin  Roosevelt's internment of Japanese Americans  each of these acts  entailed a massive assault on the Bill of Rights, endangering the  rights of thousands of American citizens whom the government was  sworn to protect from danger.
The common denominator among these actions is that they  were taken during the time of war or serious international threat.  And we might add to our list Richard Nixon's plumbers and enemies'  lists during the Vietnam War and the congressional anticommunist  witch hunts at the outset of the Cold War and through the Korean  War. American governments, it seems, have felt a consistent need  to curtail liberty during times of conflict. Democracy and warfare  do not lie easily together.
If there is something new and alarming about the wartime  actions of the current administration  and they are alarming  it  is not the repressive nature of the legislation but the shapeless,  ill-defined nature of the war. Our nation as been dragged into a  seemingly endless global conflict against a shadowy enemy whose  identity and goals remain unclear. Five years into it, our government  has yet to identify the enemy with any clarity or coherence, or to  offer the least semblance of a strategy for victory. One minute we are
told we are in a war against terrorism, the next minute it is against  extremists, the next minute against something called Islamo-fascism.  Now we are winning the war; now we are in a long, twilight  struggle that will take great amounts of patience and fortitude. One  minute our leaders tell us that we must be united as a nation in this  great struggle for our values; the next minute, they tell us that half  of America is in league with the enemy.
As for victory, we'll know it when we see it. Perhaps it will be  a miraculous disappearance of terrorism as a tactic in unconventional  warfare. Perhaps it will be the transformation of Islam into  a religion that embraces the truths in other faiths and abandons its  core principle of one world under God as it sees it. Perhaps it will be  the establishment of stable democracy throughout the Islamic and  developing world  or, perhaps, the success of pro-Western Arab  autocracies in suppressing Islamist, faith-based dissent.
Whatever our goals, they will not come quickly or easily, and  we had better recognize that fact. Democracy can recover from  temporary abandonment of its principles, but it cannot sustain a  permanent betrayal of liberty and still call itself democracy.
Five years ago, this newspaper called the emerging conflict  against Islamic terrorists a new cold war. We argued that it would  be a long, difficult battle for hearts and minds around the world. In  a war of ideas, victory belongs to the honorable.

Load-Date: October 19, 2006


End of Document