HUMOR;
Bill Maher speaks his mind on the War on Terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 29, 2003, Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
Section: VARIETY; BOOKS MIDWEEK; Pg. 3E
Length: 719 words
Byline: Eric Hanson; Staff Writer
Body


It isn't as if the cancellation of Bill Maher's "Politically Incorrect" left a rent in American society. As it turned out, the nation did somehow manage to hold itself together without hearing Kathy Ireland's thoughts on abortion, or Lisa Kudrow opining about the Bible.
     But with the publication of "When You Ride Alone You Ride With Bin Laden," we now know what Maher has been doing (besides visiting the Playboy Mansion) since the demise of his TV show. He's still obssessed with Sept. 11.
   Some of Maher's most interesting material came after the Sept. 11 attacks. That day restored the venom and vigor in Maher, who had by then become repetitive and tiresome. It transformed his priorities seemingly overnight, from how best to legalize drugs to how best to deal with this new threat. Suddenly, the gulf between the libertarian lounge lizard and some of his far-right guests narrowed to a sliver _ at least on U.S. military actions.
     The book's title is based on a World War II-era propaganda poster that urged Americans to carpool: "When you ride ALONE you ride with Hitler!" Using that poster's style as the inspiration for a new series of agit-prop, Maher has enlisted his sarcasm in the war on terror.
     Maher's salvos are powerful, and most of them are aimed directly back at us.
     In the brilliant "Why They Hate Us" series, Maher addresses the contempt that many countries hold for the United States. One poster shows impoverished South American farmers standing in a barren field while a U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration plane trails a column of poisonous defoliant above them. "We love coke, so you get Agent-Oranged _ sound fair?" writes Maher.
     "U.S. planes have thus far showered defoliant on more than 200,000 acres, killing not just coca plants but entire ecosystems: damaging legitimate crops, poisoning water supplies, killing fish and livestock, uprooting entire villages, and causing people to suffer fevers, diarrhea, allergies and rashes. And that's why they hate us: because, to keep drugs out of Bobby Brown's glove box, we kill peasants in Putumayo. If we did this kind of thing to the Arabs, they'd actually have the kind of beef with us that they think they do."
     Another poster illustrates a scene from "Apocalypse Now," with a G.I. water skiing past two Southeast Asian boaters, nearly toppling them. "They Hate Us Because We Don't Even Know Why They Hate Us," reads the tagline at the bottom.
     " 'They' hate us because they feel _ and 'they' are not wrong _ that it is within our power to do so much more, and that we practice a kind of passive-aggressive violence on the Third World. . . . We do, upon reaching a very high comfort level, mostly choose to go from ten to eleven instead of helping another guy far away go from zero to one."
     When it comes to excising self-righteousness and hypocrisy from Americans, Maher is an expert surgeon. "Put a Flag on Your Car . . . It's Literally the Least You Can Do," mocks one poster that shows two flags festooning a gas-guzzling truck.
     "I like the flag plenty, but I never forget it's only a symbol, a reminder of what we stand for, not a replacement for actually standing for it," writes Maher. "True patriotism is doing something for your country. If our car flags had to be earned with real contributions _ purchased with deeds, not dollars _ if each one we saw meant someone had given blood or volunteered their time or donated money or written their congressman or saved a gallon of gas, perhaps then we'd really be bucked up at the sight of them."
     And if Maher had more often cut through the braying nonsense of "Politically Incorrect" with this kind of trenchant, well-reasoned observation, maybe he'd still be on network TV. Then again, considering the Nielsen ratings of ABC's "The Bachelorette" relative to PBS' "The Charlie Rose Show," probably not.
_ Eric Hanson is at ehanson@startribune.com.  
HUMOR
When You Ride ALONE You Ride With Bin Laden
     By: Bill Maher.
     Publisher: New Millennium Press, 132 pages, $27.95.
     Review: Maher, former host of the irreverent "Politically Incorrect" TV show, tells it like it is about the War on Terrorism in a useful and humorous guide for those of us who want to do more here at home to help the war effort, but are at a loss as to what to do.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 29, 2003


End of Document