Hundreds discuss terrorism in new Cornell U. class
University Wire
January 22, 2002


Copyright 2002 Cornell Daily Sun via U-Wire
Length: 549 words
Byline: By Luke Hejnar, Cornell Daily Sun
Dateline: Ithaca, N.Y.
Body


The first class of ALS 494: "Global Conflict and Terrorism" was standing room only as approximately 300 students packed into Warren 401 Monday evening.
The two-credit class, which is open to all undergraduates and graduates, "presents an opportunity to review and discuss issues concerning global development and its relationship to conflict and terrorism," according to the course Web site.
Originally the class was scheduled to meet in Warren B32, but as the enrollment soared, the class had to be moved to a larger room to accommodate everyone.
Cornell U.
When the class first was organized last fall, the enrollment expectations varied from 30 to 40 students to more than 100; however, by mid-day on the day of the course exchange, more than 100 students had signed up for the class, according to professor James Haldeman, senior associate director of international programs and organizer of the course.
A waiting list was passed around during class, which will be capped at 150, according to professor of communication Jim Shanahan, who is a faculty coordinator of the class with professor of rural sociology Charles Geisler.
Waiting list
"Relatively few people will get in," Shanahan said. "I don't want to make any false promises. There is more demand than I had anticipated."
Each class session will focus on one of 11 themes, some of which will be Islamic culture and religious warfare, globalization and international economics, poverty, petroleum politics and civil liberties.
Each lecture will be given by a different panel of three to four faculty members, who then will answer questions posed by the students.
For example, after the first lecture on Islamic culture and religious warfare, students will have "a better understanding of the relationship between religion and politics in Muslim society," professor of Near East studies David Powers said.
Following the question-and-answer session, students will have "break-out sessions" in which they will lead active discussions in small groups.
All the lectures will provide "an opportunity for all participants to gain a better understanding of the events that led up to the Sept. 11 events. It didn't happen in a vacuum," Haldeman said.
Many students cited Sept. 11 and personal interest in the subject as major reasons they decided to sign up for the class.
"I thought it was very interesting, and in light of recent events, I thought it was appropriate," Jackie Buckley '03 said.
"I thought it would be interesting after Sept. 11. It's on everyone's mind,and I thought it would be interesting to hear about it from an academic perspective and not just what's on the news," Jordan Schwartz '02 said.
Annie Rosenberg '02 said she believes the class is so popular because "it makes us feel more proactive about the different forces that might have come together to produce Sept. 11 and other acts of terrorism."
The only concern of some students was the large size of the class.
"I think it's good they are doing the break-out sessions, but they should have a larger room," Schwartz said.
Buckley said, "I'm surprised this class is this big."
However, she didn't seem to mind the size.
"I think it's cool so many students are interested in learning about this," she said.
(C) 2002 Cornell Daily Sun via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 22, 2002


End of Document