Hundreds gather to mourn after New Zealand terrorist attack
The Frederick News-Post (Maryland)
March 25, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 The Frederick News-Post
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 576 words
Byline: Wyatt Massey, The Frederick News-Post, Md.
Body


March 25--     Mar. 25--Standing in the back of a pickup truck parked outside the Islamic Society of Frederick Sunday evening, local politicians, faith leaders and community organizers again mourned the tragic loss of life to terrorism.
The vigil Sunday evening came nine days after a terrorist attack at two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand. A white supremacist with hateful views of Muslims and immigrants carried out the attacks during Friday afternoon prayers killing 50 people and injuring 50 others.
Vigils for the shooting victims were held around the world, including in Christchurch, this weekend. Hundreds of people attended the event in Frederick, gathering on the parking lot and lawn of the local mosque.
Ben MacShane, city alderman and Showing Up for Racial Justice chapter co-founder, helped organize the event with the Islamic Society. Syed Anderabi, Islamic Society of Frederick Board of Trustees chairman, thanked everyone for coming and showing their support for the Frederick Community.
Dr. Syed Haque, Frederick County Muslim Council president, said coming together was important even though the acts of violent terrorism can seem more frequent.
"A lot of people ask me, 'Why are you doing this? What do will we gain by doing this?' And I told them, love, friendship, unity and knowing one another, getting to know each other, and to fight this evil," he said. "This is what we have gained by gathering here today."
Mayor Michael O'Connor and County Executive Jan Gardner said Frederick is a welcoming community that works to prevent the kinds of violent terrorism experienced around the world.
In 2017, there were 398 reported hate incidents, according to a report by Maryland State Police. The number is an increase of 103 incidents from the year prior and Frederick was one of several counties to experience an increase with 11 in 2017. None of the local incidents were related to religion, though just over a quarter of the statewide hate incidents were related to religion, according to the report.
Earlier this year, Gov. Larry Hogan (R) announced a budget item of $3 million to increase security and technology in houses of worship, along with $2 million to child care centers or schools, to stop potential hate crimes.
Rabbi Jordan Hersh of Beth Sholom Congregation said Frederick's Muslim community supported the Jewish community after the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting in October. The Jewish and Muslim faith tradition share a traditional lineage, as well as a modern experience, Hersh said.
"We know the experience of being looked at with suspicion," he said. "We know the experience of coming to our space of worship and, in the back of our minds, saying, "God willing, inshallah, everything will be okay this Friday.' And so, just as brothers and sisters embrace each other in the difficult moments, we come here to do that just as you did for us, not so long ago."
The Rev. Dr. Eliezer Valentín-Castañón, senior pastor at Trinity United Methodist Church, said the reason all faith call on people to love is because it requires working as a community.
"It's easy to hate," he said. "To love requires work. To love requires an effort that you actually seek to be in connection with that other human you are looking at."
Follow Wyatt Massey on Twitter: @News4Mass
___ (c)2019 The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.) Visit The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.) at www.fredericknewspost.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: March 25, 2019


End of Document