HURRICANE HONCHOS HOP TO IT
Tampa Bay Times
December 8, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Archive
Length: 357 words
Byline: Colette Bancroft
Body


The 2007 Governor's Hurricane Conference kicks off today in Fort Lauderdale. Usually it precedes the storm season, but Subtropical Storm Andrea beat it to the punch this year. It's not too late, though, for government officials, emergency personnel and others from across the state to gather for workshops, an address from Gov. Charlie Crist and, to ease the stress, a Hurricane Hop party.
After 95 years, more to say
We usually mark birthdays briefly at the end of the column, but this one merits its own space: On Wednesday, master storyteller and national treasure Studs Terkel (Working, The Good War) turns 95. Terkel's publisher (he has two new books coming out this year) has hired a skywriter to scroll a birthday message in the skies over his beloved Chicago. You can post a greeting at www.thenewpress.com/studsbirthday.
A Golden Palm for 'Grindhouse'?
Wednesday through May 27, the grand-pere of all film festivals unfurls in France. The 60th Cannes Film Festival will feature the usual industry power players on the red carpets and topless wanna-bes on the beaches. Among the American movies invited to the festival are Grindhouse (you know how the French love high-minded, cerebral films) and Joel and Ethan Coen's new one, No Country for Old Men, based on Cormac McCarthy's novel.
Not the everyday family story
Closer to home, the Tampa Theatre will have a single showing at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday of USA vs. Al-Arian. The documentary by Norwegian director Line Halverson focuses on the wife and children of former USF professor Sami Al-Arian and their experiences as he was prosecuted on terrorism-related charges, acquitted of most, then pleaded guilty to one charge when the government threatened a retrial. He's still in prison despite an agreement to let him leave the country. A panel discussion follows the film.
Say 'happy day' to your TV screen
Three actors on popular television series celebrate birthdays this week. Tuesday, The Sopranos' Jamie-Lynn Sigler turns 26. On Thursday, Big Love's Bill Paxton will be 52. And on Friday, 30 Rock's Tina Fey is 37.
By Colette Bancroft, Times staff writer, (727) 893-8435 or bancroft@sptimes.com

Load-Date: March 20, 2020


End of Document