Hypocrisy taints U.S. past, present
University Wire
November 10, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Daily Toreador via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 772 words
Byline: By William Harman, Daily Toreador; SOURCE: Texas Tech
Dateline: LUBBOCK, Texas 
Body


Terrorism is arguably one of the most influential buzzwords of our time. There are terrorists everywhere waiting for an opportunity to destroy everything that we, as Americans, hold dear. At least that is what we are told. However, I would like to assert that terrorism is not confined solely to a ragtag bunch of Islamic extremists sitting in a cave. Many countries around the world have been accused of state-sponsored terrorism, including our own supposedly moral government.
Most disturbing is that in several cases, claims that the United States was the culprit behind terrorism can in fact be substantiated. In the 1950s, Iran was led by a man named Mohammed Mossadegh and during his time in power he imposed socialistic policies. He even nationalized the Iranian oil industry when British Petroleum refused an audit to determine if it was providing fair compensation to the Iranian government.
Well, BP didn't like that too much, so Great Britain convinced the United States to help initiate a coup to overthrow the Iranian government. As part of this uprising, key buildings were bombed and propaganda was spread to increase the terrorist resistance. In exchange for the help, Britain gave up the oil monopoly it had in the country and allowed U.S. firms in.
Another example is the overthrow of the Chilean government in the 1970s. Salvador Allende was a democratically elected leader who supported socialist policies. During the cold war, the United States simply could not abide socialist leaders in power in the Western hemisphere. Allende's presidency was marked with turmoil, in part due to U.S. economic policy in Chile, and he was eventually thrown from power by a U.S.-backed rebellion.
The new leader, Augusto Pinochet, was a tyrant and a dictator, and he violated the basic human rights of his citizens for almost 20 years. The United States helped destroy a democracy and allowed a dictatorship to take its place in what could easily be seen as helping a terrorist group stage a coup.
Louis Posada Carriles is great example of a terrorist with close ties to the CIA and our government. Posada is a known terrorist suspected of several plots, like the bombing of a Cuban airliner in 1976, and he even admitted to bombing hotels in Cuba. Carriles is wanted in both Cuba and Venezuela for his involvement in these acts. He resides in the United States and has little chance of being extradited to the countries where he committed his terrorist acts. The United States is harboring terrorists, exactly the same thing it condemned Afghanistan for doing.
My point is there is a lot more to the terrorist issue than is generally reported in the media. I don't really believe it's fair for the U.S. to condemn terrorists from a moral stand point when it has been, and in all likelihood still is, highly involved in terrorist activities.
The fact is that when someone commits violence that isn't in our interest, they are considered terrorists. However, when their acts are in our interest, they are either not mentioned in the news or are portrayed as freedom fighters. If you look at the American Revolution, who were American rebels but terrorists? Our forefathers openly fought against their government and committed acts of sabotage to British interests like in the Boston Tea Party.
Another related point I would like to make is the stereotyped Islamic radicals in the Middle East have their own perspective. It would be a good idea for Americans to try and see it from their side in order to make better decisions when dealing with the "terrorists" there. Granted, no one hates religious extremists more than I, and I don't believe involving religion in warfare ever helped the greater good. But it takes more than just religion to rally people to a cause. The anti-Western militant groups in the Middle East see the United States and its Western allies as imperialists trying to rape the resources of the people while imposing their own ideas of morality on Middle Eastern culture.
The fact is that a rather strong argument could be made saying the United States does act as an imperial power and U.S. foreign policy in the area has resulted in hurting the interests of the local people. Propping up the oppressive Saudi royal family and the subsequent police state that followed Mossadegh in Iran are prime examples of this idea.
The U.S. doesn't have any sovereignty over those states, and we have no right to get involved in the Middle East. What would you do if the United States was occupied or subverted by foreign power? Would you rise up against that power or just sit complacently?
(C) 2006 Daily Toreador via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 10, 2006


End of Document