I JUST WANT TRUTH, SEZ PEARL WIDOW, & SHE SUES KILLERS
Daily News (New York)
July 19, 2007 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 15
Length: 391 words
Byline: BY JOHN MARZULLI DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body


THE WIDOW OF slain Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl filed a wrongful death suit yesterday against the terrorists responsible for her husband's gruesome murder.
Mariane Pearl's legal action targets one of Al Qaeda's top leaders and Pakistan's largest bank, an institution that allegedly supports terrorism.
"I am looking for the truth of what happened to Daniel, for our family, our friends, and the public record," the slain reporter's widow said in a statement.
"This process delves deeper into the investigation, and to bring accountability and punishment to those involved with his kidnapping, torture and murder," she added.
Besides Habib Bank Ltd. the defendants include Al Qaeda's No. 3 leader, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who admitted that he "decapitated with my blessed right hand the head of the American Jew, Daniel Pearl."
The suit also names Omar Sheikh, who was sentenced to death in Pakistan for kidnapping Pearl, and the outlawed Islamic charity al-Rashid Trust, which received financial services from Habib Bank.
Mariane Pearl was pregnant when her husband was abducted in Karachi, Pakistan, in 2002 while trying to arrange an interview with cleric Sheikh Gilani, who had preached at Brooklyn's Al Farooq mosque.
Her memoir, "A Mighty Heart," which documents the intense search for her husband, was the subject of a film released last month starring Angelina Jolie.
The suit, filed in Brooklyn Federal Court, charges the defendants violated the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1996, which allows U.S. nationals to bring a civil action against those who support or abet terrorism.
Mariane Pearl is a French citizen and brought the action as the representative of her husband's estate and guardian of their 4-year-old son, Adam, who holds dual U.S. and French citizenship.
Mariane Pearl's attorney, Michael Elsner, said similar suits have been filed by victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and suicide bombings in Israel.
Elsner said he did not expect any of the terror defendants to answer the complaint.
Shaikh Mohammed is believed to be in the custody of the U.S. military.
"We were approached by Ms. Pearl in the last few months and asked to investigate this," Elsner said. "We're going to rely on a jury to evaluate what they believe is appropriate damages."
A lawyer for Habib Bank did not return a call for comment.
jmarzulli@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Mariane Pearl

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document