I Quit To Sound An Early Alarm
The New York Times
March 5, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 991 words
Byline: By Ariel Sharon; Ariel Sharon was Israel's Minister of Industry and Trade.
Dateline: TEL AVIV
Body


I resigned from the Israeli Government because I fear that its present political initiatives, even if founded in a sincere attempt to achieve peace, reward the Palestinians for their terrorism and increase the risks of war.
What Israel should be doing immediately is putting an end to the Palestine Liberation Organization's terrorism, which has claimed hundreds of innocent Jewish and Arab victims in the last two years alone.
The Government's initiatives include movement toward Palestinian elections in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip. They are paving the way for establishment of a second Palestinian state in the land of Israel, west of the Jordan River, in addition to the existing one, the Kingdom of Jordan.
But no democratic elections would take place because of the P.L.O.'s on-going terrorism; instead, the state would be created by the P.L.O. Such a state would control strategic mountainous terrain on the West Bank overlooking the coastal plain.
This means the width of Israel's coastal plain (where two-thirds of the Jewish population lives) would, on average, shrink to about 14 miles. This would constitute a death sentence, for Israel's main infrastructure would be at the mercy of Palestinian and Arab missiles, rockets and artillery, as well as terrorism and a large-scale conventional invasion.
The Government's policies are also leading to a renewed division of Israel's sovereign and eternal capital, Jerusalem.
Predictably, the Arab states will take our policies as an indication of weakness, and will begin a campaign of total military aggression. The continued state of war between Israel and the Arab states (apart from Egypt) has no logic or justification.
If regional piece is to be reached -in the near future, I hope - it can be achieved only if the following conditions are met:
First, an opening of the bridges between Israel and Jordan. Second, democratization of the totalitarian regimes in the Arab countries. Third, reduction and equalization of the military might of the two parties. Fourth, a solution to the problems of Palestinian refugees in the Gaza Strip. Fifth, conclusion of a formal peace treaty between Israel and the Arab states.
The long-term pressure exerted by the U.S. undoubtedly has contributed to the political tremors in the Soviet Union and elsewhere in Eastern Europe. Today a similar U.S. effort must be directed toward the Arab regimes, for the best guarantee of real peace is genuine democracy in the Middle East.
A stable peace can be achieved only by a drastic reduction of the great military threat. Surely we can reduce and equalize the military strength of the two parties, even as relations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact are undergoing a historic change. First, the long-range arms systems should be reduced, and then tactical forces like armor and combat aircraft. The aim would be to return to the force levels of the 50's, when the mutual military threat was minimal.
Mideast disarmament must be dealt with at the global level. In contrast to the Soviet Union, which is reducing its armed forces, the Arab states are escalating the arms race in our region. Their tremendous purchasing power and the surpluses created by the force-reduction agreements in Europe are making disarmament more difficult to accomplish.
Pressuring Israel to reach immediate solutions to the differences with its neighbors instead of first guaranteeing democratization and disarmament throughout the Arab world amounts to asking Israel to be prepared to commit suicide for the sake of peace.
A more fruitful approach would lie in working out interim procedures so that Israel and the Arabs states can test each other and gradually build mutual trust. For example, it is necessary immediately to open the bridges between Israel and Jordan in the same way the Berlin wall was pulled down and barbed wire dismantled in Eastern Europe.
Once the Jordan River bridges are open, the free traffic in both directions would help create a climate of peace. Instead of symbolizing enmity and suspicion, the river would signify hope for peace talks between the Israelis and Palestinians.
The Arabs cynically chose to turn the Palestinian refugee problem into a political weapon. The U.S., European countries and Israel must join together to assist these refugees. It is possible to start toward this goal by urbanizing and industrializing the Gaza Strip, where hundreds of thousands of refugees live.
Several Arab countries could well be the first to enjoy the dividends of peace if my program were instituted. Egypt, for example, is undergoing a chronic and ever more acute economic crisis. Why is it using a large part of its U.S. aid for military growth? Why does it need to maintain a gigantic army? Why does it need the 700 new tanks the U.S. is about to give it at no cost? Who is threatening Egypt, especially since Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, is now its close friend?
Jordan, too, is undergoing a crisis and is investing vast amounts in armaments. Against whom will these arms be used - Israel?
One of my intentions in resigning from the Cabinet was to make sure no one would be able to ask why no member of the Government's inner circle stood up in time to warn against what was likely to happen (as they now ask of the Jewish leaders of Europe in the 30's and America in the 40's).
Freed from Cabinet restraints, I am trying to exploit the golden opportunities resulting from the relaxation of international tensions so that Israel can move further down the road toward genuine peace.
More than 13 Likud members of the Knesset who share my opposition to policies advanced by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir have been working with me and two Cabinet ministers to try to push the peace process the right way.
The proposed summit meeting of the Israeli, Egyptian and U.S. Foreign Ministers is the wrong way. It would not encourage the peace process but rather would lead to false expectations and more bloodshed.

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document