ICONIC BUILDINGS WILL DRESS IN RED FOR HEART DISEASE
Tampa Bay Times
January 31, 2012 Tuesday
2 Tampa Edition


Copyright  2012 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 1B; TALK OF THE BAY
Length: 346 words
Body


Several buildings are lighting red throughout February in support of Go Red For Women, including two Tampa Bay skyline icons: the SunTrust Building in downtown Tampa and the Pier in downtown St. Petersburg. The Go Red campaign is designed to remind people that heart disease is still the No. 1 cause of death among women 20 and older, killing approximately one woman every minute. The SunTrust Building goes red Wednesday and will pulsate like a heart in the color red for the month of February. Starting Friday, the Pier will be turning shades of red.
* * *
History Center exhibit lifts the cloak on terrorism and espionage
A new exhibition, "Spies, Traitors and Saboteurs: Fear and Freedom in America," will go on display at the Tampa Bay History Center starting Saturday. The exhibition, which comes from the International Spy Museum in Washington, D.C., explores the history of terrorism and espionage in America from 1776 to 2001. Historic events such as the 1814 capture of the White House, the 1971 bombing of the U.S. Capitol, the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks are featured. The exhibition, which runs through June 24 at 801 Old Water St., is recommended for ages 12 and older. For more information, call (813) 228-0097 or visit tampabayhistorycenter.org.
* * *
Health delays Frank's re-election decision
Pat Frank is one of the last Hillsborough County incumbents to say whether they will run for office again. And it could be a couple of months before she makes a decision. Frank, 82, a Democrat completing her second term as clerk of the Circuit Court, had open-heart surgery late last year at the Cleveland Clinic to repair a mitral valve. She's still recovering and works from home quite a bit. She says she may need a second procedure. Until that time, she said, she can't make a call on whether to run again. "I hate to be so iffy about it," Frank said. "But that's the way it is." So far, just one person, Republican Scott Barrish, has filed to run for the office. But he did not raise any money in his first quarter since declaring.

Graphic

 
PHOTO - LUIS SANTANA - Times (2): A replica of a suicide bomber's vest, left, and an interactive subversion-themed exhibit from 1945-1956, featuring simulated file cabinet drawers with FBI documents on such well-known celebrities as Marilyn Monroe, will be on display at the Tampa Bay History Center.

Load-Date: January 31, 2012


End of Document