ID seller was alleged to have terrorism ties;
No terrorism charges were brought, and the man and his
lawyer called November's closed-door allegations "hearsay."
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 25, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 563 words
Byline: Wayne Parry ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PATERSON, N.J.
Body


Secret evidence presented in a closed court session alleged that a man who sold fake IDs to two Sept. 11 hijackers had closer ties to terrorism than previously revealed, according to transcripts released yesterday.
In the end, authorities found no evidence to bring terrorism charges against the man, Mohamad El-Atriss, and U.S. Attorney Christopher J. Christie said yesterday that El-Atriss "is not considered a threat to national security by us."
In a plea bargain, Atriss, 46, was sentenced in March to five years' probation and fined $15,000 for selling phony documents.
Atriss and his lawyer yesterday disputed any inference that he had ties to terrorism. They said the information brought forward in the secret hearings, which they were not permitted to attend, was pure hearsay.
"Nothing was corroborated by local, state or federal authorities," said the lawyer, Miles Feinstein. "Secret evidence is abhorrent to our system. It takes away fundamental rights and protections."
The transcripts indicate that investigators from the Passaic County Sheriff's Department and the prosecutor's office believed that Atriss was a serious danger to the community and should be held on a higher bail.
Among the allegations made in the secret sessions was that Atriss was part owner of a business with ties to the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and that his partner was classified by the FBI as a terrorist.
In the secret sessions, Detective Sgt. Fred Ernst testified that the location of the business, Sphinx Trading Co., was where Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman received his mail. The blind Egyptian cleric is serving a life term for conspiring to blow up New York City landmarks, and his followers were convicted of the 1993 bombing.
"It was also indicated to me by the FBI that several of the hijackers involved in the Sept. 11 event also had mailboxes at that location," Ernst testified at a November hearing in which Atriss' bail was doubled to $500,000.
Atriss said yesterday that he was one of two people who incorporated Sphinx Trading in 1987, but within days decided not to go into business with the partner and had nothing to do with it afterward.
"I am very sad that I was held for six months based on this kind of information," he said. "They are labeling me as a terrorist and I had nothing to do with it. How can I prove that?"
Feinstein said none of the testimony given in secret came from witnesses with firsthand knowledge of what they were alleging.
Prosecutors had sought the secret hearing, saying the release of evidence could jeopardize U.S. security.
Atriss admitted selling fake documents to Khalid Almihdhar, who was on the jet that crashed into the Pentagon, and Abdulaziz Alomari, who was aboard one of the jets that hit the trade center. But Atriss stressed he had no idea who those men were or what they had in mind.
Authorities also testified that he downloaded a list of the 19 hijackers from an Internet site on Sept. 15, 2001, underlining 12 of the 19 names. Atriss said he did not recall ever doing that.
The Star-Ledger of Newark, the Washington Post, the New York Times, the Record of Bergen County, the Herald News of West Paterson, and the New Jersey Law Journal sued for the release of transcripts.
A judge agreed June 4 to release the transcript. The defense had argued that releasing the information would hurt Atriss' reputation by unfairly linking him to terrorism.

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document