Idaho terrorism expert to speak at forums Scholars say America must consider effects of new war on terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 19, 2001 Wednesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION; Pg.B3
Length: 522 words
Byline: Hannelore Sudermann, Staff writer
Body


Last week's terrorist attacks have left as much confusion as anger and
 heartache.
 The University of Idaho hopes to offer some clarity with a forum on
 terrorism tonight. National security expert Rand Lewis plans to profile Osama
 bin Laden, the Saudi millionaire whom U.S. authorities name as the prime
 suspect in the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
''There is a great interest and a great need out there for Americans to
 understand what this thing called terrorism is and how it impacts them,"
 Lewis said.
 Lewis, head of the University of Idaho Martin Institute for Peace Studies
 and Conflict Resolution, is an authority on terrorism, the Middle East and
 national security.
 He also co-founded Transnational Strategic Solutions Inc., a small private
 company that advises government agencies and private businesses on issues of
 international security.
 Even on the day of the attack, Lewis' instincts told him bin Laden was
 probably connected.
 He said it was clear the actions had been well-planned and well-financed -
 hallmarks of bin Laden and al Qaeda, the organization he leads.
 Lewis said tonight's forum should give people a more complete picture of
 what happened last week and why.
 ''I'm going to be looking at international terrorism in general and utilize
 bin Laden and al Qaeda as an example," he said. ''We'll talk about bin Laden
 himself and why he does what he's doing."
 While most national security experts were expecting a major attack on the
 United States, they probably hadn't anticipated one so devastating, Lewis
 said.
 Even for members of the security industry, ''it has taken our breath
 away," he said. ''This was a different approach from the standard, 'We want
 money' or 'We want to have our friends released from prison,"' he said.
 ''This was an attack. That's what makes it so horrific. This is a whole
 different ballgame."
 Washington State University political science professor Tom Preston agreed
 in a recent interview that ''they crossed a line most terrorist groups don't
 like to cross."
 ''They killed thousands of people. Something like this will bring down
 enormous retribution," he said.
 In that vein, Americans now have some hard decisions to make about how they
 want to fight terrorism, both scholars said.
 ''This is something that has, I think, awakened a giant," Lewis said.
 ''Where we go with that is going to be important. We need to ask what kind of
 risks are we willing to take in an international arena."
 In the 1990s, Lewis served as lieutenant colonel and foreign area officer
 in the U.S. Army.
 He was stationed in Germany and traveled extensively through Europe, the
 Middle East and North Africa, where he had regular contact with followers of
 Islam.
 ''The first thing American people need to do is realize that (bin Laden's
 involvement) is not indicative of the Muslim population around the world, nor
 the Arabs," he said.  He said he plans to emphasize that point during the
 forum.
 ''This is just a small group of radicals," he said. ''The Arabs are not at
 fault here. Muslims are not at fault."
 The forum will be held at 7:30 p.m. today in the UI College of Law
 Courtroom.

Notes

Hannelore Sudermann can be reached at (509) 334-3674.

Graphic

 
Photo; Lewis

Load-Date: September 21, 2001


End of Document