IDEAS & TRENDS
The New York Times
July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 328 words
Byline: M.P.'s Say No To New Gallows By Wide Margin
Body


One of the largest Conservative majorities in modern parliamentary history voted against bringing back the gallows in Britain last week. Not even the murder of four members of the Ulster Defense Regiment 14 hours earlier by the Irish Republican Army was enough to turn the tide for pro-hangers.
One of the largest Conservative majorities in modern parliamentary history voted against bringing back the gallows in Britain last week.The vote was 361 to 245.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who has supported restoration of the death penalty for acts of terrorism and other violent crimes, freed members of her party to vote their conscience. Public opinion polls showed strong sentiment in favor of hanging, but British institutions concerned with its legal and moral ramifications generally opposed it. In a series of ballots on providing the death penalty for specific crimes, Parliament rejected hanging even for murdering police officers. ''The finality of the punishment is too great for the frailty of human judgment,'' said Roy Jenkins, former Labor Party Home Secretary, who joined former Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath in opposition.
Violence in Northern Ireland overshadowed the debate more than Britain's rising crime rate. The Orange Day festivities early in the week brought 30,000 police officers into the streets of Belfast, Londonderry and 17 other cities. Gangs of Protestant and Catholic youths threw gasoline bombs in scattered rioting, though a carnival atmosphere prevailed as parades marked the Protestant victory over King James II in 1690.
In the death penalty debate, the views of James Prior, the Government official responsible for Northern Ireland affairs, carried heavy weight. He said the Irish Republican Army would try to benefit from the use of capital punishment by creating martyrs. John Hume, a Roman Catholic M.P. from Northern Ireland, also said the death penalty, abolished in 1964, would play into the hands of terrorists.


End of Document