Ideas on torture and terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 31, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: HERNANDO TIMES; Pg. 2
Length: 407 words
Series: YOUR LETTERS
Body


Re: Putting the 'new' back into the news, column by Barbara Fredricksen Oct. 28
Over the years, I've read Ms. Fredricksen's column reviewing local shows and entertainment in the area. Now I see she's turned to her "expertise" in the area of how to interrogate terrorists. Where does her experience in this field come from?
As a Vietnam War veteran and with 33 years in law enforcement, I don't consider myself an expert, but evidently she feels she has the experience to be one.
I feel I have a fair solution to offer in two areas of much contention:
* Capital punishment. The choices are lethal injection or die in the exact fashion of your victim.
* Interrogation methods. Sit naked in a cold room and listen to loud music by the Dixie Chicks or be treated the way terrorists treat their prisoners. (That one may be a tossup.)
Please, Ms. Fredricksen, stick to what you do best, as everyone enjoys your expertise in the entertainment field. Anything else is just, well, torture.
Gene Huber, Spring Hill
Pair older pets with older owners
An article I read in a pet magazine recently has a great idea. I hope all our local shelters will try to do it. That way, some of the older pets will get a good home.
The article said pet adoption programs aimed at senior citizens are popping up around the country. Older people and older pets are often a perfect match, since many seniors prefer the companionship of a more mature, mellow dog or cat, and older pets get a forever home with people who have lots of time and love to give.
Queen Anne's County in Maryland recently launched the Senior-to-Senior program, matching up people 60-plus with older animals. Because many seniors are on a fixed income, the adoption fee is waived.
In Seattle, a program called Seniors for Seniors is "all about rediscovering the joys of having a cat or dog in your life." Besides a reduced adoption fee, they offer a certificate for a free health exam and followup support from shelter volunteers.
And in Cleveland, the Sanctuary for Senior Dogs is developing a program called "Companions" to bring elderly people and old dogs together. To encourage adoption, the adoption fee will be reduced or waived, and services may include transportation for vet visits and volunteers to walk the dogs if needed.
I just adopted a 9- or 10-year-old dog that was being treated for heartworms. He is a very sweet, loving dog that I hope will live as long as I do, and we will grow older together.

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document