Identifying terrorism in the U.S.
The Daily Athenaeum: West Virginia University
December 1, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: STAFF EDITORIALS; Pg. 1
Length: 409 words
Body


Terrorism is defined as "the use of violence and threats to intimidate or coerce, especially for political purposes." Though terrorism has led many to quick conclusions about what terrorism looks like, a recent shooting at a Planned Parenthood facility in Colorado Springs, Colorado has led many to question the true nature of its identity.
Robert Dear, a 57-year-old white male, opened fire at the clinic before noon last Friday, which killed three people and injured nine others. Though the police have yet to name any true motive for the attack, Dear was reportedly muttering phrases similar to "no more baby parts" after he was apprehended. Among those killed were police officer Garrett Swasey and two civilians who were accompanying friends receiving services at the clinic.
Dear's statement refers to presidential candidate Carly Fiorina's claim that she had viewed film of an abortion from a Planned Parenthood clinic where doctors surrounding the fetus had indicated they wanted to "harvest its brain" to sell for profit. Though experts studying the footage have stated the video was heavily edited, Planned Parenthood's reputation has continued to fall due to confusion surrounding its tissue donation policy.
According to FactCheck.org, women receiving abortion services have the option to donate fetal tissue to medical research when their procedure is over. It's common practice in hospitals to give tissue and receive payment between $100 and $500, but Planned Parenthood does not make a profit from the money received in reimbursement for transporting the tissue to laboratories.
As if Dear's crime wasn't horrific enough, several Twitter users expressed sentiments condoning Dear's actions. "...I would think this brave hero is saving innocent baby lives," one tweet reads. Another says, "Planned Parenthood kills a million babies and no one bats an eye, but one brave hero tries to put a stop to that, everyone loses their minds."
Reacting to an act of terrorism by applauding brutality is not the answer in moving forward. Three people entirely unaffiliated with Planned Parenthood lost their lives in what was ultimately a senseless shooting, and even more may suffer if gun violence continues to be an option in voicing political discontent.
With this single event, many have come to realize terrorism is not attached to any race or religion. The true potential for terrorism lies in bigotry - something separate from any deity or skin color.

Load-Date: December 1, 2015


End of Document