Ideology and mental illness 'a dangerous cocktail'
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 16, 2014 Tuesday


Copyright 2014 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 907 words
Byline: JILL LAWLESS The Associated Press
Body


LONDON - A radical Muslim killed a soldier outside Canada`s Parliament. A right-wing extremist opened fire on buildings in Texas` capital and tried to burn down the Mexican Consulate. An Al-Qaida-inspired assailant hacked an off-duty soldier to death in London.
Police said all three were terrorists motivated by ideology. Authorities and family members said they were mentally ill. A growing body of research suggests they might well have been both.
New studies have challenged several decades of thinking that psychological problems are only a minor factor in the making of terrorists. The research has found a significant link between mental problems and "lone-wolf" terrorism.
"It`s never an either-or in terms of ideology versus mental illness," said Ramon Spaaij, a sociologist at Australia`s Victoria University, who conducted a major study - funded by the U.S. Justice Department - of lone wolf extremists. "It`s a dangerous cocktail."
The study preceded Tuesday`s ending of a 16-hour siege involving a gunman who took hostages in a cafe in Sydney. The gunman, Iranian-born Man Haron Monis, was facing charges including sexual assault and accessory to murder in separate cases, and his former lawyer said the standoff was "not a concerted terrorism event" but the work of "a damaged-goods individual."
With groups like Islamic State spreading violence in Syria and Iraq - and bloodthirsty rhetoric on the Internet - authorities around the world have issued increasingly insistent warnings about the threat posed by lone-wolf attackers.
They can be difficult to stop with a counterterrorism strategy geared toward intercepting communications and disrupting plots.
Police forces and intelligence agencies are examining research by Spaaij and others. A British security official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to talk on the record said many attackers display warning signs, but recognizing them is easier in retrospect. He said British intelligence officials are studying the link between mental illness and lone-actor terrorism.
Most people with mental health problems are neither terrorists nor violent, and mental illness alone can`t explain lone-wolf attackers. Some experts dispute whether there is a link at all.
But the new research suggests solo terrorists are much more likely to have mental health problems than participants in group terrorism.
Spaaij and Mark Hamm of Indiana State University studied 98 lone-wolf attackers in the U.S. They found that 40 percent had identifiable mental health problems, compared with 1.5 percent in the general population.
Spaaj said mental illness can play a part "in shaping particular belief systems and in constructing the enemy, externalizing blame for one`s own failure or grievances onto this all-threatening enemy."
A second study by Paul Gill and Emily Corner of University College London looked at 119 lone-wolf attackers. Nearly 32 percent - had been diagnosed with a mental illness, while only 3.4 percent of terrorist group members were mentally ill.
"Group-based terrorists are psychologically quite normal," the researchers said. It`s possible that terrorist recruiters are rejecting candidates who appear erratic or mentally ill.
Mental illness could make lone-wolf attacks easier to foresee: Gill said 60 percent of the attackers he studied leaked details of their plans to friends or family.
More than a year before he hacked a soldier to death in London in 2013, Michael Adebowale`s online extremism drew the attention of Britain`s intelligence services.
MI5 agents suggested that Adebowale - who is now serving a life sentence in a psychiatric hospital - be assessed by the agency`s Behavioral Science Unit, a team of psychologists and social scientists, but the assessment was never done. The lawmakers` report called that a missed opportunity, and recommended that "MI5 should ensure that the unit`s advice is integrated more thoroughly into investigations."
Signals also were misread in the case of Nicky Reilly, a 22-year-old convert to Islam who walked into a restaurant in the English town of Exeter in 2008 with a homemade bomb. The device went off in the restroom, injuring Reilly and no one else.
At his trial, jurors were told that Reilly had learning difficulties and had many years of contact with mental health services. In 2003, he talked to a psychiatrist about making a bomb. The information was passed on to the police, who judged that Reilly wasn`t a serious threat.
American authorities, in contrast, have been accused of being too aggressive in pursuit of lone attackers. The FBI has foiled several alleged attacks through sting operations in which agents posed as terror supporters, supplying advice and equipment. Critics say the strategy can amount to entrapment of mentally vulnerable people who wouldn`t have the wherewithal to act alone.
Meanwhile, the fundamental question of whether there is a link between mental health problems and terrorism remains controversial.
The most lethal lone-wolf attacker in recent years was anti-Muslim extremist Anders Behring Breivik, who killed 77 people in a bombing and gun rampage in Norway in 2011. Breivik was unrepentant. One psychiatric report found him to be insane, while a second concluded that he was sane - and judges agreed, sending him to prison indefinitely.
The killer was happy with the outcome. For Breivik, it was recognition that his views were legitimate and not those of a madman.

Load-Date: December 16, 2014


End of Document