Idyllic vistas wash away fear of terrorism
USA TODAY
June 2, 2000, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 360 words
Byline: Julie Schmit
Dateline: KOTA KINABALU, Malaysian Borneo
Body


KOTA KINABALU, Malaysian Borneo -- Maurice Lewis, 67, a retiree
from Kent, England, looks at it this way: "I have more chance
of being run over in England," he says, than being kidnapped
by Muslim rebels.
The April 23 kidnapping of 21 tourists, including 10 foreigners,
from a dive resort on the island of Sipadan in Malaysia is hurting
tourism. Cancellations are running about 10% to 20%, and the U.S.
State Department warns travelers to be extra cautious when near
Sipadan.
But tourists recently visiting Sabah, the Malaysian state that
Sipadan belongs to, had only glowing reports about their travels.
"This is paradise," says retiree Brenda Percy, 60, of Newcastle,
England.
Sabah markets itself as a "soft adventure" destination for those
who appreciate nature but also like modern comforts. It isn't
a cheap trip when compared with Thailand, Indonesia or other parts
of Malaysia.
But it offers a smorgasbord of delights, especially for nature
lovers. Mt. Kinabalu, at 13,435 feet, is popular with climbers
of all levels. Sabah's rain forests are home to brilliant flowers,
rich bird life and rare mammals, including the orangutan, proboscis
monkey and Sumatran rhinoceros.
Many of Sabah's resorts are relatively new, along with its tourism
industry. Just 305,000 international tourists, and fewer than
10,000 Americans, visited last year. Hotel occupancies run about
60%.
Still, Kota Kinabalu, the main city, has numerous four- and five-star
resorts, including the popular beachfront Shangri-La Rasa Ria.
Recently, it offered a walk-in rate for a twin, sea-view room
of $ 157 per night, including breakfast and dinner. Sabah's nature
resorts, such as the Borneo Rainforest Lodge, have fewer resortlike
amenities but are closer to nature. The Rainforest Lodge offers
simple but comfortable cabins, ranging in price from $ 92 to $ 180.
Meals and guided nature walks are included.
Most Sabah travelers use tour operators to arrange hotels, guides
and transportation, which isn't always available in remote areas.
In the main cities, taxis and English speakers are plentiful.
When assessing his experience, Victor Lewington, 57, of Essex,
England, gave the ultimate compliment. "We would come back."

Load-Date: June 2, 2000


End of Document