IF ISRAEL WOULD REMAIN WORTHY OF OUR UNDERSTANDING - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 781 words
Body


To the Editor:
Your July 1 editorial ''Judging Israel'' provides some instructive examples of our failure to draw the appropriate lessons from so much taking place around us.
In common with a number of others who have written letters or Op-Ed pieces, your editorial reflects the unease of Israel's friends in the face of a rising tide of disillusionment and questioning of Israeli actions and intentions. It is mistaken to view the worldwide voicing of disquiet over the callous Israeli campaign in Lebanon, although more muted here in the U.S., as expressive of a cynical double standard.
You ask for ''fair judging.'' To ''see both sides'' of a problem is the surest way to prevent its complete solution, for there are always more than two sides - and nowhere is this more true than with the current war in Lebanon. If your statement is correct that ''most Israelis now scorn the opinion of mankind,'' this indicates an alarming intolerance and dangerous disregard on Israel's part for the common understanding of the world community.
Your July 1 editorial ''Judging Israel'' provides some instructive examples of our failure to draw the appropriate lessons from so much taking place around us.
To better understand Israel's plight, we must remind ourselves that it is not only Israel's critics who could be said to have held it to a higher code. Israel itself can be perceived to have done the same - through its claim to a homeland in the fertile crescent based on biblical covenantal promises; its posturing as a bastion of democracy in a surrounding sea of military dictatorships and Communist-backed regimes; or even the messianic fantasies of medieval-minded bigots shrouded in the myth of Jews warring against Gentiles while ushering in a resurrected Jerusalem.
Yet this is only the shallower part of Israel's plight. A more potent factor operative in the self-perception of Israeli moral superiority has been, and continues to be, the depth of anguish and suffering stemming from the Nazi pogrom and the historical ambivalence, if not open persecution, of Christian nations.
All of these have entrenched Israel's conviction of the justice of its cause, and led to its extracting a peculiar type of retribution.  By playing on the guilt/sympathy complex of Western nations, Israel consciously exercises moral blackmail through ''guilt-tripping'' them into unqualified support in whatever demand or adventure it undertakes. In effect, Israel right or wrong.
The state of Israel, born out of world sympathy, Christian guilt and not a little old-fashioned terrorism, was the solution settled upon for the Jewish refugee problem. Besides creating an international ghetto for the Jewish people, the creation of Israel also created the Palestinian refugees.
Thirty-four years later, the Palestinian refugees are still with us, with a vengeance.The military campaign of the Israeli Defense Forces against Palestinians and Lebanese is of such selfish savageness that we do not want to recognize and accept its implications. So we seek for some good excuses - at least ones which will deceive ourselves and others for a time.
Half-truths and plain misinformation are pressed into service: the P.L.O. and Syria have already ravaged Lebanon, why not let the Israelis have a go at it? The Arab states have exploited the Palestinian refugees, so why complain when Israel also denies them self-determination, a homeland, safe and secure borders? The litany invoked against the P.L.O. and/or Palestinians as ''terrorists'' now assumes grotesquely banal dimensions with the latest and on-going installment of Israel's special brand of state-institutionalized terrorism being inflicted by the Israeli war machine in Lebanon.
You urge us to ''judge fairly'' and to ''understand Israel's plight'' - by accepting that Israel is just as callous, cruel and repressive as you would like us to believe the Arab nations are. We have the distinct impression you are trying harder to convince yourselves, and Israel's supporters among American Jews, more than anyone else.
Israel has enjoyed American ''understanding of its plight'' for over 30 years. If our understanding of it is to continue, let Israel do more to be worthy of understanding. And this can begin precisely by Israel, and its friends, transcending judgments, forsaking the spiral of deceit and entering the arena of self-scrutiny. There alone can we be helped to fight the real battle - the battle gainst our fears, our intolerance, our turning a blind eye toward the sufferings and the self-perceptions of others in order to maintain our own crippled image of reality.
DOUGLAS S. CROW, Professor of Religion, Columbia University, New York, July 4, 1982
Correction

Douglas S. Crow, whose letter appeared July 12, was incorrectly identified. Mr. Crow was an associate in the Department of Religion at Columbia, Sept. 1981-May 1982. He will be an associate in the Department of Middle East Languages and Culture in the fall.
Correction-Date: July 14, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document