If Protests Are an 'Infection,' What Is China's Cure?
The New York Times
November 24, 2019 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 1452 words
Byline: By Louisa Lim
Body


Escalating rhetoric reveals how seriously Beijing views the unrest in Hong Kong.
In a week when Hong Kong's universities became tear-gas-scented battlegrounds, the escalating violence has been matched by an intensifying spiral of rhetoric from the governments of Beijing and Hong Kong. Words have always been weapons in conflict, but in the social media age, their potential as tools of mobilization is exponentially multiplied, and the terminology used to describe protesters seems like a signal of tough action ahead. 
  Language has been key to this protest movement since its beginning. In June, Hong Kong's chief executive, Carrie Lam, characterized a protest against a controversial extradition law as a ''riot.'' That designation -- which echoed a pivotal moment in April 1989 when The People's Daily, the main newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, called a mourning assembly by students in Tiananmen Square ''turmoil'' -- was met with fury by protesters. They argued that the gathering had been calm until the police responded with tear gas and rubber bullets. That anger helped swell the crowds of marchers to an estimated two million people four days later, with new demands including the retraction of the term ''riot.''
  For the first few months of the Hong Kong protests, China's state media outlets seemed to be drawing upon the 1989-era playbook. They attributed the unrest to mysterious instigators whom they called ''black hands,'' and external hostile forces including the C.I.A.
  By August, state media had stepped up the rhetoric, describing the protesters as ''violent mobs'' and saying the protests showed ''signs of terrorism.'' On Tuesday, a day after students lobbed Molotov cocktails and fired arrows at police officers who had trapped them inside Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China Daily, a state-run English-language newspaper, described Hong Kong's campuses as ''fortresses of terrorist activities,'' and warned of separatists ''conspiring with foreign forces'' to turn Hong Kong into a ''bridgehead to subvert China.'' Another article carried by the state mouthpiece described protesters' demands for Western-style liberal democracy as a ''malignant virus'' and an ''infection.''
  Such comparisons reveal how seriously Beijing views the unrest in Hong Kong, which had long been one of the most stable places on China's periphery. In a move that was part public relations exercise and part threat, People's Liberation Army troops that are stationed in the city jogged out of their barracks last weekend to ''voluntarily'' clean the streets, bearing brooms and plastic buckets. It was only the second time since 1997 that they have been seen on Hong Kong's streets, and it was not lost on Hong Kong's residents that these soldiers were from the top counterterrorism unit, a designation emblazoned on their colorful jerseys.
  The mini-constitution that governs Hong Kong, the Basic Law, stipulates that troops can be called out to help with disaster relief if requested by the local government. In this case, no request had been made. Even if the troops remain in the barracks in the future, their presence has now been advertised, and this contributes to the perception of a militarization of Hong Kong's streets, which nightly -- and increasingly by day, too -- teem with regular police officers, riot policemen and members of the elite ''Raptor'' unit, a specialized riot control task force.
  To Chinese readers, mentions of separatism and terrorism invoke Xinjiang, the northwestern province where China is holding an estimated one million members of the Uighur minority in political indoctrination camps. The discourse of pathology is often used in relation to Xinjiang, where Islam is depicted as an ideological illness. One China Daily opinion essay expanded on the comparison, explaining: ''The problems of Hong Kong and that of terrorism have similar causes: lack of realistic economic opportunities and misguided ideology. Regarding terrorism, China has shown the world a more effective and humane approach than that pursued by other countries.''
  According to this logic, a ''weakened immune system'' is a vulnerability that can be healed only by the education of ''corrigible'' but misguided youngsters, raising the chilling prospect of some form of Xinjiang-style ideological re-education in Hong Kong. However, an attempt seven years ago to introduce courses in ''national and moral education'' to Hong Kong failed after mass protests by students.
  These disease metaphors underline Beijing's view of Hong Kong's protest movement as a threat to its body politic, with ideological infection posing an existential danger to the Chinese Communist Party. Such discourse could prefigure new restrictions on speech in Hong Kong, a possibility that seems to be inching incrementally closer. An injunction that has been introduced to protect Hong Kong police officers from ''doxxing'' -- releasing their personal details online -- has been criticized as overly broad, since it also prohibits ''harassing, threatening, pestering or interfering'' with the police. Such a law could even technically outlaw singing protest songs about the police. More worrying, one adviser to Hong Kong's government has already warned that an internet ban has not been ruled out.
  As the arrests in Hong Kong mount, to around 4,500, the language from Ms. Lam, the unpopular chief executive, is hardening as well. In August, she lay the blame for the protests on a small minority with ''no stake in society.'' Two weeks ago, she denounced the ''rioters'' as ''enemies of the people.'' This phrase, alien in Hong Kong, comes straight from the Communist Party lexicon. Chairman Mao once decreed that ''enemies of the people'' do not actually belong to the category of people. They are, effectively, nonpeople.
  The dehumanization of Hong Kong's protesters has been underway for months. In July, when a pro-Beijing legislator, Junius Ho, complained that his parents' graves had been defaced, a senior police officer, John Tse Chun-cheng, said the vandalism was done not by humans but by ''cockroaches.'' Since then, state media has carried cartoons depicting activists as cockroaches, which has become a term of abuse by the police. A week ago, video emerged on social media of police officers talking about ''killing cockroaches.'' This language -- the rhetoric of genocide -- carries an implicit threat for protesters.
  The protesters' language, too, has become much harsher; ''dogs'' and ''triads'' -- a reference to Hong Kong's feared criminal syndicates -- are among the few printable epithets used against the police. Cantonese is famously sweary, and profane graffiti now spackles Hong Kong's streets, including provocative terms like ''Chinazi,'' a portmanteau comparing today's China to Nazi Germany. 
  As the protest movement has widened its focus -- from one specific law to police brutality and Hong Kong's own political future -- its slogans, too, have changed. A subversive rallying call that was once considered a fringe idea has become a clarion call: ''Retake Hong Kong, Revolution of Our Times!'' The phrase was coined by Edward Leung, a pro-independence politician who is serving a six-year jail sentence for his role in a 2016 street skirmish that became known as the Fishball Revolution. Its meaning is ambiguous, but officials are publicly denouncing it as a challenge to national sovereignty.
  But Beijing is not trying to counter the protesters slogan for slogan. Its strategy is much broader. Earlier this year, China harnessed Twitter and Facebook to run state-backed disinformation campaigns, directed mainly at overseas Chinese and Hong Kongers, to frame the protests as a separatist plot aimed at undermining China's territorial integrity. In October, having laid that groundwork for public support, Beijing said that it was planning a ''national security'' solution in Hong Kong, paired with ideological education. It's unclear how severe those measures will be, butPresident Xi Jinping has warned that anyone attempting to split China will face ''crushed bodies and shattered bones.'' The violence of his language leaves little space for compromise or compassion.
  Louisa Lim (@limlouisa) is a senior lecturer at the Center for Advancing Journalism at the University of Melbourne, Australia, and the author of ''The People's Republic of Amnesia: Tiananmen Revisited.''
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/23/opinion/sunday/hong-kong-protests.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The police detained protesters and students Hong Kong Polytechnic University on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BILLY H.C. KWOK/GETTY IMAGES)               

Load-Date: November 24, 2019


End of Document