If terrorist law passes, foreign powers face suits
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
July 3, 1995, Monday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 599 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- An attorney for relatives of Americans killed in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 is seizing the moment. He's already drafting a lawsuit against Libya in anticipation of President Clinton's signing broad new anti-terrorism legislation now moving through Congress.
"If it happens, we will immediately sue Libya," said Lee Kreindler, lead counsel and chairman of the Flight 103 families' committee.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
The bomb is believed to have been put aboard the Boeing 747 by Libyan terrorists supported by their government.
In another case, Scott Nelson says he was imprisoned and brutally beaten in Saudi Arabia for criticizing the state-owned hospital where he worked, leaving him with permanent nerve injury and chronic pain. Nelson, an American, has been stymied for 11 years in his efforts to sue the Saudi government for damages.
The Saudis deny his allegations, calling Nelson "an admitted liar and forger."
His lawyer, Joseph Aronica, calls a provision in the House anti-terrorism bill "a tremendous breakthrough" for his client and other Americans with grievances against foreign nations.
This new talk of lawsuits anticipates passage by Congress of anti-terrorism legislation that the Clinton administration sought in response to the Oklahoma City bombing last April 19.
Nestled in both House and Senate versions are little-noticed provisions that would allow American citizens to sue foreign countries in U.S. courts for personal injuries caused by alleged terrorist acts. Other countries have traditionally been protected from such lawsuits by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976. The bill now under consideration would change that.
But there is a key difference between the House and Senate provisions. The Senate would permit Americans to sue only those foreign nations that are officially classified as pro-terrorist by the U.S. government -- Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria.
Under the House bill, Americans could sue any foreign country, provided that the country does not offer a fair remedy in its own legal system. Legal experts say the new legislation could apply to longtime cases such as Nelson's, since it contains no statute of limitations.
The State Department opposes that House provision, which, if enacted, would allow Aronica to file suit against the Saudis, for example.
But Rep. Howard Berman, D-Calif., author of the House measure, says limiting suits to the seven countries deemed terrorist would "make the provision next to meaningless."
Berman's amendment was approved by voice vote recently by the House Judiciary Committee, which means it could wind up as part of the final anti-terrorism bill.
That could put the administration in a diplomatic bind. For years, the State Department has opposed Nelson's efforts to sue Saudi Arabia, a close U.S. ally, for alleged torture.
"We believe this provision would inadvertently undermine our ability to fight terrorism by involving U.S. courts in decisions about which nations are responsible for particular terrorist acts," said a State Department official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
After a federal appeals court ruled in 1991 that Nelson and his wife could sue the Saudi government in U.S. federal court, the State Department supported Saudi Arabia's appeal and asked the Supreme Court to reverse the appeals court ruling.
Then, in a March 1993 decision, the Supreme Court made it harder for all Americans to sue foreign nations as it killed Nelson's lawsuit, ruling that the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act required dismissal of the diplomatically sensitive case.

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document