IF THERE WERE NO K.G.B., WOULD THE SCALE AND INTENSITY OF TERRORISM BE DIMINISHED?
The New York Times
July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 1072 words
Byline: By Harry Rositzke
Dateline: MIDDLEBURG, Va.
Body


In addition to reviving the standard image of the Soviet Union as a military juggernaut, Washington has also resurrected the old idea that the Soviet Union is managing a worldwide conspiracy. ''International terrorism'' apparently has replaced human rights as a major concern of United States foreign policy. A Senate subcommittee is investigating ''Soviet and surrogate support for international terrorism.'' The Central Intelligence Agency's 1981 report on terrorism has added a new category of terrorist acts: ''conspiracy.''
The underlying thesis, a novel one for most of us in the counterintelligence business, is both simple and vague: Moscow is somehow responsible for encouraging and aiding world-wide terrorism.
Harry Rositzke op-ed argues with alleged Soviet responsibility for acts of terrorism by various countries
Though its proponents do not go so far as to picture Moscow directing individual terrorist groups or actions, the thesis has overtones of the old image of international Communism run by a mastermind who employes puppets in a global conspiracy against the capitalist world. The instruments are no longer Communist parties and fronts, but the Soviet Committee for State Security (K.G.B.), working secretly with the intelligence services of Libya, Cuba, Syria, and Southern Yemen.
Though the conspiracy theory is bolstered by several random facts, such as the meeting of a Basque terrorist leader with a K.G.B.  official and the use of a safehouse in Prague by Italian terrorists, its persuasiveness rests mainly upon a mechanical application of the master-puppet notion and a blurring of the distinction between ordinary terrorism and wars of national liberation.
There is no question about the close operating relationships among the European (and other) terrorist groups themselves, nor about the support they receive from Libya, Southern Yemen, and Cuba. The question is: To what degree are the Russians involved?
The case for a Moscow connection can be made only on the assumption that the K.G.B. is somehow in total charge in Tripoli, Aden, and Havana. The regimes there, the argument runs, are Soviet clients or surrogates, their intelligence services tightly controlled by the K.G.B., and their training camps ''supervised'' by K.G.B. officials.
With all due respect for the K.G.B., no service can totally control and manipulate a dozen regimes and security services, including such men of spirit as Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, and Fidel Castro.
However limited or extensive the K.G.B. role may be, the key question is a simple one: If there were no K.G.B. at work anywhere, would the scale and intensity of terrorism be diminished? I seriously doubt it.
The ''training, funding, and equipping'' of global terrorism that Moscow is officially charged with by Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. does not need the Kremlin. Oil dollars count today, not rubles. Small-arms and explosives training is a simple two-week exercise. The required materiel (Soviet, American, Swiss) is available to all comers with cash.
A politically more damaging error is the equating of terrorism with wars of national liberation. An editorial dictum in The Wall Street Journal demands that ''no one should be allowed to say without challenge that Soviet support for national liberation movements is by definition different from Soviet support of terrorism.''
The two are different, both in definition and in practice, both in Moscow's eyes and, I hope, in Washington's. Anyone should hesitate to equate the ''liberation'' of South Vietnam and Angola with the actions of the Red Brigades in Italy or the wholesale slaughter in the bombing of the Islamic Republican Party's headquarters in Teheran last month.
For Moscow, terrorist acts with no realistic political purpose - terrorism in the old sense of random hijackings, killings, kidnappings, and bombings - are irrational. For the Russians, simple terrorism - that is, a terrorist act that is not a step in transforming society but rather is its own justification - is considered anarchic, and they deplore it as pointlessly destructive.  The Russians are serious about violence - they still consider themselves a revolutionary power, and it is the last weapon in their arsenal - but violence as a deliberate political instrument, as a means of seizing power.
The ''just'' wars of national liberation that the Soviet Union has supported in the last 30 years have met both success (Vietnam, Laos, Angola) and failure (South Korea, the Philippines, the Congo), and there is little prospect that Moscow will stop supporting such ''just'' wars. The Russians continue to select and train guerrilla units in a score of camps from Czechoslovakia to North Korea, as the Cubans do outside Havana. They are committed to the support of the Palestinian, Namibian (South-West African), and South African guerrillas. Not unreasonably, they anticipate further successes.
Terrorist acts are a natural ingredient in these liberation wars, as in Vietnam and in the Palestine Liberation Organization's strategy, and they are justified in Moscow's eyes as contributions to the guerrillas' eventual seizure of power.
Confusing simple terrorism with serious revolutionary ''wars'' will create problems for United States policy makers. Are all terrorist acts to be charged to Moscow's account as further cases of ''misbehavior'' that must cease before Washington is willing to talk about arms limitation or credits? If a superstate is the ''source'' of all violence, what can we do about it?
The conspiracy thesis can only divert us from the long-term Soviet revolutionary threat. The main covert vehicle for expanding Soviet influence in the third world will continue to be wars of national liberation.
Rather than getting lost in the fog of ''international terrorism,'' the Reagan Administration would do well to focus its energies on devising political and economic strategies that will reduce the prospects for success of these liberation efforts in South-West Africa, and South Africa, in the Middle East, and in Central and, inevitably, South America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Harry Rositzke, who retired from the Central Intelligence Agency in 1970 after working for it and its predecessors for 25 years, mainly on Soviet operations, is author of the forthcoming book ''The K.G.B.: The Eyes of Russia.'' This is the first of three articles.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo


End of Document