If the price of safety is war ... We're paying too much
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 23, 2005 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B5
Length: 1299 words
Byline: By Victor T. Le Vine SPECIAL TO THE POST-DISPATCH 
Body


With all due deference to the recent revelation by Palestinian notables that President George W. Bush told them that God Himself had instructed him to invade Afghanistan and Iraq, and his attempt -- in his speech on Oct. 6 -- to justify the war on terrorism, we need to ask the basic questions: Really, how is the war on terrorism going, and are we any safer now for all our efforts to ensure our security?
Last year, and on Oct., the president asserted that Iraq had become the "central front" in "our war against terrorism," and his lieutenants reminded us that there had not been another terror attack in the United States since 9/11, implying that our defenses had improved to the point, as the president noted, that we had nipped some 10 al-Qaida terror plots in the bud. Putting aside for the moment the question whether there is in fact a connection between Iraq and the absence of another terror attack in the U.S., it still makes sense to examine the implied proposition that the absence of another major terror attack since 9/11 plus the 10 foiled plots indicate that the "war" is going well for our side.
First, there is nothing that guarantees that another major terror attack on U.S. soil will not occur, the 10 foiled attacks notwithstanding. Even if there had been double, or triple, or 100 such foilings, given what we know about how al-Qaida and the worldwide networks of terrorists operate, the odds on another terror attack on the U.S. remain the same.
Moreover, almost all our leading authorities on terrorism, including those in the Bush administration, continue to tell us that it is not so much a question of "if" there will be another attack, but "when." And as if to underline the point, after Bush's speech, New York almost immediately announced a subway terrorism alert, a major highway and tunnel in the East were closed temporarily to traffic, ostensibly because of a terror threat, and the Department of Homeland Security posted a national "elevated" terrorism-security alert notice.
In all, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that anyone who thinks the absence of an attack points to success in the war on terror must be living in a fool's paradise. To be sure, we ought to do everything we can to prevent acts of terrorism and foil those we can, as well as improve the effectiveness of our counterterrorism agencies, but we ought not delude ourselves into thinking we have somehow become terror-proof. No country, even those with the most stringent anti-terror defenses (such as Israel, Russia, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia), claims that kind of "success."
Fronts in the war
Second, the "central front" in Iraq isn't doing so well, either. As of Oct. 15, the official American casualty count in Iraq was 1,976 dead and 14,755 wounded, not counting the Iraqi toll, which had reached close to 30,000 dead and wounded. Since President Bush declared "Mission Accomplished" on May 5, 2003, the number of rebel terrorist attacks has steadily escalated. And except for two semi-breathers during the legislative and constitutional elections, when security was at its highest levels, today those attacks throughout the country are counted in three figures on "bad days," slightly less on "good" ones.
Most of the casualties are civilians because the rebels now find them easier targets than coalition soldiers, who shoot back. And if Gen. George W. Casey Jr. is to be believed, after two years of crash training of 200,000 Iraqi troops and police, no more than a battalion (between 300 and 1,000 men, depending on its mission) is ready to defend the country. If we are supposed to take comfort from our performance on the "central front," the figures that document the ongoing carnage and our seeming inability to make more than the occasional dent in the insurgency certainly offer little reason for optimism.
And finally, there is the uncomfortable fact that a central pillar of our Iraq strategy -- that political progress would quell the insurgency -- has been crumbling before our eyes. Elections, the constitutional referendum, a new government, all presumably evidence of Iraq's new democratic spirit, have in fact served to intensify the country's internal conflicts and to stimulate an increase in insurgent attacks.
If Iraq is our "central front" in the war on terrorism, what about all those other fronts where we are either directly involved in counterterrorism operations, such as in Afghanistan, or helping local governments fight local or international terrorists -- as in Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Chechnya and the north Caucasus, Morocco, the western Sahel, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, parts of south and central America, not to speak of such European targets as Great Britain, Spain, Belgium and France?
First, there is Afghanistan, where we rejoiced in the popularly elected government of Hamid Karzai. Its future is clouded by a resurgence in Taliban-inspired violence, the lurking presence of Osama bin Laden in the mountainous Afghan-Pakistan border region and a resurgence of warlords fueled by an exponential increase in opium poppy production.
Al-Qaida adaptations
Worldwide, according to the 2005 report of the U.S. government's National Counterterrorism Center, terror attacks tripled in 2004, rising from 175 in 2004 to 655 last year. If my own tallies are accurate, that trend continues, and we may wind up doubling that latter figure this year. And that includes the Madrid and London bombings, the new Bali bombing, the Beslan school horror, the Sharm al Sheikh bombings, the Damascus resort slaughter and the latest spate of car bombings in Iraq.
Al-Qaida now appears to have embarked on a campaign of unleashing a tightly controlled string of closely connected attacks in many parts of the world, using loose networks of allied groups operating across the Middle East, Europe, West Africa, southeast Asia and the western Pacific. And the better the target governments become in ferreting out these groups, or foiling their plans, or rounding them up after major terror strikes, the better the terror groups seem to have become in adapting to, and evading, new counterterrorism measures. In all, it is not a pleasant prospect, and no amount of official wishful thinking can turn the new reality into "success" for our side.
The key questions
So, back to our initial questions: How are we doing in the war on terrorism? Are we any safer now? Clearly, the answer to the first question must be that we're not doing well, and to the second, a qualified "no." The reality on the ground is that this is not an ordinary war, and that it cannot be "won" or "lost" in the conventional sense conveyed by the term "war," a misnomer at best for describing a long-term campaign of violence carried out on the global stage by enemies operating out of the shadows and willing to kill without restraint and be killed without regret. The best we can do is to keep slightly ahead of the killers by, for example, improving our intelligence capabilities and getting our allies to do the same.
And, of course, we are no safer now, though again, we are beginning to give serious thought to improving our national intelligence-gathering capacities and making our security agencies more efficient in dealing with both the national and global terror threats.
The wrong model for coping with those threats was Homeland Security under Tom Ridge, whose budget allocated next to nothing for better intelligence, and vast sums for politically potent pork, such as new firetrucks to local officials. As Ken Ryan, a security expert with long experience in the field put it succinctly, "There's no way you can fight terrorists with new firetrucks, unless you manage to run over them."
---
Victor T. Le Vine is professor emeritus of political science at Washington University.

Notes

 My view | Terrorism 

Load-Date: October 24, 2005


End of Document