If war with Iraq is inevitable, then let's finish what we start;
Infrastructure and education can fight terrorism.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
January 29, 2003 Wednesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 11A
Length: 826 words
Byline: Nikki Kallio staff writer
Body


Leave it to a child to ask a question that an adult can't answer.
I gave my globe to my 9-year-old nephew before I left Wisconsin, and together we assessed how far away Maine was, how far away China was and where Afghanistan was. I told him about the war there.
"Are we going to win?" he asked.
Good question, kid.
Factions of the Taliban and al-Qaida are springing back to life in isolated pockets of Afghanistan. But even if we succeed in wiping all trace of the terrorists from the caves and mountains, that doesn't mean we've wiped out terrorism.
The idea of a war with Iraq bothers me on several levels, but what bothers me the most is what could happen after the war is over.
Let's go back a few years to when Afghanistan was fighting the Soviets. We helped, and then we left. The crippled infrastructure and shattered economy that remained created the perfect conditions for the Taliban to rise and for the nation to become a breeding ground for al-Qaida operatives.
If you don't believe me, ask someone who has talked with Afghan President Hamid Karzai. U.S. Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, who briefly visited Afghanistan and other Central Asian nations last year with other senators, discussed with me the importance of staying involved in the nation's redevelopment.
"I think the United States and its allies walked away from Afghanistan at a critical time in its history," Collins said. "That was one of the factors - not the only one - that allowed the conditions to be created that gave rise to the Taliban. That's why I feel so strongly that our work is not all done in Afghanistan and that we have to drain the swamp that bred the Osama bin Ladens and the Taliban."
One of the ways we can do that is by helping Afghanistan establish a stable agricultural alternative to poppies, which was the nation's No. 1 crop before Sept. 11. The opium from the poppies was used to make heroin, which was - guess what? - used to fund terrorism.
Education also is vital. Most people are aware of what happened to girls' education when the Taliban took over - there wasn't any. But, Collins said, President Karzai explained that girls' education wasn't the only problem. Boys were forced to attend extremist Islamic schools where they learned to hate Americans, Christians and Jews.
Lovely.
Right after the Taliban was overthrown, the international community pledged billions of dollars in aid to helping Afghanistan rebuild. The money hasn't been coming, though, and that has to change, Collins said. It's not just a matter of humanitarianism, it's in our self-interest as well, she explained.
"Once the Taliban government was removed from power, some people thought, 'Well, we've done our job.' But we have to help Afghanistan remedy some of the roots of terrorism," Collins said.
Collins, who along with Sen. Olympia Snowe supported a resolution authorizing the president to take unilateral military action against Iraq, also is worried about what could happen in Iraq after a war. The potential for the nation to split into separate states makes our continued involvement all the more important. A northern Kurdish state could threaten the stability of Turkey, the one Muslim nation that's a member of NATO, for example. Then there's the question of who could come into power to replace Saddam. Someone worse?
Collins says that she wouldn't feel as strongly as she does had she not visited the region and talked with the leaders there. Snowe also visited Afghanistan and other nations in February. The experiences the senators had there will help them convince the Bush administration that if, indeed, a war is necessary, then it's even more necessary to finish what we start.
Though it's impossible to completely understand a nation in a matter of hours or days, there's something about traveling to a region - seeing it, smelling it, touching it - that can stir one's interest like nothing else.
While supporting education iin Afghanistan is important to fighting terrorism, so is our education. We fail miserably at understanding cultures outside of our own or truly understanding how our actions can affect the world.
The National Geographic Society released a study in November that said that about 85 percent of American adults ages 18 to 24 can't find Afghanistan or Iraq on a map of the world. As if that weren't bad enough, about 11 percent couldn't find America. Yes, Americans who couldn't find America.
It's this kind of ignorance and apathy that's going to come back and bite us. We can't all travel to the Mideast or Central Asia, but we can do our best to understand how our policies and actions affect people in other parts of the world, and what other cultures think of America. Our lack of understanding is dangerous.
That's why I gave my nephew the globe. It's one step toward giving him a peaceful world.
- Nikki Kallio is an editorial writer for the Portland Press Herald and Maine Sunday Telegram. She can be reached at 791-6481 or nkallio@pressherald.com.  

Load-Date: January 29, 2003


End of Document