Ignorance, terrorism go hand in hand
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 12, 2005 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Editorial;; NEW ATTITUDES; Column
Length: 676 words
Byline: SUSAN FANG
Body


I spent three hours Thursday watching CNN and wondering what was going on because everything looked unreal. I wish it was unreal. How did we get here? What did we do to drive these lunatics to commit such a horrendous crime and to feel justified in doing so?
As much as we try to distance ourselves from these terrorists, the truth is that they were born from the global society that we have created. So what was it that drove them over the edge? Our freedom, our democracy, our religion, or anything else that our politicians have us believe is the reason? Or maybe it is our sheer ignorance.
We live in a time where the only way to make us aware of anything outside of our own self-obsessive lives is to package it in glitter and have pop stars deliver it to us.
Would we care about the poverty in Africa if, say, Sarah Vowel from NPR held a concert to raise awareness for it with all her other NPR cohorts? No. We need to have it dressed up in $500 Gucci sunglasses while singing a rocking power ballad for us to climb out of our self-isolated shells. And even then we care more about the show than the issues. That is exactly our problem.
The Group of Eight consists of the eight most powerful countries in the world, each with its own ideology and agenda, but the one thing that they have in common is their attraction to the glittered pop star over the NPR disc jockey. They are aware of what is attractive and ignorant of things that aren't.
Terrorism does not just appear out of thin air. It is the result of decades of neglect by community, government and society. It is in these times of neglect that anger builds and illogical and absurdist ideas take root, ideas that could have easily been set straight and corrected, but are not. Why? No one takes notice of places such as the Middle East or Africa unless they have something to offer us, such as oil, gold, or just a good story for the TV news, but by then their problems become almost unmanageable.
Ignorance and terrorism go hand in hand. Had the cowards of Sept. 11 or the most recent London bombings understood the very cause that they were fighting for, they would have realized how ludicrous it was. Hate, violence and terrorism are bred by reinforcing a false mantra, while continuously blocking out any semblance of truth. The scary thing is that ignorance and terrorism form a vicious cycle.
Right now, while the world watches terrorism on an international scale, there is an insurgence of ignorance right in our face. It regards the Muslims and the Quran. While many al-Qaida members terrorize in the name of the Quran, we are making assumptions based on a false pretense. We reinforce a false idea that terrorism and Islam are one and the same.
In actuality, the Quran teaches and preaches peace. It is the terrorists who have skewed the words to fit their own sadistic agendas. Like all religions, there are the radicals who claim to work for the "higher power." Yet, strangely enough, it is the crazies who are brought to our attention --- insane evangelicals to suicide bombers who believe they will be received by a sea of virgins in heaven. But because these crazies are the ones who are prominently displayed, we associate them with the religion. Don't do that!
Muslims shouldn't apologize for rogue lunatics who terrorize in the name of Allah, because to apologize would be to take claim for an action that their religion does not approve of --- much as Christians shouldn't apologize for Timothy McVeigh just because his mother didn't love him.
So what do we do? Isn't that the universal question in life? Teaching leads to understanding, understanding leads to tolerance, tolerance leads to diversity, diversity leads to acceptance and acceptance leads to peace. Is it really that easy? Of course not, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't try, right?
 
* Susan Fang is a third-year art student at the University of Georgia.
New Attitudes is a weekly opinion column written by readers between the ages of 15-22. E-mail submissions or questions to dbeasley@ajc.com or call 404-526-7371.  

Graphic

 
Susan Fang ONLINE FORUM Should ignorance share the blame for terrorism? Weigh in at www.ajc.com/opinion. 

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document