ILLINOIS SENATE OKS DEATH PENALTY FOR TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 6, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO ; Pg. C9
Length: 334 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


The Illinois Senate on Thursday enacted a sweeping law that makes terrorism a death-penalty offense, unanimously snubbing lame-duck Gov. George Ryan's veto.
Ryan, a Republican, had said that Illinois' death-penalty system is error-prone and shouldn't be expanded. The Senate - currently controlled by Ryan's own party - voted 55-0 to override the veto. The House had earlier voted to override, meaning the bill now becomes law.
Ryan and other critics say the death-penalty provision in the terrorism bill was unnecessary, because any conceivable murder committed in the course of terrorism already would probably be covered under the more than 20 types of murder eligible for capital punishment. Murders committed during commission of another felony, for example, are eligible for the death penalty.
But the bill's supporters say a specific reference to terrorism is important in the post-Sept. 11 world.
"This is a situation where you want no ambiguity. You want to make sure every base is covered," said state Sen. Peter Roskam, R-Wheaton, the bill's sponsor. ". . . This is a place where you do want to send a message."
The new law also expands law-enforcement power to eavesdrop on terrorism suspects; makes it easier to get search warrants and seize terrorism-related charitable assets; and requires that DNA samples be taken from those convicted of terrorism.
The Senate on Wednesday also had handed Ryan defeat on the death penalty by approving a capital-punishment reform package that he said didn't do enough to fix a system that has wrongly sent 13 men to death row. Ryan has threatened to veto that bill if the full Legislature passes it, but the House didn't take it up Thursday and is unlikely to next month.
Ryan's term has been marred by scandal and by criticism from within his own party. As the Republicans fight over the death penalty, the GOP is braced to lose almost every lever of government early next month, the result of the Democratic sweep of state government in the elections last month.

Load-Date: December 6, 2002


End of Document