Illinois news in brief
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 1, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 9
Length: 414 words
Body


Undercover FBI agent testifies in Chicago terrorism case
CHICAGO - An undercover FBI agent who played the central role in ensnaring a suburban Chicago man in a terrorism sting testified Tuesday at the 25-year-old's sentencing.
The judge closed the courtroom to protect the agent's identity over objections from the defense and press at Adel Daoud's hearing. Live audio was available in another room. Prosecutors referred to the agent as "Mudafor," the false name he used when he met with Daoud posing as an Islamic militant .
Daoud was arrested in 2012 after trying to detonate an inert bomb he believed would destroy a crowded Chicago bar.
Prosecutors played wiretap recordings of the agent's first meeting with Daoud in 2012. The then-18-year-old Daoud is heard constantly giggling as he boasts about his willingness to kill.
State's attorney opposes special prosecutor in Smollett case
CHICAGO - Chicago's top prosecutor is fighting a push to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate her office's handling of the case against actor Jussie Smollett.
Cook County State's Attorney Kim Foxx says she'd welcome an independent probe into her office's dismissal of felony disorderly conduct charges that accused Smollett of staging a racist and anti-gay attack on himself. But the Chicago Sun-Times reported she filed a motion Tuesday opposing retired appellate judge Sheila O'Brien's demand for a special prosecutor.
In another motion, Foxx seeks to quash O'Brien's subpoenas for her and a top assistant to appear in court Thursday.
Foxx is also seeking permission to allow her office and the county's inspector general access to records in the case that were sealed last month when the charges were dropped.
Chicago police summer strategy: More visibility
CHICAGO - Chicago police will be more visible along the lakefront, in parks and at train stations during the summer months in the hopes of reducing the spike in crime that comes every year when temperatures rise and children are out of school.
And while police on Tuesday didn't offer many specific crime fighting strategies, Superintendent Eddie Johnson says deployment of officers will be driven in large part by data that's collected and intelligence gathered by police. The department will also deploy specialized units to specific areas to combat crime.
And Johnson says department will pay special attention to the unruly youths who have been gathering in the downtown area recent weeks and that offices "will not tolerate misbehavior."

Load-Date: May 3, 2019


End of Document