ILLINOISANS WOULD SACRIFICE SOME LIBERTIES TO AID TERRORISM FIGHT, U OF I SURVEY FINDS ;
 MOST SAY AUTHORITIES ARE DOING A GOOD JOB OF PROTECTING PEOPLE'S RIGHTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 20, 2001 Thursday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C5
Length: 331 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


About seven in 10 Illinois residents are willing to sacrifice some of their civil liberties to help fight terrorism, according to a new survey by the University of Illinois.
About 90 percent of respondents polled by U of I's Institute for Public Affairs here said the government was doing a good job of protecting people's rights while addressing national security concerns.
The university randomly selected 715 adults statewide for the telephone survey conducted Oct. 10 through Nov. 5. The survey has a margin of error of 3.7 percentage points.
Thirty-nine percent strongly agreed that the average person should be willing to give up some civil liberties to curb terrorism in the United States, and 33 percent agreed somewhat.
The poll did not specify what liberties should be sacrificed.
Sean Hogan, assistant director of the survey team, said the university conducted the survey shortly after the start of the military campaign in Afghanistan. He said the question of civil liberties was broadly defined because the government's domestic policy on terrorism hadn't taken shape.
"We didn't really have a clear idea of what the government was contemplating in terms of domestic actions. We didn't know what to ask exactly," he said.
Hogan said the university will likely follow up with a similar survey in winter or spring to see whether attitudes have shifted.
While most people were willing to give up some of their civil liberties, more than one-quarter of respondents said Arab-Americans should surrender more rights than others. Thirteen percent strongly agreed, and 15 percent agreed somewhat that "while we combat terrorism, Arab-Americans must be willing to give up more liberties than other Americans."
People who identified themselves as Republicans were more likely to say that the government was successfully protecting civil liberties. Ninety-seven percent of Republicans said the government was doing a good job, compared with 84 percent of Democrats and 86 percent of Independents.

Load-Date: December 20, 2001


End of Document