ILLINOIS LAWMAKER PREDICTS LEGISLATURE WOULD OVERRIDE VETO OF ANTI-TERRORISM PLAN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 6, 2002 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B1
Length: 359 words
Byline: Christopher Wills The Associated Press
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


Gov. George Ryan's concerns about the death penalty are complicating the future of anti-terrorism legislation that legislators overwhelmingly approved.
Ryan has said he will use his amendatory veto powers to remove part of the bill that allows the death penalty for murders committed in a terrorist act.
But Senate President James "Pate" Philip, R-Wood Dale, predicted Tuesday that legislators would override any such veto. And the bill's chief backer, Attorney General Jim Ryan, wants to keep the death penalty provision.
A decision must be made soon.
If the governor does not act -- whether by signing the bill into law or vetoing it -- the measure automatically becomes law Saturday.
The measure was approved in November. Only one legislator in the two chambers voted "no."
It would give police new power to tap phones and obtain search warrants when investigating possible terrorism. A statewide grand jury could investigate terrorism, and the attorney general could freeze terrorists' assets.
The bill also adds terrorist acts to the list of crimes eligible for the death penalty.
But the Republican governor halted executions two years ago after the courts found that 13 Illinoisans had been wrongly convicted and sent to death row. Ryan appointed a commission to suggest ways of improving Illinois' death penalty procedures.
Ryan said he did not want to sign any law expanding the death penalty while that commission is deliberating.
A spokesman said Attorney General Ryan, who is not related to the governor, opposes any change.
The Illinois governor has the option of rewriting legislation rather than simply signing it or vetoing it.
===
Point of conflict
Legislators approved in November an anti-terrorism measure that would:
* Give police new power to tap phones and obtain search warrants when investigating possible terrorism.
* Authorize investigation of terrorism by a statewide grand jury.
* Permit the attorney general to freeze terrorists' assets.
* Add terrorist acts to the list of crimes eligible for the death penalty.
But Ryan halted executions two years ago after the courts found that 13 Illinoisans had been wrongly convicted and sent to death row.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - Gov. (George) Ryan; Opposes death penalty provision in the bill

Load-Date: February 6, 2002


End of Document