ILLINOIS HOUSE OVERRIDES RYAN ON EXECUTIONS;
 HE VETOED USE OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 20, 2002 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A1
Length: 576 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


Lawmakers handed Gov. George Ryan a setback Tuesday on the death penalty by voting to expand capital punishment in cases of terrorism.
The House vote was taken as Ryan tries to push major reforms to the death penalty through the Legislature in the few weeks remaining before he leaves office. Ryan had used his "amendatory veto" on an anti-terrorism bill to take out a provision that added terrorism-related murders to the list of crimes eligible for the death penalty.
But the House restored the provision by voting 84-30 to override Ryan. He had vetoed the provision on the grounds that some critics say the state already has too many crimes that could result in the death penalty, and that could be a factor in wrongful death sentences.
The terrorism bill now goes to the Senate.
In addition to expanding the death penalty, the measure also would expand police powers to investigate alleged terrorist plots. Ryan and most of the Legislature appear to agree on those parts of the bill.
Some legislators who voted to override the veto said they didn't believe a terrorism bill was the proper place to have the death penalty debate.
"Part of my problem is, I think the governor needs to find the proper place to debate the whole question of reforming the death penalty. I feel like he's overstepping his bounds" by fighting that battle with the terrorism bill, said state Rep. Gary Hannig, D-Litchfield, who voted to override the veto.
"You've got a major piece of legislation out there that deals with terrorism," Hannig said. "We really ought to deal with it on its own merits, and then deal with the issue of reforming the death penalty separately."
An "amendatory" veto is similar to a regular veto except the governor makes specific recommendations for change. The Legislature can accept the recommendations by a simple majority, in which case the bill becomes law. Or lawmakers can vote by a three-fifths majority in both chambers to override the governor and pass the original bill over his objections.
If the Senate also votes to override, then the original bill - including the death penalty provision - will become law. If the Senate fails to override, then the entire bill is dead.
"We're not surprised (by the override). . . . We are a little disappointed," said Ryan's spokesman, Dennis Culloton. "Nonetheless, we remain committed to getting some significant (death penalty) reforms passed this session."
Ryan suspended all executions in Illinois in January 2000 after Illinois courts had freed 13 condemned men. In some cases, evidence showed they were innocent; in others, courts ruled they received unfair trials.
Since then, Ryan - once a fervent death-penalty proponent - has hinted he might commute some or all current death-row inmates to life in prison because of lingering concerns about the validity of capital punishment in Illinois.
Separate legislation may soon be debated in the Senate to directly address a series of reforms recommended by Ryan's death-penalty reform panel this year. The recommendations include requiring police to videotape confessions, new restrictions on how jailhouse snitches and other kinds of evidence can be used, and better training for lawyers and judges.
"They certainly ought to look at the proposals . . . to improve a system that's badly flawed," Ryan said Tuesday. "We almost put 13 innocent people to death. There's an opportunity to clean the system up and make it better."
The anti-terrorism bill is HB2058.

Notes

Reporter Kevin McDermott:; E-mail: kmcdermott@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 217-782-4912  

Load-Date: November 20, 2002


End of Document