ILLINOIS SENATE APPROVES ANTI-TERRORISM PACKAGE;
 HOUSE MAY VOTE TODAY ON THE LEGISLATION PUSHED BY ATTORNEY GENERAL RYAN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 29, 2001 Thursday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C18
Length: 260 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


The Illinois Senate on Wednesday overwhelmingly approved an anti-terrorism package that would expand police and prosecution powers and make terrorism punishable by death.
The measure, which was passed by a 55-0 vote, was created by Attorney General Jim Ryan.
It would give police new powers to eavesdrop on communications of suspected terrorists and seize assets. It would make it a felony, instead of the current misdemeanor, to carry a weapon onto a plane. And it would add terrorism to the list factors that can trigger the death penalty in murder cases.
"The first responsibility of government is to keep people safe," Ryan said. Critics of Ryan's plan have said terrorism is a federal issue, not a state issue, and they have pointed out that Ryan is running for governor next year.
But Ryan said that when there's an emergency, "People are going to turn first to their local police department."
Some civil liberties activists have expressed concern about the bill. The House is expected to vote on it today.
The Senate also Wednesday approved, by a vote of 45-3, an open-meetings measure that would require public officials to certify that they did not conduct illegal business during closed-door meetings.
The state's Open Meetings Act says that only certain issues can be discussed secretly by city councils and other public bodies. Under the new measure, the officer presiding over an executive session would have to certify that the session did not cover topics that should be discussed publicly.
The terrorism bill is HB 2299.
The open meetings bill is HB 3098.

Load-Date: November 29, 2001


End of Document