Images from 9/11 troubling but relevant; Bush administration's response to terrorism is a legitimate issue in the presidential campaign
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 7, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a16
Length: 281 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


The first television commercials promoting President Bush's re-election campaign rolled out last week, and they immediately generated controversy.
The commercials include images from Sept. 11, 2001, a date that changed U.S. history and American life forever.
The terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, as well as the hijacked jet's crash in Pennsylvania, are events and images burnished in our national psyche.
The Bush administration's response to those events- and, to a lesser degree, prior to them - and its performance in the nearly 21/2 years since then are legitimate issues in the presidential campaign. The outcome of the election might well hinge on voters' assessment of Bush's performance and leadership on those issues, including the war in Iraq.
Some relatives of 9/11 victims, as well as a firefighters union, have objected to the Bush campaign showing images from that tragic day in the commercials. They consider it opportunistic. (The union complaining the most has already endorsed the president's probable opponent, Sen. John Kerry.)
While some people - the victims and their families - suffered a greater loss than others, the events of that day are a shared national tragedy.
Indeed, some relatives of 9/11 victims applauded Bush's commercials. One, Debra Burlingame, said, "These images honor those whose lives were lost."
It should not be up to a few people to decide what the president may and may not show the American people. It will be up to the American voter to decide that.
Editorials reflect the consensus of the Telegraph Herald Editorial Board: Brian Cooper (chairman), Ken Brown, Libby Burkhart, Monty Gilles, Amy Gilligan and Jim Normandin.

Load-Date: March 7, 2004


End of Document