Imam at center of mosque furor; Rauf has represented U.S. abroad and trained FBI agents about Islam
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 23, 2010 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-05
Length: 473 words
Body


 To people skeptical of Feisal Abdul Rauf, the New York imam is a wolf in sheep's clothing who claims to be building a monument to tolerance near ground zero but is actually an apologist for radical, anti-American Muslims.
 To those who have worked with him in the interfaith community, the white-bearded Sufi is a visionary for peace and progressive Islam, an American patriot who has toiled for decades to build bridges between this country and like-minded Muslims around the world.
 Rauf, 61, is the product of unusual circumstances.
 Rocketed to prominence after the Sept. 11 attacks by government and interfaith leaders interested in moderate Muslims, the former industrial filter salesman won a book contract and jobs representing the State Department in the Muslim world and training FBI agents in Islam. In a matter of few years, he went from a well-liked leader of a small New York prayer group to an internationally known figure.
 "After Sept. 11, when we were all afraid, Imam Feisal was one of the people who stood up for American Muslims who totally rejected terrorism. He built a significant network of Christian and Jewish supporters," said Randall Benn, a D.C. attorney and interfaith activist who has worked as Rauf's Washington adviser for about two years. "It was where he was, and the power of his ideas, that made him big."
 Rauf is the grandson and son of imams. His father, Muhammad Abdul Rauf, was born in Egypt and ran the Islamic Cultural Center on E. 96th Street in Manhattan and the Islamic Center of Washington on Massachusetts Avenue - both early important institutions for Muslim emigrants that are run by representatives of Muslim countries.
 Rauf was educated in England, Egypt and Malaysia before moving as a teenager to the United States, where he got degrees in physics from Columbia University and the Stevens Institute of Technology in New Jersey.
 As is not uncommon for Muslim-American imams, Rauf has no formal religious education, and initially explored other careers. According to a Web site he runs, he taught remedial reading in Harlem until he was laid off during the city's fiscal crisis in the mid-1970s, and sold industrial filters for a New Jersey company before taking the job to oversee the mosque at 225 W. Broadway in 1983.
 Rauf has been criticized for comments such as the one he made in June when asked if he agreed with the State Department's assessment of Hamas as a terrorist organization.
 "I'm not a politician. I try to avoid the issues. The issue of terrorism is a very complex question," he told New York's WABC radio. "I do not want to be placed, nor do I accept to be placed in a position of being put in a position where I am the target of one side or another."
 He went on to say that he sees targeting civilians as a sin in Islam and that he is a supporter of the state of Israel.

Graphic

 
PHOTOS

Load-Date: August 25, 2010


End of Document