IMMIGRATION AIDES SEEK MONEY TO STOP TERRORISTS
The New York Times
September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 620 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6
Body


The Immigration and Naturalization Service is proposing major new programs in two areas: to prevent terrorists from entering the United States and to capture and expel aliens who sell illegal drugs or commit other crimes in this country.
The proposals were outlined in budget documents prepared by the immigration service, in a report to be submitted to Congress by the agency, and in interviews with officials of the immigration service and the Justice Department.
The report says that in recent years ''76 percent of all aliens under final orders of deportation failed to surrender when directed to do so,'' and it describes this figure as ''alarming.'' Nationwide, according to the report, the immigration service has the names of 42,200 aliens convicted of crimes and 92,800 aliens suspected of crimes, obtained from Federal, state and local law-enforcement agencies.
Fewer than 8,500 criminal aliens were deported in the last two years, the report said. All aliens, even those convicted of serious crimes, are entitled to a series of administrative hearings and judicial appeals before they can be deported, the report notes.
The immigration agency is seeking $17 million and 290 new employees for its effort to ''stop international terrorists before they set foot on American soil,'' according to the confidential budget documents. The request marks the first time that the Government has explicitly invoked terrorism as a reason for stepping up enforcement of the immigration laws.
Some of the proposals are subject to approval by Congress; others can be carried out by the immigration service alone.
Despite the general climate of fiscal austerity in Washington, the Justice Department's component agencies, including the immigration service and the Drug Enforcement Administration, have proposed to increase spending on drug enforcement by 29.5 percent, to $745 million in the fiscal year 1988, which starts in Oct. 1, 1987.
 
'A Threat to Well-Being'
Justice Department officials said the proposals were part of President Reagan's campaign against the use of illegal drugs.
In the report, the immigration service says a ''growing number of criminal aliens pose a threat to the well-being and security of citizens throughout the United States.''
The report says that despite the ''staggering'' workload of criminal alien cases, the immigration service has 26 percent fewer investigators today than in 1976. The number declined to 690 from 935.
In its budget request, the immigration agency said it was ''in a unique position to combat terrorism because it is the single agency in the Federal Government'' best equipped to keep foreign terrorists from entering.
''Immigration inspectors at ports of entry and Border Patrol agents between ports are the nation's first line of defense against terrorism,'' it said.
The immigration service is seeking 110 additional inspectors, at a cost of $4.7 million a year, for its antiterrorist program. In addition, it is seeking $4.3 million in additional funds for the Border Patrol, $3.9 million to fight alien smuggling rings, $1.7 million for intelligence and $1.6 million for computer and communications equipment.
The immigration service currently does not have any resources specially earmarked for combating terrorism, nor did it count the number of terrorism suspects among the 1.2 million illegal aliens apprehended last year. Verne Jervis, a spokesman for the immigration agency, said the number was probably ''no more than 20.''
The number of terrorist incidents in the United States has declined for several years, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, after rising from 42 in 1981 to 51 in 1982. They declined to 31 in 1983, 13 in 1984 and 7 in 1985, the bureau said.


End of Document