In '01, Bremer derided Bush officials on terror;
Months before 9;
11, the man who is now Iraq's civilian
chief said that only a major attack would grab their attention.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 1, 2004 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 265 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


L. Paul Bremer, the U.S. administrator in Iraq, said in a speech six months before the Sept. 11 attacks that the Bush administration was "paying no attention" to terrorism.
"What they will do is stagger along until there's a major incident and then suddenly say, 'Oh, my God, shouldn't we be organized to deal with this,' " Bremer said at a McCormick Tribune Foundation conference on terrorism Feb. 26, 2001.
Bremer spoke at the conference shortly after he chaired the National Commission on Terrorism, a bipartisan body formed by the Clinton administration to examine U.S. counterterrorism policies.
On Thursday - the same day Bush and Vice President Cheney met with the Sept. 11 commission to explain what precautions they took to prevent a terrorist attack after taking office in January 2001 - White House spokesman Scott McClellan did not comment on the Bremer remarks directly.
But he said: "The actions we took prior to Sept. 11 demonstrate that we took the terrorist threat seriously. The first major foreign-policy directive was a comprehensive, aggressive strategy to eliminate al-Qaeda."
The foundation is a charitable organization founded by Robert McCormick, former editor and publisher of the Chicago Tribune.
At the speech, delivered in Wheaton, Ill., Bremer, whose diplomatic jobs included a stint as ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism, said a war against terrorism would be unending.
"If you call it a war, you suggest there's a victory," he said. "I would argue there is no final victory in the war against terrorism any more than there is in the so-called war against crime."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
L. Paul Bremer had chaired the National Commission on Terrorism before he spoke out against the White House on Feb. 26, 2001.

Load-Date: August 25, 2005


End of Document