IN 3 LANDS, FAULT FOR BOMB IS ELSEWHERE
The New York Times
April 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 800 words
Byline: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, April 5
Body


Since the bombing Wednesday of an American airliner, Italy, Greece and Egypt have been reacting in turn defensively, cautiously and angrily at the idea that they might once again have to bear a major burden of blame.
Typical of the mood of the three nations, which have themselves suffered more than their share of terrorist violence, was the Greek Government's reaction to Italy's decision to send eight Italian police experts to Athens to look into the bombing, which killed four Americans and wounded nine other passengers on a Trans World Airlines flight from Rome to Athens.
At a news conference in Athens today, Kostas Tsimas, secretary general of the Ministry of Public Order, insisted that neither the Italians nor agents of the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation were involved in the investigation as such.
''The investigation is being carried out by Greek police,'' Mr. Tsimas said. ''The others are here as observers. If they are not satisfied by our investigations, they can do their own afterwards.''
Italy Points to Egypt
A similar exchange took place between Italy and Egypt on the source of the bomb itself.
On Thursday, the Italian Interior Minister, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, announced that Italy suspected that the bomb had been placed on the plane by a passenger who went from Cairo to Athens on an earlier flight and later flew to Beirut, Lebanon. The passenger was later identified as a woman traveling on a Lebanese passport.
Mr. Scalfaro's announcement was greeted here with something approaching relief, since it seemed to absolve Italy from responsibility.
That feeling was evident in Italian newspaper headlines today. ''The Bomb Came From Cairo,'' the Rome daily La Repubblica declared in its main front-page headline.
The first reaction from Egypt to Mr. Scalfaro's statement was angry and mocking. The idea that the bomb was carried on board in Cairo was ''silly and unworthy of a reply,'' a spokesman for the Egyptian Government said.
Today, Egypt's Minister of Tourism, Fouad Sultan, said: ''Any investigation will prove that this bomb could not have been carried in Cairo. We are applying very tight security measures at Cairo airport.''
 
T.W.A. Is Also Criticized
The desire to spread responsibility also extended to criticism of T.W.A.
For instance, Il Messaggero, a Rome daily, reported today that T.W.A. had hired a private security company called Flashpol to check the plane and passengers in Rome. According to the paper, the company had manual detectors to search for bombs and explosives, but did not have dogs, who can sniff for explosives.
In Greece and Italy, frustration is especially high because both countries have taken major steps to improve security at their airports, and controls are now unusually rigorous.
''There is an atmosphere of hysteria,'' said the Greek Foreign Minister, Karolos Papoulias. He quoted the Secretary of State George P. Shultz as saying he felt ''very safe'' during his visit to Athens last month.
Mr. Papoulias said Greece had one of the lowest rates of terrorist incidents in the world.
 
Fears Termed Exaggerated
Antonio Badini, the top diplomatic counselor to Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy, voiced similar feelings, saying foreigners' fears about security in the Mediterranean were ''exaggerated,'' though understandable.
''We took a lot of measures to reinforce security and control at the airport, and Athens has too,'' Mr. Badini said. ''We thought our controls were so strict that it would be impossible to put a bomb on an airplane.''
Mr. Badini said he still doubted the bomb was put on the plane in Italy, but added, ''If we discover the responsibility is ours, we will assume it.''
He also said an upsurge in terrorism was galvanizing European opinion in favor of tougher anti-terrorist measures.
 
Nations 'Rethinking Position'
''A lot of countries that did not want to cooperate fully are now rethinking their position,'' he said.
Earlier this week, President Francois Mitterrand said he was no longer opposed to a United States proposal for an initiative on terrorism at the meeting of industrial nations in Tokyo next month. Mr. Mitterrand was described as being angry over the kidnapping of a four-man French television crew in Beirut.
In an interview with the Italian magazine Panorama made public today, Defense Minister Giovanni Spadolini of Italy said recent events showed that Europe should take a stronger stand against what he called ''the crescent of international terrorism whose roots are predominantly Arab-Islamic.''
''We cannot be equidistant, we cannot put ourselves midway between Washington and Qaddafi,'' Mr. Spadolini said, referring to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, whom Washington has accused of involvement in terrorism. ''Italy and Europe must assume their share of the responsibility.''

Graphic

 
Photo of investigators standing outside plane (Reuters)


End of Document