In America;
Terrorism by the Book
The New York Times
November 30, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 9; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Column 5;; Op-Ed
Length: 696 words
Byline: By BOB HERBERT

By BOB HERBERT
Body


A copy of the decree, translated from Arabic, was given to me by human rights workers in New York who are providing assistance to women fighting against the extreme terror in parts of Algeria. The decree explains, in gruesomely explicit terms, the protocol that is to be followed by terrorists who abduct women for the purpose of raping them.
A brief sampling:
* "Brothers must not hit her, save the one to whom she has been offered."
* "If a mother and daughter have been captured together and you possessed the mother, you therefore must not also possess the daughter."
And so on.
The decree, widely attributed to a faction of the Armed Islamic Group, which has been responsible for some of the worst violence in Algeria, was posted in villages where scores and perhaps hundreds of people have been massacred and large numbers of women and girls abducted and raped.
When filtered through news reports, the accounts of such atrocities seem not quite real. You turn the page of the newspaper or magazine and even the slightest hint of the imagined terror vanishes. There is a crossword puzzle to do or television listings to read. The mind no longer has to deal with the carnage and the trauma of wholesale decapitations, or bombings in public places, or teachers being murdered in classrooms in full view of hysterical students, or the disbelief and concurrent despair of parents forced to watch as their daughters are carried into the night by terrorists.
These may be crimes against humanity, sure. But few people really want to think about them.
Inevitably, there are those who insist that we pay attention.
Rhonda Copelon is the director of the International Women's Human Rights Law Clinic at the City University of New York. Working with the Center for Constitutional Rights, also in New York, and two private law firms, she filed a Federal lawsuit some months ago on behalf of several Algerian activists, most of them women, who have been victims of the terror.
The suit, filed in Washington, is an effort to fix responsibility for at least some of the atrocities. The defendants are the Islamic Salvation Front (or F.I.S., its French acronym), which is the main political party of the Islamic militants in Algeria, and Anwar Haddam, the so-called representative-in-exile of the F.I.S. in the United States.
The suit was filed under the Alien Tort Claims Act and the Torture Victim Protection Act, which give the Federal courts jurisdiction in certain cases involving foreign victims of torture and other violations of international law and U.S. treaties.
While the suit seeks monetary damages, its true value lies in the fact that it gives a voice here in the United States to victims who are unable to be heard in Algeria. And it brings the reality of the Algerian tragedy closer to Americans who might not otherwise be aware of it.
One of the plaintiffs is a woman whose son, after speaking out against the F.I.S., was assassinated. Another is a woman whose husband and brother-in-law were murdered by F.I.S. supporters. A third is a woman who was kidnapped and gang-raped by terrorists when she was 17.
Mr. Haddam has been in the United States since 1993. He raised money and otherwise promoted the F.I.S. while seeking political asylum here on the grounds -- hold on to your hat -- that he was a victim of persecution. He was denied asylum last year and has since been in Federal custody pending possible deportation. He is appealing the asylum decision.
Ironically, the F.I.S. has come to be seen by many as a moderating force in the Algerian turmoil that has taken more than 60,000 lives since 1992. And Mr. Haddam has repeatedly denied that he was involved in any terror activity.
But Ms. Copelon and other human rights workers have pointed out that the F.I.S. has for years been entwined with groups that are openly dedicated to the establishment of an Islamic state through violence and terror, and to the ruthless subjugation of women. And Mr. Haddam has time and again expressed his public support of specific terrorist attacks and what he describes as the "armed struggle."
According to Mr. Haddam, all of the armed groups come from the same "womb, and that womb is F.I.S."

Load-Date: November 30, 1997


End of Document