In Argentina, a New Security Apparatus Resurrects Old Fears
The New York Times
September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 623 words
Byline: By CALVIN SIMS, 

By CALVIN SIMS,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Sept. 9
Body


President Carlos Saul Menem has created a security agency to oversee the military, the police and the intelligence-gathering services in emergencies, reviving memories of a time when an all-powerful military terrorized the country.
Since its formation, one day after the terrorist bombing of a Jewish community center here in July, the agency has been shrouded in secrecy, raising concerns here that it could be used to harass or intimidate opponents.
While the Government of Mr. Menem is considered one of the most democratic in Argentina in decades, human rights groups, opposition political parties and even members of his Cabinet have assailed the so-called Super Secretariat as potentially repressive and authoritarian.
For them, it resurrects images of the "Dirty War" in the late 1970's when more than 10,000 people are estimated to have disappeared after the military seized power and carried out a repressive campaign against leftist guerrillas and opposition forces.
"This is but one more example of what has always happened in Argentina: facing a real and concrete necessity -- in this case the fight against international terrorism -- the military is used to render the common individual totally defenseless against the powers of the state," said Martin Abregu, director for human rights at the Center for Legal and Social Studies, a leading rights organization here.
A ranking official of Mr. Menem's Peronist Party said: "The danger resides in the potential for abuse of power when you centralize authority. It is as if in the United States, the F.B.I. decided that all the states' internal security depended on them."
President Menem appointed his friend Andres Antonietti, a retired air force general, to head the security agency, which has authority over 60,000 people in the federal police, the border police, the river police and the coast guard.
Mr. Antonietti also serves as chairman of the Internal Security Council, which includes the Ministers of Interior, Defense and Foreign Affairs, the Secretary of State Intelligence and the Chiefs of Staff of the three armed services, with 73,000 people.
While it appears that Mr. Antonietti has ultimate operational control of the country's various security forces, the true extent of his authority is uncertain. Officials of the Menem administration did not return telephone calls seeking information on the new security initiative, which is still being organized.
Speaking on the condition of anonymity, a Government official close to Mr. Menem said the Government needed an central authority to react quickly to terrorist attacks and regional uprisings, like the one in the province of Santiago del Estero in December.
The official said Mr. Menem believed that Argentina's security forces had reacted too slowly in crisis situations and were ill-equipped to handle the attack on the Jewish community center, in which about 100 people were killed.
Some critics of the agency say that it is just the latest example of the Menem administration's trampling on personal freedoms, citing recent legislation proposed by Justice Minister Rodolfo Barra and a Menem-sponsored anti-terrorism bill that would grant the police greater powers, like the ability to raids homes without warrants.
"If you link the creation of this security secretariat with these other proposals, then I would say that this Government is favoring repression instead of prevention," said Horacio Jaunarena, a member of Congress from the opposition Radical Party who served as Defense Minister in the administration of Raul Alfonsin, Mr. Menem's predecessor.
"I believe when there is an accumulation of power in few individuals, this produces a loss of public liberties and constitutional guarantees," Mr. Jaunarena said.

Load-Date: September 11, 1994


End of Document