In Algeria Now, No Appeal in Terrorist Cases
The New York Times
October 15, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 537 words
Byline: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,

By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 10
Body


In another move by Algeria's military-backed Government to eliminate legal recourse for its opponents, the country's head of state has signed a measure into law allowing sentences ranging from five years in prison to death without right of appeal for people accused of terrorism.
The new law appears to have been drafted for use in a campaign of "iron cleansing" that Government officials have vowed to put into force in the next few weeks with the aid of special security forces. The campaign may go as far as imposing curfews in the capital and in the rebellious province of Blida as well as the provinces of Tipasa, Boumerdas and Bouira.
The military-civilian Government ruling Algeria under emergency decree has imprisoned thousands of supporters of the Islamic Salvation Front since it began a crackdown on the Muslim fundamentalist movement in February. But until now it had maintained a semblance of quasi-legal procedure, allowing imprisoned militants to hire defense lawyers and to appeal their sentences, even though such appeals were generally ignored.
The new measure, which leaves no room for appeal for people accused of terrorism, was signed by Ali Kafi, head of the Supreme State Council, days after the Government announced that the Islamic Salvation Front was responsible for a bombing at the Algiers airport on Aug. 26. At least 10 people were killed and 124 wounded.
Many Algerians were startled by the Government's assertion and by the airing of confessions from four of the accused on television recently. But the announcement left many others only more cynical about what they view as machinations by the Government to avoid a dialogue with its Muslim fundamentalist opponents.
Experts on Algerian affairs said that by showing four men identified as members of the Islamic movement confessing on television that they planned and carried out the bombing, the Government had effectively eliminated any chance of a "dialogue" with Islamic militants to end the nation's cycle of violence. Nearly 200 army and police officers and soldiers have been killed since the Government's crackdown on the movement began in February.
"The question that must be asked is to what degree the security apparatus's 'iron cleansing' can succeed without widening the circle of popular discontent and enmity to the Government," Qossai Saleh Darwish, an expert on Arab affairs who has studied and lived in Algeria, wrote in a front-page commentary in the Saudi daily Asharq al Awsat.
The Algerian Government's anti-terrorist law reflects the secrecy and ambiguity with which Algeria's leadership is increasingly ruling the country, with decisions made by fiat without a constitutional basis.
President Kafi appears to have effectively abandoned an offer of national dialogue he made in early September, a few days after the airport bombing. The overture did not stir much enthusiasm among opposition parties or citizens, who seem to be growing more suspicious about the Government's intentions each day.
One of the accused men shown on the Algerian television segment, Hocine Abderahim, a former aide to the imprisoned leader of the Islamic Salvation Front, Abassi Madani, said "we were seeking a political impact" through the bombing.

Load-Date: October 15, 1992


End of Document