IN COMBATTING TERRORISM, THE U.S. TAKES A NEW TACK / AUTHORITIES ARE TAKING A PAGE FROM ORGANIZED-CRIME PROSECUTIONS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 11, 1998 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. E01
Length: 1755 words
Byline: Henry Goldman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Wadih el Hage, a slender, bearded Texan of Lebanese descent, walked into a federal courtroom here last week facing relatively minor charges of lying about his contacts with the organization run by accused terrorist leader Osama bin Laden.
He walked out in much deeper trouble after prosecutors surprised him with a 48-page indictment charging that he and three others were part of a conspiracy to murder American soldiers and civilians all over the world.
That indictment, fashioned on a model similar to organized-crime and drug prosecutions, provides the first glimpse of a U.S. law enforcement strategy to go after bin Laden's terrorist organization for a lot more than its alleged role in the Aug. 7 bombings of U.S embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Instead, prosecutors say, the bombings were merely the latest murderous acts either financed or committed by bin Laden's al Qaeda group during a decade-long jihad, or holy war. Prosecutors say they have established links between bin Laden's organization and terrorists already convicted of the 1990 assassination of Jewish Defense League founder Rabbi Meir Kahane and of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center in Manhattan.
"They're going after the whole kit and kaboodle," said Steven Emerson, an author and expert on Middle East terrorism, who compared this case with the prosecution of the World Trade Center bombing. Several people, including Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, were convicted of furthering a conspiracy that involved several terrorist acts dating to 1989.
"It's the organized-crime attitude here - a group of people involved in furthering a conspiracy, and it's eight years old," Emerson said.
More than 30 al Qaeda members have been arrested or charged in the aftermath of the Aug. 7 embassy bombings, which killed 263 people, including 12 Americans, and wounded more than 5,500. On Friday, Lewis D. Schiliro, assistant director in charge of the New York FBI office, said more arrests and indictments could be expected.
The speed with which authorities have made arrests and gathered information, Schiliro said, was partly the result of information gathered during two years of investigation into bin Laden by the FBI and CIA. That, and international cooperation and some blunders by bin Laden's operatives, helped crack the case swiftly, he said.
In contrast, other deadly truck bombings of American targets - including attacks on U.S. Marines and the U.S. embassy in Beirut in 1983 and the bombings of a U.S. military installation in Saudi Arabia in 1996 - have never been officially solved.
"When you can key in on people responsible for a crime at the outset, it does help the investigation proceed at a rapid pace," Schiliro said of the bin Laden investigation. "There were a lot of interviews, a lot of leads were covered. It's very similar to how we would manage an investigation in this country. Just some good old-fashioned police work."
Within two days of the bombings, the FBI had 200 agents on the ground in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, Schiliro said. It was the largest overseas use of FBI agents in the bureau's history.
The CIA probe began in 1996, when the agency's Counterterrorist Center, in cooperation with the FBI, created a bin Laden "station" to monitor the terrorist's international operations. That year, federal prosecutors impaneled a grand jury in New York to hear evidence of suspected crimes that he and his organization committed.
Bin Laden became the focus of scrutiny after he issued a fatwah, or decree, in 1992 calling on Muslims to kill Americans stationed in Somalia. In February, he said all "Muslims should kill Americans - including civilians - anywhere in the world where they can be found," said a federal indictment issued last week.
"We must use such punishment to keep your evil away from Muslims," bin Laden said in an interview in Afghanistan with ABC News last year. "We do not differentiate between those dressed in military uniforms and civilians. They are all targets in this fatwah."
When the CIA began scrutinizing him, bin Laden had been running his organization for seven years. He set up headquarters in Afghanistan and Pakistan in 1989, then moved to Sudan in 1992. Four years later, he returned the headquarters to Afghanistan, where authorities say he has camps - built originally to train anti-Soviet guerrillas - that for several years have trained Islamic fundamentalists in bomb-making and other acts of terrorism.
He began al Qaeda ("the base") as an outgrowth of the mekhtab al khidemat, or the Services Office, which portrayed itself as a worldwide Afghan refugee relief organization. Its U.S. headquarters were the Alkifah Refugee Center in Brooklyn, later identified as a site that conspirators in the World Trade Center bombing used.
Bin Laden is the 17th of 52 siblings born to a Saudi family with wealth estimated at more than $5 billion. The family is so prominent that its construction company built a U.S. Air Force base in the Saudi Arabian desert - a project required after a June 1996 blast destroyed the Khobar Towers apartment complex near the old base, killing 19 U.S. servicemen. That bombing has never been solved, but authorities now suspect al Qaeda was responsible.
Although bin Laden is reportedly estranged from his family, some estimates put his personal wealth at up to $200 million. He has investments in more than 60 companies, ranging from gum arabic - an ingredient in candy - to banking to pharmaceuticals. Investigators say he has used his wealth to set up businesses and charities around the world that finance and act as covers for terrorist activity.
Criminal complaints filed in the aftermath of the Kenya and Tanzania bombings charge that bin Laden spent time and money trying to procure weapons and sell them to Islamic fighters all over the world, including the militia that attacked and killed 18 American soldiers in Mogadishu, Somalia, in 1993.
A complaint against al Qaeda operative Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, now under arrest in Germany, alleges that he and others tried to obtain nuclear-weapons components in Sudan and elsewhere that same year.
"We knew that bin Laden was up to no good for some time, and the events in East Africa gave us the justification we needed for picking up these people," said Gene Gately, a retired CIA official who is vice president of the Institute for the Study of Terrorism, headquartered in Washington.
Some information was gathered by the federal grand jury in New York, which interviewed el Hage as early as Sept. 24, 1997. Although he has been charged with lying to the grand jury, authorities say privately that he also provided truthful information, perhaps inadvertently, that helped further the investigation.
Other information was obtained through surveillance, and some was acquired through at least one confidential source within al Qaeda, according to criminal complaints supporting arrests of individuals in the case. Still more information flooded in, hours after the bombing, when authorities arrested two suspects.
Mohamed Sadeek Odeh, a Palestinian from Jordan and a longtime bin Laden aide, was arrested upon stepping off a flight from Kenya to Karachi, Pakistan, the day of the Nairobi bombing. With a fresh shave and new clothes, he reportedly tried to enter Pakistan on a Yemeni passport showing a bearded man who did not resemble him.
Detained and questioned, he was returned to Kenya and arrested by the FBI.
Mohammed Rashed Daoud Al-Owhali, who authorities say was in the truck that carried the bomb to the Nairobi embassy, was arrested after receiving treatment for lacerations the day of the blast. The FBI says he told an agent he never expected to survive the blast.
Each suspect talked to FBI interrogators after being warned that they had a right to remain silent, according to complaints supporting their arrests.
"A skillful interrogator is worth his weight in gold," Gately said. Based on his CIA experience, he speculated about how agents elicited information from the two:
"One person says something, and then they play on that information to go to the next person, and back and forth. And then suspects begin to think we know more than we really do, and little by little, back and forth, we put together a mosaic that completes the picture."
According to the criminal complaint against Odeh, he told the FBI that he had been an al Qaeda member since 1992, and had learned how to make explosives in Afghanistan in 1993. He also said he had trained Islamic militia fighters in Somalia, and had lived in Kenya since 1994. Though denying he had participated in the actual bombing in Nairobi, he said he believed that al Qaeda was responsible.
Al-Owhali, an Egyptian in his early 20s, allegedly told the FBI that he was a passenger in the bomb truck and that he threw a grenade-like device at a guard during the embassy attack. He said that he had received training in explosives, kidnapping and hijacking at one of bin Laden's Afghanistan camps and had entered Kenya on a flight from Lahore, Pakistan, on July 31.
FBI agents say they recovered two keys that fit the padlock on the back of the bomb truck and three bullets for a gun Al-Owhali left in a bathroom at the hospital where he was treated. The bullets came from a gun he said he had tossed aside at the embassy.
Authorities say Odeh and Al-Owhali not only gave information about their roles, but named others.
El Hage, a tire-store owner in Fort Worth, Texas, who is married to an American and has seven children, is described by federal investigators as a high-ranking operative in al Qaeda who communicates with bin Laden and others by code.
El Hage last year denied to the grand jury that he knew Odeh and said he did not recognize Odeh's photograph. But during interrogation in Kenya, FBI agents say Odeh described el Hage as "a very close old friend, like an older brother."
Two co-conspirators in the case, identified by the FBI only as CC-1 and CC-2, provided information about the fourth man named in the New York indictment: Fazul Abdullah Mohammed, also known as Harun Fazil.
FBI agents said that interviews with CC-1 and CC-2 disclosed that Fazil had rented a villa in Nairobi where investigators later found powder believed to be used to make a bomb, and that Fazil had received training in explosives. Using phone records, agents traced Fazil to his home in Comoros, off the coast of East Africa. He was gone by the time agents arrived, and he remains a fugitive.
In New York, the other three - Odeh, el Hage and Al-Owhali - are being held without bail.

Graphic

 
MAP AND CHART

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document