IN CAPITAL, LEGISLATORS CALL FOR MORE SECURITY
The New York Times
September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 629 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20
Body


Congressional reaction to the bombing of the United States Embassy in Beirut today ranged from criticism of security measures to calls for stronger efforts to eradicate international terrorism.
Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, the ranking minority member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said he thought security at the annex was ''clearly inadequate.''
''We seemingly need to change our approach to security of American embassies,'' Senator Nunn added.
Senator Nunn, one of a number of legislators who attended a State Department briefing on the suicide attack, said the United States has ''got a long way to go to protect our embassies. We need to beef up intelligence.''
Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachussetts, the Speaker of the House, said it appeared to him that ''we were not prepared and we didn't have proper and sufficient barriers there.''
Senator Bob Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, chairman of the foreign operations subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, said he would work ''to make sure we have more security, perhaps more Marines.''
He recommended ''some sort of system of gates or automatic security devices. We can't depend only on human beings. There are things that could have been done at this new facility that would have prevented this.''
 
Funding Requests Expected
Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, said he had been given the impression at the briefing that there would be ''requests for additional funds'' to improve security.
Senator Daniel J. Evans, Republican of Washington, said security precautions were ''stronger than they've been in the past'' but still not enough. He recommended a remote-controlled barrier so that the guards at the gate would not be the last line of defense against a suicide attack.
Senator Evans said it was ironic that the last American marines left Lebanon only last month. ''Our security was not as great as it otherwise might have been,'' he said.
Senator David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, said that ''the bottom line is this, we must increase our security. There must be a barrier between the checkpoint and the embassy.''
Senator Dan Quayle, Republican of Indiana, called for action against terrorists, saying, ''Eradicating international terrorism must continue to be the top priority for the United States and the entire international community.''
 
'Failure' of Intervention
Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, said the attack ''must increase our resolve to contribute to a peaceful settlement to the problems that plague Lebanon. We should have learned a painful lesson about the failure of American military intervention in the region.''
''This Administration must redouble its diplomatic efforts if we are to help bring peace to this war-torn country,'' Senator Hart said.
Stating that he would not attempt to make the incident a partisan political issue, Mr. O'Neill said the United States should maintain its diplomatic presence in Lebanon and should not be intimidated by the bombing.
The Speaker said he would reach no final conclusion about the adequacy of security until he received more information.
 
Direct Retaliation Favored
By The Associated Press
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said that ''the time has come'' for direct retaliation for the attack on the United States Embassy in Beirut.  ''They've got to learn we mean to retaliate when things like this happen,'' the New York Democrat said yesterday on the WNBC program ''Live at Five.'' Interviewed from Washington, Senator Moynihan, said he realized it would not be easy to ferret out those responsible for the bombing.  He added: ''We don't know where they are, we don't know who they are, but we know they are there. We can retaliate, and the time has come for us to find these people.''


End of Document