IN EUROPE, P.L.O. COMES UNDER CLOSE WATCH
The New York Times
April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 895 words
Byline: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, April 12
Body


In a period of heightened vigilance against terrorism in Europe, Palestine Liberation Organization offices in 18 non-Communist countries are under close scrutiny by security and intelligence agencies.
European and other officials say there is a dual purpose: to insure that those representing the P.L.O. in Europe carry out only their official functions, and to protect them against possible attacks by Palestinians opposed to Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader.
In Greece, Cyprus, Turkey and Malta, the P.L.O. offices have diplomatic status equivalent to that of embassies. Officials have diplomatic immunity and are entitled to encode their communications and use diplomatic pouches that are not subject to inspection by host governments.
In France, Italy, Switzerland and Austria, the organization enjoys similar rights as an accredited observer to international organizations there.
 
Information Offices
Elsewhere, the missions are designated as information offices - in Belgium, Britain, Denmark, Finland, West Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Spain, although Spanish officials announced March 22 that they would grant the P.L.O. office in Madrid diplomatic status. In some of those countries, the offices are part of the missions of the Arab League and thus have access to some diplomatic prerogatives.
There was a time when the P.L.O. was the main focus of counterintelligence to prevent Palestinian terrorist acts, according to an American expert on terrorism in a Western capital. Now, he said, concerned agencies are struggling to keep track of more shadowy groups and ad hoc plots.
In recent days, for example, the United States has asked Western European nations, as well as those in the Middle East, to increase security for American diplomats because of concern over the possibility of Libyan acts of revenge in the wake of fighting in waters off Libya between American naval forces and Libya.
 
Most Terrorism in Europe
According to the Project on Terrorism of the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University, terrorist acts attributed to Palestinians last year more than doubled in number over 1984, from 32 to 67. The center said Al Fatah, the P.L.O. group that Mr. Arafat heads, carried out 13 of these actions. It also said that 48 of the 67 acts took place in Europe.
For the time being, Government officials in various countries said, Mr. Arafat's European representatives seem to be following the P.L.O. leader's emphasis on conducting political actions and not terror attacks outside Israel and the territories it occupies.
But security officials in several capitals contended that whatever the present attitude toward terrorism by Mr. Arafat's mainstream followers, several of the organization's European representatives have been at least indirectly implicated in terrorist acts.
 
Recruiting Activity Reported
David Kimche, director general of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, said in an interview in Jerusalem that people attached to P.L.O. offices in Europe were preparing a suppprt structure for terrorist operations. He described this activity as recruiting, renting safehouses, providing identity documents, choosing potential targets and collecting operational intelligence.
According to Prof. Paul Wilkinson of Aberdeen University in Scotland, a specialist in Palestinian movements, ''there are several kinds of people employed in P.L.O. offices,'' and ''they are all ready to do violence.''
European and Israeli officials and scholars who specialize in Palestinian affairs said each P.L.O. mission in Europe had on its staff a specialist in clandestine operations, including terrorism.
''In all of our offices we have representatives of different Palestinian organizations,'' said Massoud Ghandour, the P.L.O. diplomatic representative in Greece. He contended that all employees followed the political line laid down by Mr. Arafat and Farouk Kaddoumi, head of the P.L.O.'s political wing.
All P.L.O. representatives in Europe described their activities as political, educational and cultural. ''The P.L.O. has now finally turned against terrorism,'' Mr. Ghandour said. He said the P.L.O. was ready to offer its assistance to governments.
''We would cooperate with anybody against terrorism - if you want, even with America,'' he said. He added that as a P.L.O. representative, he is ''a target for many sides.''
Last December, he said, Greece and the P.L.O. agreed to cooperate against terrorism. He said he was also sometimes called to help the Cypriot Government ''control the Palestinians'' to prevent terrorism on the island.
Israeli and European specialists said the organization's missions geographically closest to Israel were active in intelligence work to prepare for possible terrorist actions.
An Israeli official report that could not be verified from another source said that in December 1984, Abu Tayeb, who is described as the commander of Force 17, an elite military unit of Al Fatah, reported to a meeting of other senior officials that he had reorganized the unit's representation at P.L.O. offices in Europe in preparation for future actions. Israeli security officials said Force 17 representatives in Europe were stocking weapons.
Israel holds Force 17 responsible for the slayings last year of two Israeli seamen in Barcelona, Spain, and of three Israeli tourists on a yacht in the harbor of Larnaca, Cyprus.


End of Document