In Focus: Seeking Push For Terrorism Insurance Bill
The American Banker
February 4, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1
Length: 907 words
Byline: BY NICOLE DURAN
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Financial services industry officials rallied last week in favor of terrorism insurance legislation -- a show of force that in itself acknowledged their long odds.
For the first time in the weeks since the bill stalled, some encouraging signs emerged, including supportive words from Senate Majority Leader Thomas A. Daschle and reports of an imperiled New York real estate deal that provided long-awaited evidence of economic harm from congressional inaction.
Still, three aides to some of the bill's staunchest backers on Capitol Hill warned attendees of an American Insurance Association conference on Thursday that they will have to turn up more concrete signs of hardship to nudge reluctant lawmakers into protecting insurance companies from catastrophic losses from future terrorist attacks.
"Congress will only react to your needs," said Robert Gordon, the senior counsel for the House Financial Services Committee. "Unfortunately, we've had a deafening silence."
Debra J. Hall, senior vice president and the general counsel for the Reinsurance Association of America, tried to provide specific examples of developers or investors who either could not get terrorism insurance or could do so only at an exorbitant price, but her examples were vague.
"Anything worth more than $25 million" is in jeopardy of not getting adequate coverage, she claimed.
Seeming to bolster that statement was a report in The Wall Street Journal on Thursday that the billionaire Marvin Davis is having trouble closing a $350 million deal on an office tower next to New York's Grand Central Terminal because of insurers' reluctance to provide the building with terrorism protection. A spokesman for Mr. Davis was unavailable to comment at press time.
Deborah B. Beck, executive vice president of the New York Real Estate Board, said "terrorism redlining" is occurring in big cities near marquee properties and across the country in areas surrounding "high-risk" places, such as nuclear power plants.
The Mortgage Bankers Association acknowledged that it must bombard Congress with evidence.
"We have to confuse them with the facts," MBA Chairman Jim Murphy told reporters on Jan. 24. "We will gather as much information as we can and provide (Congress) with empirical data."
Examples are scarce partly because insurance companies only started cutting off properties on Jan. 1. However, a bigger reason is that business leaders are afraid to let it be known that their properties are "bare."
"No one wants to disclose it, because investors would go crazy," Mr. Gordon said.
In fact, federal securities lawyers are debating whether businesses should be forced to disclose a lack of terrorism insurance coverage to investors as a potential "material risk," the AIA reported.
While the early supporters on Capitol Hill of a federal backstop recognize these problems, their enthusiasm for it remains strong, the three aides said.
Calling the fallout from the lack of terrorism insurance a "fear tax" -- everything from the added cost of existing policies to the money lost on halted projects -- Mr. Gordon said his boss, House Financial Services Chairman Michael G. Oxley, R-Ohio, will make the case that it exists.
"Chairman Oxley is committed" to pressing ahead "until something happens," he said. "This is not a last gasp."
The House passed a bill last year, but the Senate failed to even put its version on the floor.
"If we felt right now that the membership was ready for this, that the rank-and-file was ready for it right now, Sen. (Phil) Gramm would go down right now and offer an amendment to the stimulus bill," said Wayne Abernathy, the Republican staff director of the Senate Banking Committee.
All the panelists at the AIA conference conceded that supporters would have to work to rebuild momentum.
After Sept. 11 Congress scrambled against a Dec. 31 deadline -- the date on which 70% of the reinsurance agreements that propped up primary market policies expired -- to devise a plan.
"We have lost that right now," Mr. Abernathy said about the looming date that passed without any apparent economic disaster. "Legislation will take as long as you give it."
Though Mr. Gordon blasted the Senate leadership for inaction last year, Sen. Daschle said passing a bill was one of his priorities. "We… need to pass terrorism reinsurance," Congress Daily reported him as saying on Jan. 23.
At least one consumer group says it doubts that federal involvement is imperative.
In a Jan. 23 report, the Consumer Federation of America said the lack of a terrorism insurance bill has had fewer adverse consequences than predicted. For example, banks are still lending to real estate projects, the report stated.
Meanwhile, states insurance regulators have tackled the issue as policies come up for renewal.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners had advised its members that they may grant companies terrorism exclusions for commercial property/casualty policies under certain circumstances, but it recently recommended not doing so for personal lines.
"It is the sense of the NAIC membership that terrorism exclusions are generally not necessary in personal lines property and casualty products to maintain a competitive market, and they may violate state law," the group stated Tuesday. "We expect these cases to be limited."
Insurance companies were immediately critical of the NAIC decision.
 
Copyright c 2002 Thomson Media. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Oxley

Load-Date: February 1, 2002


End of Document