In Focus: Sen. Leahy Takes Lead In Money Laundering ;
His draft tones down anti-terrorism ideas from Justice's bill
The American Banker
October 1, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 American Banker, Inc.
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1
Length: 820 words
Byline: BY ROB GARVER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Though support for a government bailout to help the insurance industry cope with the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks was fading last week, lawmakers have lost none of their enthusiasm for enacting a law to target money laundering.
No fewer than five legislative proposals are being considered on Capitol Hill -- three from lawmakers and two from the Bush administration.
What will become law is unclear, but the smart money is on a bill being drafted by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy.
The Vermont Democrat's proposal would combine elements of the anti-terrorism bill backed by the Justice Department with two anti-money-laundering bills, one introduced by Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., and the other co-sponsored by Sens. John Kerry, D-Mass., and Charles E. Grassley, R-Iowa.
The Leahy draft is viewed as the front-runner because lawmakers are adamant about wanting to act quickly on money laundering and, at a week old, his proposal has had the most exposure. Being chairman of the powerful Judiciary Committee does not hurt either.
Sen. Leahy plans to tone down parts of the Justice bill that would expand the government's authority to detain suspects, which may allay the concerns of some senators who felt the administration plan impinged on civil liberties.
Though the administration's bill focuses on combating terrorism, Sen. Leahy's measure contains more extensive anti-money-laundering provisions aimed directly at financial institutions. The Leahy proposal would bar U.S. financial institutions from hosting correspondent accounts for so-called "shell banks" -- institutions that exist on paper but have no physical existence.
It would also give the Treasury secretary authority to impose an array of sanctions on countries that fail to cooperate with the United States in efforts to fight money laundering. Much like President Bush's executive order last week, this bill would let the Treasury cut off access to the U.S. financial system for banks and other financial institutions in noncompliant countries.
However, some lawmakers are concerned that requiring foreign banks to either comply with U.S. standards or be shut out of the world's largest market may be seen as extraterritorial application of U.S. law. If enacted, they argue, such a law could cause the sanctioned countries to retaliate against U.S. institutions that operate abroad.
Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., criticized the provision, arguing that cutting off one country would have little effect if the banks there could simply reroute their money by opening correspondent accounts in countries that have not been shut out of the U.S. market.
"We can cut them out of our system," he said during a hearing Wednesday, "but if we can't cut them out of other large countries, in effect we haven't accomplished much."
A spokesman for the Senate Judiciary Committee said its staff has been meeting with Justice Department officials every day and that they expected to work through the weekend on "a consensus package for the Senate."
Running second to the Leahy bill is a compromise being crafted by Senate Banking Committee Chairman Paul Sarbanes, who at a hearing Wednesday promised fast action on anti-money-laundering legislation.
He reportedly is also working to combine the bills introduced by Sens. Levin, Kerry, and Grassley. However, Sen. Sarbanes plans to focus on just the provisions designed to stop money laundering, leaving out the broader enforcement issues such as rules for detaining suspects in terrorism investigations.
Sen. Sarbanes' bill could be introduced as early as today.
Also in the legislative mix, though of less direct concern to banks, is a second Justice Department proposal. Unveiled as the Money Laundering Act of 2001, it incorporates all the anti-money-laundering elements of the department's terrorism bill with provisions that would strengthen enforcement of criminal statutes concerning money laundering.
Over in the House, the situation is simpler.
The Judiciary Committee is working on anti-terrorism legislation that would include money-laundering provisions and is expected to vote this week, possibly Wednesday or Thursday. The House Financial Services Committee has scheduled a hearing on money laundering Wednesday but has not announced whether it will take up the legislation.
For now, the banking industry trade groups are keeping a low profile.
Edward Yingling, chief lobbyist for the American Bankers Association, refused to discuss the specifics of any of the proposals.
"The assumption is that both the House and Senate are working on bills on a fast track," he said. "Our view is that whatever they are doing we are going to provide input and be supportive of the effort. There are a lot of ideas floating around. The ones that are on the table we are generally supportive of."
Michele Heller contributed to this story.
 
Copyright c 2001 Thomson Financial. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Load-Date: September 28, 2001


End of Document