In governments, business leaders, we withhold trust;
A global survey reflects shaky faith in those who preside over weak markets, the rise of terrorism.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
January 24, 2003 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C02
Length: 756 words
Byline: By Ken Moritsugu; Knight Ridder News Service
Dateline: DAVOS, Switzerland
Body


In most of the world, people don't trust their governments and are losing faith in their business leaders amid economic stagnation and fears of terrorism and impending war, according to a new global survey.
Although lots of Americans share those views, the poll also exposed a rift between the United States and the rest of the world: While 75 percent of Americans think U.S. leaders can master the challenges of 2003, only 27 percent of foreigners think American leaders can cope.
The results are worrisome for the World Economic Forum, an annual international gathering of the corporate and political elite in the Swiss ski village of Davos. The pessimism they reflect is a reversal from just three years ago, when the forum's participants were widely revered as superheroes of a new economy and a global economic boom. Building trust is the humble theme of this year's gathering.
The findings of the poll, which was commissioned by the forum, reflect the public's shaky faith in leaders who preside over declining stock markets, growing joblessness, and the rise of terrorism.
"We have in fact made a mess of the world," Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad said in opening remarks yesterday. "We are not much more capable of managing our affairs than Stone Age people."
The poll of 36,000 people in 47 countries, taken over the last few months, asked which institutions they trusted to operate in the best interests of society. The military topped their list, although results were skewed by exceptionally strong support for the military in a few countries, including the United States, Israel, India and Pakistan.
After the armed forces, the most trusted institutions were so-called nongovernmental organizations, known as NGOs, such as environmental and social advocacy groups. Also ranking high were religious institutions and the United Nations.
Elected parliaments or congresses were at the bottom of the list in many countries, with large companies next to the bottom. Governments ranked in the middle of the 17 categories. Americans revealed a higher trust in their government and Congress than most countries, reflecting, pollsters said, a spike upward after Sept. 11, 2001. The poll was first conducted in 2000.
"It's an upside-down world," said Doug Miller, president of Environics International Ltd., the Canadian company that conducted the survey with Gallup International. "It's a world in which the people who do not have much power - the NGOs, the United Nations, religious institutions - are the most trusted and the people with the most power are least trusted."
Corporate leaders pointed to business' fevered focus on short-term profits in the late 1990s as a root cause of the loss of trust in business.
Vernon Ellis, the London-based international chairman of Accenture Ltd., the consulting firm that split off from Arthur Andersen before the Enron accounting scandal, described it as a "downward spiral in financial capitalism." In its course, Ellis said, chief executive officers were rewarded financially when their company's stock rose; issuing stock options to them only increased their incentive to boost the stock price.
Corporate chiefs should heed the interests of shareholders, said DuPont Co. chairman Charles Holliday Jr., but not at the expense of consumers, employees and the communities worldwide where their companies do business.
Companies should strive to grow in ways that are sustainable in the long term instead of playing to the hopes of investors looking to get rich quickly, the business executives said.
In well-received speeches, Mahathir and Swiss President Pascal Couchepin took note of the split between the United States and much of the rest of the world.
Of a possible U.S. invasion of Iraq, Couchepin said: "Force must not be used before the matter is brought before the U.N. Security Council," drawing applause. "The use of force can only be a last resort once all other means of persuasion have been exhausted," he said.
Mahathir blamed global economic inequality for producing terrorist attacks and said terrorism could be fought only by reducing the gap between the world's rich and poor.
Asked to respond, Rep. Rob Portman (R., Ohio) said economic development was part of the war on terrorism, but disagreed that there was a direct relationship between the two.
Portman, an invited participant, acknowledged being confused by some of the criticism of the United States abroad and said he had come to the forum to hear the views of others.
Contact Ken Moritsugu at kmoritsugu@krwashington.com  

Load-Date: January 24, 2003


End of Document