In Greece, Bloomberg Seeks Mayors' Help on Terrorism 
 The New York Times
September 21, 2002 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 534 words
Byline:  By MICHAEL COOPER
Dateline: ATHENS, Sept. 20  
Body


Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg called on cities around the world to unite to fight terrorism in a speech today at an international conference of mayors here.
     Mr. Bloomberg -- who has already dispatched several New York City police officers to posts in other countries to investigate terrorism and who said police officers from Athens were training in New York -- made an appeal for international cooperation not only at the national level but also at the local level. 
 "Terrorism is a worldwide menace," he said. "As mayors of the world's cities, all of us face the duty to combat terrorism, to support one another's efforts in this struggle, and to defend the freedoms that make progress to a better, more prosperous world possible for the citizens of all cities." 
Mr. Bloomberg spoke to a conference of mayors and quite a few vice-mayors dispatched from several dozen cities, including Moscow, Beijing, Florence, Sarajevo, Milan and Paris. Mayor Anthony A. Williams of Washington, D.C., was the only other American mayor to attend the meeting, which was called the Summit Conference of the Mayors of the World. 
The attack on the World Trade Center figured prominently at the conference, which began with a video display featuring images of New York City firefighters, a trumpeter playing taps and people observing a moment of silence for victims of terrorism everywhere.
As Mr. Bloomberg asked the other mayors to support one another against the modern threat of terrorism, he used a quotation attributed to Pericles, the statesman who held sway here nearly 2,500 years ago: "The secret of happiness is freedom, and the secret of freedom is a brave heart."
During the speech, Mr. Bloomberg praised the government of Greece for the steps it had taken recently to crack down on terrorists within its borders, noting the recent arrests of more than a dozen people accused of belonging to November 17, a group held responsible for the killings of 23 people over the last 27 years.
Later, in remarks to reporters, Mr. Bloomberg said that some of the cooperation among cities that he was promoting was already taking place.
"New York City has been training a number of police officers from around the world," he said. 
"There are some from Athens there right now. And we not only can train; we want to learn. New York City doesn't have all the knowledge."
And he urged cities to share information about possible threats. 
"Sharing information is one of the things that is most difficult but most important," he said. "Intelligence gathering is by its very nature a secretive process. But then, the fact of the matter is, if you don't know what other intelligence services have found out, you really can't protect the populace."
The mayor found time at the end of the day for a tour of the Acropolis. He said he was filled with wonder at the majesty of the Parthenon but that it also prompted him to muse on more pedestrian municipal matters. He marveled at the scale of the public works project ("Can you imagine getting this through the City Council?") and even brought up one of his favorite subjects, tort reform, wondering whether the uneven, slippery marble steps to the top of the hill resulted in many lawsuits. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Prime Minister Costas Simitis, right, joking with Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg during a meeting in the Greek leader's office in Athens. (Associated Press for The New York Times) 

Load-Date: September 21, 2002


End of Document