In Houston, Sen. Hagel speaks on terrorism
University Wire
October 30, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Daily Cougar via U-Wire
Length: 574 words
Byline: By Ken Fountain, The Daily Cougar
Dateline: Houston
Body


Following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, America is entering "a new seriousness of purpose that will define our generation," said Sen. Chuck Hagel (R-Neb.), one of the leading lights of the Republican Party, in a speech in Houston on Monday.
"The events of the last weeks have touched each of us in ways that we haven't fully yet comprehended," Hagel said to a luncheon gathering of the Houston Forum in downtown's Hyatt Regency hotel.
"The world has been redefined, if you'll allow a weak-minded U.S. senator from Nebraska to make such a big, bold pronouncement," he said. "But then, I'm in Texas, and you're used to big, bold pronouncements."
U. Houston
Hagel, who was elected to the Senate in 1996, said that in 1998, he delivered his first major foreign policy speech at Harvard University. There, he warned of the new "borderless threats" facing the United States, particularly "terrorists and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the greatest threat to global security."
He said then that in order to defeat terrorism, "we will need to build coalitions with other nations out of mutual self-interest."
"Today, I wish those words would have rung hollow," Hagel said. "But the talons of terrorism have drawn American blood on American soil, and we are now engaged in an enduring struggle against this evil. All the world is engaged in this struggle."
The struggle will have three distinct stages, Hagel said. The first one (the one the U.S. and its allies are currently engaged in) is the "prepare, protect and prevent" stage, which requires "a sustained effort against terrorism, which takes many forms, of which bioterrorism is the most recent."
The second stage, he said, is the "interconnect" stage. "This will require accepting the reality that the world is, has been, and increases to be interconnected in every way," he said.
The needs of the global community are immensely complicated, he said, and in order to meet them, today's leaders face as great a challenge as that faced by President Harry Truman and Secretary of State George Marshall at the end of World War II.
In dealing with the countless countries involved in the struggle, Hagel said the United States must realize that "each nation is different. Nations start from different places. They cannot go in the same way at the same time."
Of critical importance, Hagel said, was getting the Middle East peace process, all but dead after a year of violence between Israelis and Palestinians, "back on track."
A Palestinian state must be part of the ultimate conclusion of that process, Hagel said.
The third stage, which Hagel said would evolve from the successes or failures of the first two, will be the "restructuring" stage. The United States and its partners will have to be willing to provide financial investments and human capital in bringing "democratic governance" to the countries in which terrorism thrives.
"The effort and the process will be imperfect. But we must respond. We have no choice," he said.
Hagel summarized by trying to "peer into the American soul." The attacks, he said, caused Americans, as individuals and as a people, to take "a personal inventory.
Who are we? What is important to us? What are our most important responsibilities?"
Since the attacks, he said, America has "a new center of gravity," in contrast to the "societal laziness" that existed before.
(C) 2001 The Daily Cougar via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document