In India, Cricket Loses To Politics On Security
The New York Times
March 23, 2009 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 483 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Dateline: NEW DELHI 
Body


Cricket and politics are two of India's fiercest passions. On Sunday, they butted heads. Terrorism was to blame.
  Organizers of the Indian Premier League, a brash and lucrative new tournament scheduled to begin in less than three weeks, announced that they had been compelled to move the games out of India. With the tournament schedule overlapping with national elections, the government could not guarantee adequate security for the games, they said.
  Shashank Manohar,  president of India's cricket board, said in a televised news conference that the  board was in talks with other countries to host the tournament ''because of the attitude of the government that we are not in a position to provide security.''
  In an interview with a private television channel, CNN-IBN, the Indian home minister, Palaniappan Chidambaram, said that elections were ''unquestionably'' more important than cricket and that he could not spare central paramilitary forces to guard the tournament when elections were under way.
  The Indian Premier League is scheduled to take place from  April 10 to May 24; the elections overlap almost exactly, in five  phases around the country. More than 700 million people are eligible to vote, and more than two million law enforcement officials are to be deployed.
  The league chairman, Lalit Modi, said that the tournament would be played and televised live in prime time in India, and that the league would announce the location of the games by Monday evening.
  The league's announcement drew political repercussions on Sunday. The main national opposition, the Bharatiya Janata Party, which has consistently called the  Congress Party-led coalition government  weak on terrorism, criticized it  for failing to guarantee security for cricket.
  It is difficult to overstate the love of cricket in this part of the world, and until recently, the cricket pitch had been widely seen as the rare safe zone from terrorism attacks. That changed  this month in Pakistan when a dozen gunmen attacked a bus carrying the Sri Lankan cricket team in Lahore, killing six police officers and a driver.
  India is also under high alert against possible terrorist attacks since the siege of Mumbai in  November, when more than 160 people were killed in coordinated assaults.
  The Indian Premier League, which was started last spring, has transformed the gentleman's sport, with celebrities, cheerleaders and big-brand endorsements. Its teams have attracted some of the world's best and most expensive players, including the English cricketers Kevin Pietersen and Andrew Flintoff,  whose services were bought at an auction last February for $1.5 million each.
  ''Unfortunately, we cannot play in India because of election issues,'' Mr. Modi said Sunday, flanked by two celebrity team owners, the actors Preity Zinta and Shah Rukh Khan. ''It's a domestic tour being held at international venues.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 23, 2009


End of Document