In My Opinion: Work to head off terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 27, 1999, Friday,
Final Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial; Pg. 23A
Length: 299 words
Byline: LAUREN MORRIS, For the Journal-Constitution
Body

Submissions to this readers' column should run 300-350 words and include a recent photo of yourself, brief biography and a daytime phone number.
A joint announcement recently was made by Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Sergei Stephashin: The United States and Russia have agreed to discuss further reduction of their nuclear arsenals. Although the Russian prime minister says. "We are entering the 21st century. We have to enter it as friends," both he and his country's attitude towards nuclear disarmament are decidedly cool.
Journal
Even as Stephashin agreed to further negotiations, his country has yet to ratify the 1993 START II accord. This treaty that agreed to cut our arsenals to a max of 3,500 warheads by 2003 and was ratified by our U.S. Senate. The Russian Parliament has yet to put it to a vote of ratification.
The Russian parliament should ratify the 1993 START II accord. Further negotiations regarding future disarmament are moot if they and we do not live up to our agreements. The fewer nuclear weapons in this world, the better off everyone will be.
As citizens of the reigning superpower, we must become more aware of the awesome and destructive power that nuclear war represents. In such a war, we literally could destroy our world. Terrorists using death as a means to an end are a particular threat.
Before the United States and Russia lose sight of the "trust" that we are building between our countries, we should use our combined forces to control the loose cannons of this world. Stop the terrorists and other maniacs before they start something that we --- the United States and Russia --- can't stop. We should utilize our trust, knowing that we know better than to start a war, by working together to stop terroristic agendas.
LAUREN MORRIS, Marietta

Graphic

 
Photo
Lauren Morris, 17, a Marietta native, is a senior at Pope High School. She enjoys outdoor activities and wants to be an astrophysicist.

Load-Date: August 28, 1999


End of Document