IN MIDEAST, JUSTICE IS A FIGHTING WORD
The New York Times
November 1, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 380 words
Body


To the Editor:
In her Oct. 25 letter, Elaine C. Hagopian of the Association of Arab-American University Graduates contends that anti-U.S. Arab terrorism (which she calls ''the violence of resistance'') will cease as soon as the U.S. initiates a Middle East policy based on ''justice.'' Her prognosis suffers from a fatal flaw. When it comes to justice in the Mideast, what is sauce for the goose is
not
 
 sauce for the gander.
If the United States were to force Israel to accept a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, it would probably satisfy the ''justice'' requirements of some truly moderate Palestinians. But it would not come close to mollifying hard-line Palestinians, whose sense of ''justice'' requires the replacement of Israel by a Palestinian state.
As the P.L.O. declared in its still- valid 1968 Palestine National Covenant, ''the Palestinian Arab people, expressing themselves by the armed Palestinian revolution, reject all solutions which are substitutes for the total liberation of Palestine.'' Hence, the creation of what the hard-liners have derisively dubbed ''Mini-Palestine'' would only spur them to further anti-U.S. terrorism.
Or, when the United States attempted to stand up to Syrian ''justice'' in Lebanon, it suffered some of the worst terrorist blows in its history. But to endorse Syrian ''justice'' in Lebanon would invite violent opposition from well-armed extremist Lebanese groups, whose sense of justice calls for the removal of Syria's presence from their country.
And when it comes to the Ayatollah Khomeini, there is no way of ending anti-U.S. terrorism through recourse to justice. Oppose Khomeini's ''justice,'' and Iranian and Libyan assassins are on your trail. Support him, and you offend the sense of ''justice'' of such Arab regimes as Iraq, which will unleash their own terrorists.
Catering to Arab terrorists' sense of ''justice'' will not end attacks. The antidote to international terrorism is not appeasement but, in Secretary of State George P. Shultz's words, ''the certainty that swift and sure measures will be taken against those who engage in it.''
 
PHIL BAUM RAPHAEL DANZIGER New York, Oct. 26, 1984
The writers are, respectively, associate executive director and international-policy analyst at the American Jewish Congress.


End of Document