IN NEW MEXICO, BUSH HINTS AT EXPANDING WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 25, 2002 Sunday Early Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A2
Length: 443 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LAS CRUCES, N.M.
Body


His August fund raising almost finished, President George W. Bush turned Saturday to giving Republicans a policy record to win on in November and preparing the nation for an extended, expanded war on terrorism.
"Oh, the hill might be steep at times. It might be a rugged terrain like you're used to out here in New Mexico," Bush said at New Mexico State University. "But we're going to cross that terrain to achieve peace - not only peace for ourselves but, see, we value life all around the world."
Bush collected campaign cash Saturday in Las Cruces and in Los Angeles, closing out a three-day Western trip marked by unusually large and aggressive protests. Outside a breakfast in Los Angeles benefiting the Californian GOP gubernatorial nominee, Bill Simon, scores of shouting demonstrators opposed to U.S. military action in Iraq banged drums and held anti-war signs, one of which suggested that Bush send his own twin daughters to war.
Bush appeared unswayed and suggested he will make a clear and compellin g case against Iraq's Saddam Hussein in the coming weeks.
Protecting America, he said Saturday, is always on his mind because of the menacing threat reports he reviews every morning. "And it would be on your mind too if you saw what I saw on a daily basis," he told his audience in Los Angeles.
Reviving memories of the horror that America experienced Sept. 11 emerged as part of a strategy to reinvigorate popular support for his war aims.
"One of the challenges that I knew I would have is that the further we got away from September 11, the more likely it would be people would forget, would forget the challenge, would not remember the pain and suffering," he said.
One of the candidates he aided Saturday with a $200,000 fund-raiser was New Mexico GOP gubernatorial nominee John Sanchez, who is running against Bill Richardson, former President Bill Clinton's energy secretary.
In his weekly radio address, Bush took issue with opponents of his proposal to make it easier for logging companies to thin overgrown national forestland. Without mentioning Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., by name, Bush said pointedly: "Some members of Congress have already gotten important forest reform passed for their states because they know it is the fastest and most effective way to get forests thinned. We should pass this important reform to help protect all of America's forests."
In his fund-raising speeches, Bush also swatted at Senate Democrats for balking at part of his plan for special executive hiring and firing powers in a new Department of Homeland Security and said he needed the government restructuring to do his job protecting Americans.

Notes

PAGE TWO

Load-Date: February 5, 2003


End of Document