In our view: Better Mileage
The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)
June 19, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Columbian Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. C6
Length: 529 words
Byline: Columbian editorial staff
Body


In World War II, the U.S. government imposed all manner of restrictions on consumption of goods, including sugar, rubber and gasoline. With U.S. soldiers, sailors and Marines fighting and dying in Europe and the Pacific, few Americans at home questioned Uncle Sam's imposition of rationing and quotas.
Today, we are in another two-front war. One is against terrorism, identified by ideology rather than by national borders or standing armies in uniforms. The other is even less traditional. It is, to considerable measure, a threat of our own making: climate change brought by carbon dioxide emissions.
Like Germany and Japan in the early 1940s, terrorism and climate change are long-term threats and each requires a national commitment and sacrifice. But if there's good news in this, it is that an attack on the single target of oil consumption helps the war against each of these threats.
This week, Congress is wrestling with a massive, multi-pronged energy bill that includes a proposed increase in minimum miles-per-gallon standards.
It was the scarcity of  oil, rather than terrorism or climate change,  that motivated Congress and the president to impose vehicle mileage requirements nearly two decades ago. The mileage standards have gone unchanged in all that time, while the world's supply of oil has gone down and international tensions have gone up.
Under that law, Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency (CAFE) standards are 27.5 miles per gallon for autos and 24 mpg for light trucks and most SUVs. The pending legislation would boost the auto mileage requirement to 35 mpg by 2020 and raise it 4 percent a year for a few years thereafter.
That wouldn't be as big a deal as it first seems. Fuel economy for cars sold by all manufacturers in the U.S. is already slightly more than 30 mpg. But when light trucks, SUVs, pickups and minivans are added to the equation, the overall average plummets to 24.2 mpg.
The proposed new standards aren't likely to scare Japanese automakers, as Democratic presidential aspirant Sen. Barack Obama said last month. He went into the lion's den to address the Detroit Economic Club and said Japanese cars typically get 45 mpg. He proposed a gradual annual increase in U.S. mileage standards up to 40 mpg by 2022. His goal, he said, "is not to destroy the industry, but to help bring it into the 21st century."
But, that would be an inconvenience for American automakers, who would rather not be inconvenienced and risk their short-term maximization of profits.
Two key Democratic committee chairman, Sen. Carl Levin and Rep. John Dingell, both from Michigan, are leading the "rather not" cause.
But as Sen. Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., a member of the Senate Energy Committee, said Saturday in the Democrats' response to the president's weekly radio address, "America's strength lies in our ability to invent new and better ways of doing things."
It is sadly obvious that American automakers have forfeited the fuel-efficient market to the Japanese and Koreans. Besides landing a blow against terrorism emanating from oil-producing regions and against global warming, tougher mileage standards will help move American automakers to find a better way.

Load-Date: July 17, 2007


End of Document