In plays, a variety of links to 9/11
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 4, 2011 Sunday
ADVANCE Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES MAGAZINE / ENTERTAINMENT; P-com Ent. Entertainment; Pg. H05
Length: 467 words
Byline: By John Timpane

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The date 9/11 denotes not a single event, but rather a chain reaction touched off by unimaginable criminal acts. The intervening decade's theater has grappled with various links on that chain. 
 Anne Nelson's The Guys debuted off-Broadway in December 2001, less than three months after the attacks, and has been in production somewhere ever since. In it, an editor helps the chief of the Fire Department of New York write eulogies for firefighters killed in the Twin Towers collapse.
The Guys launched a subgenre of 9/11 theater, based on notebooks, interviews, diaries, personal witness. In Philadelphia, Jennifer Schelter's Love Lessons from Abu Ghraib - part monologue, part yoga, part dance, based on her interviews with Iraqi former prisoners and torture victims - debuted at the 2007 Fringe Festival, and Schelter continues to perform and rework it. 
 In Neil LaBute's The Mercy Seat, which premiered off-Broadway in December 2002 and was among the best-received 9/11 dramas, a man's family believes he has been killed, and he contemplates leaving things that way. A theme in many other plays - loss or family tensions after 9/11 - turns in some telling, surprising directions.
 Terrorism, torture, espionage, patriotism, militarism, media frustrations, the West's relations with the Muslim world - there was a sense that 9/11 was a subject too big to grapple with on stage, much as the Nazi genocides in World War II had been. Perhaps that elusive, vast complexity is why the 2000s also were a time of satire, as in Will Ferrell's send-up of George W. Bush, You're Welcome America. Satire makes the beholder scoff in service of social work.
 That also may be why an Egyptian-born, naturalized U.S. playwright, Yussuf El Guindi, may have come closest to capturing the sweep of the era's issues. In his comedy Jihad Jones and the Kalashnikov Babes, premiered by Philadelphia's InterAct Theatre Company in 2009, an Arab actor fights Hollywood stereotypes. He's no hero; the play prefers provocation to moralizing. 
 And in Language Rooms - his witty, irreverent, knowing play that debuted at the Wilma in 2010 - an immigrant works as an Arabic translator at a U.S. interrogation center ("Place: An undisclosed location"), serving what he believes is the "right" side against what he assumes is the "evil" of terrorism. Rooms glances off torture, ethnic tension, identity, extraordinary rendition, misprisions of history, and the power of language to manipulate people and distort the truth.
 The least laughing of matters was 9/11. And dramatists and theater companies, 10 years on, are still finding it challenging to make the issues live. That in itself is a drama likely to play out for years to come. 
 Contact John Timpane at jt@phillynews.com or 215-854-4406, or follow him on Twitter at @jtimpane.    

Load-Date: September 4, 2011


End of Document