In Plea Deal, Jerseyan to Testify in Terror Trial
The New York Times
May 2, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 387 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED 

By JOSEPH P. FRIED 
Body


Prosecutors have agreed to drop terrorism conspiracy charges against a New Jersey man under a plea deal in which he is expected to testify for the Government against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 other men now being tried on the charges, according to court papers made public yesterday.
The man, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, is not part of the current trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan. His case was severed earlier amid unofficial reports that he would cooperate with prosecutors against Mr. Abdel Rahman, the militant Muslim cleric who is the most prominent defendant, and with whom Mr. Haggag had a close relationship.
Mr. Haggag, an immigrant from Egypt, which is also Sheik Abdel Rahman's homeland, is expected to testify as early as today, defense lawyers at the trial said.
On Friday, when the trial was in recess, Mr. Haggag appeared in the same courtroom and agreed to a deal under which the prosecution would drop the conspiracy charges against him in the terrorism case and he would plead guilty to another crime unrelated to that case: a New Jersey arson-for-profit scheme. He pleaded guilty to setting fire in 1991 to a Denville, N.J., cafe that he co-owned in a plot to collect insurance money from the blaze.
The fraud charge to which he pleaded is punishable by up to five years in prison. A prosecutor, Robert Khuzami, told Judge Michael B. Mukasey that the terrorism conspiracy charges would be dropped when the 35-year-old Mr. Haggag was sentenced on Oct. 13.
Mr. Khuzami did not tell the judge that Mr. Haggag would testify in the terrorism trial, but defense lawyers have said they were told he would be called as early as today. As the court session ended yesterday, the lawyers told Judge Mukasey they wanted such information as how much he might be getting from the Government for relocation and other expenses as part of his going into the witness protection program. They also demanded to know if he has links to Egyptian intelligence. He is free on a $100,000 bond.
When Mr. Haggag was arrested in July 1993, about the time the other defendants in the terrorism case were also arrested, he was charged with conspiring in just one of the several plots charged in the overall case -- a purported plot to assassinate President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt during a 1993 visit he made to the United States.

Load-Date: May 2, 1995


End of Document