In Rome, Netanyahu talks U.N.; He lobbies U.S., Italy on Palestinian drive for statehood
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 16, 2014 Tuesday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 20
Length: 347 words
Byline: Batsheva Sobelman

Los Angeles Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM  
Body


Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu held a series of diplomatic consultations in Rome on Monday, attempting to build opposition to a planned Palestinian appeal to the United Nations for statehood.
Netanyahu met with Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi and Secretary of State John Kerry. The State Department said before the meeting that the two intended to discuss a number of issues, including recent developments in Israel, the West Bank, Jerusalem and the region.
However, the topic topping the leaders' agenda is the Palestinian Authority's bid to the U.N. Security Council to set a two-year deadline for an Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank.
We want a clear and specific resolution for a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, chief negotiator Saeb Erekat told news media after the Palestinian leadership convened Sunday night.
Reportedly, the Palestinians plan to approach the Security Council this week. Jordan, a nonpermanent member of the council, would most likely submit the draft on the Palestinians' behalf, and a vote could be held as early as Wednesday.
Before Monday's meetings, Netanyahu vowed the measure would not pass.
We will not accept attempts to dictate to us unilateral moves on a limited timetable, he said at Israel's airport. In a reality in which Islamic terrorism is reaching out to all corners of the globe, we will rebuff any attempt that would put this terrorism inside our home, said Netanyahu, who rejects demands for withdrawal to the pre-1967 borders as a security threat.
In a briefing last week, State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said the U.S. continues to support Palestinian statehood through negotiations, but she didn't directly answer whether the U.S. would support or oppose proposals brought to the UN.
Our belief is that a two-state solution, an agreement between the two parties, is the best way to achieve peace in the region, Psaki said. But the fact is that there are a number of countries out there that want to see action at the U.N. ... so this is an appropriate time to have the discussion.

Load-Date: December 16, 2014


End of Document