In Retreat, Bush Says U.S. Will Win War on Terrorism
The New York Times
September 1, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section P; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 4; THE REPUBLICANS: THE CONVENTION IN NEW YORK -- THE PRESIDENT
Length: 796 words
Byline: By ELISABETH BUMILLER
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Aug. 31 
Body


President Bush moved to put out a political brush fire on Tuesday with a forceful declaration to the nation's largest veterans group that the United States will win the war on terrorism and that the country will never show ''weakness or uncertainty'' on his watch.
 A day after NBC broadcast an interview with Mr. Bush in which he said he did not think the United States could win the war against terrorism, which has become the focus of his presidency and his re-election campaign, he raced back to his optimistic statements that America will prevail.
  ''In this different kind of war, we may never sit down at a peace table, but make no mistake about it, we are winning, and we will win,'' Mr. Bush told a cheering crowd at the annual convention of the American Legion. 
 In the interview with Matt Lauer of NBC, recorded Saturday and run on Monday, Mr. Bush was asked about the war on terrorism and replied, ''I don't think you can win it.'' Democrats immediately seized on the remark as defeatist and used it to begin a full day of political attacks against Mr. Bush.
 After addressing the veterans, Mr. Bush continued to backtrack from the comment he made to Mr. Lauer. ''I probably needed to be more articulate about it,'' Mr. Bush told Rush Limbaugh, the radio talk show host, in a live interview in Des Moines.
 By then, Senator John Kerry's campaign had jumped on the president's comments to the American Legion, saying that they amounted to backpedaling and showed Mr. Bush to be a flip-flopper -- a phrase that Bush officials have used for months to belittle Mr. Kerry.
 ''Bush flip-flops on winning the war on terror,'' read the e-mail message sent to reporters by Phil Singer, a Kerry campaign spokesman. Mr. Singer added, ''This president has gone from mission accomplished to mission miscalculated to mission impossible on the war on terror.''
 The president in turn began his own new attack on Mr. Kerry for what he said was the senator's wavering position on a Pentagon plan to move up to 70,000 troops out of Europe and Asia over the next decade. Mr. Bush announced his support for the plan on Aug. 16, and Mr. Kerry's campaign promptly criticized the realignment as dangerous, particularly the shift of about 12,000 troops from South Korea to Iraq.
 ''Within hours after I announced this plan, my opponent came out against it, and that's his right to do so,'' Mr. Bush told the veterans. ''He's allowed to say what he believes. The only problem is that he endorsed the idea just 17 days earlier.'' 
 As the crowd laughed, he cited a segment of comments Mr. Kerry made Aug. 1 on ''This Week'' on ABC. Mr. Kerry, Mr. Bush recounted, said ''I think we can significantly change the deployment of troops, not just in Iraq, but elsewhere in the world -- the Korean Peninsula, perhaps, Europe, perhaps. There are great possibilities open to us, but this administration has very little imagination.''
 Mr. Bush then said to more laughter, ''Well, it takes a lot of imagination to come out against a position you took just 17 days earlier.''
 The Kerry campaign countered that the president had distorted the senator's remarks and that Mr. Kerry had preceded his comments on Aug. 1 with the caveat, ''if the diplomacy that I believe can be put in place can work.'' Kerry aides said he did support redeploying troops from South Korea, but only if North Korea made concessions in talks to dismantle its nuclear weapons program.
 Laura Bush also joined the fire and counterfire over the war against terrorism on Tuesday. In an interview with Diane Sawyer on ABC's ''Good Morning America,'' Mrs. Bush said that when her husband said he did not think America could win the war, he was emphasizing the unconventional nature of the struggle.
 ''This isn't a war with a country where you're going to have a surrender at some point,'' Mrs. Bush told Ms. Sawyer. ''But the fact is, as we look around the world, we are already winning the war on terror.''
 Mr. Bush was accompanied on Tuesday by Senator John McCain of Arizona, who has repeatedly promised to press the president to denounce commercials by a group of Vietnam War veterans who say that Mr. Kerry lied about his war record.
 Mr. McCain told reporters in Nashville that he had not yet spoken to the president about the issue, but would try to do so later in the day. ''One thing you don't want to do with the president of the United States is try to, you know, really? He knows how I feel. We've discussed that and many issues. It's important, but it's not the overriding issue of our relationship.''
 Mr. McCain also played down Mr. Bush's comments to Mr. Lauer. ''What he meant was, we're never going to have a peace signing on the Missouri,'' Mr. McCain said, referring to Japan's surrender on the battleship Missouri in 1945. 


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush greeted members of the American Legion yesterday after his address at the group's annual convention in Nashville. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

Load-Date: September 1, 2004


End of Document