IN SHORT;
FICTION
The New York Times
January 31, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk; Review
Length: 291 words
Byline: by MARILYN STASIO
Body


OUT ON THE RIM. By Ross Thomas. (Mysterious Press, $17.95.) Here's one solution to that panicky, last-ditch scramble at the airport for the perfect book to read on the plane.
Ross Thomas's nimble international thriller will get you to Washington, Malibu, Manila, Hong Kong and even - with a few backup books like his earlier ''Briarpatch'' and ''Cold War Swap'' - to the Philippines. These are also the locales visited by the putative hero of ''Out on the Rim,'' Booth Stallings, an expert on terrorism who is given the unenviable assignment of waving a $5-million bribe at a Communist guerrilla leader to dissuade him from bringing down the Aquino Government. Being no bushwhacker himself, Stallings shrewdly recruits the services of four professional adventurers, who are no sooner hired than they're scheming with (and against) him on ways to take the money and scoot. At this point, Mr. Thomas proves that he really knows how to fly this airline literature as he puts his plot through some sidewinder loops that confound all our assumptions about the moral and political value of the original do-good assignment. With each twist of the story, he also reveals a darker side to his disarmingly comic characters, who include a consummate con artist who goes by the sobriquet of Otherguy (as in ''the other guy did it'') Overby and a wily tactical genius, Arthur Wu, who declares himself the Emperor of China. Ultimately, Mr. Thomas uses the heroic conventions of the genre to mock the very notion of heroism. With cynical amusement, his witty rogues define a world war as ''the ultimate geography lesson'' and terrorism as ''politics without moral compunction.'' It's this kind of black humor that can keep you laughing even while the plane goes down.

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document