In self-defense, U.S. has right to kill terrorist bin Laden
USA TODAY
October 26, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 594 words
Byline: Robert F. Turner
Body


As the U.S. rounds up minor suspects in the Aug. 7 terrorist bombings
of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, architect Osama bin Laden
remains out of reach, harbored by Afghanistan's Taliban faction.
He has reportedly admitted to killing hundreds of people and has
announced he intends to kill more Americans in the future. If
U.S. officials are unable to arrest him, the only way to prevent
future attacks may well be to kill him.
Several prominent senators have recently suggested such an approach,
but the usual response is that "assassination" is immoral and
prohibited by Executive Order 12333, the law that provides that
"no person employed by or acting on behalf of the United States
government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assassination."
True, but irrelevant.
Intentionally killing a murderer like bin Laden when necessary
to prevent the slaughter of additional innocents is not assassination.
Lethal force. Black's Law Dictionary defines assassination
as: "Murder committed for hire. A murder committed treacherously
or by stealth or surprise, or by lying in wait." The Oxford
Companion to the Law defines it as: "The murder of a person
by lying in wait for him and then killing him, particularly the
murder of prominent people from political motives."
Neither term would apply to the deliberate use of lethal force
against bin Laden.
Self-defense. Killing someone like bin Laden would be a
legitimate act of self-defense under international law. While
Article Two, Section Four of the United Nation's charter strictly
limits the use of force in the world, the authors of the article
stated that "the use of arms in legitimate self-defense remains
admitted and unimpaired."
Rogues unprotected. At least since the Nuremberg trials
that followed World War II, it has been clear that neither international
terrorists nor heads of state are immune from punishment for the
intentional slaughter of large groups of innocent civilians.
The U.N. Security Council recently resolved that "the suppression
of acts of international terrorism is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security." It reaffirmed "the determination
of the international community to eliminate international terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations."
Until there's effective international machinery to deter or defeat
terrorism, the U.S. has the right and duty to protect its people
and property -- including embassies abroad -- from terrorist attack.
If there are no peaceful options, intentionally targeting the
most heinous terrorist leaders will deter at least some attacks
and prevent new attacks by those who refuse to be deterred.
Every civilized society recognizes the moral imperative of instructing
police sharpshooters to kill a gunman who is murdering hostages.
This is law enforcement, not assassination.
The U.S. criminal code includes specific prohibitions against
"assassinating" the president and certain other high government
officials.
However, were such an official to start murdering people, the
use of lethal force against him or her would not constitute "assassination."
Similarly, killing bin Laden because of his religious beliefs
would be assassination -- illegal and horribly wrong. But that
is not the issue here.
The preferred response to terrorism ought to be apprehension and
trial, with full due process of law.
But if our policymakers are compelled to choose between using
lethal force against someone like bin Laden or permitting him
and his ilk to continue their terror, they ought not be distracted
by the spurious argument that such a policy would constitute assassination.

Load-Date: October 26, 1998


End of Document