In sermon, leading imam of Egypt assails terrorism People who kill innocents in the name of Islam are "liars and charlatans," he tells worshippers.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 30, 2005 Saturday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 568 words
Byline: BY LEE KEATH The Associated Press
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt 
Body


Egypt's top Islamic cleric delivered a fierce sermon Friday against terrorism.
The cleric spoke at the main mosque in Sharm el-Sheik, the Red Sea resort struck by deadly bombings a week ago. He is Mohammed Sayyed Tantawi, grand imam of Al-Azhar -- one of the Sunni world's most prestigious institutions.
Even the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah says Muslim clerics have to act to curb extremism.
After the continuing bloodshed in Iraq and this month's London bombings, the Sharm el-Sheik attack has deepened what has been a growing debate among Muslims about how Islam should deal with terrorists who act in its name.
Tantawi delivered the sermon at Friday prayers in Sharm el-Sheik's "Peace Mosque." It was packed with hundreds of worshippers still stunned by the bombings, which killed scores of Egyptians and foreign tourists on July 23.
Tantawi told worshippers that "even polytheists who come to Egypt to see its civilization, who didn't come to harm you -- you have to protect them and treat them in a good way."
The cleric used the Arabic word mushrikin -- "polytheists," or those who worship more than one god. In Islam, the term is heavy with negative connotations. The Quran, Islam's holy book, repeatedly denounces mushrikin. It accepts Jews and Christians as fellow monotheists -- worshippers of one god.
Those who killed dozens of innocents "have no justification," Tantawi said. If they claim to be obeying orders of Islam, he said, "They are liars, liars and charlatans, and Islam disavows them."
He said, "The aggressors who blow up themselves, their cars and bombs against innocent men, women and children, will not be given any mercy by God."
Tantawi has emerged as a strong voice against terrorism. Early this month, he condemned Islamic insurgents in Iraq, saying all Iraqis and Arabs should unite to purge Iraq of "their filth and viciousness."
Egyptian investigators have been focusing on the likelihood that homegrown Islamic militant cells in the Sinai Peninsula carried out the Sharm el-Sheik bombings. The official death toll stands at 64, but hospitals say bodies still uncounted could bring it to 88. 
With every terrorist attack, Arabs and Muslims have been struggling to strike a balance between condemning bloodshed and charging that U.S. policies in Iraq and Israel fuel Islamic militant violence. Debate has focused on whether reform is needed to purge extremist teachings.
In Lebanon, the militant Shiite Muslim Hezbollah said immediately after the Sharm el-Sheik bombings that attacks against innocent people "require a decisive stance by clerics" against violence.
Hezbollah is considered a terrorist organization by the United States, which accuses it of supporting Palestinian militants against Israel. But in Lebanon, Hezbollah is seen as a nationalist force after its long fight against the Israeli soldiers who occupied southern Lebanon until 2000.
The group's stance on violence is becoming more nuanced. It opposes the U.S. military presence in Iraq. But as more of its Iraqi Shiite brethren fall victim in bombings, Hezbollah has grown more vocal in condemning the insurgency in Iraq.
Lebanon's most senior Shiite cleric, Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, said after the Sharm el-Sheik attacks that all Muslims must condemn such attacks. But in his sermon Friday, he said the "evil phenomenon" of terrorism "stems from the policy of arrogance" by the U.S. and Israel.

Load-Date: July 31, 2005


End of Document