In the know
The Mirror: Fairfield University
February 13, 2008 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2008 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 413 words
Body


FAIRFIELD
Fairfield University updates its media center. Fairfield's Media Center recently received an upgrade with three Hitachi SK-3020P HDTV Studio/EFP Cameras added to the Center, which is located in Fairfield Prep's Xavier Hall. The cameras now allow Fairfield to become a multi-standard, broadcast-quality, native 16:9 HDTV production capability, as well as being able to be packed up and record from other locations, such as the sports fields and auditoriums.
"New Media students at Fairfield have an extraordinary opportunity to be working hands-on with broadcast-quality HDTV equipment from Hitachi," Fr. Jim Mayzik, S.J., director of the Media Center and the new media academic program, said in a press release. "Few schools of Fairfield's caliber offer students access to such technology, beginning in freshman year."
  Click for more information on the topic.  
POLITICS
  Democratic presidential debate scheduled for next week  .
Democratic presidential hopefuls Illinois Sen. Barack Obama and New York Sen. Hillary Clinton have agreed to participate in a Texas debate next week. The debate is scheduled for Feb. 21 at 8 p.m. at the University of Texas in Austin. The debate will air on CNN.
NATIONAL
Charges filed against six involved in 9/11 The Pentagon announced on Monday that the U.S. is filing charges against six Guantanamo detainees involved with the Sept. 11 attacks. Brig. Gen. Thomas Hartmann of the Air Force announced at a news briefing that the charges will include conspiracy and murder in violation of the law of the war, attacking civilian targets, terrorism and support of terrorism,  according to The New York Times  .
One of the six accused is Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who has publicly claimed that he was the mastermind behind the attacks.
Prosecutors in the case are seeking the death penalty because the crime committed was on such a large scale. According to the Times, each of the six accused will be granted the same rights as American military officers who are accused of crimes.
INTERNATIONAL
The largest art robbery in Switzerland Four masterworks were stolen from a Zurich museum during the weekend in what some are calling the largest art theft in Europe.
The famed paintings were taken from the Buhrle Foundation, one of the largest privately owned collections of French impressionists,
The New York Times said. The paintings, including works by van Gogh and Monet, together were worth an estimated $163 million.
  Click for the full NY Times article.  

Load-Date: February 23, 2016


End of Document