IN THE NATION;
FIXING THE BLAME
The New York Times
January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 788 words
Byline: By Tom Wicker
Body


President Reagan has accepted the responsibility - and well he might - for the Marines' lack of preparedness in Lebanon and for the many resulting casualties. At first glance, this may look like a magnanimous Presidential gesture; in fact, it places the blame precisely where it belongs.
 As the Pentagon's own official study of events in Lebanon has now made clear:
* It was Mr. Reagan's policy that sent the Marines into the crossfire of international, religious and historical forces in Lebanon; and it was his definition of their role as that of a ''peacekeeping force'' with a mission of ''limited duration'' that essentially disarmed them - psychologically as well as literally. Even after two marines were killed and 14 were wounded last August 29, Mr. Reagan steadfastly refused to concede, in the language of the War Powers Act, that he had sent forces ''into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances''; nor has he done so yet.
* After U.S. naval forces began shelling anti-government positions on behalf of the Lebanese Army, fundamentally shifting the American role to one of armed partisanship, neither Mr. Reagan nor any of his military or civilian defense officials modified the Marines' mission or the ''peace time'' rules of engagement under which they were operating - rules which required, for instance, that sentries load their rifles but keep them uncocked, while most marines were not allowed to carry loaded weapons.
* The Marines have been in Beirut since September, 1982, during which 15 months' ample warnings of terrorist tactics - notably the car bomb that all but destroyed the U.S. Embassy last April - were available. Ample opportunity also existed to prepare against such tactics. Yet, the Pentagon Commission concluded that Mr. Reagan's ''peacekeeping force'' actually was ''not trained, organized, staffed or supported to deal effectively with the terrorist threat . . .'' which in Lebanon was the most obvious threat. Not since Pearl Harbor has an Administration left its forces so unprepared for what should have been foreseen.
Even after the Oct. 23 car bombing that took the lives of 241 inadequately protected marines, and the rising level of combat since then, Mr. Reagan still insists that this small force must stay in Lebanon, ostensibly to establish the kind of peace that country has seldom known, to unify the factions that have been ancient enemies and to ensure the withdrawal of Isareli and Syrian forces - but in fact to protect the U.S. ''credibility'' that Ronald Reagan says would be damaged if they were removed.
Mr. Reagan's public assumption of responsibility, in this light, hardly seems heroic. Not only is it questionable command policy for him to shield the military officers in direct charge from the consequences of their misjudgments; but this seemingly selfless gesture also diverts attention from the Pentagon study's scathing statement of the President's own culpability.
The commission concluded bluntly that ''U.S. decisions as regards Lebanon taken over the past 15 months have been, to a large degree, characterized by an emphasis on military options and the expansion of the U.S. military role.''
These decisions - President Reagan's - the commission suggested, had been taken ''without clear recognition . . . that initial conditions had dramatically changed and that the expansion of our military involvement in Lebanon greatly increased the risk to, and adversely impacted upon the security of'' the marines stationed there.
Consequently, the report concluded, ''there is an urgent need for reassessment of alternative means to achieve U.S. objectives in Lebanon and at the same time reduce the risk'' to the Marines. That is the opposite of what President Reagan has been saying, and the oppposite of what he intends; and as long as he refuses to consider basic measures to ''reduce the risk'' in Lebanon, the responsibility lies squarely on him for the casualties the Marines are taking. Ultimately, and with good reason, the American people are going to ask: ''Why? And what has been achieved?''
Curiously enough, in denouncing terrorism in Lebanon, Mr. Reagan contended that the U.S. has always ''recognized a clear distinction between being at peace with other states and being at war. We have never before faced a situation in which others routinely sponsor and facilitate acts of violence against us while hiding behind proxies and surrogates . . .''
That clear distinction seems to elude Mr. Reagan in the case of Nicaragua, which now routinely suffers acts of violence from the ''proxies and surrogates'' of the Reagan Administration itself. Terrorism is, it seems, as terrorism does.


End of Document