In terrorism fight, U.S. consults Pan Am 103 suspect
USA TODAY
October 12, 2001, Friday,
FINAL EDITION  Correction Appended


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 406 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- U.S. officials have sought assistance for their new war against terrorism from a Libyan accused of plotting the bombing in 1988 of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland -- one of the worst terrorist acts against Americans before Sept. 11.
The State Department confirmed on Thursday that Musa Kusa, Libya's foreign intelligence chief, met in London on Oct. 3 with Assistant Secretary of State William Burns.
Disclosure of the meeting has upset relatives of the 189 Americans who died in the jetliner's midair explosion. State Department officials alerted family members that they planned to meet with Libyans but did not mention Kusa. His presence was first revealed in British newspapers this week.
A top Libyan intelligence agent for 2 decades, Kusa has "blood on his hands all around the world," says Vince Cannistraro, the CIA's former head of counterterrorism. Cannistraro led the CIA's initial investigation of the crash.
The meeting reflected the Bush administration's willingness to deal with unsavory characters to root out Osama bin Laden's al-Qa'eda network, which is blamed for last month's attacks.
That was not sufficient reason for Pan Am 103 relatives. "What are we doing sitting down at the table with this guy?" complained Rosemary Wolfe of Alexandria, Va. She lost a daughter, Miriam, 20.
Wolfe said that after she protested to the State Department, an official told her that Kusa "probably knows a lot about Lockerbie."
A State Department official said the meeting originally was to have been with Libya's ambassador to Britain and a British diplomat. Burns pressed Libya to accept responsibility for blowing up Pan Am 103 and pay compensation to relatives, the official added. Both demands are conditions for Washington to lift U.S. economic sanctions against Libya.
In the forefront of terrorism in the 1980s, Libya is a potential mine of information about bin Laden's group. U.S. officials say Libya has provided leads on the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, an offshoot of al-Qa'eda, which opposes Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi.
The United States also received recent intelligence from Sudan and Syria, which, like Libya, are on a State Department list of terrorist sponsors.
Kusa was head of Libyan intelligence when Pan Am 103 went down, but he was never indicted in the bombing, which killed 270 people.
Two low-level Libyan intelligence agents were charged in the explosion, and one was convicted this year.
Correction

A story Friday should have said that at the time of the Pan Am 103 bombing in 1988 over Lockerbie, Scotland, Musa Kusa was Libya's deputy head of foreign intelligence.
Correction-Date: October 15, 2001, Monday

Load-Date: October 19, 2001


End of Document