IN THE NATION;
MR. REAGAN'S WEEK
The New York Times
April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 802 words
Byline: By Tom Wicker
Body


Here's a small sampling of what we learned from the press last week about the domestic and foreign policies of the President of the United States:
 Monday: The New York Times quoted Alice Rivlin, the distinguished former director of the Congressional Budget Office, as follows on the Reagan budget and economic policies: ''The outlook for a high-growth economy in the United States is very good, unless we blow it. And it looks as though we are about to blow it, by having opted for a very peculiar mix of fiscal and monetary policy . . . a dumb choice.''
Tuesday: Mr. Reagan had informed Congress that a treaty banning anti-satellite weapons in space would not be ''in the overall interest of the United States'' because, he said, it could not be adequately verified - a statement directly contradicted by an authoritative report from the nongovernmental Union of Concerned Scientists.
A three-judge panel, it was reported, had named a special prosecutor to investigate the financial entanglements of Edwin Meese, Mr. Reagan's nominee to be Attorney General, the nation's highest law enforcement officer. The prosecutor will also investigate how and why some who lent money to Mr. Meese later obtained Federal appointments, as well as Mr.  Meese's alleged links to the 1980 Reagan campaign's use of confidential Carter campaign documents.
Wednesday: Reports on a Congressional Budget Office study of the cumulative effect of budget and tax changes enacted during Mr. Reagan's first three years in office disclosed that low-income families really had lost the most money and high-income families really had gained the most.
Secretary of State Shultz was quoted as telling the Trilateral Commission that the U.S. had to fight back against ''state-supported terrorism,'' which he called ''a form of warfare'' directed ''at America's interests, America's values and America's allies.'' Mr. Shultz did not mention United States- supported terrorism - guerrilla warfare, mining harbors, blowing up oil storage facilities, interdiction of travel, etc. - in Nicaragua.
Thursday: The text of Mr. Reagan's news conference confirmed that he could only deny that the C.B.O. study proved the unfairness of his tax and budget cuts. He did not even attempt to refute findings that families with incomes under $10,000 had lost an average of $390 a year, while those with incomes over $80,000 had gained an average of $8,270 annually. He only said it was ''political demagoguery'' to charge that his programs were unfair to the poor.  That same text showed Mr. Reagan attempting to blame Congress for any loss of U.S. ''credibility'' in Lebanon, where he had sent troops against the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; insisting that U.S.-supported terrorism against Nicaragua was intended only to ''inconvenience'' that country until it stopped supporting terrorism in El Salvador; and reflecting that the U.S. should have declared war on North Vietnam and allowed General MacArthur ''to lead us to a victory in Korea'' - whether over North Korea or Communist China or both he did not say.  Friday: Following Mr. Reagan's charges against Congress, the press quoted Speaker Tip O'Neill in one of the strongest attacks yet made on the President: ''The deaths lie on him and the defeat in Lebanon lies on him and him alone. . . . the trouble with this fellow is that he tries to be tough rather than smart.'' Mr. O'Neill's House Democratic colleagues, aided by 55 Republicans, were reported to have defeated a deficit-reduction proposal backed by the President and to have approved their own plan, 250 to 168. They aim to cut $95.7 billion from military spending plans, rather than the $40.2 billion Mr. Reagan had approved.  Saturday: Lead stories cited Mr. Reagan's renewed attack on Congress. He charged that its reluctance to support military force had undermined his efforts in Lebanon and encouraged ''enemies of democracy'' in Central America. His national security adviser, Robert McFarlane, said that after a foreign policy decision had been made by the President, members of Congress should criticize it only in private letters to and meetings with him.  But the British Government, the nation's closest ally and usually Mr. Reagan's ideological supporter, hadn't got the word. A London spokesman said the President had been informed that Britain disapproved of the mining of Nicaraguan harbors and wanted it stopped.  Sunday: The New York Times quoted Reagan Administration officials who said that Americans working for the C.I.A. had been supervising the mining of Nicaraguan harbors. ''Senior officials'' also said contingency plans were being laid for the use of U.S. troops in Central America, if more limited efforts failed to achieve the Administration's goals.  Moral: Don't look back. Something may be gaining on us.


End of Document