In the wake of Sept. 11...;
ACLU fears anti-terrorism act may be used to curtail freedoms
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
October 29, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 387 words
Byline: P.J. Reilly
Body


The American Civil Liberties Union is keeping its eye on President Bush.
As the president presses forward with his war on terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the ACLU is watching to make sure Americans' civil liberties do not become a casualty of that war, according to Gary Gildin, an ACLU attorney and professor at Dickinson School of Law.
"Grave threats to civil liberties come at times of urgency," Gildin told a handful of Lancaster County Chapter ACLU members Sunday at Lancaster Friends Meeting House. "You're not going to see the courts or Congress overly concerned about civil liberties these days."
#LIBERTY.O290#
Gildin was the keynote speaker at the local ACLU chapter's annual meeting.
On Friday, Bush signed into law the USA Patriot Act, which is an anti-terrorism bill that, the ACLU says, grants new and unchecked powers to the government.
According to Gildin, the ACLU is afraid the government will use these powers against American citizens who are not under criminal investigation and immigrants who are in the country legally.
Essentially, the USA Patriot Act allows the government more freedom in gathering information on people.
"The ACLU is not against greater protections for the country," Gildin said. "We all want to be safe, but what's the cost?"
In his address, Gildin outlined a series of encounters between Americans and police in which police appeared to have violated the citizens' civil rights, but their actions were upheld by the U.S.  Supreme Court in the name of the war on drugs.
For example, Gildin described an incident in which police searched a man's trash outside his house and recorded a variety of information, such as the types of prescription medications he used and the people he corresponded with, based on what they found.
When the man filed a lawsuit claiming his civil rights were violated, Gildin said, the Supreme Court ruled that once the man discarded items as trash, he assumed the risk that they could reach police hands.
The war on drugs, Gildin said, led Congress and the courts to afford police greater latitude in conducting investigations.
"We've been fighting the war against drugs for 30 years and look where it's gotten us," he said. "Maybe this is a harbinger of what we can expect to happen to our civil liberties in the name of the war on terrorism."

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTOS, Suzette Wenger, Imam Mohammed Rassan of the Islamic Center of Lancaster, left, explains Islam to a packed house at the Unitarian Universalist Church Sunday evening. At right, Gary Gildin of the American Civil Liberties Union addresses concerns about recently passed anti-terrorism legislation being used to repress people's civil liberties at the local ACLU's annual meeting Sunday afternoon.

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document