IN THE NATION;
Still a Success
The New York Times
October 14, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 760 words
Byline: By Tom Wicker
Body


Inexplicably, the Government of Italy has released Mohammed Abbas, one of the major figures in international terrorism, apparently in violation of its extradition treaty with the U.S. and despite Prime Minister Craxi's personal pledge to President Reagan that Mr. Abbas would be held with the hijackers of the Achille Lauro.
Qualified U.S. officials say they have evidence of Mr. Abbas's direct links to the ship hijacking, and a wealth of information on his past terrorist activities. His release is a dismaying development, particularly in view of Italy's good record in fighting terrorism. It need not, however, dampen Americans' pride in the capture of the hijackers and in having penetrated at last what had seemed to be the immunity of terrorists to U.S. retaliation.
This success doesn't mean the end of terrorism in the Middle East -probably quite the opposite - and it doesn't mean that from now on all terrorists will be punished; that's possible only in special cases like that of the Achille Lauro. It does put terrorists on notice that the U.S. can and will act effectively when circumstances make it possible.
If, moreover, any cloud of international illegality hangs over the action of U.S. military planes in forcing down the Egyptian airliner that was carrying the four terrorists to presumed freedom, it should be speedily dispersed by the facts of the matter.
First, safe passage had been guaranteed them only on condition that they had committed no acts of violence while they commanded the ship. Second, the Egyptian Government by accident or design misled Washington as to the whereabouts of the terrorists after it became known that they had murdered the American, Leon Klinghoffer.
In fact, the terrorists' murder of Mr. Klinghoffer invalidated the safe-passage guarantee as soon as the crime was discovered. And Egypt's confusing response appears to have made it impossible for either the U.S. or Italy to take custody of the terrorists by more conventional means than the aircraft intercept.
Ironically, the swift U.S. military operation may well have validated earlier contentions, by President Carter during the Iranian hostage crisis and Mr. Reagan during the T.W.A. hijacking earlier this year, that practical retaliatory measures could not be carried out in those cases.
This time, alert intelligence work gave what Mr. Reagan told Mr. Craxi was ''reasonable certainty'' that the four Achille Lauro hijackers were aboard the Egyptian airliner. Thus, they could be pinpointed and apprehended with little danger to the lives of innocent persons. That was not the case in the earlier incidents, and rarely will be again.
U.S. officials deliberately are not saying whether Mr. Reagan would have ordered the Egyptian plane shot down had it not followed instructions to land, but the answer is almost certainly no. His restraint in the past has shown that he is not that kind of man; and in this particular situation, how could he have ordered innocent persons - the Egyptians aboard - killed after the strong language he used about the Soviet Union's destruction of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 in 1983?
Some other cautionary notes may be useful. Americans need to restrain, for one thing, what some may regard as a justified bloodthirstiness - as expressed in the old frontier saying, ''Give 'em a fair trial and string 'em up'' - while the four Achille Lauro hijackers face justice in Italian courts. Americans' abhorrence of terrorism requires their own respect for law, which now must be allowed to take its course.
The death penalty, in fact, is not an issue. Italy has abolished capital punishment, but the hijackers could not be executed in the U.S. either. The murder of Mr. Klinghoffer having been committed on the equivalent of Italian territory, Abraham Sofaer, the State Department legal counsel, says the hijackers could be charged under U.S. law only with hostage-taking, piracy or conspiracy to do both - none of which crimes are punishable by death.
U.S. relations with Italy and Egypt almost certainly will require a good deal of patching up. And events in the Middle East, unfortunately, may be stirred rather than calmed by Mr. Reagan's retributory stroke. Terrorist retaliation in some form is almost certain to follow, perhaps in ways not so open to a U.S. counterblow. The Palestine Liberation Organization, moreover, appears to have been besmirched anew by some degree of complicity in the Achille Lauro seizure, and that can only complicate any Middle East peace process that depends ultimately on Palestinian participation.


End of Document