IN THE NATION AND THE WORLD
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 4, 2018 Saturday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OBITUARIES; Pg. B4
Length: 461 words
Body


Michael A. Sheehan
Counterterrorism expert, 63
Michael A. Sheehan, 63, who led counterterrorism efforts around the globe with the United Nations, State Department and New York City Police Department, and later, as a top Defense Department official, directed the country's Special Forces units and drone programs, died July 30 at a military hospital in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was multiple myeloma, said his wife, Sita Graham Vasan.
Mr. Sheehan, who began his career as an Army Ranger, first took part in clandestine operations in Panama in 1979. Later, he was part of drug-interdiction and counterterrorism operations in Colombia, El Salvador and Honduras, scaling buildings and jumping out of helicopters as a "real-life Rambo," in the words of a New York Daily News prof In 2000, almost a year before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, Mr. Sheehan raised alarms about Osama bin Laden and the dangers of al-Qaeda.
"What's it going to take to get them to hit al-Qaeda?" he reportedly asked at the time. "Does al-Qaeda have to attack the Pentagon?"
After the 9/11 attacks, Mr. Sheehan spent two years as an assistant secretary-general of the U.N., coordinating antiterror efforts around the world. In 2003, he joined the New York City police as a deputy commissioner and directed what was widely recognized as one of the country's foremost counterterrorism units.
Mr. Sheehan later founded an international security firm and, from 2006 to 2011, often appeared as an NBC News commentator on terrorism.
His 2008 book, Crush the Cell: How to Defeat Terrorism Without Terrorizing Ourselves, spelled out his sometimes unorthodox theories of fighting terrorism.
"Having spent the first twenty years of my career as a soldier," he wrote, "the need to be on the front lines was firmly imbedded in my psyche."
He believed the most effective way to prevent terrorist cells from attacking the United States and other countries was to stop them from forming in the first place, through diplomacy and what he called a "small-footprint" and low-cost presence in countries that gave rise to militants.
Security checkpoints at airports did little to deter terrorism, he said, and only served to annoy the "white-haired grandma" whose life was "turned upside down by overzealous airport inspectors."
Michael Andrew Sheehan was born Feb. 10, 1955, in Red Bank, N.J., and grew up in Hazlet, N.J. He father was an engineer, his mother a teacher.
After graduating from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point in 1977, he entered the Special Forces. He received a master's degree in 1988 from the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service and a second master's degree, in 1992, from the Army Command and Staff College. He retired from the military as a lieutenant colonel in 1997. - Washington Post

Load-Date: September 28, 2018


End of Document