IN THE NATION;
Facing Up to Terrorism
The New York Times
April 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 766 words
Byline: By Tom Wicker
Body


Even before the Reagan Administration's bombing raids on Libya, the fear of terrorism was causing a sharp decline in Americans' air travel to Europe, particularly to the Mediterranean. The raids may well have increased the danger, but the traveling public has no need to exaggerate its risks.
Every plane flying into Rome or Athens or Cairo this summer cannot be hijacked or bombed; owing to tightened though far from foolproof security measures, the chances are that very few of them, or perhaps none, will be. The randomness of the risk - the difficulty in foretelling which plane might be attacked, rather than some other - makes it more frightening. But it should be reassuring that the overwhelming majority of flights, even to high-risk airports, will be completed without incident.
Americans are not in the habit of canceling vacation trips by automobile because of the high incidence of highway accidents - a substantially greater threat to most of them than the terrorist's bomb. In fact, Newsweek magazine reports that more Americans drowned in the bathtub last year than were killed in terrorist attacks.
The Libyan crisis may cause Americans to overlook some other points -for instance, that over the years Europeans have suffered far more terrorist incidents, and from a greater variety of sources, than Americans have; that Arab groups are not the only perpetrators - witness the Red Brigades, Basque separatists, Sikhs in India, the I.R.A. and others almost too numerous to list; and that the Mediterranean has not been the most frequent theater of terrorism - a dubious honor belonging to Latin America.
None of that means, of course, that Americans flying to Europe this summer have no need to worry about terrorism. The situation does suggest the possibility of a greater effort against Americans by terrorists under the control of, or sympathetic to, Libya, Syria and Iran, and concentrated in the Mediterranean. On the other hand, increased security is likely to be noticeable in the same region; and countries like Italy, Greece and Egypt that are eager for American tourist dollars may be moved by fear of their loss to much stronger anti-terrorist efforts than in the past.
New technology available to terrorists - for example, plastic guns and bombs that can pass through metal detectors, and can be quickly assembled in airliner restrooms - may be more of a threat to air travel than Colonel Qaddafi's vengeance. Security measures haven't caught up with sophisticated devices like plastic explosive disguised to look like string on a package or a detonator shaped like a ballpoint pen. The explosive that recently blew a hole in a T.W.A. airliner over the Mediterranean may have been smuggled aboard within a woman's body.
The peculiar vulnerability of an airliner crowded with passengers, taking off from overworked and overcrowded airports, and flying at 30,000 feet, makes it a natural target for the terrorist. But the kind of time-consuming and inconvenient searches and passenger interrogation carried out by the Israeli airline El Al, if applied to all planes traveling the crowded skies over the U.S., the Atlantic and Europe, would destroy most of the speed and amenity that have made flying the most popular modern travel mode.
But more can and now probably will be done -more extensive hand searches, increased use of dogs trained to detect explosives, better international intelligence coordination. The woman suspected of planting the bomb in that T.W.A. airliner was a terrorist known to some intelligence services - but not, apparently, to the computer records in Cairo, where she boarded the plane. Better international exchange of information might have caused her to be detained, interrogated and more thoroughly searched.
Passengers can help themselves, too. Don't protest more strenuous security measures or otherwise distract security officials from what might be a real terrorist. Don't carry packages or even letters for strangers who ask a favor. Check under your seat and in the baggage compartment near you and report anything suspicious. Don't add to security burdens by demanding that officials check out any- and everybody who looks like an Arab, or not like an American.
Above all, go ahead with any reasonable travel plans; to be scared into staying at home is to give a victory of harassment and intimidation to a terrorist before he pulls his gun. And anyway, you won't be much, if any, more at risk flying to Europe than driving on the Interstates, or walking the streets in some American cities, or making your way home after a too-convivial party.


End of Document