IN TURKEY, THE GAG IS THE RULE DISSIDENTS AMONG THE GOVERNMENT'S MOST WANTED.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 13, 1994 Sunday FIRST EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 593 words
Byline: Zeynep Alemdar, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: HAYMANA, Turkey
Body


Economics professor Fikret Baskaya is waiting behind heavy iron doors to see if the government will come through on its promise to ease the expression laws that landed him in prison.
Baskaya was jailed here eight months ago. He was convicted of publishing Kurdish separatist propaganda for writing in a history book that the modern Turkish state has pursued a chauvinistic policy toward the Kurds.
With his jail companion Haluk Gerger, another university professor, he became the symbol of those incarcerated under Turkey's strict freedom-of- expression limits.
About 100 others - 70 of them journalists - share similar fates, but it was the imprisonment of Baskaya and Gerger that stirred a painful dispute about the laws imposed during military rule in the early 1980s.
Even at the official level, the problems caused by the harsh laws have been acknowledged.
"The freedom to spread opinions will be expanded. Limitations on books and publications including restrictions on sales, confiscations and heavy penal fines will be lifted in line with the standards of modern democracies," promised a joint proclamation when Prime Minister Tansu Ciller's center-right True Path teamed up with the Social Democrat Populist Party in a coalition government last year.
'LIMITS' OF EXPRESSION
But no actions have been taken as the country intensifies its armed struggle with Kurdish guerrillas.
"Intellectuals should not have the right to harm the sovereignty and integrity of the country or be allowed to support terrorism," said Yasar Topcu, a member of True Path and an opponent of expanding freedom of expression.
The conservative legislatures use the Kurdish problem to back their views, saying such legal revisions will help spread Kurdish separatist views to the benefit of the terrorists.
"When two-thirds of the army is engaged in war against terrorism and funerals for martyrs take place every day throughout the country, it is not easy to describe the limits of freedom of expression," said Ertugrul Ozkok, a columnist for the national newspaper Hurriyet.
But the country has come under increasing pressure from the United States and Western Europe to improve its human-rights record, which has suffered immensely during the army's crackdown on Kurdish guerrillas.
The government's partners have been pushing for an amendment in the anti- terrorism law, which gives officials wide latitude to declare writings and speeches as terrorist propaganda.
Under a recent draft proposal, a thin line is drawn to protect writings and speeches that fall within the limits of intellectual work.
VAGUE WORDING
It bans "propaganda supporting terrorist organizations in a way which will result in clear and immediate danger to the integrity of the state."
Although its chances for parliamentary approval appear to be slim because of stiff opposition from conservative deputies, it is still far from being satisfactory to many circles.
"The wording . . . is still vague enough to be used against journalists writing about terrorist organizations," said the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists in a recent letter to the government.
Baskaya agrees. "If we are not allowed as intellectuals to speak loud about our country's problems and discuss possible solutions, it means our citizenship rights are not recognized," he said in an interview in his cell, which he shares with Gerger.
The cell contains books, a typewriter and a computer. Being jailed has not interfered with his writing.
"I will be out in seven months," he said, adding, "but my chances to be back here are quite high."

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document