IN THE NATION;
THURMOND TAKES COMMAND;
by Tom Wicker
The New York Times
December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 813 words
Body


Twelve lost seats have converted the Senate Democ rats from a 58 to 41 majority i nto a 46 to 53 minority - a calamity unthinkable for so long that onl y Russell Long, John Stennis and Henry Jackson are still around to recall when last the trappings of power had to be yielded to th e Republicans.
On the other side of the aisle, only Barry Goldwater was present when the Republicans last had control, from 1953 to 1955. But do not fear for the Grand Old Party; primordial political instinct, if not recent experience, tells these nouveau riches just what to do with the spoils of victory.
Take the Judiciary Committee -which is just what J. Strom Thurmond has done, with gusto. On social issues, old Senate hands believe, this will be the ''point committee'' in the Reagan years, ''where the bloodbath is going to be.'' And under the chairmanship of South Carolina's ageless, tireless Mr. Thurmond - rewarded at last for his 1964 leap from the Democrats to the Republicans - the new majority obviously is ready to take the offensive.
AN-A
Just created, for example, is a subcommittee on ''Security and Terrorism,'' which has the obvious possibility of reincarnating the old Communist-hunting Internal Security subcommittee. Chairing it will be the ex-admiral, ex-P.O.W. and new Senator from Alabama, Jeremiah Denton, with two other staunch conservatives, Orrin Hatch of Utah and John East of North Carolina, forming the majority.
 
But that is only the beginning of the Judic iary Committee story, which actually begins in 1977; then, as the 9 5th Congress was organizing, Mr. Thurmond gave up his place as most senior Republican on the Armed Forces Committee to take the sam e spot on Judiciary.  That bumped liberal Republican Charles Mathia s of Maryland, who wouldotherwise have become senior member and would be taking over as chairman in the upcoming Congress.
Such rude treatment of Mr. Mathias never was fully explained (although the canny Mr. Thurmond may only have foreseen Republican control in the reasonably near future). But it continues. The next senior Republican after Mr. Thurmond, Mac Mathias normally would have become chairman of the important Antitrust and Monopoly subcommittee, of which he has been the ranking minority member.
Mr. Thurmond apparently did not relish the prospect of Mr. Mathias perhaps voting occasionally with the Democrats on such a sensitive committee. He simply abolished Antitrust and Monopoly, promising to deal with its business in full committee, and once again giving the back of his hand to the Senator from Maryland.
Mr. Mathias was given the subcommittee on Criminal Law but even this body was stripped of its former jurisdiction over the F.B.I. and the Drug Enforcement Administration, headline stuff now assigned to - you guessed it - Admiral Denton and the Security and Terrorism subcommittee.
As for the committee Democrats, when they were the majority, they gave the minority Republicans seven committee seats; now, however, the Republicans have assigned them eight to the majority's ten. The new majority has also cut the committee's budget by 25 percent. Thus, the third of the budget that goes to the minority not only has been sharply reduced; it also has to be divided among eight rather than seven minority members, leaving nobody much of anything.
The Republicans also appear to have stacked the Judiciary Committee and its subcommittees for ideological purposes. Of the four new members, for example, Admiral Denton, Mr. East and Charles Grassley are staunch conservatives but not lawyers; Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, a moderate by comparison to the other three, is a lawyer - but he was assigned last place in committee seniority.  Former Attorney General Slade Gorton of Washington will not be a member of Judiciary.
The vital subcommittee on the Constitution, with jurisdiction over civil rights, civil liberties, and constitutional amendments, will be chaired by Mr. Hatch, with Mr. Thurmond and Mr. Grassley (not a lawyer) as members. No more conservative subcommittee majority can be imagined -unless, perhaps, the Immigration and Refugees subcommittee - also new -with Chairman Alan Simpson of Wyoming, Mr.  Thurmond and Mr. Grassley as the majority.
No doubt anticipating such developments, former Democratic Chairman Edward Kennedy has yielded the ranking minority position to Joseph Biden of Delaware and taken his seniority to more promising territority. How Mr. Biden lines up his six colleagues on the minority side of the subcommittees remains to be seen; but he'll no doubt take into account the likelihood that Dennis DeConcini of Arizona and Howell Heflin of Alabama will often vote with the Republicans.
In fact, Mr. Heflin would have been bumped off the committee had the minority been held at seven, which is probably one reason it wasn't. And that's the way it goes, when Strom Thurmond girds for battle.


End of Document