In Uniform
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 7, 2012, Wednesday


Copyright 2012 Charleston Newspapers
Section: METRO EAST; Pg. P2
Length: 343 words
Body


Army National Guard Pfc. Cole W. Johnson has graduated from One Station Unit Training at Fort Leonard Wood, Waynesville, Mo., which included basic military training and advanced individual training.
During basic military training, the trainee received instruction in drill and ceremony, weapons qualification, map reading, tactics, military courtesy, military justice, physical fitness, first aid, and Army doctrine, history, principles and traditions.
During AIT, Johnson completed the military police specialist course to acquire skills to provide combat area support, conduct battlefield circulation control, area security, prisoner of war operations, civilian internee operations, and law and order operations. He performed as a team member in support of battlefield operations, installation law and order operations and security of Army resources and installations.
Additional training included providing peacetime support to the military community through security of resources, crime prevention programs and preservation of law and order.
A 2011 Sissonville High School graduate, Johnson is the son of Tricia Johnson of Sissonville Drive, Sissonville.
Army National Guard 1st Sgt. Bryan R. Cole has returned to the United States after being deployed overseas at a forward operating base to serve in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Operation Enduring Freedom is the official name given to anti-terrorism military operations involving U.S. troops and allied coalition partners. Active duty and reserve component members from all branches of the U.S. armed forces have been deployed to support the war against global terrorism outside the borders of the United States. U.S. troops serve in South, Southwest and Central Asia; the Arabian peninsula; the Horn of Africa; islands in the Pacific; and Europe.
Cole is assigned to the 1484th Transportation Company in North Canton, Ohio. The first sergeant, a 1988 Charleston High School graduate, has served in the military for 24 years. He is the son of Ronald and Nancy Cole of East Donnally Road, Charleston.

Load-Date: November 7, 2012


End of Document