In which our columnist appears to encourage cairn terrorism
The Bismarck Tribune
February 20, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1C
Length: 942 words
Body


I heard my first meadowlark of 2011 last Sunday. I was at Lebanon, Kan., the so-called geographic center of the lower 48 states. It was 63 degrees in north central Kansas. The sun was shining. Every car wash, no matter how primitive, in every wee village in Kansas, was bursting with human activity, like a street fair, deep queues at every bay, people with too little clothing exhibiting too much luridly white flesh too soon. And while I took pictures of the cairn at the center of the "48 contiguous states," a meadowlark issued its lusty clarion call from a nearby field. I did not believe my ears at first, so early in the year, but the (possibly New Age) meadowlark sang its pure liquid note again and again at the national vortex. There is nothing quite like the first meadowlark of the year. Or the first thunderstorm. I'm guessing we won't hear our first meadowlark for six more weeks up here in North Dakota.
Lebanon and Smith Center boast of being the geographic center of the USA, but only if you discount Alaska and Hawaii, the last two states admitted to the union. The claims of Smith Center and Lebanon were established in the 1940s, long before the admission of Alaska on Jan. 3, 1959, and Hawaii on Aug. 21, 1959. I hope and assume that Smith County, Kan., mounted a strenuous formal objection to statehood for these troublesome noncontiguous states, not on the grounds of shattered pride, for that would be petty and selfish, but because Alaska and Hawaii "were not ready for statehood," or on the Madisonian grounds that they would "overextend the sovereign jurisdiction of the republic." There is something rather pathetic about having to qualify your claim to being at the very center of things with a series of welded-on asterisks. Probably there are folks in Lebanon (population 252) and Smith Center (1,585) that reckon they'd be as populous and grand as Omaha or Wichita were it not for the dastardly ambitions of Alaska and Hawaii.
As every North Dakotan knows, Rugby is the geographic center of North America. Well, not quite and not necessarily. Actually, the precise location is some distance away from Rugby: 15-16 miles southwest to be exact, 5.2 miles north of Orrin and six miles west of Balta. That would put the actual GCNA on the shores of the seldom-visited Kilgore Lake not far from the Pierce and McHenry county line. So far as I know, the people of Orrin (population 18) and Balta (73) have never attempted a nocturnal "relocation" of the 21-foot-high rock obelisk that now graces the intersection of U.S. Highway 2 and N.D. Highway 3, but they would certainly be justified in doing so from a scientific point of view. The location was determined back in 1928 when federal mathematician Edward M. Douglas experimented with a continental map and a stickpin. Where the physical map of North America balanced on Mr. Douglas' finger was declared to be the GCNA. I wonder if Douglas ever journeyed to the heart of the continent to see "the fulcrum of the pin."
Alas. I have always assumed that the determination of this critically important bit of geographic data was more sophisticated than a pin-balancing trick. I'm guessing that a great deal depends on the map one chooses and, of course, on how you define the limits of the term "North America." Do the Aleutian Islands count? Where the land of Canada ends and Arctic ice begins, are we still in North America? If one of Hawaii's volcanoes spills lava westward into the Pacific, do we have to move the GCNA to Towner? The U.S. Geological Survey gave its official imprimatur to the Rugby site (actually, the near-Rugby site) in 1931, and the designation is unlikely to change. You can easily see the genius of North Dakota in this. Silly Kansas tied its wild claim to statehood-a geopolitical, not a geographic, standard. As Alaska and Hawaii proved, statehood parameters can change. If we ever grant statehood to Puerto Rico or - much worse - annex Alberta, the folks of Lebanon will have to weld another asterisk to their cairn. We North Dakotans wisely tied our claim to the authority of the Earth itself. Still, as a lover of North Dakota, I will now lose sleep thinking about the San Andreas Fault.
As soon as Alaska and Hawaii came on board, South Dakota declared a kind of civil war against Kansas. The National Geodetic Survey at the National Ocean and Atmospheric Administration resumed the state-of-the-art pin game and determined that the new Geographic Center of the United States (inclusive) was located about 20 miles north and west of Belle Fourche, S.D. There is a lovely little cairn (and flag) in the middle of the middle of the middle of nowhere, to which I sometimes go on pilgrimage. There used to be a wonderful butte top monument on U.S. 85 between Belle Fourche and Buffalo - not merely the geographic center of the nation, but arguably the windiest place on Earth - but in recent years it has been neglected. Belle Fourche, meanwhile, has built (within city limits) a 21-foot-diameter (low but wide) Center of the Nation monument made of South Dakota granite, on which you can stand to be photographed, if you don't mind perpetuating a fraud.
I'm going to ask my mathematician friend Douglas of Portland to create a pinless computer model to determine the exact center of North America. Stay tuned.
I'm hoping that the true center turns out to be in Marmarth.
(Clay Jenkinson is the Theodore Roosevelt Center scholar at Dickinson State University, as well as Distinguished Scholar of the Humanities at Bismarck State College and director of the Dakota Institute. He can be reached at Jeffysage@aol.com or through his website, Jeffersonhour.org.)

Load-Date: February 22, 2011


End of Document