Indefinite detention provisions are wrong; WHERE I STAND
Lassen County Times (Susanville, California)
December 20, 2011


Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2011 Lassen County Times


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 246 words
Byline: Lassen County Times staff
Body


The Obama administration has already claimed that the president has the authority to kill Americans overseas, if he believes they are terrorists.
Now, in the latest National Defense Authorization Act, Congress is trying to give the president the power to imprison Americans indefinitely, without charges or respect for habeas corpus, if he claims they are terrorists.
Democrats and Republicans in the senate have already joined hands to pass the bill.
This contempt for our rights is outrageous.
Any member of Congress who supports that provision is grossly violating his or her oath to uphold the Constitution.
If the president thinks you are a terrorist, let him present charges and evidence to a judge.
He has no authority to lock you up without any judicial review, just because he and Congress believe he should have unlimited power.
That is the kind of power held by tyrants in totalitarian regimes.
It has no place in the United States.
The Libertarian Party opposes terrorism. We also believe our government should stop taking actions that provoke terrorism.
We want to end military involvement in Iraq, Afghanistan and many other countries, and we want to repeal the Patriot Act.
For more information, call LP Executive Director Wes Benedict at (202) 333-0008 ext. 222.
The LP is America's third-largest political party, founded in 1971.
The Libertarian Party stands for free markets, civil liberties and peace.
You can find more information on the Libertarian Party at announce.lp.org.

Load-Date: January 31, 2013


End of Document