India and Pakistan Sign Visa Agreement, Easing Travel
The New York Times
September 9, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 611 words
Byline: By SALMAN MASOOD
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Pakistan and India signed a new visa agreement on Saturday, easing restrictions for travelers in what was seen as a step toward warming relations between the rival South Asian countries after years of heightened mistrust and hostility.
The agreement was signed by S. M. Krishna, the Indian minister for external affairs, and Rehman Malik, the Pakistani interior minister, in Islamabad.
The visa requirements have been strict in the past because of suspicions on each side. Among other changes, the agreement will exempt travelers over 65, children under 12 and businessmen from reporting to the police during their travels.
Relations between the two countries have improved in recent months, and trade has been increasing. The visa changes are meant to build on that by increasing contacts between Indians and Pakistanis in the hopes of instilling more trust. Some previous agreements to improve relations, however, have stumbled in being carried out.
Mr. Krishna, in Pakistan for a three-day tour, has met with top government officials, including President Asif Ali Zardari and Prime Minister Raja Pervez Ashraf.
Indian and Pakistani officials have offered optimistic statements about the nations' relations. ''We must learn from the past,'' Mr. Ashraf said Friday in his meeting with Mr. Krishna. ''We cannot change our neighbors.''
Pakistan's foreign minister, Hina Rabbani Khar, called the new visa agreement ''the first step in normalization of relations with our neighbor.''
Mr. Krishna and Ms. Khar covered a broad range of issues in their talks, but it was not immediately clear if they made headway in addressing mutual irritants.
The most volatile issue, Kashmir, remains at the center of discord between the countries and shows no signs of resolution. Officials say they are continuing their discussions over the disputed Himalayan territory, which has led to wars in the past.
On Saturday, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India -- who supports the visa changes -- made clear that security remained a big concern. According to the Indian news media, he said there had been increased attempts by militants to infiltrate the de facto border that divides Kashmir.
Frictions also continue over the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks, for which India has blamed Lashkar-e-Taiba militants based in Pakistan. India wants swift prosecution of suspects arrested in connection with the attacks. A trial of seven Lashkar-e-Taiba suspects is under way in Pakistan, but critics say its progress has been stalled by frequent adjournments.
For its part, Pakistan wants India to move quickly on disputed territories beyond Kashmir, including the Siachen Glacier. Pakistan also is pressing for India to remove nontariff barriers to trade.
Despite continued tensions, Pakistani politicians and Indian officials said that a step-by-step approach to repair ties was essential.
''We will not be held hostage to history,'' Ms. Khar said.
Pakistan has sent a strong message to India by increasing trade ties, she said. Bilateral trade between the two countries was only $300 million in 2004, but increased ninefold to $2.7 billion in 2011, and is expected to grow further.
In his remarks, the Indian foreign minister stressed that terrorism was dangerous to both countries.
''We agreed that terrorism poses a continuing threat to peace and security,'' Mr. Krishna said. ''The Pakistani side reiterated its commitment to bring all perpetrators of the Mumbai attacks to justice expeditiously.''
He said Mr. Singh would visit Pakistan when ''he feels something worthwhile will come out of the visit.'' There is speculation that Mr. Singh might go to Pakistan by the end of the year.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/09/world/asia/india-and-pakistan-sign-visa-agreement-easing-travel.html

Load-Date: September 9, 2012


End of Document