INDIA IS HOLDING 5TH SIKH IN INDIRA GANDHI KILLING
The New York Times
December 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 363 words
Byline: By SANJOY HAZARIKA
Dateline: NEW DELHI, Dec. 27
Body


A Sikh, the fifth suspected of involvement in the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, was flown here today from the Philippines for questioning.
 The suspect, Jasbir Singh, was identified as a nephew of Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, the Sikh fundamentalist preacher turned extremist leader, who was slain with hundreds of followers during an Indian Army assault in June on the Golden Temple at Amritsar.
An Indian spokesman here, noting that Mr. Singh had not been formally extradited from Manila, praised what he called ''full cooperation'' by the Government of President Ferdinand E. Marcos. Mr. Singh, who is said to be about 22 years old, has been charged with sedition, terrorism and creating sectarian hatred, offenses that carry a maximum term of life imprisonment.
The Filipino authorities had denied Mr. Singh permission to travel into their country on Wednesday and had detained him at the Manila Airport after a request from New Delhi. His return to India ended nearly two weeks of efforts to evade arrest that began with a plea for asylum in Britain.
 
Barred by Several Countries
His request was rejected by Britain, and he was deported to Dubai. He was also refused entry there and flew to Bangkok, Thailand, where again immigration officials ordered him to leave the country. He then traveled to Manila, where he was detained and handed over to Indian intelligence and police officers on Wednesday.
An Indian Government source said tonight that investigators had flown Mr. Singh to an interrogation center in the central state of Madhya Pradesh.
Mr. Singh was reported last month to be at a Sikh holy site in Pakistan. There he is reported to have made a series of criticisms of the Indian Government and was quoted in a Pakistani newspaper interview as saying Mrs. Gandhi's slaying on Oct. 31 by two Sikh bodyguards was part of a larger plan to kill several top Indian leaders.
The other Sikhs in custody in connection with the assassination are the sole surviving accused assassin, Satwant Singh, a police inspector; a Sikh constable; and an uncle of the second accused assassin, Beant Singh. Beant Singh was shot and killed by guards soon after the assassination.


End of Document