India-Bangla Relationship
The Sentinel
October 9, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 569 words
Body


The recent visit of Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to India and the discussions she held with her Indian counterpart Narendra Modi has not only strengthened relationship between the two neighbours, but also led to signing of a number of bilateral treaties that are expected to lead to mutual socio-economic benefit between the two nations in the years to come. While the two Prime Ministers held detailed discussions in an atmosphere of great cordiality and warmth, the duo also presided over the ceremony to exchange bilateral MoUs/ Agreements signed during the visit, apart from jointly inaugurating three crucial bilateral projects through video link. Both Hasina and Modi also expressed satisfaction at the excellent state of bilateral relations, which are based on deep historical and fraternal ties, which reflect an all-encompassing bilateral partnership based on sovereignty, equality, trust and understanding that transcends a strategic partnership.

They held productive and comprehensive discussions during which they also reviewed various aspects of the bilateral relations, and exchanged views on regional issues. They also agreed to fully utilize various opportunities for advancing mutually beneficial partnership in both conventional and non-conventional areas, and to ensure that this irreversible partnership enhances the legacy that started with the Great War of Liberation of Bangladesh. Modi on his part also sent clear signals to Pakistan by way of appreciating the zero-tolerance policy of the Government of Bangladesh against terrorism and commended Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina for her resolute efforts to ensure peace, security and stability in the region. While it is a fact that terrorism remains one of the most significant threats to peace and stability of both countries and the region, it is significant to note that Modi and Hasina reiterated their strong commitment to eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Modi also took the opportunity to tell Hasina that India looks forward to closer cooperation against extremist and radical groups, terrorists, smugglers, smuggling of fake currency, and organized crime that continue to disturb India, especially in the east and northeast. One of the best things that has happened during the discussions is the decision to simplify people-people movement between the two countries. The two sides agreed that the remaining restrictions on entry/ exit from land ports in India for citizens of Bangladesh travelling on valid documents would be removed in a phased manner, beginning with checkpoints at Akhaura (Tripura) and Ghojadanga (West Bengal).

It was also imperative that both the leaders laid emphasis on effective border management for ensuring a tranquil, stable and crime-free border, with Modi telling Hasina that Bangladesh has to check trans-border movement of people from the other side. On the development front both sides recognized that increasing connectivity through air, water, rail, road offers mutually beneficial opportunity for enhancing economic cooperation between Bangladesh and the North-eastern region in particular. It is a welcome move that Standard Operating Procedures for the use of Chattogram and Mongla ports for movement of goods to and from India, particularly to and from the Northeast of India, were formally agreed upon, one which could create a win-win situation for both economies.

Load-Date: October 10, 2019


End of Document