India's Governing Party Fares Well at Polls, Despite Siege
The New York Times
December 9, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 672 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Dateline: NEW DELHI 
Body


Even in the face of widespread criticism of its handling of security issues, the governing Congress Party has performed surprisingly well in state elections that are seen as a bellwether for national elections next spring.
  The results of the elections, which were held over the last several weeks, were announced Monday. In the polls, the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P., had sought to capitalize on the government's inability to prevent a rising number of terrorist attacks this year, like those in Mumbai last month, which killed 163 people.
  ''Fight Terror: Vote B.J.P.,'' exhorted one of the party's newspaper advertisements here in the capital amid the three-day siege of Mumbai. The ads showed blood splattered on a black background. 
  But the Congress Party did not suffer the political body blow many had expected. The terrorism issue seemed not to be enough to swing voters entirely in three of the five state elections. 
  In Delhi, a city-state, the incumbent Congress Party chief minister was re-elected for a rare third term, defying predictions of anti-incumbent rage. 
  In the neighboring state of Rajasthan, voters threw out the incumbent B.J.P. government, as Congress gained enough votes to form a government in coalition with other parties. 
  Congress also won in Mizoram, a state once racked by an insurgency in the country's northeast. The B.J.P. held on to power in two central states, both troubled by Maoist insurgencies.
  Taken together, the results signaled once again that in India, all politics is local, with voters in each state apparently choosing their leaders on their individual appeal and on the local issues they championed. As Arun Jaitley, a B.J.P. leader, said on the private CNN-IBN television station, ''each election is a basket of issues.''
  In Rajasthan, for instance, caste clashes and rivalries within the B.J.P. were in part responsible for the party's downfall. In Chhattisgarh, the B.J.P.'s championing of an anti-Maoist vigilante force bore political fruit: the party's chief minister was re-elected.
  The Congress Party's Delhi victory was perhaps the most striking, in part because of the city's symbolic importance as the capital. Its two-term chief minister, Sheila Dikshit, sailed to a third term, defying the opposition's strenuous efforts to cast the government as weak on fighting terrorism.
  Delhi has been hit particularly hard. In September, serial blasts in and around busy shopping areas killed 24 people. They were part of a spate of bomb attacks across Indian cities and towns. 
  Then came the most devastating and brazen assault: the Mumbai attacks, in which at least 10 heavily armed young men, who the police say belonged to a Pakistan-based extremist group, stormed the city's busiest railway station, two luxury hotels and a Jewish denomination's outreach center. 
  The Mumbai attacks instantly raised tensions between India and Pakistan, while also inflaming public anger against the government for failing to heed intelligence warnings or for not stamping out the assailants more quickly.
  Even before the standoff in Mumbai had ended, Delhi voters went to the polls. Ms. Dikshit, in explaining her victory, said on television that voters rejected ''divisive politics'' and politicians who ''blame each other for terrorist attacks.''
  That is not to say that the Congress-led coalition government has not felt the heat of the Mumbai attacks. Its home minister, Shivraj Patil, resigned within days of the bloodshed. 
  Congress politicians in Maharashtra State, of which Mumbai is the capital, also stepped down in embarrassment. Political analysts have pointed out that the Indian electorate is  mostly rural, and for them terrorism is historically a low political priority.
  Elections are still in progress in the Indian-administered state of Jammu and Kashmir. Those results will not be known until the end of the month. No dates have been announced yet for the national polls, but they must be held by May, when the current government's term expires.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Congress Party workers celebrated Monday in New Delhi. The party faced criticism of its handling of security issues. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                            

Load-Date: December 9, 2008


End of Document