INDIAN GOVERNMENT TAKES ON SIKHS IN A BLOODY ENCOUNTER
The New York Times
June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 474 words
Body


M OSLEMS against Hindus, Assamese against Bengalese, Sikh terrorists against all the rest - in India the sources of conflict that threaten the unity of the world's largest democracy seem endless. Last week, a long-running conflict between the Government and the Sikhs of Punjab, one of India's most advanced states, appeared to reach a point of desperation. Some 450 Sikh terrorists and more than 80 soldiers died as the army assaulted the Golden Temple of Amritsar, the holiest shrine of a holy city, and other religious centers.
In 1919, hundreds of Sikhs died in a park in Amritsar at the hands of British troops and became martyrs to the cause of Indian independence. This time, Amritsar was pitted against Indian troops, including Sikhs. The temple had become a fortress from which Sikh extremists led by Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale deployed machine guns, mortars and rockets against their besiegers.
After much hesitation, the Government gave the army a free hand to end the terrorism that had accompanied a two-year campaign for political autonomy and more recognition of the Sikhs' distinctive religion. ''There is a limit to restraint,'' Home Secretary M.K. Wali said. In addition to clearing out the Golden Temple, the army attacked guerrillas in 43 temples and shrines throughout Punjab. Yesterday, guerrilla snipers were still killing soldiers at the Golden Temple.
Mr. Wali declared that the assaults had ''broken the back'' of the extremist campaign. But the immediate result was 27 more deaths as Sikh anger exploded into riots in New Delhi, and other cities, and in killings between Moslems and Hindus in Bombay, where the army also intervened. The increased tension was unwelcome news to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who in elections later this year will be seeking approval of her efforts to hold the fractious country together under strong central rule.
The main Sikh political party, the Akali Dal, announced a ''protest program'' in New Delhi. The party, a nonviolent group up to now, has hardened its attitude to compete with more militant groups. The Akali Dal leader, Harchand Singh Longowal, had been in the temple complex although he left it with his followers before the assault. The party was condemned by Mrs. Gandhi for not combating terrorism but her Government was under fire for not dealing with the Sikh demands effectively.
Among those who held out in the temple and were killed were Mr. Bhindranwale, the fundamentalist religious leader, who may become a martyr in the eyes of many of the 14 million Sikhs, and Bhai Amrik Singh, the head of the student federation. Students have been blamed for most of the terrorism in recent months.
Punjab has practical as well as symbolic importance for India. It is a major grain producer and a threat to halt shipments was among the reasons for the Government's tough reaction.

Graphic

 
photo of Sikhs trying to smother a tear gas cannister


End of Document