India's Dirty Little War
The New York Times
September 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 511 words
Body


A relentless, deadly struggle goes on and on in India's mainly Muslim state of Kashmir, where New Delhi is trying to crush forces seeking independence or union with Pakistan. The violence comes from both sides, but India's obdurate insistence on resolving a political problem by force has increasingly enmeshed it in a campaign of lawless state terrorism. The ugly results are documented in a new study by Human Rights Watch/Asia.
Regrettably, Washington, instead of raising its voice to defend human rights, has lowered it in an effort to improve commercial and diplomatic ties. The U.S. may have little power to deter India from repression. But the Clinton Administration should assert American disapproval more forthrightly.
Kashmir's political status has been disputed almost since the subcontinent was partitioned in 1947. A local Muslim uprising drew armed support from Pakistan. The Hindu maharajah then called in Indian troops who recaptured most of his lost territory. The two countries have confronted each other over tense cease-fire lines ever since. Meanwhile, on the Indian side, a promised plebiscite was never held and the state was formally incorporated into India in 1954. Separatist agitation continued on and off, flaring again into open conflict in 1989.
Some pro-Pakistani militant groups have resorted to terrorist deeds like kidnapping, assassination and extortion and even to common crime. No political grievance can justify such acts.
But Human Rights Watch/Asia reports that Indian forces, which are obliged to follow higher standards, have also resorted to reprisal killings and burning down villages. They are also said to be executing many suspects without trial; 200 in the first half of this year and 50 in one month alone, according to local human rights groups. There are also many reports of torture and "disappearances," two other common features of state terrorism.
India insists it has prosecuted some responsible for these crimes, but has offered no information about such prosecutions. The State Department, in its latest annual human rights report, said "there was little evidence that the responsible officials received appropriate punishment."
Until this year, American officials were equally candid in their public statements. But more recently, after New Delhi warned that continued human rights criticism could damage relations, the Clinton Administration has gone silent on the subject. Meanwhile, India has aggressively courted help from the likes of China and Iran to block condemnation by the U.N. Human Rights Commission.
The Administration needs to find a firm and consistent voice on human rights, whether in powerful countries like India and China or puny ones like Haiti and Cuba. Selective denunciations carry no moral authority. Criticizing the weak but not the strong is bullying, not leadership.
Meanwhile India, which captured the world's moral imagination with Gandhi's nonviolent struggle for independence, is now in the unflattering company of countries that use deadly force to keep their unhappy citizens in line.

Load-Date: September 6, 1994


End of Document