India Vows to Halt Terrorism Tied to Pakistan 
 The New York Times
August 16, 2001 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 475 words
Byline:  By CELIA W. DUGGER 
Dateline: NEW DELHI, Aug. 15  
Body


In his first direct address to the nation since the breakdown of peace talks with Pakistan a month ago, India's prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee, said today that his government would "not hesitate in the least to crush Pakistan-sponsored terrorism."
     India has blamed Pakistani-backed Islamic militants fighting Indian rule in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir for attacks in recent weeks on Hindus and other civilians. 
 Dozens of pilgrims, rail passengers and other civilians have been killed in the attacks. 
On Tuesday night, seven people, three of them women, were gunned down in a village, the police said. 
Mr. Vajpayee, in an independence day speech, delivered from behind bullet-proof glass on the ramparts of the Mughal-era Red Fort, today scoffed at the Pakistani president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, for characterizing the violence in Kashmir as a freedom struggle. 
General Musharraf, who took power in an October 1999 bloodless coup, was just as blunt in statements he made on Tuesday. He reiterated that Kashmir is the primary obstacle to better relations between Pakistan, an Islamic state, and India.
Pakistan maintains that the 12-year-old insurgency in Kashmir is an indigenous rebellion against India's oppressive rule. 
India and Pakistan were created 54 years ago when the former British colony was partitioned into two nations. They have fought two full wars over Kashmir since and a small one in 1999.
India considers predominantly Muslim Kashmir an integral part of the nation, while Pakistan contends it should have the right to join Pakistan.
Today, Mr. Vajpayee also again blamed the Pakistani ruler for the disappointing outcome of peace talks last month, saying India would never accept the general's singular focus on the two nations' conflict in Kashmir.
When General Musharraf and Mr. Vajpayee met in Agra, India, for two days in July, the Pakistani leader stole the show in a lengthy question-and-answer session with Indian editors, while the aging Indian prime minister remained invisible.
Many people in his own party and coalition criticized the prime minister and the government for failing to aggressively and publicly state India's case when hundreds of reporters were gathered.
Mr. Vajpayee has since met with party leaders and spoken to Parliament, but today was his first nationally televised address to the nation. 
He repeated India's longstanding position that relations between India and Pakistan would stand the best chance of improvement if the two nations made progress on a range of issues, including trade, cultural exchanges and travel restrictions, as well as Kashmir.
Despite the harsh words, Mr. Vajpayee said India would continue talking to Pakistan.
He has accepted an invitation to go to Pakistan for talks, but he gave no indication that a date has been set and no one here expects the visit to      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 16, 2001


End of Document