India Hands Over Mumbai Attacks Proof To Pak
RTT News (United States)
January 5, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Monday, India stepped up its diplomatic offensive by handing over to Pakistan evidence linking that country to the Mumbai terror attacks even as U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Richard Boucher arrived in the Pakistani capital Islamabad Monday to discuss terrorism-related issues, media reports said.
Foreign Secretary Shivshankar Menon summoned Pakistan High Commissioner Shahid Malik to hand over the dossier, which includes confession of Ajmal Amir Kasab, the lone Pakistani terrorist held during the Mumbai attacks, records of GPS and satellite phones used by the attackers and transcript of conversations between the attackers and their handlers in Pakistan during the three-day gun-battle and other material.
It also includes details about weapons and other articles recovered from the 10 Lashkar-e-Taiba(LeT) terrorists who came from Karachi and attacked Mumbai last year.
The Foreign Ministry will be briefing all heads of missions based in New Delhi Tuesday while Indian ambassadors and high commissioners will be doing the same in their host countries.
Describing the Mumbai attacks as an "unpardonable crime," Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee asked Pakistan to promptly follow up on the evidence by holding further probe there and share the results with New Delhi so that the guilty are brought to justice.
He asked Islamabad to implement the bilateral commitments it has made at the highest levels to India and "practice its international obligations."
He said he had also written to his counterparts around the globe, giving details of the Mumbai attacks, and hoped that the "world will unite" in ensuring an end to cross-border terrorism directed against India.
"We have today handed over to Pakistan evidence of the links with elements in Pakistan of the terrorists who attacked Mumbai on November 26, 2008," Mukherjee told reporters in New Delhi Monday.
Meanwhile, Home Minister P Chidambaram is expected to visit the U.S. Tuesday, to share evidence on the Mumbai attacks as part of efforts to build pressure on Pakistan.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document