INDIA ACTS TO STEM AIRLINE TERRORISM
The New York Times
June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 918 words
Byline: By SANJOY HAZARIKA, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: NEW DELHI, June 26
Body


Indian Government and airline officials announced today that they were putting new measures into effect aimed at forestalling terrorist attacks on airports and airliners. The steps include more rigorous rules for checking baggage.
A civil aviation official here said that from now on all passengers on domestic flights would have to personally identify their luggage before it could be placed aboard an aircraft. The requirement is currently in effect for flights to the Punjab, the northern region where most of the country's Sikhs live.
Indian Government and airline officials say they are putting new measures into effect aimed at forestalling terrorist attacks on airports and airlinesrs; steps include more rigorous rules for checking baggage (M)
A spokesman for Air-India, the Government-owned airline, said in a telephone interview from Bombay that it had begun enforcing the same rule on its international flights.
''Passengers on transfer flights must also now identify each piece of personal baggage at the time of changing planes,'' the spokesman, Kamlakar Mhatre, said.
 
Checks 'at Every Point'
He said this meant that there would be no automatic transfer of luggage booked on various flights and that ''at every point there will be physical checks and where X-ray facilities exist, they will be X-rayed.''
A senior Civil Aviation Ministry official also said that the Government planned to buy X-ray machines for scanning checked baggage to be stowed in cargo holds.
Currently, most Indian airports have metal detectors, X-ray machines for hand baggage and personal searches as part of their security measures.
''We are pushing plans to acquire these facilities so that we can be a hundred percent secure,'' said Surendra Singh, a secretary in the Civil Aviation Ministry, of the new X-ray machines.
At New Delhi airport armed troops and policemen are present on the tarmac and in the various lounges and only travelers with tickets are allowed inside terminals.
 
Dogs at Some Airports
Civil aviation officials noted that all major airports currently have devices designed to detect explosives and that some airports have dogs trained to sniff out explosive materials carried by passengers and in checked bags.
The aviation ministry is closely monitoring salvage operations and investigations into the crash of an Air-India jumbo jet off Ireland last Sunday. The cause of the crash has yet to be determined, but many aviation experts said circumstantial evidence suggested that the plane had been destroyed in midair by a bomb. The crash killed all 329 passengers and crew members.
Anonymous telephone callers have claimed responsibilty for the crash on behalf of militant Sikh organizations, but a spokesman for the leading Sikh activist group, the All-India Sikh Student Federation, has denied it had anything to do with it.
Meanwhile, the Indian Government announced that it would fly one relative of each of the victims to London and Cork, Ireland, free of charge to identify those bodies found and decide what final arrangements should be made.
 
Sikh Briefly Detained
Indian newspapers reported today that a Sikh was briefly arrested at Indore airport in central India after a check of his briefcase revealed a revolver. The Sikh, identified as Jasbir Singh Bhatia, told policemen he had a valid pistol license but had left it at home in Bombay. He was released on bail after questioning, the police said.
Mr. Mhatre, the Air-India spokesman, said the airline expected a drop in bookings because of the uncertainty surrounding the crash off Ireland and fears that Air-India may become a target of future terrorist attacks.
''Air-India is an easier and more vulnerable target than others,'' he said. He added that figures of cancellations were not yet available.
He noted that terrorism in Sri Lanka had caused a sharp drop in tourism but said it was too early to say if this would also happen here. ''I do not think this will affect our image much because any airline is vulnerable, no matter how secure you think you are,'' Mr. Mhatre said.
He said that an Air-India airliner bound for New York from London was delayed for several hours at Heathrow Airport on Monday after an anonymous caller said there was a bomb on board. Searchers found no explosives. He also discounted earlier statements by airline officials that a maximum of $75,000 in compensation would be paid to relatives of the victims of the crash off Ireland.
 
Airline Won't Be Miserly
''It will be done according to international standards and Air-India is not going to be an exception to these standards, nor will it be niggardly and miserly regarding compensation,'' Mr. Mhatre said. Under an international convention, dependents of air crash victims are entitled to a maximum of $100,000 in compensation.
The spokesman added that the airline had information that two men identified as L. Singh and A. Singh were booked to travel by an Air-India flight from Tokyo to Bangkok on Sunday.
Investigators say they believe that the crash and a bomb explosion in unloaded baggage at Narita airport near Tokyo may be related and that the two Singhs were possibly the fugitives who evaded arrest by American authorities last month for a purported plot to assassinate Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India.
Mr. Mhatre said Air-India's once-a-week flight to Canada, which was suspended on Tuesday, would not be resumed until the airline buys a new 747 jumbo jet from the Boeing Company. He could not say how long that would take but ''we have to buy one soon.''

Graphic

 
photo of bodies of plane victims (Agence France-Presse)


End of Document