Indianola man who led police in standoff pleads guilty
The Simpsonian: Simpson College
August 30, 2016 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 424 words
Byline: Alex Kirkpatrick
Body


by Alex Kirkpatrick, Digital Editor
August 30, 2016
INDIANOLA, Iowa - An Indianola man charged with terrorism in June has pleaded guilty to providing a false report of an explosive or incendiary device.
The Des Moines Register reports that Quinten McMurry, 35, was arrested after a nearly five-hour standoff with police earlier this summer. McMurry had threatened to blow up the Indianola square, killing himself and responding officers, with explosives at his apartment.
The incident happened just a few blocks south of campus.
McMurry faced a jury trial Thursday with his lawyer, Zachary Priebe, launching a defense of diminished responsibility or insanity.
Indianola authorities suggested McMurry had previously encountered law enforcement due to mental health issues at the time of the standoff.
He was also charged with harassment, but the charge was dropped early last week.
McMurry is scheduled to attend a sentencing hearing at 10 a.m. Sept. 20 at the Marion County Courthouse in Knoxville.
ORIGINAL STORY:
An Indianola man was taken into custody and charged early Wednesday morning after a standoff that lasted almost five hours on the square, just four blocks away from Simpson's campus.
Des Moines television station KCCI reports 35-year-old Quinten McMurry barricaded himself around 7:30 p.m. Tuesday in an apartment at 105 1/2 South Howard Street, making threats about explosives.
McMurry has been charged with terrorism.
The initial call, police said, was for a welfare check.
Police blocked off entry points to the square and evacuated nearby businesses due to the threat, including the movie theater.
Police spoke with McMurry over the phone until around 12:15 a.m. Wednesday when he was apprehended.
About 40 reinforcements from several departments assisted in the standoff, including the state's bomb squad and SWAT team.
Indianola police Capt. Brian Sher said in a news conference that this wasn't the first encounter with McMurry, who was apparently upset about a recent custody arrangement.
Online records show McMurry was sentenced to two years probation in January for child endangerment causing bodily injury stemming from a Dec. 27, 2014, incident.
The same woman filed for domestic abuse against McMurry in 2011 and again in 2014. Her most recent protective order was due to expire in November.
After his apprehension, McMurry was taken to the hospital.
He's being held at the Warren County Jail on $50,000 cash-only bail and faces charges of terrorism and first-degree harassment.
Check back with thesimpsonian.com for updates to this story.

Load-Date: January 7, 2017


End of Document