INDICTMENT CHARGES FOUR WITH SENDING MONEY TO IRAQ ILLEGALLY THROUGH CHARITY;
 NO TERRORISM IS ALLEGED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 27, 2003 Thursday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A9
Length: 431 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SYRACUSE, N.Y.
Body


Four men of Arab descent were indicted Wednesday on federal charges that they had illegally sent at least $4 million to Iraq through a Syracuse-area charity.
The indictments contained no allegations of terrorism. And U.S. Attorney Glenn Suddaby said he did not know where the money went or what it was intended for.
"That's one of the questions we are unable to answer," Suddaby said at a news conference. "As money makes its way into Iraq, it becomes exceedingly difficult to say where it ends up."
Money transfers to Iraq, even for charitable purposes, are illegal unless the organization has U.S. government approval.
The four men are accused of soliciting contributions for a charity called Help the Needy from people in the United States, depositing the money in New York banks and laundering much of it through the Jordan Islamic Bank in Amman.
Charged were Dr. Rafil Dhafir, 55, an oncologist from Fayetteville, N.Y., and a U.S. citizen born in Iraq; Maher Zagha, 34, a Jordanian who attended college locally; Ayman Jarwan, 33, of Syracuse, a Jordanian citizen born in Saudi Arabia who worked as executive director of Help the Needy; and Osameh Al Wahaidy, 41, of Fayetteville, a Jordanian citizen employed as a spiritual leader at the Auburn state prison and a math instructor at the State University of New York at Oswego.
Dhafir, Jarwan and Al Wahaidy were arrested in the Syracuse area. Zagha is in Jordan, and efforts were under way to bring him back to the United States.
The four men and the charity were charged with conspiring to transfer funds to Iraq in violation of U.S. law. Dhafir, Zagha and the charity also were charged with money laundering.
Dhafir and Jarwan were ordered held without bail for another hearing Friday.
"I'm short on details," said Edward Menkin, Dhafir's attorney. "But Dr. Dhafir told me he was fully, deeply and openly involved in providing what he believed was food aid to Iraq."
Help the Needy used a postal address in DeWitt, a Syracuse suburb. The group's Web site said it raises money to help poor children in Iraq. The charity failed to obtain the required license to provide humanitarian aid to Iraq, prosecutors said.
"As President (George W.) Bush leads an international coalition to end Saddam Hussein's tyranny and support for terror, the Justice Department will see that individuals within our borders cannot undermine these efforts," said Attorney General John Ashcroft. "Those who covertly seek to channel money into Iraq under the guise of charitable work will be caught and prosecuted."
The prosecution resulted from a three-year investigation.

Notes

WORLD; See also: Bush promises freedom for Iraq, page A1.; See also: NATO missiles arrive in Turkey for war defense, page A9.

Load-Date: February 27, 2003


End of Document