India, US to cooperate against JeM, LeT; ask Pakistan to rein in terror groups
Metro Vartha
June 27, 2017 Tuesday


Copyright 2017 Vartha News Network Pvt Ltd All Rights Reserved
Length: 622 words
Dateline: Washington 
Body


Washington , June 27 -- India and the US Monday vowed to strengthen cooperation against terror outfits like Jaish-e- Mohammad, Lashkar-e-Taiba and D-Company, while urging Pakistan to ensure that its soil is not used for terror strikes against other nations.
In a joint statement released after talks between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Donald Trump, the two nations also called on Islamabad to "expeditiously bring to justice the perpetrators of the 26/11 Mumbai, Pathankot, and other cross-border terrorist attacks perpetrated by Pakistan- based groups."
Briefing reporters on the meeting, Foreign Secretary, S Jaishankar said counter-terrorism was a major issue that was discussed between Trump and Modi during the day.
On the reference to Pakistan, he said the joint statement could not have been more explicit on the issue of cross border-terrorism being perpetrated by terror groups from the neighbouring country's soil.
"There was a broad and extensive discussion on Pakistan.
On certain issues it was very detailed," he said, adding that there was a converging viewpoint of what is the problem and diagnose the problem.
In another strong reference to Pakistan, Jaishankar said there was an extensive discussion between the two leaders on terrorism, "what its epicenter is" and how it is affecting the region, particularly the South Asian region where India is located.
"It is not just an India situation. A lot of the discussions also related to what was happening in Afghanistan," he said.
Resolving to fight together against this grave challenge to humanity, the two leaders announced increased cooperation "to prevent terrorist travel and to disrupt global recruitment efforts by expanding intelligence-sharing and operational- level counter-terrorism cooperation."
The statement said that the two leaders committed to strengthen cooperation against terror threats from groups including Al-Qaeda, ISIS, Jaish-e-Mohammad, Lashkar-e-Taiba, D-Company and their affiliates.
The two leaders recognised that terrorism is a "global scourge" which must be fought and terrorist safe havens rooted out in every part of the world.
Jaishankar said the designation of Hizbul Mujahideen leader Syed Salahuddin by the US as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist "is a strong signal coming out of the administration that it is committed to ending terror in all forms."
"We should take the step for what it is. It is fixing responsibility, highlighting the problem. There is a signalling out of it, it is focusing on a particular group and particular individual. None of us can really miss that message," he said.
The two sides also agreed to have a new consultation mechanism on domestic and international terrorist designations and listing proposals.
Modi and Trump welcomed the exchange of information on known and suspected terrorists for travel screening.
"They further resolved to strengthen information exchange on plans, movements and linkages of terrorist groups and their leaders, as well as on raising and moving of funds by terrorist groups," the statement said.
The leaders affirmed their support for a UN Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism that will advance and strengthen the framework for global collaboration and reinforce the message that no cause or grievance justifies terrorism.
"They also pledged to work together to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems and to deny access to such weapons by terrorists and non-state actors," the statement said.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from MetroVaartha English. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com

Load-Date: June 27, 2017


End of Document