India rejected peace talks offer on flimsy grounds, Qureshi says at UNGA
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 29, 2018 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 584 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


(Dunya News) - Exposing India's state-terrorism in occupied valley of Kashmir and Pakistan, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood stated India will no longer be able to continue "planned massacre" of Kashmiris on pretext of terrorism.
"Our neighbour's expertise is not restricted to spawning grounds for terrorism; it is also an expert in trying to mask malevolence with verbal duplicity", Swaraj said in her fourth address to the world body.
In her speech, she attacked Pakistan and said "India is not sabotaging talks" and "we need a common definition of terrorism".
She also assured the Assembly that India would achieve its sustainable development goals much before time.
NDTV is one of the leaders in the production and broadcasting of un-biased and comprehensive news and entertainment programmes in India and overseas.
"We believe that talks are only rational means to resolve the most complex of disputes", she said.
External Affairs Minister Swaraj appealed at UNGA that a Comprehensive (Convention On International Terrorism) should be passed as soon as possible after a consensus is reached. "EAM in her speech had extensively dealt with various SAARC related projects and expressed India's commitment to making SAARC a success as regional grouping", a source said. "Pakistan needs to support economic stability in Afghanistan and allow transit trade between Afghanistan and India", she said. Holding Pakistan responsible for harbouring terrorists, she said it is a country that "glorifies" terrorists and "refuses to see blood of innocents".
Last year, Swaraj had berated Pakistan over its continuous support for terror organizations. "Under the leadership of Prime Minister Imran Khan, we have begun to shape up a new Pakistan", he added. "But within hours, they killed three of our policemen in Kashmir".
No cutoff date for Canada to join NAFTA 2.0: Mexico president-elect
But the Canadian prime minister insists that he remains committed to the talks - and the prospect of a breakthrough. However, Canada's transport minister is dismissing the October 1st cutoff as just a creation of the U.S.
"Does this indicate a desire for dialogue", Swaraj asked. Islamabad has also accusedNew Delhi of human rights violations in Kashmir Valley.
"Time and again, Pakistan accuses India of human rights violations", Swaraj said.
Sushma Swaraj said that those who take innocent human lives in pursuit of war by other means are defenders of inhuman behaviour, not of human rights.
Qureshi discussed with the UN Secretary General the first-ever report on Kashmir by the UN High Commission for Human Rights and called for an worldwide probe into the violations of human rights in the held territory. Started after World War 1 to prevent conflicts, the league folded up in 1946 after failing to stop World War 2.
In her address to the Assembly which consisted of an attack on Pakistan for sponsoring terror, Ms. Swaraj said: "In 1996, India proposed a draft document on CCIT at the United Nations. If the United Nations is ineffective, the whole concept of multilateralism will collapse", the external affairs minister warned.
India on Saturday told the UN General Assembly that countries that have exploited the nature for their immediate needs can not abdicate their responsibilities and developed nations must lift the deprived with financial and technical resources.
Mr Qureshi said that some other nations also recognised Pakistan's strategic location and understood its importance, "so, we are not alone, everyone has options".

Load-Date: September 29, 2018


End of Document