Indictment unsealed in NYC subway plot
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 8, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 5
Length: 300 words
Byline: TOM HAYS and MATT APUZZO The Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK - A failed plot to set off bombs in the New York subway system last year was part of a larger al-Qaida terrorist conspiracy that included a similar attack planned in England, U.S. prosecutors said.
In an indictment unsealed Wednesday in federal court in Brooklyn, prosecutors added several al-Qaida figures to the case, including Adnan Shukrijumah, an FBI most-wanted terrorist.
Shukrijumah, one of the al-Qaida leaders in charge of plotting attacks worldwide, was directly involved in recruiting and plotting the New York attack, prosecutors said. The U.S. is offering a $5 million reward for information leading to his capture.
The indictment added new terrorism charges against Adis Medunjanin, who already was awaiting trial in the subway case. It also named three other men - Abid Naseer, Tariq Ur Rehman and an alleged al-Qaida operative in Pakistan known only as "Ahmad" - and linked them to a previously undisclosed companion plot in England.
Last week, authorities said they believe that Ahmad is in Pakistani custody.
Prosecutors said Medunjanin and two other U.S. citizens were arrested in September before they could carry out a trio of suicide bombings in Manhattan.
Najibullah Zazi, a Denver airport shuttle driver, and Zarein Ahmedzay have pleaded guilty to plans to detonate homemade bombs on the subway. Medunjanin wants a trial so that the case can "be resolved by a jury and not a government press release or indictment," said defense attorney Robert Gottlieb.
After 9/11, Shukrijumah, 34, was seen as one of al-Qaida's best chances to attack inside the U.S. or Europe, captured terrorist Abu Zubaydah told authorities. Shukrijumah studied at a Florida community college. When the FBI sought to arrest him as a material witness to a terrorism case in 2003, he had left the country.

Load-Date: July 8, 2010


End of Document