India, Saudi Arabia Sign Five Treaties
RTT News (United States)
March 1, 2010 Monday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 369 words
Body


(RTTNews) - India and Saudi Arabia signed a treaty of extradition Sunday, with both sides vowing to jointly fight terrorism and money- laundering. It was one of the many signed during Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh&apos;s state visit to the desert kingdom.
After arriving to a grand welcome at Riyadh&apos;s imposing Al Rawadah Palace, Dr Singh held detailed talks with Saudi King Abdullah, followed by the signing of the "Riyadh Declaration," marking a new era in ties between India and Saudi Arabia.
The six-page declaration seeks to raise bilateral co-operation between the two nations to a strategic partnership covering areas of security, economic, defense and political in view of the existing ties.
Dr Singh and the Saudi Monarch, who condemned terrorism and extremist violence in all its forms, agreed to step up co-operation in exchanging information relating to terrorist activities, money-laundering, narcotics, plus arms-and-human trafficking, besides developing joint action to combat these threats.
The Delhi Declaration on strategic energy partnership signed between the two countries in 2006 too was discussed.
The two leaders reviewed the Middle East peace process, and hoped that an independent Palestine state would be established within a specific time-frame.
The Declaration also pledged the support of the two countries for efforts to resolve the nuclear issue with Iran, and asked that country to respond to efforts to dispel doubts over the aims of its nuclear program.
The two leaders agreed to continue strengthening defence co-operation that would realise the common interests of their couontries.
The Extradition treaty is expected to further enhance bilteral security co-operation and help in the arrest of persons wanted by both countries.
In addition, four other agreements relating to the transfer of sentenced persons, cultural co-operation, memorandum of understanding between the Indian Space Research Organisation and King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology for co-operation in peaceful uses of outer space and joint research and information technology were signed.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document