India premier blames Pakistan for 102 Kashmir killings
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
August 6, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 635 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


SRINAGAR, India -- Calling for a major overhaul of India's internal anti-terrorism system, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee blamed Pakistan on Saturday for a series of attacks that killed 102 people in Kashmir.
Vajpayee accused India's neighbor of everything from indulging in carnage like the Kashmir killings earlier this week and planning bomb attacks on Christian churches to ordering the circulation of fake currency notes and aiding a festering insurgency in the remote northeastern states.
"Pakistan has adopted cross-border terrorism as an instrument of state policy to further its hostility toward India," he told chief ministers of all Indian states at a conference in New Delhi on terrorism and internal security.
There was no immediate response from Pakistan, but officials there have denied all week that they were behind the attacks Tuesday and Wednesday on a group of Hindu pilgrims and villages around the state.
Pakistani officials also suggested this week that renegade elements of the Indian military could have been involved.
India and Pakistan have fought three wars, two of them over control of Kashmir, since they won independence from Britain in 1947. The insurgency that broke out in 1989 has killed more than 25,000 people in the Kashmir valley.
Violence has risen in Kashmir since the main guerrilla group, the Hezb-ul Mujahedin, declared a unilateral three-month cease-fire July 24. More than a dozen other militant groups have vowed to scuttle the peace moves and continue fighting the Indian forces.
Hours before Vajpayee spoke, a Pakistan-based rebel group said two of its fighters stormed an Indian army camp in Kashmir early Saturday and killed six India soldiers in an exchange of gunfire.
The shootout continued for several hours in the Sarankot camp, nearly 310 miles southwest of Srinagar, the Jammu-Kashmir state's summer capital, said Abu Dalaha, a spokesman for the Lashkar-e-Tayabba.
In downtown Srinagar, suspected militants lobbed two hand grenades Saturday, wounding at least three security men and six civilians.
The pro-Pakistan Lashkar-e-Tayyaba and a string of other guerrilla groups have spurned India's peace gestures. New Delhi has stopped all military operations against the Hezb-ul Mujahedin and appealed to other rebel groups to join negotiations to end the fighting.
"Our initiative is for a dialogue with anybody who is willing to sit across the table and eschew violence in Jammu and Kashmir," Vajpayee said.
In Kashmir, Indian government officials met with six local commanders of the Hezb-ul Mujahedin to discuss ways to implement and monitor the cease-fire on the ground. The army did not confirm the meeting, but sources close to the delegates said it had taken place.
At the New Delhi conference, Vajpayee told chief ministers and top state officials that India's border is not adequately protected and that terrorists, arms, drugs and religious fundamentalists make their way into India territory. He also called the police force inadequate and poorly armed, the criminal justice system cumbersome and said government officials were insensitive to people's grievances.
The federal government plans to introduce a Prevention of Terrorism bill in Parliament.
"India is the only country in the world that faces a serious problem of terrorism but does not have an effective anti-terrorism law to deal with the problem," Vajpayee said.
Earlier Saturday, Pakistan urged India to hold three-way talks involving New Delhi, Islamabad and Kashmiri leaders. According to the state-run news agency in Pakistan, the foreign minister said the militants' demands for talks with India is "logical," and in line with U.N. resolutions recognizing Pakistan and India as the two major parties to the dispute.
India has refused to include Pakistan in any talks on the future of Kashmir.

Load-Date: August 6, 2000


End of Document