Indiana U. student leaders defend fee distributions
University Wire
November 17, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Indiana Daily Student via U-Wire
Length: 1000 words
Byline: By Julie Mahomed, Indiana Daily Student; SOURCE: Indiana U.
Dateline: BLOOMINGTON, Ind. 
Body


Controversy surrounding a $5,000 Indiana University Student Association grant to the campus group, Students Against Terrorism, for its Nov. 9 free T-shirt initiative, has led some students to question how the student government distributes student fees. However, IUSA leaders supported their decision and the process of distributing grant money to campus groups.
About $350,000 is available for distribution to student organizations from the IUSA Assisted Inter-organizational Development Department, said senior Jeff Evitts, IUSA AID director for student organization funding. About $5 from the $69.51 Student Activity Fee students pay each semester was allocated to the AID fund this year.
IUSA AID aims to foster an active student body by providing the necessary funding for events, speakers and other activities sponsored by student organizations that are registered with the Student Activities Office, Evitts said.
"One big hindrance to student activities on campus are financial constraints," Evitts said. "This fosters an active student body by providing the necessary funds for events and speakers. This is a department where we want to get rid of our entire budget because that is our goal."
The proposal for the Students Against Terrorism grant explained the event would help raise awareness on campus by going beyond a typical program, said the group's president, junior Danny Schwarz. He added the T-shirts prompted a positive dialogue throughout the campus.
"The T-shirts (were) not a one-time thing because students can wear them again and again," Schwarz said. "Yes, I do think it was a success. There have been a lot of people talking about it."
But some students argued there might be better ways to convey a group's message.
"Terrorism is a big issue in our country, and there does need to be awareness," senior Derrick Smith said. "But I think there are better ways to promote anti-terrorism than T-shirts."
While some students in the Indiana Memorial Union Thursday night said they were opposed to the amount of student fees Students Against Terrorism received, most said they supported IUSA AID contributing to campus groups that take action to improve the campus or community.
"If I felt passionately about something with a group of students, I'd want to be able to express that," sophomore Rachael Tunick said.
Supporting student organizations could be a good use of the $5 from the Student Activity Fee, junior Sean Bullman said, as long as there is oversight of where the money goes.
"It's great to support student groups, but you want a goal to lead to action," senior Michael Moran said.
Two Habitat for Humanity fundraisers this semester have also been funded in part by IUSA AID grants, IU Habitat for Humanity President David Doyle said. During Rake-a-Thon, held Nov. 11, volunteers used rakes and trash bags bought with money from the grant. A separate grant provided funds that helped set in motion the inaugural Bucket 100, a bike tour beginning Saturday from IU's Memorial Stadium to Purdue's Ross-Ade Stadium. He wouldn't give the amount of funds they received but said it was enough for significant advertising in local papers.
"They (the AID Board) look for organizations trying new things," Doyle said. "They are really generous with grants."
Habitat for Humanity and Students Against Terrorism represent only a fraction of those who have recently received IUSA AID grants. About 80 total student organizations have received funding so far this semester, Evitts said.
IUSA AID is connected to IUSA only through its name, IUSA President Betsy Henke said. Only the IUSA AID Board is involved in decisions about how the AID funds are distributed.
"It provides resources to hundreds of student groups while making sure they have an unbiased, fair group when applying for a grant," IUSA Vice President Andrew Lauck said.
The IUSA AID Board is composed of nine members and one director. Four of the members are elected during the annual IUSA elections. The remaining five members and the director are then appointed by the incoming IUSA administration, Evitts said.
To receive a grant from IUSA AID, a student organization must fill out a four page application, which, Evitts said, is a simple process. The student organization must describe itself and what it intends to accomplish with its initiative. Groups must also provide an itemized budget listing the specific expenses for which funds are needed. After its AID application is submitted, a student group must make a brief presentation to the AID Board.
"It's tedious to get a budget together," Doyle said. "But you have to go into the meeting prepared so everything is presented exactly as you have the event pictured."
While Evitts said considering each done on a case-by-case basis, he said most applications receive at least a portion of what they asked for. He added it is not need-based funding, and they will support groups even if they do not have financial problems.
In order for a grant to be approved, a vote by the nine members of the board must pass by simple majority.
The AID board does consider certain criteria when reviewing a grant proposal -- the number of members in the organization, the number of students anticipated to participate in the event, the amount of funding an organization has secured on its own, how much money the organization may have already received from AID and how the event will enhance the student body at IU, Evitts said. He added they will only consider events that have not yet occurred held by registered groups.
When a group applies for AID, up to 75 percent of the total amount requested may be granted, according to the IUSA AID application. Evitts was not able to release specific figures of how much has been distributed to groups so far this semester.
"We don't have a forced breakdown because this allows us the freedom to adapt to student groups' needs," Evitts said. "It's hard to lay down a set policy when every event is so different."
(C) 2006 Indiana Daily Student via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 17, 2006


End of Document