Indonesia promises terrorism crackdown;
Under pressure after the Bali bombings, Jakarta was preparing to issue a decree broadening officials' powers.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 17, 2002 Thursday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A02; news
Length: 698 words
Byline: Michael Dorgan Knight Ridder News Service
Dateline: JAKARTA, Indonesia
Body


Responding to international and domestic pressures after the bombing in Bali that killed more than 180 people, Indonesia's government signaled yesterday that it finally may be ready to crack down on terrorists.
Police said yesterday that the Bali blast originated in a minivan whose roof had been packed with C-4 plastic explosive, and Foreign Minister Hassan Wirayuda told reporters the government was preparing to issue an emergency antiterrorism decree that would give authorities legal tools to combat extremists.
Such a decree would be a major step by President Megawati Sukarnoputri, who has long been criticized by some of Indonesia's neighbors and by the United States for not responding to mounting evidence that the world's most populous Muslim nation had become a haven for terrorists.
Pressure on her has increased since Saturday's bombing, which many experts suspect was the work of Jemaah Islamiyah, a regional terrorist network with links to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda organization.
Megawati's chief minister for security, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, said yesterday that Jemaah Islamiyah did not exist in Indonesia "as an organization." But he told reporters that Jemaah Islamiyah existed in Malaysia and in Singapore and that Indonesians, including Abu Bakar Baasyir, a militant Indonesian cleric, were "the former leaders."
Government officials in Malaysia, Singapore and the United States say Baasyir is still the leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, which hopes to create a pan-Islamic state uniting Southeast Asia's 230 million Muslims.
Regardless of whether Baasyir and other Indonesians are members of Jemaah Islamiyah, they will be prosecuted if evidence links them to international terrorism, Susilo said.
"I have urged the Indonesian police to increase their efforts to monitor and to watch every suspicious activity," he told reporters. "There is no need for us to argue whether or not there is terrorism in Indonesia, but there is a need for us to do something to stop it. All the nations should be united to fight against terrorism."
Baasyir, 64, a cleric who runs an Islamic school, denies that Jemaah Islamiyah exists or that the Bali bombing was linked to al-Qaeda. He has said repeatedly that the blast was a plot by the United States to discredit Islam.
Police are expected to interrogate the cleric today. Yesterday, police grilled another Islamic militant, al Habib Muhammad Rizieq, the head of the Front Pembela Islam. Several of his followers went on trial yesterday for violent attacks on nightclubs, liquor stores and other businesses that violate the strict codes of Islam.
In what may be another sign of a government crackdown, the lawyer for the Laskar Jihad, a Muslim militia group that has sent members to fight Christians in the Maluku islands and elsewhere in Indonesia, said Tuesday that the group had disbanded. About 1,200 Laskar Jihad members were being withdrawn from the war-torn area, according to local news reports.
Details of the planned emergency decree have not been disclosed, but it would give the government a stronger hand in dealing with militants. The decree also would allow Megawati to circumvent Indonesia's parliament, where proposed antiterrorism legislation has languished for months.
Critics fear the legislation would be a step toward resurrecting the draconian internal security act that the former authoritarian Suharto regime used to jail its critics. Similar internal security acts in Singapore and Malaysia have been used in the last year to detain without trial dozens of suspected Jemaah Islamiyah members.
Announcement of the emergency decree was not the only indication of a shift in the government's stance.
Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, after meeting with Hassan, his Indonesian counterpart, said he was "very optimistic about the degree of cooperation unfolding between Indonesia and Australia."
Downer told CNN he believed the Indonesian government now realized the need for a tougher stand against terrorism and had agreed to create an investigative team with Australia to probe the Bali bombing. Many of those killed in the blast were vacationing Australians.
Contact Michael Dorgan at mdorgan@krwashington.com.  

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document