Indonesian Leaders Praise Raids
The New York Times
August 10, 2009 Monday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 724 words
Byline: By SETH MYDANS
Dateline: MANILA 
Body


Concerns over possible terrorist attacks heightened in Indonesia on Sunday after two raids in which the police said they had foiled plans to assassinate President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono but might have failed to capture Southeast Asia's most wanted terrorism suspect.
  The reported plan to kill the Indonesian president was a significant escalation in the profile of terrorism attacks that have taken hundreds of lives in Indonesia in recent years.
  Experts say the terrorism suspect, Noordin Muhammad Top, 40, is responsible for the major attacks in Indonesia since 2003, and he has been the target of the country's most intensive manhunts.
  Officials retreated Sunday from an earlier claim that he had been killed in one of the raids on Saturday.
  The raids came one month after suicide attacks on the JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels in Jakarta that killed seven people, six of them foreigners, as well as the two bombers.
  In raiding the safe houses, the police apparently acted on information given by suspects arrested after those bombings.
  In the first raid, the police said they recovered bomb-making equipment and a truck packed with explosives at a house not far from a residence of Mr. Yudhoyono. They said two men were killed in the raid.
  ''Our president was a target,'' said the National Police chief, Gen. Bambang Hendarso Danuri. There were conflicting reports as to whether the bombing suspects intended to attack Mr. Yudhoyono's residence, his official office or his motorcade.
  Officials said security was increased Sunday around the president, who had claimed to be a target in the hotel bombings on July 17 and had implied that they were the work of a political rival.
  ''I extend my highest gratitude and respect to the police for their brilliant achievement in this operation,'' the president said Saturday. His claim to have been the target of the hotel bombings was widely doubted by experts in Jakarta, who said they seemed certain to have been the work of Mr. Noordin.
  The second raid, which began late Friday, was more spectacular: a 16-hour standoff involving gunfire and explosives in which the police at first said four men, including Mr. Noordin, were trapped in a safe house in central Java.
  In the end just one body was found in the house, and officials backed away from claiming it was Mr. Noordin's. They said Sunday that his relatives had been asked to give DNA samples to determine the identity of the victim and that it would take about a week for the results.
  It was not clear whether Mr. Noordin had in fact been in the house, or whether he had managed to escape, said  Sidney Jones, an expert on terrorism with the International Crisis Group who is based in Jakarta.  The apparent likelihood that he was still at large means that ''we still have as high a risk as we had before,'' she said.
  ''It means that his stature as somebody who has managed to elude the police under the most trying circumstances is probably going to rise even higher, at least within jihadi circles,'' she said.
  She said the region's leading Islamist terrorist group, Jemaah Islamiyah, had been weakened by internal divisions and by a tactical and ideological shift away from violent tactics.
  As the leader of a splinter group directly associated with Al Qaeda, Mr. Noordin had come to be considered the most dangerous operative in Indonesia.
  ''There is no question that he was involved with the bombings in Jakarta,'' Ms. Jones said. ''He is certainly the person who has masterminded every major attack in Indonesia beginning with the Mariott Hotel bombings in 2003.'' A Malaysian citizen, Mr. Noordin claimed in a video in 2005 to be Al Qaeda's representative in Southeast Asia and said he was carrying out attacks on Western civilians to avenge Muslim deaths in Afghanistan.
  The Indonesian news media had reported Saturday that Mr. Noordin had been killed in the raid, but those reports, attributed to anonymous police officers, were largely retracted Sunday.
  Abdullah Hendropriyono, a retired general who is the former head of Indonesia's counterterrorist operations, told Indonesian television that he doubted that the person killed in the raid had been Mr. Noordin.
  ''It is impossible for a terrorist like Noordin to walk or stay alone, without guards,'' he said. ''As an analyst, I believe it is not Noordin.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 10, 2009


End of Document