Indonesia pledges terrorism crackdown However, official's statement may undercut credibility
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 16, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 478 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


JAKARTA, Indonesia - Scolded internationally for ignoring demands that it crack down on terrorism, Indonesia pledged today to press ahead with tough new anti-terror laws and formed an international investigative team to hunt for the culprits in the Bali nightclub bombing.
But even as it announced the initiatives, Indonesia's resolve appeared to waver when its security minister claimed that Jemaah Islamiyah - an al-Qaida-linked Islamic extremist group identified by Australia and others as a likely culprit - does not even exist in Indonesia.
The spiritual head of Jemaah Islamiyah, meanwhile, denied the group existed at all, along with denying that al-Qaida was tied to the attack, which killed at least 183 people, most of them foreign tourists, and left hundreds more injured.
"There is no link between al-Qaida and the bomb blast," Muslim cleric Abu Bakar Bashir told reporters, calling the accusations "the invention of infidels."
Foreign Minister Hassan Wirayuda told reporters the government was working on giving President Megawati Sukarnoputri authority to impose, by decree, a long-stalled anti-terrorism law. The law has been stuck in Parliament for months.
"We are working on that," Wirayuda said after a meeting with Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer. There was no indication when a decree would be handed down, but Megawati would be expected to seek approval from parliamentary leaders before doing so.
Indonesia and Australia, which lost dozens of citizens in the explosion, have agreed to form a joint intelligence team in the wake of the blast and have invited other nations to join, Downer said.
Downer said officials still "don't have any hard evidence as to who is responsible" for the explosion.
U.S. officials said today they believed the number of Americans killed in the weekend bombing would eventually climb to five or six.
Authorities have so far confirmed that two U.S. citizens died and four were injured. The dead were identified as Steven Brooks Webster, of Huntington Beach, Calif., and Deborah Snodgrass of Phoenix, Ariz.
The government is struggling to shake off the impression that it ignored months of warnings about terrorists being active here, particularly Jemaah Islamiyah, which wants to establish a pan-Islamic state in Southeast Asia.
But U.S. Ambassador Ralph Boyce said a report today in The New York Times that he warned Megawati of an imminent attack the day before the bombing was "imprecise, to say the least." He did not elaborate.
Senior intelligence officials speaking on condition of anonymity said a former air force lieutenant colonel with a background in explosives had been questioned by intelligence officers after the bombing, and would be questioned Thursday by police.
But they denied he was a suspect or had confessed, as the Washington Post reported today on the Web site of the International Herald Tribune.

Load-Date: October 19, 2002


End of Document