INDONESIA GIVES RADICAL CLERIC 15-YEAR PRISON TERM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 17, 2011 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-6
Length: 509 words
Byline: Ali Kotarumalos, Associated Press
Body


JAKARTA, Indonesia -- The Indonesian Muslim cleric known as the spiritual leader for militants who carried out the deadly 2002 Bali bombings was sentenced Thursday to 15 years in prison for his support of a terror training camp uncovered last year.
Abu Bakar Bashir's conviction for incitement of terrorism followed two unsuccessful attempts by prosecutors over the past eight years to link him to terror activities, including a conviction later overturned in the Bali attacks that killed 202 people.
The relatively stern sentence for Mr. Bashir, now 72, shows Indonesia's continuing resolve to tackle its deadly extremist movement.
The verdict was announced in a Jakarta courthouse amid tight security, with nearly 3,200 police and soldiers patrolling the surrounding area.
Mr. Bashir, who denies involvement in terrorism, rejected the ruling, and his lawyer said it would be appealed. "This verdict ignores Sharia law and is based on the infidel law, so it's forbidden for me to accept it," Mr. Bashir said in the courtroom.
Hundreds of Mr. Bashir's supporters outside the court, some carrying placards saying "Free Abu Bakar Bashir," reacted to the ruling with shock. Many shouted "God is Great," and others wept. Their leaders urged them to be calm. The crowd dispersed peacefully.
The aging cleric has been a potent symbol for Indonesia's radical Islamists and, even if not operationally involved in terrorist attacks, is believed by experts to provide crucial ideological sanction for violent extremism.
Prosecutors said Mr. Bashir provided key support for a jihadi training camp discovered in early 2010 in westernmost Aceh province that brought together men from almost every known Indonesian extremist group.
Militants there allegedly intended to carry out attacks on foreigners and assassinations of moderate Muslim leaders, such as Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
Mr. Bashir was found guilty of inciting terrorism in connection with the jungle camp. But he was not convicted of a charge of funding terrorist activities, with the panel of judges saying there was not enough evidence to prove that Mr. Bashir knew that money he raised was used to purchase guns for the training camp.
Arrested militants testified that Mr. Bashir watched a video of the Aceh military training and received written reports assuring him that funds he had raised were being used for the struggle to build an Islamic state.
Mr. Bashir denied involvement in the camp but repeatedly defended it as legal under Islam. He told reporters before the verdict that the trial was an attempt by the United States and Australia "to eliminate me from Indonesia."
Jemaah Islamiyah, the radical group co-founded by Mr. Bashir, thrust Indonesia into the front lines of the battle against terrorism with its bombings on the tourist island of Bali. Many of the victims were Australians and Americans.
Since then, the government's counterterrorism campaign has had notable successes, including convictions of dozens of Jemaah Islamiyah operatives in the Bali blasts. Three were executed.

Load-Date: June 17, 2011


End of Document