Indonesias changing face of terrorism
The Oracle: University of South Florida
October 11, 2010 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2010 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 583 words
Body


HAMPARAN PERAK, Indonesia - Muslim militants wearing black masks stormed the tiny police precinct in western Indonesia and unloaded their assault rifles - riddling officers' bodies with bullets and shining a spotlight on the country's changing face of terrorism.
Extremists, better known for targeting Western nightclubs and hotels, are now going after Indonesia's state and for the first time in more than a decade, the army has waded into the fight.
"It happened so fast, there was no way to react," said Irsol, the chief detective at the precinct on Sumatra island, who escaped the midnight assault by turning off the lights and hiding in the bathroom.
By the time the militants had sped off, one of his friends was sprawled on the floor with a hole in his head and 10 others in his arms and chest. Another friend was slumped over his computer, and a third lay motionless in a pool of blood in front of a holding cell.
"It was like they were sending a message to police and soldiers everywhere," said Irsol, who like many Indonesians goes by only one name. Still shaken after the Sept. 22 strike, he said the message was simple: "Watch out ... you're next."
Indonesia, a secular nation with more Muslims than any other in the world, was struck by a massive terrorist attack in 2002, when members of the al-Qaida linked network Jemaah Islamiyah carried out twin suicide bombings in crowded nightclubs on the country's resort island of Bali. Exactly 202 people were killed, many of them foreign tourists.
Though Jemaah Islamiyah has since abandoned such tactics, saying too many Muslim civilians were among the victims, members of a violent offshoot led by the late bomb-making expert Nordin Top continued to carry out near-annual strikes on embassies, beach-side restaurants and glitzy hotels, killing more than 60.
But the attacks have been far less deadly, in part because hundreds of suspects have been arrested and convicted - making the government and its security forces yet another target.
Indeed, the discovery of a new terror cell's jihadi training camp in westernmost Aceh province in February made it clear the game was about to change.
Several arrested militants said they wanted to punish the state for lending support to the U.S.-led war on terrorism, said Maj. Gen. Ansyaad Mbai, the head of the newly formed National Anti-terrorism Agency.
Their weapons of choice were guns, not bombs, he said, so they could be more precise.
Sidney Jones, a leading international expert on Southeast Asian terrorist groups, said the Aceh cell - which brought together militants from different networks - has been influenced in part by the Middle East.
"They have a long-term strategy of building an Islamic state and Muslim officials who hinder that objective are the enemy and need to be confronted," she said.
"That doesn't mean attacks on foreigners are a thing of the past. But for now, at least, police appear to be the No. 1 target."
Militants also have warned of high-profile assassinations, saying President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono topped their list.
The government has wasted no time in going on the offensive.
For the first time since longtime dictator Gen. Suharto was swept from power in a wave of pro-democracy street protests in 1998, the military has joined U.S.-trained elite police in fighting the militants.
"We're ready to crush terrorists, any time," said Maj. Gen. Lodewijk Paulus, who heads Kopassus, an army unit that recently was on a U.S. blacklist for widespread, Suharto-era rights abuses.

Load-Date: November 9, 2019


End of Document