INDONESIA SIGNALS TERRORISM CRACKDOWN;
 EMERGENCY DECREE WOULD GIVE AUTHORITIES LEGAL TOOLS TO COMBAT EXTREMISTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 17, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A13
Length: 365 words
Byline: Knight Ridder Newspapers The Associated Press Contributed To This Report.
Dateline: JAKARTA, INDONESIA
Body


Responding to international and domestic pressures in the wake of a bombing in Bali that killed more than 180 people, Indonesia's government signaled on Wednesday that it may be ready to crack down on terrorists.
Police disclosed that the Bali blast originated in a minivan whose roof had been packed with C-4 plastic explosive.
Police said they had detained two Indonesian men for further questioning after an initial round of interrogation. They are a security guard and the brother of a man whose ID card was found at the blast scene.
The Jakarta Post reported today that the investigation was focusing on seven foreigners who apparently arrived in Indonesia two days before the attack. Citing intelligence sources, the paper said the suspects included a Yemeni and a Malaysian.
Foreign Minister Hassan Wirayuda said the government is preparing to issue an emergency anti-terrorism decree that will give authorities legal tools to combat extremists.
Such a decree would be a major step by President Megawati Sukarnoputri. She has long been criticized by neighboring nations and by the United States for not responding to mounting evidence that the world's most populous Muslim nation has become a haven for terrorists.
Pressure on her has increased since Saturday's bombing, which many experts suspect was the work of the regional terrorist network Jemaah Islamiyah. The group has links to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network.
Megawati's chief minister for security, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, claimed Wednesday that Jemaah Islamiyah does not exist in Indonesia "as an organization."
But he told reporters that Jemaah Islamiyah existed in Malaysia and Singapore, and that Indonesians, including the militant cleric Abu Bakar Bashir, were "the former leaders."
Details of the planned emergency decree have not been disclosed, but it would give the government a stronger hand in dealing with militants. The decree also would allow Megawati to circumvent Parliament, where proposed anti-terrorism legislation has languished for months.
Critics fear the legislation would be a step toward resurrecting the draconian internal security act that the former authoritarian Suharto regime used to jail its critics.

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document