INDONESIA TIGHTENS ITS GRIP ON GROUP ACCUSED OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 24, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 573 words
Byline: Lely T. Djuhari The Associated Press
Dateline: JAKARTA, INDONESIA
Body


The world's most populous Muslim nation tightened its squeeze Wednesday on a group suspected of terrorism, putting the man said to be its spiritual chief on trial, arresting his hand-picked successor and uncovering a cache of bomb-making materials.
After Indonesia's vocal opposition to the war in Iraq, the nation has been under pressure to crush the militant group Jemaah Islamiyah and reaffirm its commitment to the U.S.-led war on terrorism.
Jemaah Islamiyah - which Western intelligence services say has ties with the al-Qaida terrorist network - has been blamed for the Bali bombings that killed 202 people on Oct. 12.
Police announced Wednesday they had arrested 18 Jemaah Islamiyah members, including three suspects wanted in connection with the Bali bombings.
Their biggest catch was a Muslim cleric, Abu Rusdan, who police say has led Jemaah Islamiyah since last year's arrest of the man thought to be its founder, Abu Bakar Bashir.
Bashir went on trial Wednesday in Jakarta on charges of ordering a series of deadly bomb attacks against churches in 11 towns on Christmas Eve 2000 that killed 19 people. Bashir, 64, is accused of ordering the bombings against Indonesia's Christian minority in the hope of destabilizing the country, where about 90 percent of the 212 million people are Muslim.
Waving and smiling to hundreds of supporters, the Muslim cleric defiantly denounced the charges as "lies from America."
Authorities say they have not been able to link Bashir directly to the Bali attack, which killed mostly foreign tourists.
But in Wednesday's indictment, prosecutors accused Bashir of giving "his blessing" to other planned terrorist strikes against Western interests in Southeast Asia, such as aborted attacks on U.S. interests in Singapore.
Meanwhile, police raids on the islands of Java and Sulawesi netted caches of explosive material, including 88 pounds of fertilizer, and detonators similar to those used in the Bali attacks.
These as well as documents and weapons found elsewhere raised fears that Jemaah Islamiyah had been planning a new wave of terror, possibly ahead of national elections next year.
Also arrested was a Malaysian man, Nasir Abbas, who police say was another senior Jemaah Islamiyah chief.
Abbas is accused of heading a unit known as "Mantiki III" that recruited and trained new members on the islands of Sulawesi and Borneo. Other reports say Mantiki III also operated in the southern Philippines.
Police have now arrested 32 suspects in the Bali bombings, many of them identified as Bashir's supporters.
Prosecutors also allege that Bashir's group drafted a death list of Christian priests in Indonesia and at one time plotted the assassination of President Megawati Sukarnoputri.
They said Bashir's ultimate aim was to topple Indonesia's secular government and establish a fundamentalist Islamic state that would span much of Southeast Asia. To this end, he founded Jemaah Islamiyah and secretly recruited, trained and deployed militants in several countries.
Bashir, who has been detained in Jakarta since October, maintained Wednesday that he is a religious teacher, not a terrorist mastermind. In the past he has denied that Jemaah Islamiyah existed.
The trial, whose opening day was televised live across the nation, was adjourned until April 30.
Outside the courtroom, a few hundred supporters - many of them students from Bashir's Islamic boarding school in the city of Solo - called for his release.

Notes

WORLD

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Abu Bakar) Bashir; Denounces charges as "lies from America"

Load-Date: April 24, 2003


End of Document