INDONESIA PASSES ANTI-TERRORISM DECREES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 19, 2002 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. 7
Length: 506 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: JAKARTA, INDONESIA
Body


* The measures were made retroactive to cover the Bali bombing and could result in death sentences for those responsible.
Indonesia issued tough anti-terrorism decrees today - and one would punish the bombers on Bali with the death penalty.
Meanwhile, the spiritual leader of an Islamic group suspected in the attack was hospitalized, postponing his police interrogation.
Nearly a week after bombs exploded in a nightclub district on the resort island, killing at least 183 people and injuring more than 300, the world's most populous Muslim country was moving to crack down on terrorism.
President Megawati Sukarnoputri's government achieved two milestones in the anti-terrorism fight - ramming through emergency measures by decree after months of legislative delay in Parliament and naming the cleric Abu Bakar Bashir as a terrorism suspect.
Both reflected signs of the difficulties confronting the government, which has feared that a crackdown could provoke a backlash by extremists.
Anyone who commits an act of terrorism, or threatens to do so, or who damages public or international facilities, could face prison sentences ranging from four years to life to death by firing squad. Using chemical, biological or radioactive materials to cause terror would bring the same penalties.
People who stockpile or use firearms or explosives could face penalties ranging from three years in jail to death.
The second decree permits suspects to be detained for three days based on intelligence reports. A judge can then order the suspect held for up to six months for further interrogation, even if no charges are filed.
The measures were made retroactive to cover the Bali bombing.
Justice Minister Yusril Izha Mahendra said: "After what happened in Bali, Indonesia urgently needs a law to fight terrorism. By having this decree, we have the authority to take action against terrorism."
The measures will be enforced by the police. Many Indonesians are hesitant about giving wider powers to the military. The armed forces have a record of human rights abuses only partially reined in by democratic leaders since dictator Suharto was toppled in 1998.
Bashir, 64, the leader of the group suspected in the Bali bombing, runs an Islamic boarding school in the Java city of Solo. He was summoned by police to the capital to be questioned today about his alleged involvement in deadly church bombings in 2000.
Police have said Bashir is not a suspect in the Bali bombing, but the organization he is accused of leading, the militant group Jemaah Islamiyah, is viewed by the United States and Australia as a prime suspect in the attack.
Bashir has avoided questioning, at least for now. Hours after giving a sermon in Solo in which he prayed for the safety of al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden, he was admitted to a hospital for respiratory problems. Doctors said he would be examined and probably would not be released before Sunday.
Bashir denied any involvement in the Bali attack.
The U.S. Embassy confirmed that nearly 300 nonessential staff had left by Friday.

Notes

TOP OF THE NEWS

Load-Date: October 19, 2002


End of Document