Indonesian Security Forces Kill 4 Suspected Militants In Raid
RTT News (United States)
September 17, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 301 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Indonesian security forces have killed four suspected militants in an an early morning raid on a house on Java island in their hunt for those behind suicide attacks on two luxury hotels in Jakarta in July. Three other alleged militants also were captured.
Counter-terrorism troops tracked the seven suspects to a hideout and sealed off the area in a suburb of Solo city in Central Java late on Wednesday. The raid ended around daybreak following an explosion inside the house. Indonesian television showed footage of a burnt-out house, with no roof and blown-out walls.
A counter-terrorism official said the dead included alleged bomb-maker Bagus Budi Pranato, alias Urwah, wanted by police in connection with the hotel bombings. The captured militants included a pregnant woman who was being treated at a local hospital. Her condition was reported to be stable.
Meanwhile, local media reports said that one of the dead could be Noordin Muhammad Top, a Malaysian suspected of planning the July 17 attacks on the Ritz-Carlton and JW Marriott hotels in the capital, Jakarta, which left nine people dead and 53 wounded.
However, there was no confirmation on this from officials as a few weeks ago the police suspected that they had killed Noordin Top but it turned out to be another person. This time they are not taking any chances and a national police spokesman said that forensic tests would need to be carried out before the identities of the dead could be confirmed.
In recent weeks, several suspects in the July bombings were detained or killed in raids, but the authorities are still on the look-out for several suspects believed to have planned the operation and recruited the bombers.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document