Indonesian Prison Riot Allows Inmates to Flee
The New York Times
July 13, 2013 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 764 words
Byline: By JOE COCHRANE
Body


JAKARTA, Indonesia -- The Indonesian authorities, including an elite police counterterrorism unit, were scouring the northern city of Medan on Friday for dozens of inmates, including convicted terrorists, who escaped from a penitentiary the night before during deadly rioting that killed five people.
The riot was set off by a power failure and water shortage that disrupted fast-breaking for the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, officials said.
Inmates holed up inside the Tanjung Gusta Penitentiary during the violence, which ended on Friday afternoon, were demanding a review of a 2012 government regulation that toughened requirements for paroles and sentence remissions for Indonesians convicted of terrorism, drug and corruption offenses.
About 150 inmates escaped from the medium-security penitentiary after setting fire to prison offices and storming the main gates beginning around 5 p.m. Thursday, and by Friday afternoon 57 had been recaptured, said Heru Prakoso, a spokesman for the North Sumatra Provincial Police.
Nine of the 14 inmates serving sentences for terrorism-related offenses were among those who escaped, he said, and five were captured. Two prison staff members and three inmates were killed during the riots, he said.
''The situation is getting better,'' Mr. Heru said Friday afternoon. ''The fires are out, the inmates are no longer doing anything dangerous, and the nearby community has resumed normal activities. The North Sumatra police chief has ordered all district police offices in North Sumatra to intensify their patrols to find the prisoners who escaped yesterday.''
He said the 14 terrorist inmates were connected either to a secret terrorist training camp in Aceh Province, which lies on the northern tip of Sumatra Island and was raided by the police in early 2010, or a bank robbery in Medan later that year.
Mr. Heru said that Detachment 88, the Western-financed and trained Indonesian police counterterrorism unit, had joined the manhunt.
One of the escaped inmates, Fadli Sadama, was convicted of being involved in three bank robberies dating from 2003 to finance terrorist activities, including the 2010 robbery in Medan.
Local television reports showed hundreds of soldiers and police officers in riot gear surrounding the prison gates Friday morning, and fires burning inside. By the afternoon, the prisoners remaining inside had allowed the soldiers in to secure the penitentiary and were starting to return to their cells, according to a reporter at the scene.
Analysts said the riot highlighted the crowding and poor conditions in Indonesian prisons as well as mismanagement by the country's Department of Corrections. The power failures and water shortages that began Thursday morning left Muslim inmates with nothing to drink to break their fast later in the day.
''Tanjung Gusta is terrible because they are overcrowded,'' said Leopold Sudaryono, law programs coordinator for the Asia Foundation in Jakarta. ''They have 2,600 inmates, while the capacity is only 1,000. So if you don't get electricity, that's O.K., but if you don't get water for more than 12 hours and you have to break your fast, it easily stirs up a situation.''
As the riots were winding down, a delegation of prisoners led by a terrorist convict named Marwan met with Amir Syamsuddin, Indonesia's minister of justice and human rights, to protest the regulation that toughens the rules under which terrorism, drug and corruption convicts can be released from prison early.
Sidney Jones, a terrorism analyst based in Jakarta, warned that inmates at other prisons could also take action to protest the regulation.
''What the government needs to do is avoid capitulating to violence,'' she said. ''Time after time it's like it takes some massive protest to force them to review a regulation, when there is no reason to review that regulation. There is already a petition to the Constitutional Court to overturn the regulation.''
Mr. Sudaryono said the riot leaders burned the penitentiary's registration office, which contained the personal files of all the inmates, including information like photographs and fingerprints, in an effort to help those who escaped elude capture.
He said, however, that the information had been backed up on an electronic database in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, about 1,200 miles southeast of Medan, because the penitentiary was part of a pilot program to create a national corrections database.
''That's the first place they target in any riot,'' Mr. Sudaryono said. ''They figure that if they can wipe it out, they can get some benefit from it.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/13/world/asia/inmates-flee-indonesian-prison.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Inmates in a damaged office at Tanjung Gusta prison. Some prisoners set fires to destroy records. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BINSAR BAKKARA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)        

Load-Date: July 13, 2013


End of Document