Industry lobbies Germany to extend terrorism backstop; EXTREMUS' future may depend on events in the United States
Business Insurance
September 10, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 17
Length: 961 words
Byline: ADRIAN LADBURY
Body


BERLIN-Risk managers, insurers and brokers are pressing the German government to back down from its previous announcement that it plans to pull its backstop for terrorism risks.
Buyers and insurance industry representatives hold that there is insufficient good-quality terrorism insurance capacity available in the commercial market and-given the recent arrest of terrorism suspects in Germany-terrorism risks are rising.
The future of the German backstop, EXTREMUS A.G., however, may be linked to the fate of legislation to extend government-backed terrorism coverage in the United States, some observers say.
The fate of EXTREMUS still hangs in the balance, according to Ralf Oelssner, head of the Deutscher Versicherungs Schutzverband e.V., the German insurance buyers' association.
Mr. Oelssner, who is also risk manager for airline Deutsche Lufthansa A.G., last week led a delegation that included representatives of the country's captive brokers association, the risk management institute and the industrial association to meet the Bundesministerium der Finanzen, the federal ministry of finance.
The group sought to persuade the finance ministry to reserve its earlier announcement that it does not intend to extend its e8 billion ($10.90 billion) two-year guarantee for EXTREMUS for a fourth term, from 2008 until 2010.
Mr. Oelssner said after the meeting that it is not clear whether the ministry will back down and that he will now write a paper to the ministry explaining why he and his colleagues believe it should extend the guarantee.
The meeting took place the day before news broke of three arrests in Germany connected with suspected plots for terrorist attacks on Frankfurt Airport and a U.S. military base.
EXTREMUS was created in 2002 in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States and is backed by 16 of Germany's biggest insurance companies.
Currently, companies can buy coverage on the open market up to e25 million ($34.1 million), most of which is reinsured, said Leo Zagel, chief executive officer of EXTREMUS based in Cologne, Germany.
Above the e25 million level, companies can buy coverage for German-based risks from EXTREMUS up to a total of e10 billion ($13.63 billion).
The 16 insurers that back the vehicle provide cover from e25 million up to e2 billion ($2.73 billion) and the government picks up the remaining e8 billion.
The maximum indemnity for any insured conglomerate is capped at e1.5 billion ($2.04 billion).
Mr. Zagel said that EXTREMUS covers about 44e of commercial and industrial risks in Germany.
While the ministry believes that there is now sufficient affordable terrorism insurance available in the open market, German insurance buyers say there is insufficient good-quality capacity to meet the needs of German industry.
One possible compromise could be for the German insurance industry to extend the capacity it offers through EXTREMUS and reduce the burden carried by the government, said Mr. Oelssner.
EXTREMUS has already upped its coverage limit to e2 billion from e1.5 billion.
``We are perfectly prepared to speak to insurers and see whether they could up the level to, say, e2.5 billion ($3.41 billion) or e3 billion ($4.09 billion), so that the government can pull its provisions back a little. This is a possibility,'' Mr. Oelssner said.
Another option that has been discussed in the past would be for the creation of a pan-European terrorism insurance vehicle that would provide consistency of coverage across the continent for buyers, particularly those with cross-border exposures.
Both Mr. Oelssner and Leberecht Funk, chairman of Hamburg-based brokerage Funk Gruppe G.m.b.H. and head of the Verband der Deutschen Versicherungsmakler, say the Treasury's decision could be swayed by the outcome of similar discussions in the United States.
If the U.S. government decides that U.S. businesses can cope with terror risk through the use of open market insurance coverage, then the German government may follow suit and see no reason to extend its financial backing of EXTREMUS, they said.
But they say that the recent arrests show the need for the coverage to be continued.
``As there are no signs of a decline of terrorism risks-rather the contrary-it is important that the EXTREMUS concept will be continued for Germany. I am therefore confident that a prolongation will be achieved in September this year,'' said Mr. Zagel.
``After an event, there has to be some security there and I do not see that without support from the government...because there is not sufficient capacity out there,'' said Christian Hinsch, chairman of the operating board of insurer H.D.I. Industrie Verischerung in Hanover.
Mr. Hinsch said that both the German insurance association-Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e.V.-and the DVS are lobbying hard for the continuation of the government backing for EXTREMUS for good reason.
``Other countries share. We insurance professionals and customers believe it is necessary, but the government thinks it is not necessary, maybe because there have not been any major attacks in Germany. But we need to take a longer-term view than that,'' he said.
``There is increased terror capacity in the private insurance sector, but this can vanish very quickly. And also the capacity EXTREMUS can offer, though limited in territorial scope, is second-to-none,'' said Mr. Funk.
Franz Hertl, head of German business at Germany-based Munich Reinsurance Co., said that he believed that weak demand from buyers was a factor in the uncertainty about EXTREMUS' future.
``Of course, we would like an extension and I am quite sure the government will extend the guarantee,'' Mr. Hertl said. ``But the buying companies, which really need EXTREMUS, need to support and demand the cover.''

Graphic

 
Art Credit: A German police officer watches passengers checking in last November at Frankfurt airport, which along with a U.S. military base were intended targets of an alleged terrorist plot that resulted in arrests last week, authorities said.
Art Credit: AP

Load-Date: September 15, 2007


End of Document