INFORMER HELPS FBI FOIL TERRORISM PLOT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 25, 1997, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 451 words
Byline: SUE ANNE PRESSLEY, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: AUSTIN, Texas
Body


Their plan, an FBI official said, was to ''wipe out'' half of Wise County on May 1.
First, the three men and one woman planned to blow up a gas refinery in Bridgeport, Texas, releasing what they thought would be a lethal cloud of hydrogen sulfide gas and perhaps killing police officers who would come to investigate a telephone bomb threat, the FBI said. During the chaos, they hoped to rob an armored car in the small town of Chico of $ 2 million, money they planned to use to finance other terrorist actions, the bureau said.
But the foursome was arrested quietly Tuesday after the Dallas Joint Terrorism Task Force, a coalition of federal and local police, conducted a month-long investigation in largely rural Wise County, northwest of Fort Worth, using an informer who was part of the group.
''He came to us and said he had learned that these people were planning this, and he could not condone violence of this nature,'' said Robert Garrity, assistant special agent-in-charge of the Dallas FBI office. ''He wanted to help us avoid a tragedy.''
The foursome planned to use the money to finance other terrorist actions.
How successful the group might have been is uncertain. Although the suspects apparently believed the plant owned by Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. of Houston used hydrogen sulfide, company spokesman Brian Engel said yesterday that was ''absolutely not true. We only produce 'sweet gas,' '' which is not lethal.
''We can't tell you why they targeted us - it sounds like it was just that we were local,'' he said.
The four suspects are being held without bond, charged with conspiracy to commit a robbery affecting interstate commerce, which carries a maximum 20-year prison sentence. They were identified as Edward Taylor Jr., 34, an unemployed Bridgeport resident; Shawn Dee Adams, 37, a tattoo artist from Boyd; his wife, Catherine Dee Adams, 35; and Carl J. Wascom Jr., 34, of Boyd, a plumber's helper who was arrested at a work site in Fort Worth. Taylor has been identified by the group Klanwatch as a member of the True Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in North Texas.
Garrity said yesterday that the group had no formal name, and no one has been identified as its leader.
''This was the first time the FBI had been aware of them,'' he said.
Garrity said the plan was to plant ''two to four'' pipe bombs at the refinery, one in a visible place. Then Catherine Adams was to telephone a bomb threat to police, who would find the visible bomb easily. The other bombs were set to detonate 45 minutes later.
 
''That was a diversion, so they could rob an armored car as it made a delivery at a bank,'' Garrity said. ''They believed there would be a lot of money, it being the first of the month.''

Load-Date: April 26, 1997


End of Document