Informer's Ex-Wife Said He Warned of Terrorism
The New York Times
September 28, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section B;; Section B; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 557 words
Byline: By MARY B. W. TABOR

By MARY B. W. TABOR
Body


At least a month before the World Trade Center bombing, the informer in what the Government has now charged was a widespread terrorist conspiracy told his former wife that he had warned authorities that a group of Islamic fundamentalists were plotting violent acts in New York, the woman said yesterday.
Barbara Rogers, the former wife of the informer, Emad A. Salem, said that the day after the explosion, Mr. Salem was upset and told her the bombing could have been averted if the F.B.I. had heeded his warnings. He had told the agency that several buildings had been targeted, she said, and he gave them names of several men, including Mahmud Abouhalima and Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, who were later arrested in the case.
"He said, 'I could have prevented it,' " she said.
A major question surrounding the trade center case has been whether the Government ignored tips that an attack was being prepared. Mr. Salem, 42, a former Egyptian military officer, had infiltrated the group as early as 1990 and was giving information to Federal agents.
But authorities say that Mr. Salem was a "difficult" personality, and not deemed credible until after the blast.  The day after the blast, Ms. Rogers said, the Federal Bureau of Investigation contacted Mr. Salem and offered to rehire him. But law-enforcement officials have said that it was not until several days after the bombing that they began to link the blast to the group of fundamentalists.
Four men -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mr. Abouhalima and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- are preparing to stand trial for the trade center explosion. Fifteen others, including Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and Mr. Elgabrowny, are charged in a larger conspiracy.
Ms. Rogers, who was divorced from Mr. Salem in January but was dating him again, also said that her ex-husband made frequent, prolonged visits to Egypt. The visits, she said, had begun shortly after he arrived in the United States in 1988 and continued until June, when he went into the Government's witness-protection program.
But defense lawyers in the case have suggested that Mr. Salem may have been working as an intelligence officer for the Egyptian Government, which could compromise his integrity as a witness in the case. There is no proof to back those statements.
Ms. Rogers, meanwhile, has found herself out of a job and almost out of an apartment -- a situation that she says stemmed from her ties to Mr. Salem.
Ms. Rogers said she was dismissed from her job at Mount Sinai Medical Center in July because hospital officials said her presence jeopardized hospital security.
She said that she had worked at Mount Sinai as a secretary for four years and had been promoted in February to a division administrator. But she said her career unraveled after her former husband was taken to Mount Sinai's emergency room on June 24 after F.B.I. agents burst into a Queens garage and arrested men who they said were mixing chemicals for a bomb.
In recent days, she said, she has been ordered evicted from her apartment which is owned by the medical center. She said that the medical center has refused to accept her rent checks since July because she is no longer a Mount Sinai employee.
"They are saying that they want to continue negotiations about this," she said, "But if they want to negotiate, hitting me with an eviction notice is not the way to do it."

Load-Date: September 28, 1993


End of Document