Informer in Terrorism Trial, Pressed by Defense, Is Cool
The New York Times
March 29, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 671 words
Byline: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 

By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 
Body


For two grueling days, a lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman has tried to pressure the Government's main informer in the terrorism conspiracy trial in Manhattan into admitting that he is in fact an Egyptian spy. And for two days, the informer, Emad A. Salem, has brushed aside the questions with a polite "absolutely not."
Mr. Salem, a former Egyptian military officer whose credibility is critical to the prosecution in the bombing conspiracy case, has managed to keep his cool under the relentless questioning from the defense lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart. He has stuck to his story again and again, denying contentions by the defense that he was paid for information he gave Egyptian intelligence officials.
But as the cross examination has ground on, Mr. Salem finally acknowledged yesterday that he had divided loyalties. Ms. Stewart used several telephone conversations between Mr. Salem and Egyptian intelligence officials -- taped by Mr. Salem himself -- to show that Mr. Salem never stopped reporting to Egyptian military intelligence authorities the entire time he worked as an informer for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"I have an obligation to protect my mother home country as much as I have an obligation to protect the United States," Mr. Salem explained.
Ms. Stewart is trying to persuade the jury that the Government's prosecution of Mr. Abdel Rahman is trumped up, and aimed at keeping him from returning to Egypt, where he enjoys wide support among religious militants. She has depicted Mr. Salem as an Egyptian double agent who came to the United States expressly to trap Mr. Abdel Rahman.
Mr. Abdel Rahman and 10 other men are accused of plotting to set off bombs at five Manhattan sites: the United Nations, the F.B.I. field office in Manhattan, the Lincoln and Holland tunnels and the George Washington Bridge.
During the cross-examination yesterday, Ms. Stewart tried to prove that Mr. Abdel Rahman never ordered the men on trial to carry out the attacks.
The defense lawyer asked Mr. Salem to recount a conversation he recorded secretly in May 1993 in which Mr. Abdel Rahman advised him against bombing the United Nations and told him to put off an attack on the F.B.I. headquarters. In the conversation, Mr. Abdel Rahman advised Mr. Salem to find a way to attack the American military instead.
Ms. Stewart then pounced on Mr. Salem, forcing him to admit that he and a defendant who has pleaded guilty in the case, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, ignored Mr. Abdel Rahman's advice and pressed ahead with a plan to bomb the United Nations and the F.B.I. office. She also pointed out that Mr. Salem and Mr. Siddig Ali later added the two tunnels under the Hudson River to the list of targets even though Mr. Salem had never asked Mr. Abdel Rahman about them.
This line of questioning seemed to be aimed at persuading the jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan that Mr. Abdel Rahman in reality was only a passive religious adviser, interpreting the Koran for his followers, and was not the fiendish head of a terrorist gang.
"The idea that he is some kind of Godfather that controls the actions of the group is total hogwash," Ms. Stewart said outside court.
Later in the day, Mr. Salem admitted he had been communicating with at least three officials of the Egyptian military intelligence service throughout his time in the United States, despite having been told by the F.B.I. to cut off his contacts with them in early 1992. He even talked to one intelligence official on the day of the arrests of several of the defendants in June 1993.
Still, Mr. Salem maintained that he was not an agent for the Egyptian Government, even though he acknowledged discussing with Egyptian intelligence officials whether the Egyptian Government would prefer to extradite the sheik and try him there. Mr. Salem insisted instead that he was simply seeking information.
"You aren't an agent for them?" Ms. Stewart said.
"Absolutely not," Mr. Salem said.
"You did not come here with the intent of being an agent?"
"No ma'am," he replied.

Load-Date: March 29, 1995


End of Document