Inquirer Editorial: Blind justice for terrorists
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 5, 2011 Saturday
CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Inq Opinion & Editorial; Pg. A08
Length: 347 words
Body


The single terrorism-related charge that federal prosecutors made stick against former Guantánamo Bay detainee Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani means he will spend the rest of this life in jail.
That's not a bad outcome for the first successful federal court prosecution of a Gitmo terrorist. 
The sentence was handed down early last week. But when Ghailani's trial wrapped up in late November, critics of President Obama's policy of closing the island military prison and trying prisoners in civilian courts made it sound like a defeat. 
Ghailani, 36, an al-Qaeda operative, managed to beat dozens of criminal counts related to the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa that killed 224 people and wounded hundreds.
He was convicted of one count and faced a minimum of 20 years behind bars. A federal judge in New York sentenced him to life without parole.
If anything, the Ghailani case reaffirms Obama's strategy of moving terror suspects' cases into the federal courts.
As Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said, "Hundreds of individuals have now been convicted in federal court of terrorism or terrorism-related crimes" since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. 
Meanwhile, the justice-lite military commission system devised by President George W. Bush and Congress has produced only five convictions. Three of those were plea deals. 
Apart from the fact that the commissions offer defendants fewer due-process protections than the federal courts, it's crystal clear that the federal courts are the best place to exact justice in the fight against terrorism.
Ghailani's life sentence in the federal trial is as stiff as what he could have received in the military tribunal. He also got a fair trial, a signal to the rest of the world that blind justice is available in American federal courts.
It's also clear that Congress should remove the roadblocks it has put up to closing Guantánamo. By going the route of federal trials for most of the detainees, federal officials will be in the best position to safeguard U.S. citizens while also honoring the nation's pledge to uphold the rule of law.

Load-Date: February 5, 2011


End of Document