Inquirer Editorial: Each attack teaches lesson
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 28, 2013 Sunday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2013 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Nav Inquirer Opinion; Pg. C04
Length: 480 words
Body


From a self-perpetuating legal limbo in the Caribbean to an endless dragnet for airborne pocketknives, much of the policy driven by the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks now looks like the counterproductive overreaction of a wounded nation. The Boston Marathon bombing wasn't comparable in scope, but it bore enough symbolic parallels to test our resolve and resilience more than a decade later. And although we are still understandably scarred by 9/11, we've also shown a capacity to learn from our mistakes in its aftermath.
 The effective shutdown of Boston and six of its suburbs was the most extreme and unprecedented response to the marathon attack and, appropriately, the most questioned. Terrorism aims to disrupt and dishearten, so bringing a major metropolitan area to a standstill threatened to fulfill the goals of the attack and encourage more like it.
 There are also questions about the lockdown's efficacy. While suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed in a shootout early in the hunt, his younger brother and suspected accomplice, Dzhokhar, wasn't discovered until the curfew was lifted nearly a day later. That was when a Watertown resident left his house for the first time all day and found the alleged terrorist hunkered down in his boat.
 But the successful conclusion of the manhunt - namely, the younger Tsarnaev's arrest without further bloodshed - helped justify its tactics. Much of the day's economic activity was only delayed, not lost. And the relatively short duration of the shutdown, as well as its largely voluntary nature, limited the consequences.
 Such orders shouldn't be issued lightly, but this was an exceptional case. And although it's not yet clear whether the FBI and CIA should have been watching the older Tsarnaev more closely before the attack, law enforcement authorities certainly performed admirably in its wake, solving the crime and finding the suspects in days.
 The handling of Tsarnaev after the younger brother's dramatic arrest deserves praise, too. Although Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) and others called for his detention as an "enemy combatant" not subject to constitutional protections, the Obama administration correctly recognized that there was scant legal or practical justification for that. Instead, after Tsarnaev was interrogated about potential threats to public safety, he was indicted on federal charges, and he will face justice under our laws just as hundreds of other terrorists have.
 The country's citizens, meanwhile, have shown a determination to carry on and come to the aid of those who were hurt, contributing more than $20 million to the cause in the week after the attacks. 
 Americans have recognized that terrorism sometimes requires new laws, policies, and responses. Now we're also learning that the civilization terrorists hope to undermine is in many ways already well equipped to deal with them.    

Load-Date: April 28, 2013


End of Document