INS arrests, may deport India terrorism suspect
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 12, 1995, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 334 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A man suspected of being India's most wanted terrorist was arrested at a Minnesota airport and faces deportation as an illegal alien, the Immigration and Naturalization Service said Friday.
Immigration agents arrested Daya Singh Sandhu, 33, alleged leader of the militant Khalistan Liberation Force, shortly after he landed at Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport on Aug. 3.
An Associated Press Report
The Khalistan Liberation Force, run by members of the Sikh religion, want a Sikh state in Punjab, where they are a slight majority. Sikh rebels began a separatist war in 1983, claiming religious and economic discrimination by India's Hindu-dominated government.
Sikh extremists were responsible for the 1984 assassination of Indian Prime Minister Indira Ghandi after government forces attacked the Sikhs' holiest shrine, the Golden Temple of Amritsar. At least 1,000 Sikhs and 200 soldiers were killed.
Also arrested in St. Paul were Sandhu's wife, Kamaljeet Kaur, 25, and Pinder Brar, 32, an Indian citizen and Canadian immigrant who met the couple at the airport.
Child protective officials in the St. Paul area were caring for Sandhu's 6-year-old son, INS spokesman Russ Bergeron said.
Sandhu also has been charged with visa fraud, INS Commissioner Doris Meissner said. He is wanted in India in connection with several terrorist crimes, the INS said, including a September 1993 bus bombing that killed eight and wounded 29 others.
Indian authorities also believe he was involved in political kidnapping and arms trafficking.
Authorities suspect Sandhu entered the United States at New York City last month using false identity papers, said Dean Hove, the INS' acting district director in St. Paul.
"We think he was in transit to Canada," Hove said, possibly as part of a plan to relocate there.
Sandhu is being held without bond by the INS pending deportation hearings. Bond for his wife was set at $ 50,000.
Brar also faces deportation and has been charged with possession and use of counterfeit documents.

Load-Date: August 14, 1995


End of Document