INSECURE AMID EXTRA SECURITY
BILL PUSHES ANTI-TERROR MEASURES
Daily News (New York)
July 29, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  18
Length: 416 words
Byline: By TIMOTHY CLIFFORD Daily News Washington Bureau Chief, With Richard Sisk and News Wire Services
Body


WASHINGTON With public concern skyrocketing over terrorism, President Clinton will meet today with congressional leaders and FBI Director Louis Freeh to fight for more law enforcement tools to meet the threat.
In a speech yesterday in New Orleans, the President said he would ask for GOP support to make it easier for authorities to wiretap suspects using cell phones. And Clinton will press for a mandate to put chemical markers, called taggants, in explosives to help track down bombers.
"As Americans, we can and must join together to defeat terrorism wherever it strikes and whoever practices it," Clinton told the Disabled American Veterans convention.
The President said the White House meeting would "help to agree on a package that will provide these additional protections against terrorism and any other measures we need to take to increase the protection of the American people."
Clinton's original anti-terrorism proposal contained the wiretap and taggant initiatives. But Republicans with allies like the National Rifle Association knocked the provisions out of the bill before the President signed it in April.
GOP opponents argued that the wiretap provision was a threat to the right of privacy. And critics of taggants contended that the microchips identifying the manufacturer could cause explosives such as gunpowder to misfire.
In the days since Saturday morning's Olympic bombing, White House officials and congressional Democrats have criticized Republicans for blocking the measures.
Talking about taggants, Rep. Charles Schumer (D-Brooklyn) said: "Imagine if this law was in place and these people in Atlanta knew they could be traced. It would have made a difference."
House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) told NBC's "Meet the Press" yesterday that he would consider a compromise on the wiretapping provision. He called the taggants "a possibility."
Even Rep. Bob Barr (R-Ga.), who led the House fight against the measures, told CNN's "Late Edition" that he would be willing to reexamine the chemical tracers.
But the House member remained opposed to the wiretapping provision.
Earlier in the day, GOP presidential candidate Bob Dole praised Clinton's handling of the recent spate of terrorist attacks, saying the country "must continue searching for ways to improve our defenses against terrorism to better insure the safety of all our citizens."
"The point should be made over and over again that it's not a partisan issue," Dole told reporters in Washington. "This is an American issue."

Graphic

 
REUTER ON THE LOOKOUT: Soldiers clear bus during security check at Wolf Creek site of Olympic shooting competition in Atlanta yesterday.

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document