Inside Terrorism's Tangled Web 
The New York Times
December 8, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; PT1; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 1; TELEVISION REVIEW
Length: 1328 words
Byline: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY
Body


''Sleeper Cell: American Terror'' is the worrying man's ''24'' -- a thriller that looks at counterterrorism from the terrorist's point of view. The second season of ''Sleeper Cell'' burrows even deeper into the mind-set of Muslim extremists than the first and is all the better and more troubling for it. 
  The eight-part series, which begins on Sunday on Showtime and will be shown on consecutive nights, is smart and suspenseful and teeters just this side of seditious. It doesn't condone jihad or the hate that fuels it, but it tries to show why they hate us, and in doing so goes further than any other post-9/11 drama on American television.
 This season goes further afield. The action in the first season was limited mostly to Los Angeles. This time the plot snakes in and around Los Angeles, London, Hamburg, Sarajevo, back alleys in Sudan, palaces in Saudi Arabia and remote desert base camps in Yemen. 
  It's a Tom Clancy cloak-and-dagger tale as told by Graham Greene. Terrorists on ''Sleeper Cell'' are evil, but the United States is neither innocent nor blameless and carries the seed of its own decline. For every act of barbarity by Muslim radicals, and there are plenty -- from nuclear Armageddon to the beheading of a female F.B.I. agent on camera -- there is a parallel, if not equivalent, blunder by American law enforcement officials and civilians. 
  Islamic fundamentalism squares off against Western decadence: Qaeda operatives communicate by piggybacking on the server of an American pornography Web site. ''Turns out the adult entertainment industry is on the cutting edge of Web security technology,'' an F.B.I. official says ruefully. 
  Michael Ealy is back as Darwyn al-Sayeed, an African-American F.B.I. agent and practicing Muslim. Last season Darwyn infiltrated an underground cell in Los Angeles and managed to avert an anthrax attack on Dodger Stadium that was meant to kill tens of thousands of people. Only one of the plotters, Ilija (Henri Lubatti), a Bosnian Muslim, escaped. The cell leader, Faris al-Farik (Oded Fehr), a chilly but charismatic Saudi, was captured. 
  The new season begins with Darwyn on vacation with his girlfriend, Gayle (Melissa Sagemiller), and her young son while Farik sits in a C.I.A. prison, withstanding psychological and physical torture and tormenting his captors.
  ''You Americans are so obsessed with yourselves,'' Farik tells his interrogators, ''that you care more about analyzing your guilt than achieving victory. That is why we will win, and you will lose.''
  Farik is sent -- or outsourced -- to Saudi Arabia, a country with fewer inhibitions about torture, and escapes. Darwyn, whose cover remains intact, reluctantly accepts a new assignment to infiltrate a different cell that includes Salim (Omid Abtahi), an Iraqi engineer raised in Britain; Benny (Kevin Alejandro), a Latino gang member who converted to Islam in prison; and Mina (Thekla Reuten), a European convert. Their task is to build a dirty bomb and detonate it over the Hollywood Bowl, spreading nuclear waste all across the coast of Southern California. 
  The series's creators, Ethan Reiff and Cyrus Voris, try to avoid offending Arab-American sensitivities. Many of the cell members are American or European converts to Islam who have their own twisted personal motives for distorting the teachings of the Koran. Salim's radicalism is fueled by self-loathing; he is tormented by homosexual leanings forbidden by his faith. (Temptation lurks in the men's locker room of a Bally fitness center.) Mina is a former prostitute who found redemption and protection under the veil, and she is bent on vengeance for her husband, a Muslim holy warrior who was killed in Iraq. 
  Only Farik is a pure religious fanatic, and he constantly reminds his enemies and his co-conspirators that violence against the infidel is dictated by Allah. It falls to Darwyn to be the Islamic voice of reason, and he spends considerable time quoting verses of the Koran that refute Farik's tough talk, sometimes even while holding a dangerous killer at gunpoint. 
  ''You're right,'' Darwyn, sweaty and panting, says when his terrorist hostage taunts him to pull the trigger. ''But Allah says in holy Koran, 'Do not let hatred of others lead you to injustice.' ''
  For all his piety, Darwyn is a classic film noir hero, a soft-voiced loner who feels almost as alienated from his colleagues and family as the enemies he befriends under cover. His father is a former Black Panther and fervent member of the Nation of Islam who views his son's F.B.I. career as a personal betrayal. Darwyn's white colleagues consider his religious affiliation baffling; a C.I.A. agent sarcastically calls him ''Jihad Joe.'' And Islamic extremists view him as a traitor to his people and his faith. 
  ''What true Muslim works for the Americans?'' a terrorist asks contemptuously. ''I don't work for the Americans,'' Darwyn replies through gritted teeth. ''I am an American.''
  But his compatriots are not always on his side. Darwyn is assigned a new case handler, Russell (Jay R. Ferguson ), a handsome, confident and inexperienced F.B.I. agent who is more of a hindrance than a help. Russell doesn't trust Darwyn, and he insists on holding his secret meetings with Darwyn in a sleazy strip club, either oblivious to his agent's religious sensibilities or intent on trampling them. 
  In the first season field agents did their best, hampered by the naivete and buck-passing careerism of the top brass in Washington. In this season Russell is stupid and sneaky, a far more lethal combination. 
  Showtime is a premium cable channel that has found its niche in contrarianism: the heroine of ''Weeds'' is a pot-dealing suburban mom; in his spare time the top sleuth on ''Dexter'' is a serial killer. Darwyn is the hero of ''Sleeper Cell,'' but the real star is Farik. He is cool and worldly, tougher and smarter than his captors and far more relentlessly dedicated. 
  Farik is so compelling a character that the writers have to keep piling on reminders of his bad side. He uses children as human shields, and imposes the most cruelly stringent rules on his own British-reared 12-year-old daughter, dressing her in a chador and forcing her to burn drawings she made for him because they are not religious enough. 
  Farik's implacability nevertheless stands out against the compromises and political expediencies of his opponents in Washington. When Darwyn demands to hunt down Farik in his lair, his superiors waffle. ''The State Department says that the PR war on the Arab street is going against us, badly,'' Darwyn's boss at the F.B.I. explains. ''Iraq. Lebanon. People at the top figure that any direct action in Yemen may do us more harm than good.'' 
  ''Sleeper Cell'' is so deadly earnest about the state of the world that it could serve as an audio-visual appendix to the Iraq Study Group report. But it is not entirely humorless. A swaggering C.I.A. agent calls in a favor from a colleague in British intelligence. ''I know you think all Brits are gay, Patrick,'' the British spy says. ''But I have never seen 'Mamma Mia.' ''
  Counterterrorism is television's new western: dramas like ''24,'' ''The Unit'' and ''NCIS'' have picked up where ''Gunsmoke'' and ''The Rifleman'' left off, putting white hats on the best and the brightest and the Few and the Proud. 
  ''Sleeper Cell'' is the one show about terrorism that highlights the weaknesses of our system and the enemy's inner strength. It's make-believe entertainment, but painted in a darker, more realistic hue. 

Sleeper Cell: American Terror
Showtime, Sunday night at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.

Ethan Reiff and Cyrus Voris, creators and executive producers; Ann Kindberg, producer.

WITH: Michael Ealy (Agent Darwyn al-Sayeed), Oded Fehr (Faris al-Farik), Thekla Reuten (Mina), Omid Abtahi (Salim), Kevin Alejandro (Benny), Jay R. Ferguson (Agent Russell), Henri Lubatti (Ilija), Melissa Sagemiller (Gayle).


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Sleeper Cell -- The new season of the Showtime series, with Oded Fehr, begins on Sunday. (Photo by Randy Tepper/Showtime)(pg. E1)
 Michael Ealy, left, and Oded Fehr in ''Sleeper Cell'' on Showtime. (Photo by Randy Tepper/Showtime)(pg. E24)

Load-Date: December 8, 2006


End of Document