Inside the Times
The New York Times
July 16, 2010 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 685 words
Body


International
  ARGENTINA APPROVES 
  Same-Sex Marriage
  Argentina's Senate narrowly approved a law authorizing same-sex marriages, making Argentina the first country in Latin America to allow gay couples to wed.  PAGE A3
  MEDVEDEV DEFENDS INQUIRY
  A year after a human rights worker, Natalia Estemirova, was abducted outside her home in Chechnya and found dead, the Russian president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, said the authorities had identified her killer and were searching for the person who ordered her murder.  PAGE A6 
  CAR BOMB KILLS 9 IN IRAQ
  A car bomb exploded in northern Iraq, killing nine people in a wealthy area of Tikrit, the hometown of the former dictator Saddam Hussein.  PAGE A8 
  IRAN'S BAZAAR STRIKE SPREADS
  A strike at the traditional bazaar in Tehran continued into a second week, spreading to at least two other major cities. The strike, only the second at the bazaar since the 1979 revolution, broke out last week after the government proposed a 70 percent income tax increase.  PAGE A8 
  SHIP TO GAZA REROUTED
  A Libyan ship that tried to break Israel's blockade of Gaza docked in Egypt, as the ship's sponsor, a son of the Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, said that the boat shifted course because the Israeli government allowed Libya to support reconstruction in Gaza. PAGE A10 
  National
  SOME INTERROGATION TACTICS 
  Unauthorized, Official  Says
  A former official in the Bush Justice Department who approved brutal interrogation methods by the C.I.A. has told Congress that he never authorized several other tactics inflicted on terrorism suspects, including prolonged shackling to a ceiling and repeated beatings. PAGE A12
  ARIZONA CUTS ROAD CAMERAS
  Arizona, the first state to adopt automated cameras on its highways aimed at catching speeders, has become the first to pull the plug, bowing to the wishes of a vocal band of conservative advocates who complained that photo enforcement intruded on privacy and was mainly devised to raise money. PAGE A12 
  TEXAS FEELS EFFECTS OF SPILL
  The impacts of the oil spill have touched Texas for the first time in Galveston, a tourist destination surrounded by drill operations and refineries, now that oil and other mysterious substances have been washing up on its shores.  PAGE A16 
  New York
  FOR AIDING TERRORISM,  
  Lawyer Is Resentenced
  A federal judge increased the sentence of Lynne F. Stewart, a disbarred lawyer convicted of assisting terrorism, to 10 years -- more than four times as long as her original sentence of 28 months, which was deemed too light.  PAGE A20
  June Jobless Rate Fell to 9.5% A20 
  Business
  F.D.A. PANEL VOTES 
  Against Obesity Drug
  A federal advisory committee narrowly voted not to endorse a drug vying to become the first new prescription medicine for obesity in more than a decade, signaling heightened concern for possible health risks associated with a new generation of diet pills.  PAGE B1
  Google's Income Rises 24% B1
  Sports
  HEAD-BUTTS TARNISH  
  Tour de France Finish
  The multiple crashes, oil-soaked roads and cobblestones were behind them but the cyclists at the Tour de France faced another unexpected moment of peril when Mark Renshaw of Australia head-butted Julian Dean of New Zealand three times in the final seconds of the stage as the lead group sprinted to the finish line.  PAGE B12 
  Weekend 
  BOROUGH PRESIDENT BRINGS 
  Free Music to Brooklyn
  As the Brooklyn borough president, Marty Markowitz appoints community board members and oversees a budget for capital projects. But for three decades, Mr. Markowitz's summer fun initiatives have revolved around two free concert series in Brooklyn parks that are perhaps the most popular in the city.  PAGE C1
  Drama and Pac-Man C1
  Obituaries
  ARNOLD KRAMISH, 87
  A physicist who survived an explosion while working on the Manhattan Project, he later became an expert on nuclear proliferation and espionage.  PAGE B10 
  Op-ed
  PAUL KRUGMAN PAGE A23 
  DAVID BROOKS PAGE A23 
  Online
  A slide show about spending 36 hours in Nantucket, focusing on the historical museums and harborside homes of the island. 
  nytimes.com/travel

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 16, 2010


End of Document