INSURANCE FIRMS ARE TOLD TO COVER TERRORISM DAMAGE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 30, 2002 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 354 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: JEFFERSON CITY
Body


* The state's decision affects homeowner, auto and other personal property policies sold in Missouri.
The Missouri Department of Insurance has told insurers that with few exceptions, they cannot exclude terrorism-related damage from homeowner, auto and other personal property policies they sell in the state.
Such an exclusion is allowed only if an insurer can show that providing the coverage would cause it to fail, the department said in a recent bulletin.
No company to date has been able to justify the exclusion, department director Scott Lakin said Friday.
So far, insurers have filed notice with the department of terrorism exclusions on 47 homeowner and related policies.
But 35 have been withdrawn, and the department has asked insurers to withdraw the other 12. Also withdrawn was a request from 12 insurers, all in one insurance group, to exclude terrorism-related damage from private passenger auto policies.
While Lakin said it has been difficult for insurers to buy insurance to cover their own losses since the Sept. 11 attacks, Missouri consumers also need protection.
"Particularly in the case of auto, home and health lines, it is very difficult to assert that insurers now face such an unpredictable and potentially expensive loss that they can drop such coverage from policies and leave Missourians totally unprotected," Lakin said.
Lakin said the agency has not yet addressed life and health insurance as it pertains to acts of terrorism but expects the state's position to differ little from its stance on auto and homeowner plans.
Joe Annotti, a spokesman for the National Association of Independent Insurers based in suburban Chicago, said the Missouri approach was reasonable.
"It's pretty much standard operating procedure that most state insurance departments have taken," Annotti said Friday in a telephone interview. "It sounds like they are acting responsibly."
Brent Butler, a lobbyist for the Missouri Insurance Coalition, which represents about 100 insurers, said his only concern was how terrorism would be defined with regard to policies.
"Terrorism can be defined in many different ways," Butler said.

Notes

LOCAL

Load-Date: March 30, 2002


End of Document