INSURERS SEEK TO DROP TERRORISM COVERAGE IN '02
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 17, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Business; Pg. e1
Length: 569 words
Byline: MARCY GORDON, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Stung with huge losses from the Sept. 11 attacks, insurance companies are asking state regulators for permission to exclude terrorism coverage from policies next year.
Many insurance contracts expire on Dec. 31, and insurers generally must give policyholders 30 or 45 days' advance notice of cancellation or major changes in coverage.
"We have few options with respect to terrorism," Gretchen Schaefer, a spokeswoman for the American Insurance Association, said Friday. "It shouldn't be surprising that insurers are seeking to exclude terrorism as they prepare to deal with the 2002 policies."
Schaefer said companies are requesting the exclusions to deal with the situation they would face if Congress should fail to enact by year's end a workable plan for government help.
Kathleen Sebelius, president of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which represents state regulators, said they are not yet acting on the requests and are waiting for Congress to act.
"We feel that it's incredibly important as a short-term solution to have the federal government stand behind the private insurance market," Sebelius said.
House lawmakers said they expect legislation to be sent to President Bush next month to help cover the industry's costs from future attacks. Proposals have been moving slowly through the House and Senate.
"It will be passed into law, and that will not take long to do," House Majority Leader Dick Armey said Friday.
Backers insist the legislation is needed to avert major economic disruption and would not amount to bailing out the insurance industry.
"This is a bill to keep the economy going and to stimulate the economy," declared Rep. John LaFalce of New York, senior Democrat on the House Financial Services Committee.
Lawmakers and administration officials warn it would be difficult to get bank loans for projects such as building construction, pipelines and bridges without terrorism coverage. That, they say, probably would be possible only through legislation to guarantee government help in paying catastrophic losses.
Last week, the Financial Services Committee approved a bill to commit the government for at least a year to covering 90 percent of losses from another major terrorist attack, with insurance companies paying the rest. The measure would require insurance companies to reimburse the government for aid received.
A Senate version endorsed by the Bush administration would not require reimbursement. That measure would have the government help cover costs of future attacks for two years, with the insurance industry paying the first $ 10 billion each year.
"We are hopeful that the various approaches being discussed will soon be melded into a single package that can … be quickly enacted," Sheila Bair, assistant Treasury secretary for financial institutions, said in a speech Friday. "Yet this must get done quickly. Every day counts."
Insurance companies that write policies protecting property could face pay-outs of $ 30 billion to $ 50 billion for the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon. That would amount to the biggest insured losses ever.
Before the attacks nearly all such policies, both commercial and residential, covered terrorist acts without additional charge. Now insurance companies are unable to calculate risks associated with potential future terrorist attacks and what the corresponding premiums should be.

Load-Date: November 18, 2001


End of Document