Insurance For Terrorism Gains Support
The New York Times
July 28, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 471 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER
Body


Republicans and Democrats in Congress expressed support yesterday for continuing a federal program that pays most of the insurance losses in a terrorist attack, but increasing the share covered by insurance companies.
  Many of those speaking at a hearing of the House Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises argued for modifying the program, which was adopted after the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. But lawmakers made it clear that they would forgo radical changes to assure that there was no interruption in terrorism coverage when the current program is scheduled to expire at the end of the year.
Opening the hearing, Representative Richard H. Baker, the chairman of the subcommittee and a Louisiana Republican, said he had concluded that without the government program there would be harmful ''market consequences.'' 
  Construction and real estate companies have said they could not receive financing without assurances that losses in a terrorism attack would be reimbursed and private insurers say they cannot provide the coverage without government backing. Therefore, said Representative Paul E. Kanjorski of Pennsylvania, the ranking Democrat on the subcommittee, maintaining the federal program was ''critical to protecting our economic security.''
  In late June, the Treasury Department recommended against continuing the program, contending that it eliminated an incentive for insurers to develop a free-market solution. House and Senate Republican leaders agreed. But within a few days, the Treasury department and Republican leaders suggested that a compromise could probably be reached to extend the program for at least two years. 
  The administration and Republican leaders in Congress are arguing for increased costs for the insurers and a reduction in the range of coverage. But in the hearing yesterday, several lawmakers and industry representatives contended that coverage should be expanded to include workers covered by group life insurance. 
  ''We need to insure the people inside the buildings and not just the buildings themselves,'' Mr. Kanjorski said. Some industry representatives also argued against ending coverage for general liability and for commercial vehicles, especially cargo trucks. 
  Under the current program, the insurance industry is required to pay the first $30 billion in losses. The government would then pay 90 percent of additional losses up to $100 billion. There was no agreement yesterday on how much to increase the insurers' share, but Mr. Baker urged that insurers be required to eventually repay losses covered by the government. Lawmakers and industry representatives said a Treasury proposal that would raise the threshold for the program to take effect to $500 million from $5 million was unmanageable for small and midsize insurers.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 28, 2005


End of Document