Insurers seek help with risk of attacks;
The U.S. is asked to be the "insurer of last resort"
by creating a fund to handle terrorism coverage.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 11, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C02
Length: 485 words
Byline: Marcy Gordon ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The insurance industry, socked by billions of dollars in losses from the terrorist attacks, is lobbying to get legislation that would shift some of the risk from possible future attacks to the government.
The industry, one of the biggest donors to lawmakers' campaigns in recent years, seeks to call in its political chits in a sympathetic atmosphere on Capitol Hill.
"Things are moving ahead," said Gretchen Schaefer, a spokeswoman for the American Insurance Association, the industry's biggest trade group. "Our messages are being heard and understood on the Hill."
Consumer advocates support in principle the sort of government backup for future terrorism risks that the insurance industry seeks. They are concerned, however, that the cost to taxpayers be limited to the extent possible and that the government monitor the program.
"Taxpayers shouldn't have to lose money over the long run," Robert Hunter, director of insurance at the Consumer Federation of America, said yesterday. U.S. insurance companies that write policies protecting property could pay an estimated $30 billion to $40 billion for the Sept. 11 attacks, the biggest insured loss ever. Life insurers are expected to pay much less: about $2 billion to $5 billion.
Chief executive officers of several big insurance companies testified before Congress recently that the legislation being drafted by the Bush administration and lawmakers from both parties was sorely needed. It would make the government the "insurer of last resort" for businesses that suffer future terrorist attacks.
"We have a crisis brewing," Dean O'Hare, chairman and chief executive officer of Chubb Corp., warned the House Financial Services Committee at a hearing.
O'Hare and the other executives said they could handle the claims arising from the terrorist attacks and were not seeking a bailout akin to the $15 billion rescue package approved for the airline industry. What is needed, the executives stressed, is government help in covering potentially huge and unmanageable costs from unpredictable terrorist acts.
Already, major reinsurance companies, which assume part of the risk covered by insurance firms, have said they will not renew their terrorism coverage after Dec. 31, when many contracts expire.
The measure being drafted would create a government-backed insurance-industry pool to cover losses from terrorism but not those from natural disasters or acts of war. The plan is modeled after a government-guaranteed insurance pool, funded by the industry, established in Britain in response to attacks by the Irish Republican Army. If insurance losses were to exceed the amount of money in the pool, the government would cover the difference.
The industry made $40.5 million in political contributions for the 2000 election cycle, making it the sixth-largest giver of about 80 industries, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan watchdog group.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document