INSURANCE INDUSTRY FACING CRISIS?;
HIGH COST OF TERRORISM NOT FACTORED IN BEFORE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 17, 2001 Monday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-7
Length: 892 words
Byline: Gil Klein, Media General News Service,
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


At Virginia's Potomac Mills, one of the largest shopping centers and tourist attractions on the East Coast, shoppers are thinking about holiday gifts, but insurers are thinking about terrorists.
The 220-store center saw its property and casualty insurance rates double after Sept. 11, said Kenneth Taylor, Potomac Mills' marketing director.
And it may have gotten off easily.
As the insurance industry appeals to Congress for help after the terrorist attacks, many insurance rates are going through the roof, and some insurers are even canceling policies.
"It's unconscionable," said David Hunter, insurance analyst for the Consumer Federation of America. "We're seeing it in trucks, in housing, in small business and large business. We're seeing it in all kinds of risks like inestadiums and malls. It's a genuine crisis."<
So far, the evidence of rate increases has been anecdotal, but 100 percent jumps in property and casualty insurance are not uncommon. Aviation underwriters have raised airline premiums by 200 percent to 400 percent.
"I'm sure tall buildings are a concern," said Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., the only former state insurance commissioner serving in the Senate. "I'm sure big shopping malls are a concern. The Giant Stadium has had its premiums hiked from $750,000 to $3.5 million, a 500 percent increase."
Insurance companies are appealing to state regulators to allow them to limit coverage for terrorism, according to the Insurance Services Organization, which has filed appeals for 200 property and casualty insurance groups.
At the same time, the industry is appealing to Congress to provide a backstop for catastrophic losses from terrorist attacks.
If Congress does not act by the first of the year and states have not allowed the companies to drop terrorism insurance, then individual insurers will have to decide whether they want to continue to offer property and casualty insurance at all, said ISO's Mike Donnelly.
"It's anyone's guess what's going to happen after Jan. 1," he said. "The companies are going to have to make those decisions one by one, and they have to decide how to price it."
 An insurance bill has passed the House, but with only days left before Congress recesses for the year, a bill is not slated for debate in the Senate. Some on Capitol Hill even speculate that the "insurance crisis" may be the latest rendition of the Y2K bug and will not materialize Jan. 1.
"There is a legitimate role for the federal government," said Nelson. "But the consumer has to be protected."
He said any bill should require that terrorism insurance be included but limit how fast rates can go up. Insurance companies should not be allowed to "cherry pick" which risks they want to cover to avoid possible terrorism targets.
 Nelson said he does not see a consensus developing in the Senate. The only alternative, he said, is for Congress to pass a temporary bill to support the insurance industry in case of an attack within the next six months and then revisit the issue next year.<ka0>
"That's not desirable," he said, "but if we get to December 24 with Santa in his sleigh, that may be the last chance."
The House passed a bill to grant insurance companies loans to pay off benefits in the face of a terrorism attack. House Republicans believe the insurance industry is strong enough to sustain such losses if they are given enough time to pay back the federal loans.
Some proposals in the Senate would make the federal government the backstop for terrorism-related claims once they had hit a certain level that the insurance companies could not tolerate.
However, many conservatives believe the industry does not need federal help but should recalculate its rates based on this new threat.
"We want to protect any business that may lose their coverage," said a senior Republican Senate staff member. "At the same time, we have to watch for making a serious policy shift that would be hurtful for businesses and insurance companies in the long run."<ka0>
The insurance industry insists it is not gouging ratepayers but is groping for a way to deal with a risk it had never considered.
While the industry can meet the estimated $40 billion from the Sept. 11 attacks, it has been shocked by the size of the terrorism threat, said Gretchen Schaefer of the American Insurance Association. Terrorism had never been factored into insurance premium costs.
To cover such huge losses, insurance companies buy their own insurance from something called "reinsurance companies." Once a claim reaches a certain level in a catastrophic incident, the reinsurance companies pay the rest.
But Schaefer said the reinsurance companies now will not insure for terrorism attacks until they can figure out what to charge for it.
That leaves the regular insurance companies in a bind, she said.
If they can't get reinsurance companies to pay for a catastrophic loss from terrorism, then they risk bankruptcy if the nation is hit with another major attack. They could not pay off their claims, and their insurance would be worthless.
But state regulators have not allowed insurance companies to drop or limit terrorism insurance, Schaefer said. So the insurance companies have to choose between providing insurance that they may not be able to pay or not offering the insurance.
"Yes, the rates are going up," she said. "Some businesses are getting cancellation notices."

Load-Date: December 19, 2001


End of Document