Insurance groups focus on regulatory reform for 2008; Surplus lines reform among top priorities for several lobbyists
Business Insurance
January 14, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 902 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Hopes are high that the U.S. Senate will approve a measure that would streamline the regulation of reinsurers and surplus lines insurers.
In fact, the Senate could follow the House lead and give its approval to the Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act relatively early in its upcoming session, observers say. But action on another key risk management-related issue-creation of a system of optional federal charters for insurers and producers-is much less likely in the new session.
Lawmakers also may take up legislation dealing with natural catastrophe policy issues, say observers.
``We anticipate a very active 2008,'' said Leigh Ann Pusey, chief operating officer of the American Insurance Assn. in Washington.
The Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act, which won unanimous House support last year, has ``a good chance of passing'' the Senate provided it doesn't get ``enveloped in the political concerns'' of an election year, said Ben McKay, senior vp in the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America's Washington office.
Richard Bouhan, executive director of the National Assn. of Professional Surplus Lines Offices Ltd. in Kansas City, Mo., echoed that optimism.
``We're optimistic,'' he said. ``We do look for hearings'' in the Senate Banking Committee. ``We think that hearings will be very good on the bill and we are optimistic that it will pass.''
``Surplus lines is definitely on the radar,'' said Beaumont Vance, director-external affairs, of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. in New York. RIMS wants to make sure that the definition of ``qualified risk manager'' in the measure is acceptable, said Mr. Vance, who is also senior enterprise risk manager for Sun Microsystems Inc. in Denver.
Joel Wood, senior vp at the Washington-based Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers, said lawmakers last year dealt with a slew of other insurance related issues, including extension of the federal terrorism insurance backstop. With many of those issues resolved, ``I think we have an excellent opportunity in the first quarter to advance this legislation.''
The same is unlikely regarding the OFC, industry observers agreed.
``It's going to be important for the supporters of the OFC to have some successful hearings this year'' on the issue, said Mr. Wood, who supports the OFC. ``I'm not suggesting that there's going to be any kind of markup'' of legislation to create the OFC, but hearings could set the stage for future action, he said.
The National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos. would welcome hearings ``as far as looking into the current regulatory system,'' said Justin Roth, senior federal affairs director in NAMIC's Washington office. He said NAMIC opposes the OFC and believes states have made progress in recent years on regulatory reform.
``We do not support any form of federal regulation that would add an additional layer of bureaucracy,'' Mr. Roth said. It is ``very unlikely (that) Congress would go beyond hearings due to the fact that the insurance industry is so sharply divided. Congress tends not to pass massive reform of an industry when the industry is as divided as it is on this issue,'' he said.
``We think that the equilibrium that keeps this issue in stasis continues,'' said the PCI's Mr. McKay. ``There's been no change in that equilibrium, therefore there's not likely to be any change in result from last year.''
Terrorism insurance remains an issue for RIMS, Mr. Vance said.
Even though ``TRIA passed, it's still going to be on our list because we still want to monitor the impact on the terrorism risk insurance market,'' he said. He noted that the Government Accountability Office is expected to issue a report on insuring against nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological terrorism.
Congress also may move on natural disaster issues, several observers said.
``In terms of legislative priorities, it would really be catastrophe-related proposals that have been adopted by the House,'' such as adding windstorm coverage to the National Flood Insurance Program, said Frank Nutter, president of the Washington-based Reinsurance Assn. of America. The RAA opposes that addition but supports Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., in his call for a commission to study cat risks, he said.
The idea of a national cat fund is not likely to become law this year absent a huge storm, said PCI's Mr. McKay. ``With huge storm and catastrophic losses, anything is possible, all bets are off.
``I think the industry is going to continue to be challenged on the issues'' regarding natural catastrophe and property insurance, said Ms. Pusey. ``AIA looks forward to working with Congress on solutions that maximize the private-sector capacity in the area.''
Sen. Dodd's decision to drop his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination may affect the banking committee agenda, observers said.
``Despite Chairman Dodd running for president, the Senate Banking Committee accomplished a lot of work last year, including the passage of TRIA and passing meaningful flood reform,'' said Mr. Roth. ``So NAMIC believes with Chairman Dodd's campaign coming to an end, he will continue the good work that the committee began last year.''
``I think the committee has functioned quite well and, as much as I mourn his loss from the campaign trail, I'm excited for several issues that may advance under his leadership this year,'' Mr. Wood said.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Some lobbyists see a better outlook for reform since key lawmaker Sen. Chris Dodd, D-Conn., ended his bid for his party’s presidential nomination.
Art Credit: Reuters

Load-Date: January 19, 2008


End of Document