Insurgent Attacks on Iraqis Soared in 2005, Report Says
The New York Times
April 29, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 904 words
Byline: By MARK MAZZETTI
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 28 
Body


The number of insurgent attacks on civilians in Iraq skyrocketed last year, resulting in almost 8,300 deaths and accounting for more than 50 percent of those killed in terrorist attacks worldwide, according to a State Department report released Friday.
  The figures for 2005, reported in the State Department's annual survey of global terrorism, showed a doubling from the previous year in both the number of major terrorist attacks in Iraq and the death toll from them. The overall tally of about 3,500 terrorist attacks in Iraq last year represented nearly one-third of such attacks around the world. The numbers do not include attacks against American or coalition troops.
American and Iraqi officials have long argued that political progress would gradually diminish the violence in Iraq. Yet the figures released on Friday sum up a time of increasingly powerful attacks, some involving foreign fighters, even during a year of historic elections and the formation of a democratically elected government.
  Ambassador Henry A. Crumpton, the State Department's top counterterrorism official, in a briefing on major havens for terrorists worldwide, singled out Anbar Province in Iraq and the North Waziristan region in Pakistan -- the tribal area near the Afghan border where Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, and his second in command, Ayman al-Zawahiri, are believed to be hiding.
  Anbar Province is the vast desert badlands in western Iraq that borders Syria and includes two of Iraq's most violent cities, Falluja and Ramadi. It was striking that a senior American official would list a region in a country where approximately 130,000 American troops are stationed in the same sentence as a province in western Pakistan that is largely outside the control of the government in Islamabad. 
  Speaking at a State Department briefing, Mr. Crumpton later clarified his remarks about Anbar. ''We don't see it to be a safe haven: we see it to be a battleground. It's particularly challenging, however, given the border with Syria,'' he said. ''More often than not, in fact, enemy safe havens reside in border areas.'' 
  Insurgents in Iraq carried out 150 large-scale attacks against civilians, the State Department report said, up from 65 in 2004. These ''high fatality'' attacks, defined as attacks that killed 10 or more people, led to approximately 3,400 civilian deaths, Iraqis and foreigners alike. This was double the figure in 2004, when about 1,700 civilians were killed in high-fatality attacks. 
  The Government Accountability Office, an investigative arm of Congress, reported on Tuesday that the total number of insurgent attacks against Iraqi civilians, coalition troops and infrastructure targets, like power plants and oil pipelines, jumped 23 percent from 2004 to 2005. 
  Over all, the State Department reported more than 11,000 terrorist attacks worldwide last year, a figure nearly four times the total reported for 2004. American officials said the sharp increase was mostly the result of new methodology for compiling terrorism data, rather than any worsening of global terrorism. 
  Indeed, senior American counterterrorism officials insisted on Friday that the world was becoming a safer place as more countries began to address the threat of terrorism. 
  ''Despite the continued violence we see, there's a growing recognition and a realization among civilized societies and countries and individuals that we've got to bond together,'' Mr. Crumpton said. 
  Mr. Crumpton and others said that the increasing violence in Iraq was another significant reason for the sharp rise in terrorist attacks last year, and that the American government was detecting a growth in terrorist networks that support the flow of foreign fighters into Iraq. 
  The State Department report estimated that foreign fighters account for only 4 to 10 percent of the 20,000 or more insurgent fighters in Iraq. But terrorism experts said the Iraq situation was particularly worrisome because the country could turn into a laboratory and training ground for future terrorist attacks elsewhere. 
  ''The experience and training they are getting on the ground in Iraq is much better than the kinds of training they were getting in Afghanistan under the Taliban,'' said Nora Bensahel, a terrorism expert at the Rand Corporation's Washington office. ''The question is, Where are they going to go?''
  The State Department report cited three attacks that Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, the organization led by the Jordanian terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, planned and executed outside Iraq's borders, including suicide attacks against hotels in Amman, Jordan, in November. 
  The report strikes a cautious tone about the overall progress in the American-led campaign against terrorism, pointing out that the United States is still in the ''first phase of a potentially long war.'' 
  ''The enemy's proven ability to adapt means we will probably go through several more cycles of action/reaction before the war's outcome is no longer in doubt,'' the report states.
  The State Department report said that while Mr. bin Laden and his deputy continued to inspire their followers with periodic broadcast messages, they were no longer in a position to issue orders or direct specific attacks on a daily basis. The report says there is evidence that the two men have become ''frustrated'' by their lack of direct control over the organization they built.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: A boy lay in a hospital bed after being wounded by a roadside bomb in Baghdad yesterday. The United States said insurgents in Iraq carried out 150 large-scale attacks against civilians last year, killing roughly 3,400. (Photo by Namir Noor-Eldeen/Reuters)

Load-Date: April 29, 2006


End of Document