Insurers faulted on terrorism coverage; Serio complains that TRIA 'has been nit-picked to death'
Business Insurance
March 24, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 670 words
Byline: MICHAEL PRINCE
Body


NEW YORK-The insurance industry has failed policyholders by not offering reasonable terrorism coverage under last year's federal terrorism backstop law, New York's top insurance regulator said last week.
Rather than work within the framework of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, insurers have spent their time attacking the law and offering coverage that is too costly and loaded with exclusions, said Gregory Serio, superintendent of insurance at the New York Department of Insurance.
''Every little piece of that bill has been nit-picked to death by the insurance industry,'' Mr. Serio told members of the New York Chapter of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
For example, insurers have criticized the deductible as too high and the fact that the law lasts for only three years, he said.
In response to the law, insurers have offered coverage at extraordinarily high rates and have added exclusions that dilute the terms of the coverage, he said.
In the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the insurance industry asked the federal government for some form of terrorism backstop, Mr. Serio noted. The law also includes numerous changes the industry proposed to Congress while it was being drafted. Now insurers should work with the law and not attempt to undermine it, he said.
''We have to hold them to the commitment they made,'' he said.
Concerns by insurers have led some to offer TRIA coverage that sometimes includes 600% premium increases.
''The fear that engulfed this industry is at the root of problems of the TRIA issue,'' Mr. Serio said. The property/casualty industry, he said, ''has a well of fear without a bottom.''
Mr. Serio also singled out as a major problem what he called a lack of leadership within the insurance industry to address policyholder needs. Few heads of property/casualty insurers have even engaged in a dialogue with buyers on the issue, he said. Instead, most insurers have simply walked away from policyholders.
In addition to the high prices, insurers keep trying to obtain approval of broad-based terrorism exclusions. While Mr. Serio's office has approved numerous exclusions, many more have been rejected as too vague or poorly worded. For example, many of the exclusions don't adequately distinguish between terrorism and vandalism, he said. If enacted, the wording of these exclusions could lead to years of litigation, he said.
Regulators cannot force insurers to offer policies on terms buyers will accept, the superintendent pointed out. The only alternative for buyers to get around insurers' recalcitrance is to obtain TRIA coverage through a captive or have groups of buyers pool their risks, he said.
''For a lot of people, that may be the answer,'' Mr. Serio said.
In order to change the situation, a leader in the property/casualty industry should step forward and start offering policies that buyers want, Mr. Serio suggested. Other insurers would quickly follow with similar policies, he predicted. ''This is an industry of follow-the-leader,'' he said.
Ultimately, the position taken by the industry will come back to haunt it, Mr. Serio said. In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, the insurance industry was praised for its decision to pay claims rapidly. But that feeling toward the industry is quickly changing, he said.
''The industry is losing every ounce of goodwill it gained in the remarkable job done after 9/11,'' he said.
In a related development, Mr. Serio late last week announced that the New York Insurance Department has adopted regulations that require insurers to refund unearned premiums for terrorism coverage that is canceled before the policy expires.
Under the amended regulations, policyholders will now receive a pro rata refund of any unused premium for terrorism coverage sold under TRIA.
''The new amendments will allow New York's businesses to continue to shop around for terrorism insurance coverage best suited to their needs without the unnecessary worry of penalties upon cancellation,'' Mr. Serio said Friday in a statement.

Graphic

 
Mr. Serio

Load-Date: March 26, 2003


End of Document