INSURERS GET PROTECTION FROM COSTS OF TERRORISM;
 CRITICS DENOUNCE SHIFTING OF LIABILITY TO TAXPAYERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 27, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A1
Length: 670 words
Byline: Scott Lindlaw The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President George W. Bush signed a bill Tuesday that would reimburse the insurance industry up to $100 billion in a future terrorist attack.
Bush said the bill would boost the economy, but critics called it a taxpayer-financed gift to insurance companies.
The attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, were estimated to have drained $40 billion from the insurance industry's roughly $210 billion in reserves, and companies told the White House last year that they could not withstand another such blow.
Bush campaigned for the bill as he stumped for GOP candidates this fall. He asserted that failure by lawmakers to pass a terrorism insurance bill had stalled $15 billion in construction projects because companies were reluctant to finance projects that couldn't get insurance.
Bush's figure came from Real Estate Roundtable, a trade group for property and development firms, and he repeated it Tuesday.
"Commercial construction is at a six-year low, and thousands of hard-hat workers have been kept off the job," he said in an East Room signing ceremony. "Should terrorists strike again, we have a system in place to address financial losses and get our economy back on its feet as quickly as possible."
But the Consumer Federation of America said insurance is currently available to "all but the highest risks, such as skyscrapers, rates are falling and banks are lending freely."
"It is shocking that Congress and the president accepted the wild claims made by insurance and real estate lobbyists at face value," said J. Robert Hunter, the group's director of insurance.
The federation said the new law makes taxpayers liable for billions of dollars in losses that the insurance industry could easily afford.
The insurance industry was among Bush's 10 largest donors in his 2000 presidential campaign, contributing more than $1.6 million. The industry donated more than $27 million to candidates and parties in this year's elections, 69 percent to Republicans, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.
Under the new law, the government could aid the industry on terrorism-related claims that surpassed $5 million. Insurance companies would pay deductibles ranging from 7 percent to 15 percent of the premiums they received the previous year. The federal government would then cover 90 percent of everything above the deductible, with the companies paying the remaining 10 percent. The program would be capped at $100 billion over three years.
On a related issue covered by the bill, Bush bowed to Democratic dem ands for unlimited punitive damages in civil suits stemming from terrorist attacks - a provision many Republicans consider a boon to trial lawyers usually allied with Democrats.
Bush fired back Tuesday by announcing a regulation to "make sure no taxpayer dollars will be spent on legal settlements without the approval of the secretary of the Treasury." He directed Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill to draw up the rule.
Bush has aggressively courted the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners, whose leader, Douglas J. McCarron, is a rival of AFL-CIO President John Sweeney. Unions usually align with Democrats, and Bush has sought to split that alliance. McCarron attended, invited by the White House, and Bush cited the carpenters union twice in his speech.
Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, fought the bill on grounds that it overexposed taxpayers to losses, discouraged development of a private terrorism insurance market and did nothing about punitive damage awards against those hit by terrorism.
One day earlier, Bush signed legislation creating the Department of Homeland Security.
On Tuesday afternoon, he delivered a pep talk to federal workers in the form of a presidential memo, explaining the change and introducing the new agency's leaders.
"During this time of transition it is extremely important that you continue to stay focused on your important duties and responsibilities," Bush said.
The memo to federal workers came at a time when the White House is looking to shift 850,000 federal jobs to the private sector.

Notes

NATION

Load-Date: November 27, 2002


End of Document