Internet giant calls move 'cyber-terrorism' terrorism' terrorism'
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
January 04, 1998, Sunday sunday sunday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1B P1B P1B
Length: 293 words
Byline: Jan Cienski The Associated PRess PRess PRess
Body


RICHMOND, Va. - A group representing Internet businesses warned it
will release the e-mail addresses of 5 million America Online members
next week if AOL continues to ban advertising to subscribers.  subscribers.  subscribers.
The National Organization of Internet Commerce of Chino, Calif., plans
to post the addresses on the Internet Thursday, group president Joe
Melle said Wednesday. The group initially threatened to post 1 million
addresses, but increased the number after Chantilly, Va.-based AOL
threatened legal action.
NOIC was founded three months ago and has about a dozen members.
AOL - the world's largest Internet provider with 10 million members -
called the threat "cyber-terrorism."
"We would avail ourselves of any legal remedies we need to protect our
members from this threat," AOL spokesman Rich D'Amato said. He said
AOL members have made it clear "they do not want junk e-mail."
AOL has been waging a legal battle against companies that send
unsolicited junk e-mail - known as "spam" - to its members.
Unsolicited mail makes up a significant portion of the 17 million
e-mails that AOL handles daily.
Melle said the choice of receiving e-mail solicitations should be made
by AOL members - not AOL administrators.
"All we want from America Online is to sit at the table and talk to
us," he said.
Melle said his company, TSF Marketing, collected the AOL addresses
from chat sites and other Internet locations used by AOL subscribers.
If AOL bars access to its subscribers, Melle said, his group would
lose access to about half of all Internet users.
AOL has won several injunctions against spam senders in recent months.
"A federal court has found there is no right to send AOL members
unsolicited junk e-mail using AOL's proprietary network," D'Amato
said.  said.  said.

Load-Date: January 9, 1998


End of Document