Intelligence Experts Meet to Combat Mideast Terrorism
The New York Times
March 30, 1996, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section 1;  ; Section 1;   Page 5;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 897 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER  

By STEVEN ERLANGER  
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 29
Body


In a follow-up to the Middle East summit meeting at Sharm el Sheik, Egypt, political and intelligence experts from 29 countries and organizations, including Israel and the Palestinian Authority, met today at the State Department to draft specific recommendations to fight terrorism.
The recommendations, on topics ranging from intelligence-sharing to methods for detecting false passports and hampering fund-raising by terrorist organizations, are to be presented at a meeting of foreign ministers on April 22 in Luxembourg, American officials said.
Officials also announced that an emergency meeting would be held April 12 in Brussels to speed aid for the Palestinians, who have received only small amounts of the $1.8 billion they have been promised over the past two years.
Four recent suicide bombings have created new questions in the American Congress about continued aid to Yasir Arafat and his Palestinian Authority, unless it cracks down harder on terrorists and alters the charter of the Palestine Liberation Organization, as promised, to eliminate a pledge to destroy Israel.
The original summit meeting was hastily called for March 13, in response to the bombings in Israel, which killed 62 people, led to a suspension of peace negotiations between Israel and Syria and prompted Israel to close its borders with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
The bombings damaged the election prospects of Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel by refocusing attention on Israelis' concerns about the security risks that would come from peace with Syria and with a more complete handing over of control in the West Bank to the Palestinian Authority.
The border closing, intended to stop suicide bombers from entering Israel, has caused significant economic distress. There have been reports of hunger among Palestinians who have been prevented from going to jobs in Israel.
The two-day meeting here was planned to focus on the details of the complicated fight against terrorist groups. But it also became a forum for the Palestinians and some Arab and European nations to criticize Israel for its harsh measures against Palestinians, participants said.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher helped broker a modest relaxation of the border closing. The easing, announced on Thursday, is allowing shipments of construction materials and some other items to be moved across the borders.
"We must find ways to support the Palestinian people as they, too, suffer the consequences" of the bombings, Mr. Christopher said.
Israeli officials attending the conference here said Israel had already begun to relax the border closing before today's action. They said the United States had worked hard to keep the focus of the conference on terrorism, which all the countries attending have reason to fear.
"We shouldn't regress from this period of finding peace to the period of armed conflict," one Israeli official said.
He expressed concern, though, whether much could be accomplished in such a large forum.
Information sharing, for instance, is a fine idea in principle, he said, but really represents information trading, which is best practiced on a smaller scale, "not in such a big bazaar." Otherwise, he said, "everyone thinks they are giving up too much and not getting anything in return."
Some of the topics for which committees are preparing proposals are how to promote cooperation among law-enforcement agencies, how to use extradition laws more energetically, how to enhance border controls -- with specific focus on the detection of forged documents and how to help to train the Palestinians in anti-terrorism and police tactics.
Syria and Lebanon refused to come to this meeting, as they had refused to attend the Sharm el Sheik summit talks.
At the meeting here, American officials urged Arab allies like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt to shut down public offices of organizations like Hamas, which took responsibility for three of the four bombings, and to work to cut off contributions to Hamas.
Europeans, the French in particular, have criticized what they see as the American "obsession" with Iran's possible role in promoting terrorism, saying Hamas -- unlike some other militant groups -- has indigenous roots, local grievances and little funding from Iran. "Terrorism will be over when Palestinians feel they have their rights recognized," one senior French official said.
A group of Arab-Americans, representing 14 organizations in 13 states met in Washington today under the sponsorship of the Arab American Institute. They said they were sympathetic to the Clinton Administration's desire to assuage Israeli fears, but that there had been a lack of similar measures to boost Palestinian confidence. In a statement, they said they opposed terrorism of all kinds, criticized Israeli collective punishment measures in the West Bank and called for more aid and job creation there to promote peace.
Speaking of the State Department meeting, Nicholas Burns, the Department's spokesman said that, "Given all the emotions on the agenda, it went pretty well." The aims of the conference were always multiple, he said, with the intention of working on fighting terrorism but also of recreating among Israelis and Palestinians the willingness to press ahead toward a comprehensive peace.
"We have to make the effort to create the kind of climate that allows the peace process to continue," he said.

Load-Date: March 30, 1996


End of Document