INTERNATIONAL LEADERS CALL FOR WAR ON TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 11, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 461 words
Byline: EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press writer
Body


UNITED NATIONS -- At a U.N. General Assembly session delayed by the Sept. 11 attacks, world leaders took to the podium one by one Saturday and declared that the war on terrorism must be a global fight that also addresses root causes ranging from poverty to political repression.
The grand General Assembly hall was filled with representatives of countries that have been the targets of terrorism including Argentina and India and countries accused by the United States of sponsoring terrorism, such as Iran, Iraq and Syria, recently elected to the Security Council.
From countries large and small, rich and poor, there was universal recognition that after Sept. 11 no nation is safe from terrorism, and no nation can fight it alone.
"Terrorism taught us the abiding lesson that we do indeed belong to a global village," said South African President Thabo Mbeki. "None within this village will be safe unless all the villagers act together to secure and guarantee that safety."
Rubble just miles away
Poignantly noting that only a few miles away "thousands still lie in a tomb of rubble" that was once the World Trade Center, President Bush said that "the time for action has now arrived."
"There is no such thing as a good terrorist," he said. "We must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just some of them."
A U.S.-sponsored resolution adopted unanimously by the Security Council on Sept. 28 requires nations to stop financing, supporting, and providing sanctuary to terrorists. Bush offered help to countries that lack the means to enforce laws and protect borders, and he warned governments that continue to support and harbor terrorists that "there is a price to be paid, and it will be paid."
Bush did not single out nations, but aides had said his words were directed at Lebanon, Syria, Iran and other countries whose commitment to the anti-terrorism effort are under scrutiny. He did, however, reaffirm a commitment to a Palestinian state, something Arab countries want to hear. Israeli diplomats were absent Saturday because of the Jewish sabbath.
140 high-ranking officials
Bush is among more than 40 world leaders and over 100 foreign ministers addressing the assembly's annual debate, which ends Nov. 16. The General Assembly's yearlong session opened a day late on Sept. 12.
The "general debate" was delayed for the first time in the United Nations' 56-year history because of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Iranian President Mohammad Khatami condemned the attacks as "brutal and savage," but criticized the Bush administration's military response.
The emir of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, who also spoke on behalf of the 56-nation Organization of the Islamic Conference, said terrorism is "concealed like time-bombs in our midst."

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document