Interest in terrorism coverage rises during 2003, survey says
Business Insurance
April 26, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 904 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


Risk managers' appetite for terrorism coverage may be increasing, according to new research by Marsh Inc.
That appetite, however, still can't be called ravenous, even more than two years after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, made the availability of terrorism insurance coverage a paramount risk management and political issue. In fact, Marsh's ''Marketwatch: Property Terrorism Insurance 2004'' found that over a nine-month period last year, only 27.3% of the total sample of 2,423 clients bought terrorism coverage. But the percentage of buyers taking up the coverage increased each quarter, from 23.5% in the second quarter of 2003 to 32.7% in the fourth quarter.
''A strong candidate as one potential reason for the notable upswing in terrorism purchasing in the fourth quarter may be the decline in terrorism rates over the same period of time,'' according to the report. The median rate for terrorism-which was determined by dividing the terrorism premium by total insured value-fell 42% between the second and fourth quarters of 2003, to 0.0045% from 0.0078%.
Jill Dalton, Marsh's North American property practice leader in New York, said the report was prepared to assist clients.
''We really did this to help our clients make decisions,'' she said. ''They all want benchmarking data. They all want to see what others are doing.''
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act ''was one of the most important pieces of legislation to impact the insurance industry for a long time,'' said Ms. Dalton. Marsh decided ''it was a good time to take a snapshot of the market and address all the issues that were out there,'' she said.
President Bush signed TRIA into law in November 2002 after Congress had wrangled over its details for a year. The act creates a federal financial backstop for insurers facing losses from a future catastrophic terrorist attack. Insurers that wish to participate must offer terrorism coverage to clients, though TRIA does not say how they should price it. The backstop, however, is slated to expire at the end of 2005 unless Congress reauthorizes TRIA or otherwise provides a financial guarantee against future terrorist losses.
The report is the most inclusive to date concerning the terrorism insurance market. The Treasury Department, which is charged with overseeing implementation of TRIA, has also been surveying risk managers and underwriters about the terrorism insurance market, but the Treasury survey's results haven't been released yet.
Among the report's findings:
* Companies with total insured values of between $500 million and $1 billion were the most likely to buy terrorism coverage, with a rate of 39.7% of companies in the category purchasing the coverage. Those with total insured values of less than $100 million were the least likely to buy terrorism coverage, with only 18.2% reporting doing so.
* Out of 15 industries, energy companies were the most likely industry to buy terrorism coverage, with 40.5% reporting having done so. Construction companies were the least likely, with only 12.2% reporting have bought the coverage.
* The Northeast appears to have the greatest demand for terrorism insurance, with a take-up rate of 30.3% and the West the least, with a take-up rate of 18.6%. The report cautions, though, that the analysis was based on the location of the Marsh office that brokered the account rather than the location of the property itself, noting for example that a Utah client could have a major location in New York but have the placement made by a West Coast office.
''That said, placements for most companies are generally made in the region where they are based, or have their heaviest concentration of assets,'' according to the report. The Northeast's rank ''must reflect, to some unquantifiable degree, the fact that the Sept. 11 attacks took place in New York City and Washington, D.C.''
The report also discusses the market for stand-alone terrorism insurance, which until the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks had been an issue mostly in countries where terrorism was a significant problem. ''Post-TRIA, the stand-alone market continues to provide cover in competition with TRIA and for those companies whose needs are not met by TRIA,'' according to the report. The report lists numerous examples of the stand-alone market.
The Marsh report also examines issues surrounding TRIA that could affect its ultimate fate. The report notes, for example, that TRIA was not intended to be a long-term program when it passed.
''The aim was to get the federal government out of the reinsurance business as soon as possible and allow insurance markets to gradually assume, and learn to price, a risk that had previously been covered for no cost,'' according to the report. Noting that some insurance and noninsurance groups alike have begun discussing potential problems in a post-TRIA world, the report also noted ''When TRIA comes up for possible extension, the experience of 2002 may well serve as a harbinger: difficulty lies ahead.''
Ms. Dalton said that the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers, of which Marsh is a member, will share the report with the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee and the House Financial Services Committee, both of which have jurisdiction over TRIA.
Ms. Dalton said that risk managers interested in further information about the report should contact a local Marsh office. A list of Marsh offices is available at www.marsh.com. 

Load-Date: April 28, 2004


End of Document