International briefs
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 8, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 443 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Suspect confesses
to failed bombing plot
DUESSELDORF, Germany - One of the main suspects in a plot to bomb a pair of German commuter trains in 2006 confessed his role in the plan Thursday but told the court another suspect was the ringleader.
Youssef Mohammed el-Hajdib, a 22-year-old Lebanese citizen, testified that he took part in the attempted bombing in July 2006. But he said Jihad Hamad - who was sentenced in Lebanon in December to 12 years in prison - oversaw the failed plot.
El-Hajdib said Hamad planned the attacks as revenge after some German newspapers reprinted caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad, first published in a Danish newspaper in 2005.
He said although he went along with the plan for religious reasons, he felt from the beginning that it was a bad idea and never finished making the bomb, unbeknownst to Hamad.
Turkey votes to lift Islamic head scarf ban
ANKARA, Turkey - Lawmakers voted early Thursday to approve a constitutional amendment allowing female students to enter universities wearing Islamic head scarves - a move that many secular Turks view as an attempt to impose religion on their daily lives.
Lawmakers voted 401-110 in a preliminary vote in favor of the government's proposed amendment to the secular constitution. The government has defended its plan as a reform needed to give its citizens religious liberty and bring Turkey in line with European Union human rights guidelines.
A second and final round of voting was slated for Saturday.
Canada's lower house passes anti-terror law
TORONTO - Canada's lower house Wednesday passed a revised anti-terrorism law that remains one of the country's most contentious, allowing the government to detain foreign terror suspects indefinitely without disclosing evidence against them.
Canada's Supreme Court struck down the previous law last year, finding that it violates Canada's bill of rights. The law said non-citizens suspected of being a threat to national security could be held indefinitely under security "certificates," and did not allow them to see details of the case against them.
The court said the non-citizen suspects should have a right to respond to evidence used against them and noted that Britain allows government-appointed advocates to review such sensitive intelligence material.
Britain could allow evidence from wiretaps
LONDON - Evidence gathered through wiretapping will be allowed in British courts for the first time under proposals aimed at bringing more terrorism suspects to justice, Prime Minister Gordon Brown announced Wednesday.
Faced with a backlog of terrorism cases, security officials are prepared to allow intercepted material to be used in courts.

Load-Date: February 8, 2008


End of Document