International Law and Terrorist Havens
The New York Times
January 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 289 words
Body


To the Editor:
While our international legal order does not have a law-enforcement agency that can execute an arrest warrant against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi (''Letting Loose at Libya,'' editorial, Jan. 5), the United Nations Charter and customary international law provide mechanisms for states to defend themselves from acts of aggression.
Customary international law allows a state, within the self-defense constraints of necessity and proportionality, to use armed force against a source of aggression within a harboring state when that state cannot or will not act against that source of aggression within its territory.
Abraham D. Sofaer, legal adviser to the State Department, addressing the American Bar Association last summer, summarized the Reagan Administration's policy on terrorism and the international rules: ''The President has warned terrorists and the states which support them that our patience has run out. They had best heed his warning. International law recognizes the right to use force in self-defense against armed attacks. The groups that are responsible for attacking us in Lebanon, El Salvador and elsewhere have openly announced their intentions to keep on trying to kill Americans. To the extent that they are state supported, or beyond the capacity of their governments to control, we are entitled now to use necessary and proportionate force to end such attacks.''
International law lacks a centralized enforcement mechanism; thus, responsibility falls on individual states. Our appeals for collective action are dictated, not by the constraints of international law, but by our understanding that peace cannot be maintained against terrorism without a world consensus. W. MICHAEL BURD New York, Jan. 5, 1986


End of Document