Interpol chief urges more data sharing; He says terrorism information should flow worldwide
USA TODAY
July 9, 2007 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 496 words
Byline: Jeffrey Stinson
Body


LONDON -- The United States, European nations and other countries are not sharing critical information on terrorists that could prevent attacks like the recent attempted car bombings in Britain, the head of Interpol warned.
Ronald Noble, secretary-general of the 186-nation police agency, told USA TODAY that there is no comprehensive international database of convicted or suspected terrorists because many countries are reluctant to share the information. Nations tend to provide data only to countries they are friendly with -- and that is a mistake, he said.
"You can't fight terrorism from the (European Union) only, or the United States, or with your allies," Noble said. "Al-Qaeda operates internationally. You have to fight it worldwide."
Most of the eight people Britain has arrested in connection with the car bomb plot are Middle Eastern or Indian nationals. It is unclear whether better information sharing might have prevented their entry into Britain, but Noble predicted a wave of foreign terrorists operating in Iraq will try to strike elsewhere, posing a major challenge to global border security systems. The terrorists "are not going to go home" after the Iraq war ends, he said by phone from France on Friday. "They are going to strike around the world."
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Sunday that he supports the creation of a central register of known or suspected terrorists, so data could be better shared among countries.
"If there is information in one country about the potential recruitment or the actual recruitment of someone to a terrorist group, then that should be information that is flowing to other countries," Brown told Sky News.
Brown said he supports a plan proposed last week by Franco Frattini, the European Commission's vice president in charge of justice issues, to build a computer database of passengers flying into the European Union. The initiative comes nearly a year after British police reported foiling an alleged plot to blow up passenger jets headed for the USA from London's Heathrow Airport.
The plan does not require European nations to share details on air passengers traveling among the EU's 27 nations.
The EU hasn't developed a rapid-response team of anti-terrorism experts, despite pledges to do so after last year's alleged plot.
Noble complained that most nations do not check fingerprints of those seeking entry visas against Interpol's database of criminals or wanted suspects. The United States does.
"Until we recognize that this is a global threat and concentrate resources to combat it, we're going to be putting our citizens at risk," Noble said.
Noble, 50, has run Interpol since 2000. He is the first American to head the 84-year-old agency, which is based in Lyon, France.
He said Interpol is well-positioned to coordinate global anti-terrorism efforts, but countries need to spend more money to protect themselves.
"You need to make it (counterterrorism) the highest priority, which it hasn't been," he said. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Franka Bruns, AP

Load-Date: July 9, 2007


End of Document