Intelligence analysts in high demand
Decision Times
February 6, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 11
Length: 750 words
Byline: By Tichakorn Hill; Special to Decision Times
Body


Four years after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, intelligence agencies were still struggling to hire and train the people they need.
The FBI, for example, has missed its hiring goals for intelligence analysts for the past two years. The CIA is unable to hire people with critical foreign language skills.
"We have a lot of highly qualified applicants, but there are only so many people learning or already speaking languages like Arabic, Chinese, Persian," said a CIA official in charge of analyst hiring, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "Those are very hard skills to acquire."
The agencies are using a mix of strategies to close this skills gap, mainly through partnerships with schools. At colleges and universities, they offer scholarships to students who promise to work for them and they create programs and courses - such as introduction to intelligence analysis and research and analysis - to enhance the pool of applicants. They also are studying pay reforms to attract and retain employees, and they have boosted in-house training.
Still, challenges remain. For one, agencies sometimes lose promising applicants to other employers because security clearances are delayed. And, says one expert, intelligence agencies must do more to be employers of choice to keep the employees they do hire.
The intelligence agencies' attempts to hire analysts are part of a bigger effort to predict and prevent terrorism. Congress passed the Intelligence Reform Act last December to strengthen the country's intelligence capability. The law created the Director of National Intelligence to unify the intelligence activities of 15 agencies.
The FBI seems to be making the most internal changes and facing the most challenges as it transforms from an agency fighting crime to one fighting terrorism. It is slowly building its intelligence analyst cadre, from 1,023 four years ago to 1,998 today. But the agency has struggled to meet its hiring targets. As of May, it was more than 100 hires short of its 2005 goal of 780.
The agency plans to hire 508 analysts in fiscal 2006, which began Oct. 1.
To develop expertise in intelligence gathering and analysis and make sure it has enough qualified analysts, the FBI a year ago created the Intelligence Career Service - which includes intelligence analysts, language analysts and surveillance specialists.
To support ICS in attracting and rewarding high performers, the FBI is working with other intelligence agencies to create a performance-based pay system for intelligence workers at all 15 intelligence agencies.
The CIA wants to hire more people with language skills but says it's difficult, partly because all intelligence agencies are recruiting from the same limited pool of applicants. The agency met its 2005 hiring goal but was short in meeting an ambitious 2004 goal, the CIA official said.
The National Security Agency is struggling to find people who already know about particular subjects such as counterterrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
"Any effort that we can do to bring people in with more knowledge decreases our training curve and helps us to be operational more quickly," said Deborah Maklowski, deputy NSA/Central Security Service senior intelligence authority.
Agencies cited security clearance delays as a challenge as they try to hire qualified candidates. Obtaining clearances takes anywhere between three months and a year. Both the CIA and NSA said they've lost candidates who couldn't wait a year to be hired.
On-the-job training
Intelligence agencies have made some changes to their analyst training. A month after Sept. 11, the FBI established the College of Analytic Studies, now named the Center for Intelligence Training, at the FBI Academy in Quantico, Va. Analysts with little intelligence experience take a seven-week basic course on how to gather and analyze intelligence while more experienced analysts take a similar two-week course.
The CIA has added terrorism-related segments to its main five-month training course, the Career Analyst Program, which teaches students how to look for information, interpret intelligence reports from different sources and write intelligence reports. It also offers other terrorism-related courses.
As before Sept. 11, the NSA's new hires with little intelligence analysis experience get three years of on-the-job training on the subjects of their analysis, such as weapons and technology. The agency also offers scholarships to help qualified employees pursue work-related graduate degrees.

Notes

1 COLOR GRAPH. GRAPH HED: FBI RAISES THE BAR. SEE: SP-FBI Raises the Bar 02-06.

Load-Date: March 28, 2006


End of Document