Intelligence director resigning; Blair leaving under pressure after term that was marked by anti-terrorism failures
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 21, 2010 Friday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-07
Length: 279 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 WASHINGTON - National Intelligence Director Dennis Blair is resigning under pressure from the White House, ending a tumultuous 16-month tenure marked by intelligence failures and spy-agency turf wars.
 Blair, a retired Navy admiral, is the third director of national intelligence, a position created in response to public outrage over the failure to prevent the Sept. 11 attacks.
 His departure underscores the disorganization inside the Obama administration's intelligence apparatus, rocked during the past six months by a spate of high-profile attempted terror attacks that revealed lapses in national security.
 And it comes two days after a Senate report criticized Blair's office and other intelligence agencies for failings that, despite a top-to-bottom overhaul of the U.S. intelligence apparatus after 9/11, allowed a would-be bomber to board a Detroit-bound airliner on Christmas Day.
 In a message yesterday to his work force, Blair said his last day would be May 28. "It is with deep regret that I informed the president today that I will step down as director of national intelligence," he said.
 The job of the director of national intelligence is to oversee the nation's 16 intelligence agencies.
 Former CIA Director Michael Hayden and other experts are concerned that the position never has been given the authority it needs to oversee the nation's vast and sometimes fractious intelligence system effectively.
 In the failed Christmas Day attack, the Senate Intelligence Committee found that the National Counterterrorism Center was in a position to connect intelligence that could have prevented it. As director of national intelligence, Blair oversaw the center.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 22, 2010


End of Document