Internet site key to probe Internet Fraud Center took terrorism tips after Sept. 11
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
November 29, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1C
Length: 663 words
Byline: KARIN FISCHER
Body


DAILY MAIL WASHINGTON BUREAU
WASHINGTON - Just hours after the terrorist attacks last September, Attorney General John Ashcroft went on the air and asked anyone with information about the incident to contact the FBI via the Internet.
Almost immediately, hundreds of online tips began pouring into the designated Web site, operated by the West Virginia-based Internet Fraud Complaint Center.
In the last year, more than 200,000 tips have come into the center, with Web information far out-pacing the leads that have been phoned in.
Although the FBI now has assumed responsibility for the Internet tip system, the Fairmont-housed facility played a critical and little-heralded role in collecting information in the aftermath of the terror attacks.
The planes had just crashed into the World Trade Center Sept. 11 when Timothy Healy of the FBI and Mark Gage of the National White Collar Crime Center had an idea. The then year-old fraud complaint center, operated in tandem by the two organizations, could be altered to accept terrorism tips.
"That morning we were all in shock," said Richard Johnston, director of the National White Collar Crime Center, the Justice Department-funded facility that provides support services to law enforcement agencies involved in the investigation and prosecution of economic and high-tech crime.
"And then they realized we had the type of infrastructure already in place to receive tips over the Web."
Within an hour or two, the site, www.ifccfbi.gov, had been reformatted to accept tips. Visitors to the site simply could click on an icon, opening up a page for submissions.
By the end of the day, the FBI, which actually reviews the information, had sent down the OK from headquarters. Ashcroft made the announcement.
At first, the tips trickled in. Then, they came more and more rapidly, in immense volume, from all over the world, swamping the Internet fraud center like a fast-breaking wave.
At first, one of the greatest challenges was merely to ensure the sheer number of messages did not overwhelm the fraud center's capacity. Every time Ashcroft mentioned the online tip line during a briefing or the Web address scrolled across the bottom of the television screen during a newscast, the number of incoming messages spiked, Johnston said.
The other concern, not surprisingly, was security.
"We had some anxious moments," says West Virginia auditor Glen Gainer, who is chairman of the National White Collar Crime Center's board of directors.
On each of those fronts, the Internet Fraud Complaint Center had help, some from the private sector.
One of the first groups to offer assistance was Web technology firm Akamai. The group's co-founder Daniel Lewin was killed when his Los Angeles-bound plane struck one of the Twin Towers.
In all, nearly $ 3 million worth of service, hardware and expertise was donated by about a dozen firms, Johnston estimates.
"At one point in Fairmont we had three or four of the world's best security people sitting around a table," said Johnston, who declines to discuss the specifics of some of the security threats.
The center's employees did not actually review the tips, which were handled strictly by FBI agents with higher clearances.
Rep. Alan Mollohan has helped found and fund the center from his perch as a top member of the House Appropriations Committee.
"It's an amazing story," Mollohan, D-W.Va., said. "They did a tremendous job."
In recent weeks, the FBI has taken over the terrorism tip line, allowing the center to refocus on fraud complaints. However, center officials hope the experience with the terrorism tip line will show state and federal governments the value of offering people the ability to share homeland defense information securely online, especially as the new Department of Homeland Security takes shape.
"It was nice to be able to help when most Americans were sitting wondering how," Johnston said.
Writer Karin Fischer can be reached at (202) 662-8732 or by e-mail at kfischer@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: November 30, 2002


End of Document