International flight offers lesson in traveling during terrorism alert
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 11, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: KETTERING AND OAKWOOD; Pg. RD5
Length: 397 words
Byline: HEREABOUTS WILLIAM G. SCHMIDT
Body


When Nan Allen boarded a Delta flight in Manchester, England, on Dec. 26, she had no idea that a suspected terrorist boarded another flight in Amsterdam the day before and took a similar path across the Atlantic.
Though the reported al-Qaeda operative had failed in his attempt to take down an airplane over Detroit, the word had not yet filtered back to Allen.
Few news organizations reported the incident in any detail until the following day.
So Allen, of Kettering, was perhaps blissfully unaware of the danger. But that does not mean she did not know something was going on.
She arrived at the airport a couple of hours early. As she sat waiting for her flight, she noticed "two Brits in full body armor." They were carrying sub-machine guns and began scanning the crowd.
A woman walked up to Allen and asked, "What's going on?" But no one knew the answer.
"When we were getting ready to board the plane, they said, 'We will be boarding by rows, not sections.' "
Men were forced to take a left turn as they boarded, women forced right. Each person was frisked.
Even on the plane, no one knew what was going on but for the obviously heightened security. About two hours before the plane landed in Atlanta, the pilot came on the public address system and said no one would be able to use the restroom for the last hour of the flight.
Passengers were required to stay in their seats with lap trays up and nothing on their laps. "We must be able to see your feet and you must have your hands in your lap," they were told.
Thus ended Allen's first international flight. She was visiting her son, Robert Vander Roest, who is attending the University of Leeds.
Coincidentally, he's studying to be a counter-terrorism analyst.
Vander Roest received a bachelor's degree in accounting from Ohio Northern University in Ada. But a ride with the Bellefontaine Police Department convinced him his true interest lies elsewhere.
While in England, Allen celebrated her 50th birthday.
How does she feel about the enhanced security she had to endure? "I actually welcomed it," said Allen, who is head of patron services at the Germantown Public Library.
"If there is a threat, you can X-ray me, scan me, I don't care. That does not bother me one little bit," she said.
"We just don't know what's going on. Which is probably good sometimes."
Contact this columnist at (937) 696-2080 or williamgschmidt@v erizon.net.

Graphic

 
Nan Allen, head of patron services for the Germantown Public Library, stands before Stonehenge with her son, Robert Vander Roest, on the date of the winter solstice. She was in England from Dec. 12-26. Her flight back to the U.S. was just a day after an attempted terrorist bombing of a similar flight. Contributed photo

Load-Date: February 11, 2010


End of Document