Intel officials reveal misuse of secret spying program; Chief intel official ties issues to complex nature of technology
USA TODAY
September 11, 2013 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 302 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY,
Body


Federal intelligence officials Tuesday released a trove of previously classified documents that reveal the government's misuse of  a secret surveillance program that tracks the telephone records of millions of Americans.
At one point in 2009, officials had improperly identified more than 15,000 telephone records for further scrutiny even though the records did not meet the proper standard for their links to terrorism.
Director of National Intelligence James Clapper said the  problems "stemmed in large part from the complexity of the technology."
Yet the revelations about the government's mismanagement of the phone records program, the most politically charged of the unauthorized disclosures by former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden, provide an early skeptical view of an operation that continues to raise questions among lawmakers and privacy advocates. The documents were released Tuesday as a result of a lawsuit being pressed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
In one Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) order, dated Jan. 28, 2009, Judge Reggie Walton noted that the Justice Department had alerted the court that the government had been querying the telephone records "in a manner that appears to the court to be directly contrary" to a previous court order authorizing the record collection.
Walton's challenge centered on the NSA's use of an "alert list." The list is a select group of telephone numbers that are suspected to have links to terrorism. Of the more than 17,000 numbers included on the list in 2009, according to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, about 1,800 met the "reasonable ... suspicion" standard of having links to terrorism.
Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt.,  described the new disclosures as evidence of "systemic problems." 

Graphic

 
photo AP

Load-Date: September 11, 2013


End of Document