Intelligence networks improve security, federal officials tell industry group
The Beaumont Enterprise (Texas)
February 17, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Beaumont Enterprise
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 396 words
Byline: Amy A. Collins, The Beaumont Enterprise, Texas
Body


Feb. 17--With the increase of port security and new patrol boats monitoring the local waterways, members of the Golden Tri-angle Business Roundtable had other questions concerning security for their facilities.
U.S. Department of Justice/Anti Terrorism Coordinator Brit Featherston with the U.S. Attorneys Office and Senior Supervisor Special Service Agent Mark Broom spoke to members as part of the roundtable's Tuesday meeting and luncheon and answered a few questions about security and terrorism.
"We're fighting terrorism on a lot of different fronts," said Featherston. "That can only be held in check with in-crease intelligence networks."
Featherston and Broom said communication between local and federal officials have improved since Sept. 11, 2001, with the help of the Anti-terrorism Advisory Council a communication network council which provides state and federal information to local emergency workers.
Questions about the future shut down of Guantanamo Bay Detention Camp and possible dangers of the new Google Maps aerial features fueled more discussion.
"We will execute the orders of the President of the United States," said Broom in response to the detention camp closing. "It has not been decided how to handle prisoners, but we will execute his orders."
"It's a tough balance; Gitmo is a tough thing," said Featherston.
The speakers stressed that everyone can do their part to stop possible terrorism by noticing things that may not be typical at their workplace. Examples included the absence of security and suspicious groups of people.
Featherston told the group to first notify local police if they suspect terroristic activity.
"We can defend ourselves by doing our jobs with a good eye, not paranoia" said Featherston. "Do it by being good citizens and employees."
The next meeting of the Golden Triangle Business Roundtable is scheduled March 17 at 11 a.m. in the Pompano Club at 3911 N. Twin City Highway in Nederland.
To see more of The Beaumont Enterprise, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.www.beaumontenterprise.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Beaumont Enterprise, Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: February 18, 2009


End of Document