Interviews of 5,000 yield several leads in terrorism probe
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 22, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 499 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- Federal prosecutors have developed several leads in the terrorism investigation after questioning 5,000 foreign men, most of Middle Eastern descent, the Justice Department said Friday.
The interviews, which have been conducted by federal and local law enforcement officials since early November, have also yielded information "that will be helpful more generally to the country's anti-terrorism efforts," the department said in a statement.
Gina Talamona, Justice Department spokeswoman, would not comment on whether the leads were significant or pointed toward suspects connected to the Sept. 11 attacks.
The interviews were to be completed by Friday, but some states are still looking for those wanted for questioning and have extended the deadline.
Most of those questioned "were extremely cooperative and forthcoming," the department said about the controversial effort to locate and talk to young males from countries where terrorists are believed to operate -- mostly in the Middle East.
"My sincerest thanks go out to all of the interviewees who cooperated voluntarily in this process," said Attorney General John Ashcroft. "These individuals made a choice to be responsible for helping save lives instead of remaining silent against evil."
The voluntary interviews sparked complaints from civil rights and Arab American groups and some police departments concerned that seeking out Middle Easterners was tantamount to racial profiling.
Justice Department officials said the men were not targeted based on their nationalities. Only those with passports issued by countries where Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network is known to operate were sought for questioning, the officials said.
Those sought for questioning were not suspects, but investigators believed they might have information that will help police find those who planned the attacks and others planning new attacks.
They were asked if they know anyone who has fought in a war; anyone who acted in a "surprising or inappropriate way" to the Sept. 11 attacks; anyone involved in terrorism or willing to carry out terrorist attacks; or anyone with access to guns, explosives or chemical or biological weapons.
Most of those questioned "expressed a willingness to help" and some volunteered to assist as interpreters or help in other ways, the department said.
A small number declined to be interviewed "and their wishes were respected," the department said in a statement.
Some of those on the list could not be located because they had moved or left the country. Investigators are trying to track down those still in the United States.
In Michigan, which has a large Arab American community, the interviews are expected to continue into next month, officials said.
"Some of these interviews are going to go into January, particularly with those folks who want to have their attorneys present," said FBI spokeswoman Dawn Clenney.
In Colorado, the interviews have led to the arrests of several people for serious immigration violations.

Load-Date: December 22, 2001


End of Document