Intelligence, not gear, is called key to stopping terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 13, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 447 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERUSALEM 
Body


Airports have the technology to detect liquid explosives, but it's a time-consuming process and must be coupled with passenger profiling to narrow the pool of suspects, Israeli aviation security experts said.
Security engineers are racing to devise new defenses against bombers. But terrorists have many more ways to blow up an airplane, the experts warned.
In the plot foiled by British authorities last week, the planners sought to use common electronic devices to detonate liquid explosives to bring down U.S.-bound planes.
"There are all kinds of ways to smuggle in explosives," said Yoram Schweitzer, terrorism expert at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies in Tel Aviv. "In this case, the only reason they were caught was because of good intelligence."
In the aviation world, the Israeli national airline El Al has been the No. 1 target for terrorists ever since one of its airliners was hijacked in 1968 to Algeria.
Former El Al security chief Tuvia Livneh said would-be bombers had been caught with liquid explosives in the past. "This is not new at all," said Livneh, now head of a private security company, Sital International. 
He said countermeasures had been developed but were rarely used because they were complicated and took too much time.
El Al refuses to discuss specific equipment employed to sniff out potentially dangerous chemicals, which can be part of an explosive chain of innocent-looking material. Even liquor is highly combustible and can be used to fuel an explosion.
One device on the market, developed by the U.S. company Guardian Technologies of Herndon, Va., uses image-analysis software attached to X-ray screeners. The device circles items that match the density of known explosives.
"If we detect any explosive items, it will put a big red box over the image so the screener can take a better look and do more screening," said Steven Lancaster, the company's vice president. The software costs $50,000 to $100,000 per unit, he said.
But Israeli security experts still put their faith in the human factor.
"In the end, for the attackers and the defenders, the main issue is not the equipment. It's what quality of humans they have," said Leo Gleser, of the security consulting firm ISDS. A highly trained security agent who can spot a suspicious passenger is the best defense against a would-be bomber ready to kill himself.
"In Israel, we use profiling. That means you learn your enemy, learn the way he is going to attack you, and once you know that, you build up your system," said Gleser, a former sky marshal and El Al security officer.
Profiling goes beyond racial appearances.
"Your behavior is different when you know this is your last day," he said.

Notes

 BOMB PLOT FOILED 

Load-Date: August 13, 2006


End of Document