Intolerance for terrorism
USA TODAY
August 1, 2005, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; Debate
Length: 412 words
Body

Long before terrorism visited London's Underground, the British knew a lot about what bombs and bullets and hatred could do. Between 1970 and 2005, Irish Republican Army terrorists killed 1,775 people and maimed thousands more across Ireland and England. For most of that time, the conflict seemed endless.
Yet, last Thursday, the end finally appeared to be at hand. The IRA declared that it would end its armed struggle against British rule in Northern Ireland and "dump arms." The historic statement, if it is followed by promised disarmament, could resuscitate a stagnant peace process and lead to settlement at the ballot box of Northern Ireland's future. The question is whether Northern Ireland will be reunited with the Catholic-dominated Irish Republic, as the IRA desires, or remain under British rule, leaving Protestants in control.
The Irish experience, rooted in five centuries of religious conflict, may also hold lessons for ending terrorism in Islam. Certainly, the 9/11 attacks, the Underground bombings and the recent near-misses in London have fueled a revulsion to terrorism of all sorts.
Yet, the IRA rejected terrorism only after it got the message that no one would tolerate it -- not the group's friends in the USA, not even Catholics in Ireland who shared its vision. Early this year, after the IRA acknowledged killing a 33-year-old Catholic man outside a Belfast pub, the man's sisters began a public campaign to demand the group stop preying on its own people.
It would be gross oversimplification to say that event ended 35 years of killing by the modern IRA. Many factors contributed, including years of negotiation. But nothing is more vital than intolerance of terrorism in the terrorists' own communities.
That is rare in many Islamic nations today. But in the wake of the London bombings, it is increasingly evident among Muslims in the West:
*British authorities say they received more than 5,000 tips from the public, leading to the arrest of all four
suspects in the failed July 21 bombings.
*Last Thursday, a group of Islamic scholars in North America issued a fatwa, or Islamic religious ruling, denouncing terrorism against civilians and asking Muslims to cooperate with authorities to help end violence.
Much more is needed, particularly condemnation of terrorism by the most prominent Islamic leaders in the Arab world. But those actions provide a glimmer of hope that terrorism fuels its own demise. Even if the process is painfully slow.

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document