Investing; Stock Prices and the Terror Factor
 The New York Times
August 3, 2003 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 1213 words
Byline:  By JOHN KIMELMAN
Body


IN defense of an ill-fated plan to set up an online futures market on terrorism, the Pentagon paid homage last week to the collective wisdom of the marketplace. 
     "Research indicates that markets are extremely efficient, effective and timely aggregators of dispersed and even hidden information," the Defense Department said in a statement, explaining that it hoped to study futures prices to assess the probability of specific acts of terrorism. 
 The Pentagon bowed to a barrage of criticism and dropped its online market on Tuesday. Hapless though the project may have been, it was based on a widely held assumption that financial markets continuously assess the probability of significant economic and political events, including terrorism. 
Few people on Wall Street appear to believe that the markets can actually predict external events. "The consensus is wrong sometimes," said John Manley, a senior equity strategist with Smith Barney's global private client group. "It doesn't predict the future." But Wall Street strategists have tried to build assessments of terrorism into their stock market forecasts, even though there is some disagreement on whether the possibility of terrorism has been adequately reflected in share prices and in the asset allocations of investors.
The consensus among strategists is, not surprisingly, that current pricing is appropriate with regard to terrorism risk. In this view, the market has overcome severe shocks caused by terrorism, war and other events in the past, and will do so again. "We all know the horror of terrorism; we all know the risk," said Alfred E. Goldman, chief market market strategist at A. G. Edwards, a St. Louis brokerage firm. "Will terrorism destroy our nation? I just don't buy it." 
He pointed to the historical record. After dropping 12 percent in the first week of trading after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001, the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rallied to finish the year 5 percent higher than at the close of business the day before the attacks. (The index is now 10.3 percent lower than its close on Sept. 10, 2001.)
And the markets were up 8.9 percent, on average, six months after 16 major terrorist events going back to 1979, including the 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center, the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and the 9/11 attacks, according to market data compiled by Ned Davis Research, of Venice, Fla.
But others contend that the terrorism risk has not been properly priced. "A lot of people on Wall Street seem to ignore the risk of terrorism, given the recent stock market rally," said Kari Bayer Pinkernell, a senior United States investment strategist with Merrill Lynch. She would not try to predict the likelihood of another attack, but she said that another incident could be more devastating than was generally appreciated. "Imagine a person going into a shopping mall or movie theater with a bomb," she said. "That could paralyze the economy."
To be sure, Merrill's current cautious stance on the stock market is tied primarily to concerns about the economy, not terrorism. But that firm, more than most of its competitors on Wall Street, is willing to factor terrorism, and what it believes to be an era of geopolitical uncertainty, into its predictions, though it cannot quantify the level of risk. 
Ms. Pinkernell said recently that for stock prices the year would probably finish about as it began, when the Dow was trading at 8,341, or slightly below that level. And stocks have only a 45 percent weighting in the firm's model portfolio, 20 percentage points below the Wall Street consensus, Ms. Pinkernell said. "Terrorism is factoring into our general concerns and helping to hold that allocation level down," she added. 
Mr. Manley, of Smith Barney, is more bullish about stocks than is Ms. Pinkernell and less concerned about the threat of terrorism. His firm gives stocks a 55 percent weighting in its model portfolio. 
"What we are moving toward is a form of inoculation from terrorism," he said. "We know that there are risks, but with confidence rising, there is a sense that we are missing too much by not being invested in the market." While conceding that further terrorism could send the stock market spiraling down, he said that the future market bottom caused by such an attack could well exceed current stock market levels.
In support of the view that current prices already reflect much of the risk of future acts of terrorism, Hugh Johnson, the chief investment officer at First Albany, said that investors' concerns appeared to be showing up in consumer confidence surveys, short selling and other investor activities that directly affect stock prices. And Jeremy J. Siegel, a professor of finance at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, said that fear of terrorism had contributed to the length of the bond rally, with many investors "still sticking with bonds" despite low yields.
MR. GOLDMAN, of A. G. Edwards, said that the market's current price-earnings multiple of roughly 28 times earnings was lower than would otherwise be expected with interest rates so low.
"The market would be higher today if we didn't have that terrorism risk," he said, "but there is no way to quantify by how much." Still, virtually all market forecasters, including Mr. Goldman, readily acknowledge that another terrorist attack, or a series of attacks, would send stocks dropping, at least short term.
"The fear contagion," Professor Siegel said, "could have a substantial effect on the markets."
Mr. Manley said he had told clients that if they were truly concerned about terrorism, they should trade in a few percentage points of stock in their portfolios for cash or gold. "But don't stop investing in stocks," he said.
Professor Siegel, author of "Stocks for the Long Run" (Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2002), said long-term investors should not alter their asset allocations or specific stock selections one bit. "It's not clear what form future acts of terrorism will take," he said. He said that terrorism aimed at disrupting transportation, for example, could be expected to affect a different set of companies than an act of biological terrorism.
But Milton Ezrati, a senior economic strategist at Lord Abbett, argues that investors can at least reduce their exposure to terrorism by building a stock portfolio tied to value, rather than growth, stocks. 
Speaking of value-oriented stocks, he said: "Terrorism risk only enhances their relative appeal. We are looking for companies in which you aren't paying up for a company's bright prospects. If you are worried about a shock to the system like terrorism, paying up for earnings growth could be a dangerous approach."
Currently, Mr. Ezrati sees value in a number of economically sensitive industries, including chemicals and paper. Conversely, he sees less value in traditional havens like energy and utilities. That is because many investors are not confident that the economy will be recovering strongly in the months ahead, he said.
Many forecasters contend that markets will always be vibrant enough to withstand terrorist acts. "Unless you think that the government is really going to lose control of the fight against terrorism," Mr. Ezrati said, "then every scare becomes a buying opportunity for the long term."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Kari Bayer Pinkernell, a senior United States investment strategist with Merrill Lynch, at ground zero in New York. She says terrorism could severely disrupt the economy. (Photo by Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times) Chart: "Terrorism's Effect on the Market"Terrorist attacks have had little lasting market impact and often no major short-term effect, either. Here is what happened after four attacks over the last decade. CHANGE IN THE DOW INDUSTRIALS IN TRADING DAYS AFTER THE ATTACK* 1 DAY World Trade Center (Feb. 26, 1993): +0.2%Oklahoma City (April 19, 1995): +0.7U.S.S. Cole (Oct. 12, 2000): -3.6World Trade Center and Pentagon (Sept. 11, 2001): -7.1 5 DAYS World Trade Center (Feb. 26, 1993): +1.0%Oklahoma City (April 19, 1995): +2.9U.S.S. Cole (Oct. 12, 2000): -4.2World Trade Center and Pentagon (Sept. 11, 2001): -14.3 63 DAYS World Trade Center (Feb. 26, 1993): +5.2 %Oklahoma City (April 19, 1995): +12.1U.S.S. Cole (Oct. 12, 2000): +1.9World Trade Center and Pentagon (Sept. 11, 2001): +1.7 *Calculated from the close of trading the day before the attack; 63 trading days is the average number in a three-month period. (Source by Ned Davis Research)

Load-Date: August 3, 2003


End of Document