Investigative Project's Set-Up Is a Non-Issue
The Forward
December 10, 2010


Copyright 2010 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 10
Length: 334 words
Body


Your November 26 article, Terror  Expert Emerson Feels His Own Heat  Over Finances, does a disservice by  focusing on the non-issues raised by  The Tennessean newspaper in its report  concerning the Investigative Project on  Terrorism Foundation's structure and  finances.
The relationship between IPTF and its  contractor, SAE, was vetted by experts  in the field, including Edward Coleman,  a former director of the Internal  Revenue Service's exempt organizations  division. Coleman advised IPTF in  its application for tax-exempt charitable  status and said: So far as IPTF is paying  fair market value to the for-profit,  SAE, and the for profit spends this  money in furtherance of the exempt  purpose of IPTF, and IPTF discloses on  its 990 that it gives this money to SAE,  if both organizations are headed by the  same person, I don't see the problem.
IPTF's publicly available Form 990  filing for 2008 shows how much the  foundation spends to further its goal  to research and expose the activities  of terrorist networks and supporters in  the U. S. and abroad and to educate the  public about this threat. Money paid  to IPTF's contractor is used to provide a  website, access to an unparalleled database  of millions of documents, travel  expenses to cover trials and events, and  the expenses involved in producing  books and documentary films.
Staff outsourcing arrangements are  common in the nonprofit world, and  there is nothing improper about this  one. Our contractor spends all of the  money it receives from IPTF to further  the foundation's tax-exempt purposes,  and IPTF has been compliant in its IRS  filings.
We provided the IRS with everything  it needed to recognize our tax-exempt  status. Nothing we have done since  then changes our qualification for that  status. Anyone who is interested in  learning more can read our responses  to The Tennessean at our website   www.investigativeproject.org.
Ray Locker
Managing Director  Investigative Project on Terrorism  Washington, D. C.

Load-Date: December 28, 2010


End of Document