Investors decide glass is half full for stocks
USA TODAY
September 1, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MONEY; Pg. 1B
Length: 475 words
Byline: Adam Shell
Body


NEW YORK -- Wall Street worries a lot. For most of the summer, potential what-if worries for the stock market, such as terrorism, a housing collapse, a mistake by the Federal Reserve and a nuclear Iran, have canceled out pluses spelled out in lists of positives.
Until now. In recent weeks, the perceived minuses have not led to losses  for stocks. In fact, stocks have quietly rallied since early August, in large part because investors are placing more weight on good news than bad.
For example, even though a recent report by Citigroup chief U.S. equity strategist Tobias Levkovich ticks off a dozen potential negatives, a shorter list of eight positive factors now seems to be carrying more clout with investors.
The cease-fire in Lebanon calmed some fears of escalating Middle East tensions. The Fed's decision to not raise its target for short-term interest rates in August reduced fears about future rate increases. Oil's recent dip to around $70 a barrel quieted talk of a superspike to $100. Corporate earnings and the deal market continue to chug along, dampening fears of a profit recession.
In short, investors are now focusing more on the bright side and less on potential drags ranging from an outbreak of avian flu to a world economy paralyzed by terrorism, says Peter Cardillo, chief market strategist at S.W. Bach.
Despite a limp finish, August was the best month for the Nasdaq (up 4.4%) and the S&P (up 2.1%) since January. The Dow is just 2.9% off its all-time high.
"The message of the markets is that things might be a little better than the pessimists are saying," says Michael Holland, chairman of money management firm Holland & Co.
Investors, in essence, are betting that the Fed's two-year campaign of rate increases will slow the economy but not cause a recession. Good news in the form of a  so-far-mild hurricane season, a half-percentage-point drop since late June in the yield on the 10-year Treasury note  to a five-month low, and moderating energy prices have offset some of the recent negativity.
While the "absence of bad news" has lifted stock prices, many investors believe the negatives still outweigh the positives. This camp won't rule out a more severe economic slowdown than optimists expect, says Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at Johnson Illington Advisors. "I'm still guarded on the outlook," he says.
The fact that there is such lingering skepticism is another potential positive sign. "Investor sentiment has become excessively bearish," says Bruce Bittles, chief investment strategist at R.W. Baird, adding that all the angst is already reflected in stock prices.
Market boosters
*Fed stops lifting rates.
*Mideast tensions ease.
*Earnings prove resilient.
*Oil price correction.
*Tempered job growth.
*Merger and acquisition activity.
*Dividend payouts and stock buybacks.
*Reducing terrorism.
Source: Citigroup

Load-Date: September 1, 2006


End of Document