Iowa considers database; Officials study merits of terrorism records exchange
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 1, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Iowa; Pg. a20
Length: 593 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


Iowa law enforcement officials are considering joining a controversial anti-terrorism database run by six states, The Associated Press has learned.
The database, known as Matrix, combines police records with public information on ordinary people collected by a Florida company to allow investigators quick access to various sources of information, law enforcement officials say.
"We're looking into it … I think there are some applications that would be very beneficial to law enforcement and any organization that has an interest in homeland security," said James Saunders, a spokesman for the Iowa Department of Public Safety.
He said the department was evaluating the merits of Matrix, short for Multistate Terrorism Information Exchange, but there was no timeline for a decision on participation.
The database, a pilot program funded thus far by the Justice Department, has come under fire from privacy advocates across the country as a data-mining program that erodes civil liberties.
The executive director of the Iowa Civil Liberties Union on Friday demanded that state officials hold public hearings on the matter before moving forward. "This should not be done in secret," Ben Stone said.
Saunders said protecting privacy "would be the No. 1 issue" state officials consider before signing on. "We want to make sure that we can protect people's civil liberties," he said.
At the same time, he said law enforcement should be interested in any program that could help "prevent another 9/11."
State consideration "is pretty preliminary right now," said Monica Fischer, a spokeswoman for Gov. Tom Vilsack. She said Vilsack will make a final decision after receiving a recommendation from the Department of Public Safety.
The program uses high-speed computers to give authorities a trove of information about people within seconds, including details on the property, boats, and Internet domains they own, their address history, names of possible neighbors and business associates, utility connections and any bankruptcy filings.
Supporters of the program say it is an efficient search engine for public records in sensitive crime and terrorism investigations and that the program will be monitored for misuse. Information will be provided on a need-to-know basis, they say.
But Stone said the program creates a dossier on every American and it "sounds like 'assume everybody in America is a suspect and eliminate people from that list'," he said.
"It is a massive invasion of privacy under the guise of fighting terrorism," Stone said. "The fact that Iowa is interested in this really demonstrates this isn't closely linked to terrorism. This is about broad police powers."
Florida, Connecticut, Michigan, New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania are running the program. Utah's governor on Thursday halted the state's participation and at least eight other states have considered joining before dropping out, citing privacy or long-term cost concerns.
Since 1984, Iowa has run a program called the Law Enforcement Intelligence Network that shares information with local authorities around the state. That has helped investigators with different agencies work together, officials say.
"What Matrix has the potential to do is expand that beyond Iowa's borders - maybe allow us the ability to get information that has some nexus to what's going on here," Saunders said.
He said the intelligence network provides information relevant to individuals or groups suspected of criminal activity. Matrix is a collection of public information used only for anti-terrorism purposes, he said.

Load-Date: February 1, 2004


End of Document