IRA SPURNS PEACE, REVIVES TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 1996, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 7B; EDWIN YODER COLUMN
Length: 704 words
Byline: Edwin Yoder Washington Post Writers Group
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The London Docklands bombing demonstrates once again that "Irish Republican Army" is just a fancy label for a terrorist outfit indistinguishable from any other. A huge bomb in London's East End, for which the IRA claims responsibility, injured more than 100, killed at least two, and did $ 100 million worth of damage. And this ended an 17-month truce.
There may be an impulse, here and there, to take perverse satisfaction in this sad turn of events, since the U.S. instigators of the flimsy "peace process" that preceded the bombing had been warned that it couldn't last.
Far better to take the incident as an invitation to disabuse ourselves of the giddy illusions gingered up by the Clinton administration's deeply resented intervention in the Northern Ireland question, which the British government properly regards as an internal matter.
The Clinton White House, influenced by Sen. Ted Kennedy's Senate staff, overrode vehement objections from John Major's government when it granted the IRA's political front man, Gerry Adams, a U.S. visa and later received him at the White House. Superficially encouraging noises followed. The IRA proclaimed a "cease-fire." The Major government offered to negotiate with Sinn Fein (the political arm of the IRA) if the IRA would turn in its arsenal. The IRA of course refused. It reserves the right to "negotiate" with a pistol in its pocket. Then the Major government tried another tack. Let the negotiating parties be freely elected, it proposed. The IRA again refused.
You have to be politically dimwitted not to get the point. Sinn Fein and Adams may or may not have influence with the IRA's men of violence. That is obviously very much in question. What is no longer in question is that the IRA, like other terrorist outfits, cannot afford to abjure violence or trade its weapons for elections.
The IRA is, at most, a minority of a minority of a minority in Northern Ireland. It has few friends in the Republic of Ireland, in whose interest it claims to operate, and none at all in the Irish government. Its bottom-line aim is to sever Northern Ireland by force from the United Kingdom, whether or not a majority agree. That aim can only be achieved by wearing down the will of the majority and the resolve of the British government.
Of course, no issue so deeply rooted in the long, bloody, tragic history of Ireland can be detached from that history. Many things could be said about the inequities of earlier times, beginning with Cromwell's Protestant plantations in the 17th century and certainly including the British government's decision in the 1920s to give in to a threatened army mutiny and leave the six Irish counties of Ulster out of the Irish Republic.
But all this proves is that the continuing quarrel over Northern Ireland, to which only a minority of sectarian extremists remain committed parties, is a vestige of grievances long past. In their name, the present and the future continue to be made miserable by a violent few. But of course the world is full of geopolitical anomalies, where peoples and the lands they covet are not rationally adjusted to the satisfaction of ultranationalists. Bombs and bullets settle nothing and no lasting order can be built on violence. There is no acceptable way to settle the Ulster issue on the basis of IRA demands.
Meanwhile, the reaction of Sinn Fein to the London bombing indicates, not for the first time, that its spokesman Gerry Adams remains a slippery character. He reacted to the incident with pious regrets. He claims not to have known about the bomb beforehand. But if he didn't know, what is the basis of his claim to speak for the IRA's violent men? Will he remain a credible intermediary?
President Bill Clinton says he still wants to help. If so, he ought to halt the meddling in this tragic and explosive dilemma by well-meaning amateurs. These folks don't seem to grasp that violence is addictive for inveterate terrorists; that its addictiveness for the IRA is reinforced by the knowledge that violence is the only card it has to play. The IRA insists that sovereignty flows from the business end of a gun. That is not a view in which the United States should collaborate, however well-meaningly or indirectly.

Load-Date: February 16, 1996


End of Document