IRA TERRORISM IS FAILED STRATEGY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 15, 1994, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 7B; EDWIN YODER COLUMN
Length: 737 words
Byline: Edwin Yoder Copyright Washington Post Writers Group
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Clinton administration was quick to boast of its role in promoting the cease-fire in Northern Ireland.
A harmless vanity, perhaps. The administration seems to view foreign policy as a minor extension of domestic politics: If its Irish-American constituents are happy, God's in his heaven and all's right with the world.
The rest of us must take a more complicated view. The Irish Republican Army's announced cease-fire is a slender ray of hope, but no more. If the IRA may be taken at its word - a big if - it is admitting that a quarter century's campaign to break the will of the British government by violence has failed. Bombings and assassinations - including the assassination of Lord Louis Mountbatten and the attempted assassination of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and members of her Cabinet, acts worthy of North Korean or Libyan thuggery - have not forced the British government to abandon majority rule.
The issue has never been well understood in the United States, where IRA propaganda goes far to muddle it, especially in Washington and Hollywood. Not long after the present troubles began, Sen. Edward Kennedy articulated the romantic Irish-American view of the struggle when he compared the role of the British army in Ulster to the role of U.S. forces in Vietnam.
The senator's comparison was not well received, and little has been heard of it since, at least from him. But behind the scenes, militant Irish-American organizations continue to supply financial aid and comfort to the IRA, its gunmen and bombers. Their sanctimonious hands are spattered with the blood of IRA victims. Worse still, the appeasement of militant pro-IRA elements has been the centerpiece of Clinton administration policy, highlighted by the visa given last spring to the IRA's political front man, Gerry Adams, to tour the New York talk shows.
They're still at it. The announcement of the cease-fire was accompanied by the news that the White House has again broken the rule against American visits by known terrorists by granting a visa to Joe Cahill, the IRA operative. His errand is said to be to explain to American sympathizers why the terror has been called off. Did he tell them the truth - that it has been called off because it failed?
While celebrating their role in Irish Realpolitik, the White House optimists should pay attention to the demands that Sinn Fein, the IRA's political front, continues to make: The British army must get out of the Six Counties, and the Six Counties must become a part of the Irish Republic. The Protestant fanatics, of course, say never.
If the IRA really is going to give up trying to bomb the British out of Northern Ireland, the British army can be thinned out, and no one will be happier than the British public. You don't learn from IRA propaganda, so plentiful in the American media, that the Tommies were sent as much to protect Catholics from Protestant rowdies as to protect the peace against terrorists. But it is true. The presence of the British army is a token of London's attachment to majority rule and to the principle that legal political arrangements must not be changed by - must in fact be reinforced in the face of - terrorism.
Assuming that all goes well, the three-month trial of good faith and after that the peace talks, what might the Irish future look like? Both London and Dublin agree that the issue must be settled by talk, not by violence. The IRA and Sinn Fein are at least pretending to agree. We may all wish that Ireland had a less embittering history - that Irish patriots had never made their island a springboard for the attempted Catholic reconquest of England in the distant past, or that British officers had not mutinied over the home-rule issue in this century. But no party to this tragic argument can escape history. It must be lived with and, if possible, transcended.
The case for transcendence has never been stronger. With the end of the Cold War, the world has re-entered an age of destructive nationalist and tribal passions. Yugoslavia stands as the chilling example of what happens when fossilized religious, communal and ethnic hatreds boil over into civil war. Ireland is not immune to such an outcome. But the now ancient enmities to which Irish fanatics of both Catholic and Protestant persuasion are so wedded make less sense today than ever.
Some peoples remember too little history. The Irish, tragically, remember too much.

Load-Date: September 17, 1994


End of Document