IRA VOWS TO SPREAD TERRORISM; FEARS GROW OF RETALIATION BY PROTESTANT PARAMILITARY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 20, 1996, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 648 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body


The Irish Republican Army, accepting responsibility for a bomb blast aboard a London bus that killed one person, threatened Monday to extend its terror campaign to other British cities to "get the message home."
As the peace process unraveled still further, fears were raised that a new wave of violence also could wash over both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland if Protestant paramilitary groups respond to the IRA attacks with their own renewed terrorist campaign.
Police made two arrests in connection with a bus explosion Sunday night in the theater district, and placed a guard on a survivor of the bombing who was hospitalized with a fractured skull and pelvis.
The Evening Standard quoted an anti-terrorist squad officer as saying: "We are treating this man as one of the bombers." Police declined to confirm that. The bombing left nine people injured, two seriously, and police said the man killed in the blast might have been the IRA bomb carrier.
They theorized that he used a city bus to avoid police checkpoints, and said the bomb might have gone off accidentally as he was on his way to a target, possibly the nearby London Law Courts.
"The bus was not the intended target, we believe," said police commander John Grieve, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch.
The IRA broke its 17-month cease-fire Feb. 9 with a truck bomb in London's Docklands financial and business center. That bomb killed two people and injured more than 100. The attack followed months of deadlock in the peace process. On Thursday, a bomb placed in a telephone box in the theater district was defused by police.
An IRA official, in a telephone call to the BBC in Belfast, Northern Ireland, on Monday, said the bus bombing was the work of the IRA. He professed regret for the loss of life and injuries.
Then another IRA official told Reuters news agency: "If what is happening in London doesn't get the message home, the same signal will be sent by activity in other major British cities." He apparently referred to IRA demands that Britain lift its conditions for Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, to participate in all-party peace talks.
'Peace Process Is Over' In Belfast, Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams told Irish Radio: "The peace process is over. What we have to do is rebuild it. It takes a lot of resilience at a personal and political level. It means all of us taking risks."
British officials said Prime Minister John Major was determined to carry on the peace process. He is scheduled to hold a summit meeting soon with Irish Prime Minister John Bruton, but no date has been set.
In Washington, President Bill Clinton denounced the IRA bombings as "cowardly acts of terrorism" and "the work of individuals determined to thwart the will of the people of Northern Ireland."
The renewed violence has come just as Northern Ireland was recovering from 25 years of conflict that took 3,200 lives.
The crux of the dispute is whether the province, which has a Protestant majority, should remain part of Britain, join the mostly Catholic Republic of Ireland, or assume some other status.
British and Irish officials have suspended talks with Sinn Fein pending a resumption of the cease-fire. Some of them speculate that Adams is finished politically because his peace initiative has been disrupted by hard-liners in the IRA.
The Irish Times reported in Dublin that Irish police suspect the IRA leadership has been taken over by a man with a history of involvement in violent campaigns.
It did not name the man, but said he had been previously identified as the architect of a campaign in which booby-trapped bombs were placed in vans in the late 1980s and driven to British Army posts by civilians who were told their families would be killed otherwise.
The same IRA man, the newspaper said, directed a murder campaign aimed at destabilizing Northern Ireland before an election in the late 1980s.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color photo by AP - The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility Monday for bombing this double-decker bus in London on Sunday night. The blast killed one and injured nine.

Load-Date: February 20, 1996


End of Document