IRA ALLY'S REQUEST PUTS CLINTON ON SPOT
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 31, 1994, Monday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 674 words
Byline: Kevin Cullen
Body


Analysis
Bill Clinton can keep one of his campaign
promises, enrage his government's biggest ally, and perhaps breathe
life into a stalled peace initiative in Northern Ireland if he allows
Gerry Adams into the United States.
It is all that simple and all that complicated.
Adams, leader of Sinn Fein, the party that supports the Irish
Republican Army, has asked to be allowed to participate in a
conference on Northern Ireland scheduled for Tuesday in New York City
Last year, Adams asked to be allowed to tour the United States
to promote two of the five books he has written. The Clinton
administration turned him down, as previous administrations had for a
decade, arguing that he was involved in the support of terrorism.
Now, however, Clinton has softened that stance, saying Adams
might be allowed in if he publicly renounced violence and made
positive statements about the joint declaration that the Irish and
British governments unveiled Dec. 15 and held up as the blueprint for
peace in Northern Ireland.
Adams has repeatedly called for clarifications, saying the
declaration is too ambiguous for he and his party to accept or reject.
But the British government has been adamant that there would be no
negotiation until the IRA calls a cease-fire.
Adams and the republican movement he leads, meanwhile, are
trying to make the case that they cannot urge the IRA to stop until
various issues, especially the plight of 700 IRA prisoners, are
resolved.  In that light, the New York conference is a desirable
platform.
The British government has made its opposition to the visa plain.
But Clinton, who reneged on a campaign promise to let Adams in, is
now under increasing pressure from U.S. lawmakers to alter a
longstanding State Department ban.
A coalition of more than 40 congressional figures, led by Sen.
Edward M. Kennedy in the Senate and his nephew, U.S. Rep. Joseph
Kennedy II in the House, have urged Clinton to change his mind,
saying Adams' appearance at this critical juncture could actually
help the peace process by easing Sinn Fein into the mainstream and
showing hard-liners there is credibility to be gained through
negotiation and concessions.
Those who support Adams' right to enter this country point to
other cases that highlight what they say is a double standard and
hypocrisy in barring Adams.  Clinton, for example, met earlier this
month with Syrian President Hafez Assad, whose regime has been
considered by the State Department to sponsor terrorism. The British
government itself has been engaged in clandestine contacts with Sinn
Fein for several years, something revealed only two months ago.
And in what many argue is the clearest evidence of a double
standard, the U.S. government routinely grants visas to the Rev. Ian
Paisley, the leader of the Democratic Unionists.  Paisley, a
fundamentalist preacher, has well-documented ties to loyalist
paramilitary groups, and frequently makes inflammatory remarks about
Catholics.  Many observers suggest Paisley justifies loyalist
violence no differently than Adams justifies republican violence.
Those who want the ban on Adams to remain, led by the British
government, say he should be forced to abandon support for the IRA
campaign first.
Although widely believed to have once been a leading IRA figure,
Adams denies he was ever a member.  He has never been convicted of a
violent offense.  In 1972, while being interned without charge, he
was part of the republican delegation released from prison to
negotiate an IRA cease-fire with the British government.  The
cease-fire quickly collapsed, and the IRA regards it as an exercise
by the British to identify its command and structure.  Republican
sources say it is because of that experience that the IRA is
reluctant to stop its campaign without major, guaranteed concessions
Adams says the IRA is a symptom, not the cause, of the conflict
in Northern Ireland.  Although he defends the IRA's right to engage
in its campaign, he has criticized many of its operations, including
the bombing of a West Belfast fish shop in October that killed nine
Protestants and the IRA bomber.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document