IRA HITS DOWNING STREET 3 MORTARS ARE FIRED AT MAJOR'S RESIDENCE; HE ESCAPES; INJURY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 1991, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 726 words
Body


LONDON - British officials are questioning how - despite unprecedented security because of the Persian Gulf War - an Irish Republican Army terrorist unit managed to fire three mortar shells Thursday at 10 Downing Street.  The mortars narrowly missed killing Prime Minister John Major - whose official residence is 10 Downing - and other senior members of the government.  Home Secretary Kenneth Baker, who has responsibility for law enforcement, announced that security measures for the entire government quarter in central London would be reviewed. But he admitted at the House of Commons, ''There's a limit to the sort of defensive measures that can be taken.'' He explained, ''In a democracy, people wish to be free to go about their business. To disrupt their lives any more than we need to would be a concession to terrorism.'' The attack took place shortly after 10 a.m. Three mortar shells were fired from a van in a no-parking zone off Whitehall, about 200 yards from 10 Downing Street.  One of the shells exploded in the garden about 50 feet from the room where Prime Minister Major had just convened a meeting of his ''war cabinet'' for the Persian Gulf War. The windows of the room were smashed from the blast, but no one inside was injured.  Reports say the shell appeared to have struck a tree in the garden, perhaps altering its course. The blast left a shallow crater in the lawn.  Two other shells landed near the Foreign Office, which adjoins Downing Street.
One of them exploded, and t he other failed to detonate, police said.  After the blast, Prime Minister Major calmly told the Cabinet members, ''I think we had better start again somewhere else.'' The meeting resumed 10 minutes later in a more secure room of the residence.  Meeting with Major were Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, Defense Secretary Tom King, Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont, Attorney General Sir Patrick Mayhew and Air Marshal Sir David Craig, chief of the defense staff.  None of them was hurt.  Three police officers and a civil servant suffered minor injuries, mostly from flying glass, police said.  Police said improvised mortar tubes had been bolted to the floor of the van and the top had been cut away. One or two men were seen running from the van moments before the mortars were fired through a false panel in the roof, either by remote control or a timing device. The van burst into flames from the blast.  Cmdr. George Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist unit, said, ''The witnesses we have interviewed so far say the driver of the van locked the door, ran to a waiting motorcycle being ridden by a second person, and they both then made off. A police officer was about to approach the vehicle when the mortars were discharged,'' apparently detonated by a timer, he said.  Home Secretary Baker said the van had been in the no-parking zone less than five minutes before the mortars were fired. ''This is a most unusual type of attack,'' he told Channel 4 News. ''It is very difficult to deal with, unless you cordon off large parts of London and make them inaccessible to traffic.'' The attack took place amid unprecedented security measures that have been in force in London in anticipation of Iraqi-inspired terrorism. But police said soon after the attack that it had borne the hallmarks of the IRA, which has frequently used mortar bombs against British targets in Northern Ireland.  And later, the IRA issued a statement claiming responsibility, according to Press Association, Britain's domestic news agency.  Home Secretary Baker said no evidence existed to indicate that the IRA had been acting as a ''proxy'' for Iraqi-sponsored terrorists.  Five hours after the attack, Prime Minister Major entered the House of Commons to cheers. Declaring that the IRA was responsible, he called the attack ''a deliberate attempt both to kill the Cabinet and to do damage to our democratic system. . . .'' ''The IRA's record is one of failure in every respect. It is about time they learn democracies cannot be intimidated by terrorism, and we rightly treat them with contempt.'' The attack was the first against government leaders since the IRA set off a bomb at the Grand Hotel in Brighton, England, in October 1984 at a Conservative Party conference. Five people were killed; then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher escaped unhurt.

Graphic

 
Photo Map; MAP (COLOR) by AP...10 Downing Street Shelled...Showing Location of explosion. PHOTO by Reuters...A man running from a flaming van from which mortar shells were fired Thursday at the British prime minister's residence at 10 Downing Street in London.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document