Iran's aid to terrorism should be punished
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 2, 1989, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Columns; Pg. 17A; COLUMN
Length: 649 words
Byline: A. M. ROSENTHAL
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


NEW YORK - Finally and tragically there is no escape from the truth    that the nations of the world have known but run away from for years:        The death squad that carried out the kidnapping of American    citizens, the bombing of American installations and the slaughter of    American Marines and says it hanged Lt. Col. William R. Higgins is    armed, trained and directed not by masked freedom fighters but by a    powerful government - whose flag flies over the United Nations.
 
     If he is dead, Higgins was murdered in Tehran - wherever and    whenever he died.
 
     Here it all is, written down in Appendix B, State Department    Publication 9705, released March 1989, in a low-key outline of    Hezbollah, which includes the men who captured and killed Higgins:        "Description: Dedicated to creation of Iranian-style Islamic    Republic in Lebanon. Closely allied with and largely directed by Iran    in its activities.
    "Activities: Known or suspected to have been involved in numerous    anti-U.S. terrorist attacks, including suicidal truck bombing on the    U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut in October 1983 and the U.S. Embassy    annex in September 1984. Responsible for the kidnapping and continued    detention of most, if not all, U.S. and other Western hostages.
 
     "External aid: Receives substantial amounts of financial,    training, weapons, explosives, political, diplomatic and organizational    aid from Iran."
 
     The story of Higgins focuses attention on Hezbollah. But every    intelligence organization knows other terrorist groups are getting safe    haven, money and arms from Syria, Libya, Iraq, North Korea and other    countries.
 
     What have the major powers done about it?
 
     The Soviet Union: Continued to provide arms, training and material    and diplomatic support to a range of states and groups linked to    terrorism.
 
      Mikhail Gorbachev now talks some against terrorism. But he has not    taken a single step to show Moscow is out of the terrorism-support    business, if it is.
 
     The United States: Double-crossed the world trying, with shameful    Israeli help, to trade missiles to Iran for hostages. Now tries to get    closer to Syria, paymaster for Pan Am 103 bombers.
 
     Conducts important talks with a leader of the Palestine Liberation    Organization noted for his skills in organizing terrorist acts,    including the death of two American diplomats. Relaxes sanctions    against Libya.
 
     The Western alliance: At the Paris summit meeting, its leaders said    they would try to look harder for terrorist explosives on airplanes.
 
     Why this cowardice on the part of the "great" powers? Well, there    is money, you know, good business to be done with the Middle East.
 
     But more important is that so far there has been no leader with the    intellectual, political and moral strength to tell still another truth:        To be won, the struggle against terrorism will have to be carried    directly to the terrorist nations with every economic, political and    diplomatic weapon available. A total economic boycott, a ban on all air    travel to and from these countries, political isolation and constant    public pressure.
 
     Terrorism will not end with the death of Col. Higgins, unless the    price is raised. A price tag is at hand. Iran will soon swear in its    new president. Right now is the time to tell him that he and his    country will no longer be recognized nor allowed into the world economy    - not until all hostages are freed and Iran ends its direction of    terrorism.
 
     This is a moment that will test President Bush's skill and resolve,    the moral meaning of the Western alliance and the real political    character of Mikhail Gorbachev.
 
     Action against the masters of the death squad is the only fitting    tribute to Col. Higgins.
 
 
 New York Times News Service       

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document