IRAN READY TO ARM BOSNIA MUSLIMS;
BUT ONLY IF U.N. RULES ARE USED, AMBASSADOR SAYS IN BROAD SPEECH
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 1, 1993, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 502 words
Byline: DAVID BRISCOE, ASSOCIATED PRESS WRITER
Body


Iran is prepared to supply arms to Bosnian Muslims, but would follow U.N. Security Council decisions on how to do it if an arms embargo is lifted, Iran's ambassador to the United Nations said yesterday.
''Otherwise, it could end up in a chaotic situation,'' Ambassador Kamal Kharrazi said in a speech at a Washington hotel. In other comments, he denied that Iran sponsors terrorism or has a nuclear program and defended the Islamic edict to kill British novelist Salman Rushdie.
Although Kharrazi was introduced as the highest-ranking Iranian official to make a public appearance in Washington since the Iranian Revolution in 1979, he rejected any suggestion that relations with the United States could be improved.
''There has been no change in the status of Iran-U.S. relations'' in 14 years, Kharrazi said, ''because the U.S. side has not shown any change of its policies.''
The two countries have no diplomatic relations and Kharrazi ordinarily is not allowed to travel outside of the New York City area. He was in Washington for World Bank meetings and spoke at a forum sponsored by Insight Middle East magazine.
The United States ''has used all its facilities and instruments to humiliate us and has not shown any good will,'' the ambassador said.
Kharrazi said he was personally involved in helping obtain the release of U.S. hostages from Lebanon. ''There should be some reciprocation … some will to change,'' he said. ''That is what we didn't see.''
The State Department this year called Iran the world's leading state supporter of terrorism and has criticized other Western countries for approving World Bank loans to the Islamic government.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Congress last week he was skeptical of involving Iran in any agreement to supply arms to Bosnian Muslims fighting Serbs in the former Yugoslavia.
President Clinton is considering whether to support a lifting of the arms embargo affecting the Muslims and take military action against the Serbs.
''If the United Nations would lift the arms embargo, Iran is ready to help Muslims defend themselves,'' Kharrazi said.
He said it is up to the Security Council to decide how arms would be supplied, and said Iran would follow such guidance.
He repeated denials that Iran sponsors terrorism.
''Muslims are not terrorists and they reject fully any type of terrorist activity,'' he said.
Kharrazi said statements of other Iranian officials questioning why Israel -- and no Muslim country -- is allowed to have nuclear weapons have been misinterpreted.
''We are against the building of a nuclear weapon,'' he said, denying that Iran has any nuclear program.
The late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's edict on Rushdie is ''a symbol of Muslim reaction to humiliation and insult.'' He rejected a suggestion by a questioner that Iran might be willing to drop the edict, saying that it was not an Iranian government order but a religious matter.
Rushdie is considered an apostate, he said, and ''the sentence of an apostate man is death based on Islam.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document