Iran-Contra Figure Besieged by Debt
The New York Times
August 7, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 569 words
Byline: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6
Body


The once-thriving conservative fund-raising network operated by Carl R. Channell, who is awaiting sentencing for conspiracy in the Iran-contra affair, is plagued by severe financial troubles.
His nine foundations, political action committees and companies owe substantial debts, and reports he filed this week with the Federal Election Commission indicate that the PAC's have been unable to draw many new contributions.
All but one of Mr. Channell's organizations are dormant and face an uncertain future. One company through which his fund-raising activities were coordinated, the Channell Corporation, has filed a petition for bankruptcy. The corporation claims $143,493 in debts and $18,000 in assets.
Most of Mr. Channell's employees have departed and are seeking new work. His groups have moved out of their fashionable offices near the White House. Furniture in the reception room there has been tagged with stickers warning that it is ''subject to a lien of the Palmer National Bank'' and must not be removed.
The only organization that remains active is the American Conservative Trust, which now occupies modest quarters on Capitol Hill. But financial reports filed with the election commission by Mr. Channell show that the trust is not faring well. It collected $13,554 in the first half of 1987, and owes creditors $52,057.
Most of that money came from two loyal donors - Frank G. Darlington of Leetsdale, Pa., and May Daugherty King of Corpus Christi, Tex. - who in May each gave Mr. Channell $5,000, the maximum allowable yearly contribution.
By contrast, the trust raised $76,450 last year.
 
I.R.S. Action as Well
The Anti-Terrorism American Committee, another of Mr. Channell's political action committees, collected only $3,000 this year, $2,000 of which came from contributions that were returned by two members of Congress. The committee, which in 1986 raised $48,871, now reports debts of $4,895.
Financial records from Mr. Channell's multimillion-dollar foundation, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty, are not available, but the Internal Revenue Service has revoked the group's tax-exempt status.
Alexia Morrison, Mr. Channell's attorney, declined to comment on her client's finances.
Less than a year ago, Mr. Channell, who is 42 years old, was perhaps the most successful conservative fund-raiser in the capital. Unlike other fund-raisers, he did not rely on direct mail solicitations, but concentrated on seeking large donations from wealthy donors.
Then, last April, he pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Washington to charges of conspiracy to defraud the Government by soliciting tax-exempt funds to aid the Nicaraguan rebels. He agreed to cooperate with Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair.
Three members of Congress, in a move to dissociate themselves from Mr. Channell, have since returned contributions they received last year from his political action committees, according to the financial statement he filed and to the Congressmen themselves.
Representatives Henry J. Hyde of Illinois and Jim Courter of New Jersey, Republican members of the Iran-contra panel, each returned a $1,000 contribution he received for his 1986 re-election campaign from the Anti-Terrorism American Committee. And Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, returned $3,000 to the Anti-Terrorism American Committee and $3,000 to the American Conservative Trust.


End of Document