Iranian Woman Indicted in Brooklyn in Terrorism Case
The New York Times
October 3, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 565 words
Byline: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM; Rebecca Cathcart contributed reporting.
Body


A frail 51-year-old Iranian woman was indicted last week in Brooklyn on a charge of supporting a terrorist group based in Iraq that seeks the violent overthrow of the Iranian government, federal authorities said yesterday. 
  The woman, Zeinab Taleb-Jedi, is free on a $500,000 bond and living in an East Side women's shelter. A law enforcement official said she did not pose a direct threat to the United States.
Prosecutors said Ms. Taleb-Jedi, who was arrested in late March when she flew to Kennedy Airport from Amman, Jordan, was a member of the leadership council of the Iranian resistance group People's Mujahedeen, which both the United States and the European Union describe as a terrorist organization.
  She was indicted on Friday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on a single count of providing material support to the group. The case against her was based on an investigation by the F.B.I. and federal prosecutors in California, but she will be tried in New York.
  Ms. Taleb-Jedi, who became an American citizen in 1996, has been free on a personal recognizance bond signed by her son, a recent college graduate, since shortly after her arrest, according to court records. After that she lived for a short while with him on West 128th Street and then at the Lenox Hill Neighborhood House Park Avenue Women's Shelter, according to court papers. 
  Shelter officials said it housed older women with mental health disorders. The woman and her son could not be located for comment last night. At the time of her arraignment, on April 1, her court-appointed lawyer, Justine Harris, said Ms. Taleb-Jedi, who then weighed just 95 pounds, came to the United States to seek medical care for severe digestive problems. 
  The People's Mujahedeen was first designated as a foreign terrorist organization in 1997, according to an affidavit filed in the case by F.B.I. Special Agent Mark Broihier, who said he had been investigating the group for five years. 
  Two informers cited in the affidavit said Ms. Taleb-Jedi was a member of the group's leadership council. One said the council was ''responsible for making leadership decisions for the organizations, including approving specific acts of terrorism'' against Iran, the affidavit said.
  When American forces invaded Iraq in April 2003, they disarmed the military arm of the group and ordered its members to assemble at a base about 40 miles north of Baghdad, where they turned over a range of heavy weapons, from tanks and artillery, along with lighter weapons, according to the affidavit.
  F.B.I. agents went to the base and interviewed about 200 people associated with the group, including Ms. Taleb-Jedi, the affidavit said. They found firing ranges and bomb shelters and shrines to the group's ''martyrs,'' along with bunkers that had been used to store a range of ordnance, including 420,000 pounds of plastic explosives.
  In her interview at the Iraqi base, Ms. Taleb-Jedi said she had began her college education in Iran but came to the United States in 1978 to work on her master's degree in political science in Atlanta, according to the affidavit. 
  She eventually moved to Queens, where she continued her activities for the group, and then to northern Virginia, according to the affidavit. In 1995 and 1996, she registered, under the Foreign Agents Registration Act, as a press officer for the People's Mujahedeen of Iran. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 3, 2006


End of Document