IRANIAN LEADER BLASTS ISRAEL
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 20, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P
Length: 368 words
Body


NICOSIA, Cyprus _ In one of his sharpest attacks on Israel in
years, Iran's spiritual leader today branded the Jewish state a
nation of terrorists, thieves and murderers for blaming a Buenos
Aires explosion on Tehran.
"The Zionist regime is the clearest example of state terrorism
in the world," Ayatollah Ali Khamenei told a gathering of office
workers who punctuated his speech with cries of "death to Israel."
"Because of their filthy nature, the Zionists have no right to
adjudicate on Islamic Iran," Khamenei said.  His remarks were
broadcast by the official Tehran radio and monitored in Nicosia.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin on Tuesday blamed
Iranian-sponsored Islamic militants for the explosion Monday that
leveled a Jewish headquarters in Buenos Aires, and called on the
world to join forces "to strike at this viper and crush its skull
."
He said Hezbollah, an Iranian-sponsored group of Shiite Muslim
extremists in Lebanon, was seeking revenge for "the blows it had
suffered by the Israeli army in Lebanon."
The Iranian Foreign Ministry has denied involvement in the
explosion.  It said in a statement Tuesday that Mossad, the Israeli
secret police, was behind the blast.
Iran, whose official policy calls for the annihilation of
Israel, regularly lashes out at the Jewish state.  But Khamenei's
remarks were particularly harsh.
He called Israel a "counterfeit" nation and a "cancerous
tumor inside an Islamic body."
"The gathering of a bunch of Jews from around the world who
possess qualities such as mischief, malice, thievery and murder has
created a nation called Israel, which is ruled by no other logic
except terrorism and murder," Khamenei said.
He lashed out at the industrialized nations who condemned Iran
earlier this month at a G-7 meeting in Italy.  The G-7 leaders called
on Iran to "modify" its behavior toward terrorism.
Khamenei said those countries were implicated in Israeli
"crimes" because they remained silent toward its treatment of
Palestinians and its actions in Lebanon.
"Are you looking for terrorists?  Are you looking for state
terrorism?  Then here, look at Israel," Khamenei said.
"Because of their filthy nature, the Zionists have no right to
adjudicate on Islamic Iran." Ayatollah Khamenei 30

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document