IRAN WON'T BACK COALITION AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 27, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 807 words
Byline: JOHN WARD ANDERSON AND KAMRAN KHAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: ISTANBUL, Turkey
Body


Iran's top political and religious leader yesterday said his country would not join a U.S.-led coalition against terrorism, dousing hopes that Iran's recent condemnations of terrorist attacks in the United States might lead to warming relations between the longtime antagonists.
 Sincere messages of sympathy and denunciations of terrorism from Iranian officials following the Sept. 11 attacks in New York and Washington led some analysts to suggest that there was potential for repairing relations that have been hostile for more than two decades, since the 1979 Islamic Revolution.
 But in a speech excerpted on national television, Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said that the United States was "not sincere enough to lead an international move against terrorism" because of its continued support for Israel. He added, "Iran will provide no help to America and its allies . . . in an attack on suffering, neighboring, Muslim Afghanistan."
The United States is attempting to build a broad international coalition that would support strikes against an alleged terrorist organization headed by fugitive Saudi millionaire Osama bin Laden, the leading suspect in terrorist attacks two weeks ago that left about 6,500 people dead or missing. Bin Laden is being sheltered in Afghanistan by the Taliban, a radical Islamic militia that controls most of the country.
 Thousands of demonstrators in Kabul, the Afghan capital, sacked the long-abandoned U.S. Embassy yesterday, setting five cars ablaze, ripping down the U.S. seal above the front entrance and burning American flags and an effigy of President Bush while chanting "Long Live Osama!" the Associated Press reported from the city. The embassy compound, protected by a few Afghan security guards, has been abandoned since 1989.
 Reflecting heightened concerns about security, the United States yesterday closed its consulate in Pakistan's second-largest city, Lahore. Families of U.S. diplomats posted in Pakistan have already left the country.
 In Pakistan's business capital and largest city, Karachi, a demonstration by about 15,000 people in favor of joining a U.S.-led anti-terrorism coalition was disrupted by a grenade attack that injured at least 12 people. Most recent demonstrations in Pakistan have been called by Islamic groups to protest the country's decision to help the United States track down bin Laden and persuade the Taliban to hand him over for prosecution.
 In Islamabad, Foreign Ministry spokesman Riaz Mohammad Khan reflected the country's sensitive political balancing act, telling reporters that while Pakistan supported the drive against terrorism, it would never participate in any hostile action against Afghanistan. "We are deeply conscious that the destinies of the two people and two countries are intertwined," he said.
 The statement yesterday by Iran's supreme leader added to the conflicting signals being sent by that country's bifurcated government about its position concerning an international anti-terrorism coalition and any retaliation against bin Laden or Afghanistan led by the United States, which has branded Iran as a supporter of terrorism.
 Reformists in Iran's elected government, led by moderate reformist President Mohammad Khatami, would like the international respectability and financial assistance that better relations with the United States would bring. But the appointed religious hierarchy, led by Khamenei and dominated by hard-liners, still bristle at the thought of cooperating on anything with the United States, which they see as leading attacks against Islam around the globe. While Khamenei seemed to be issuing a preemptive criticism of any U.S. actions against Afghanistan, Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi said that if the United States could prove who was behind the Sept. 11 attacks, it had the right to respond. "If it becomes clear which particular group carried out these attacks in the United States, naturally the United States, based in the [United Nations] charter, can take action," he said.
 Khamenei, however, is the highest-ranking official in Iran, and under the country's constitution his pronouncements and decisions are final. Just as importantly, his conservative, religious side of the government controls Iran's military and its intelligence agencies, which would integral to any cooperation with the West.
 His speech, delivered to a group of war veterans and their families, was punctuated by chants from the crowd of "Death to America!" and "Death to Israel!"
 Khamenei seemed to answer a challenge made by President Bush in his nationally televised address to Congress last Thursday, when the U.S. president said, "Every nation in every region now has a decision to make: Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists."
 Khamenei said, "We are neither with you nor with the terrorists."

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE COALITION

Load-Date: September 27, 2001


End of Document