Iran's terrorism network grows in sophistication
USA TODAY
August 2, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 687 words
Byline: Jack Kelley
Body


Iran's network of state-sponsored terrorism has grown more sophisticated
in the last year, U.S. officials say
In a detailed accounting, U.S. intelligence officials provided
USA TODAY with information about the 11 camps where Iran trains
terrorists.
Their documentation, verified by independent experts, shows that
the trail of violence leads directly to Iranian President Hashemi
Rafsanjani.
According to the documents, the trainees carry out attacks approved
by Iran's Supreme Council, headed by Rafsanjani.
There is also evidence that Iran's systematic approach could increase
the number of attacks.
Although Iran denies that it is running camps or exporting terrorism,
Iran's top religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, warned the
U.S. in a recent radio address that Iran would continue to retaliate
for U.S. support of Israel.
"When we said that the fire will spread to you too, you did not
believe us," he said. "All those countries that supported terrorism,
especially the United States, will be hurt by terrorism."
The FBI is investigating whether Iranian-backed terrorists were
responsible for the explosion of TWA Flight 800 that killed 230
people and the June truck bombing of a U.S. military barracks
in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 Americans.
The United States has long been concerned about Iran's "state-sponsored
terrorism" and regularly puts the country atop its list of terrorist
states.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher says Iran is spending "several
hundred million dollars a year" to fight countries supporting
Israel and its peace accord with the Arabs.
"No other regime employs terror more systematically as an instrument
of national policy," he said. So far this year, Iran has been
linked to:
-- Four suicide bombings in Israel that killed 59 people, including
two Americans, in February and March. The radical Palestinian
group Hamas and the Iranian-backed terrorist group Hezbollah both
claimed responsibility.
Iran provides up to $ 100 million a year to Hezbollah.
-- The assassination of six Iranian dissidents, mostly in Europe,
who have spoken out against Rafsanjani.
-- A Hezbollah terrorist in East Jerusalem who was arming a bomb
to blow up an Israeli airliner last April.
The bomb accidentally went off in his hotel room, severely injuring
him.
-- Three cases of arms and explosives found aboard an Iranian
ship in Belgium last March that were intended for use against
Israeli targets in Western Europe.
The arms, including a powerful mortar grenade and timing device,
were hidden in a cargo of pickles.
The increase in Iran's terrorist activity comes despite a two-year
effort by President Clinton to isolate the country economically
and overthrow its hard-line leaders.
Clinton last year banned all trade with Iran, slapped fines on
foreign companies doing business in Iran and urged U.S. allies
to follow.
But some allies, like France, which trades heavily with Iran,
are refusing to follow.
"You simply cannot continue to do ordinary business with people
who believe they have a right to practice commerce in the daytime
and fund terrorists to kill your innocent civilians at night,"
Clinton said Monday.
Meanwhile, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., made sure $ 18 million
was allocated to the Central Intelligence Agency last December
to overthrow Iran's government.
The effort has yet to begin but Iran has already allocated $ 20
million to counter it.
"We take a step and then sadly the terrorist takes a step,"
Gingrich told NBC's Meet the Press.
Calling for better cooperation among intelligence agencies, Gingrich
said, "When you're dealing with states like Iran, you've got
to have a sophisticated attitude. We need to combine our domestic
and foreign ability to know that, say, a New York City problem
may well come from an Egyptian and a Pakistani, organized and
paid for by an Iranian. We've got to stop them."
Iran conducts systematic terrorism training at 11 sites.
The camps, designed to look like small villages with houses, shops
and mosques, are off-limits to the public.
"The basis of these reports is true," says Michael Eisenstadt
of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "There's no
doubt Iran is involved in exporting terrorism."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, b/w, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY, Source:U.S. intelligence information(Map); PHOTO, b/w, Mohammed Sayyad, AP; Rafsanjani: Documents link president directly to terrorism.

Load-Date: August 2, 1996


End of Document