IRAN'S CHIEF DECRIES TERRORISM, STRIDENCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 21, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C
Length: 341 words
Body


TEHRAN, Iran (REST) PRESIDENT HASHEMI Rafsanjani denounced terrorism and the strident anti-Western slogans of Iran's Islamic revolution, as he urged government officials to abandon radical attitudes.  ''The Islamic Republic now needs a prudent policy more than anything else,'' he said in a sermon Friday at Tehran University.  ''We need a prudent policy both for inside the country, in order to strengthen our base, and for our foreign policy, so that we can have a presence and help people without being accused of engaging in terrorism.'' The comments were the latest step in Rafsanjani's attempts to improve relations with the West and to attract investment and technology for Iran's economy.  Rafsanjani has faced increasing attacks from fundamentalists who accuse him of abandoning the ideals of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the revolutionary patriarch who overthrew the Iranian monarchy in 1979.  Rafsanjani was elected president in June 1989, after Khomeini died of cancer.  In Friday's sermon, broadcast on Tehran radio, Rafsanjani said, ''We can be the leading light of the world of Islam as long as we act with prudence and wisdom. We have no need to speak fanatically. We have no need to chant impractical slogans. We do not need to say things that are not acted upon, needlessly frightening the people and blocking our own path.'' Earlier this month, he boosted Iran's international image by helping to free Western hostages held by pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim groups in Lebanon. Two Germans are still held captive in Lebanon, and Iranian officials have said they are working to obtain their release.
Rafsanjani's hand was greatly strengthened earlier this month when U.N.  Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar said Iraq had been to blame for starting the 1980-88 war with Iran. The United States backed Iraq during the conflict.  Rafsanjani called Perez de Cuellar's finding ''a great victory for Iran.'' There has been speculation that Perez de Cuellar's statement was part of the deal that led to the hostages' release.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document