Iran is still the top sponsor of terrorism, Congress told
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 21, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 898 words
Byline: By Barry Schweid AP diplomatic writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Iran remains the world's most active sponsor of terrorism, while Sudan and Libya took some steps -- but not enough -- to "get out of the business," the State Department said Tuesday in an annual report to Congress.
The report listed the same seven countries -- Iran, Sudan, Libya, Iraq, North Korea, Cuba and Syria -- as state sponsors of terrorism last year.
Iran has intensified its backing for violent Palestinian groups that attacked Israel, but Iran also apparently has reduced its other terror activity, the State Department told Congress.
President Mohammad Khatami condemned the Sept. 11 attacks in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania, but at the same time supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei continued to refer to Israel as a "cancerous tumor" that must be removed.
In this mixed picture, the State Department said there was no evidence that Iran sponsored or knew in advance of the Sept. 11 attacks, a point U.S. law enforcement officials have made privately. And yet, matching Khamenei's rhetoric with action, Iran continued to supply Lebanese Hezbollah and Palestinian groups with funds, haven, training and weapons.
Iran also encouraged Hezbollah and Palestinian groups to coordinate their activities, the report said.
The revolutionary guard and intelligence and security ministry are active in planning and supporting terrorist actions and supporting terror groups, the report said.
Hard-liners who hold the reins of power thwarted efforts to end the country's support, the report said.
In certain areas, including Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, state sponsors remained a driving force behind terrorism. Iran, Iraq and Syria were all cited for backing terror groups.
Israel's cooperation with the Palestinian Authority broke down with a renewed Palestinian uprising, and counter-terrorism by the Authority "remained sporadic throughout the year," the report said.
Israel was accused of destroying the Palestinians' security apparatus, an assertion Israel has rejected in the past, thereby contributing to its ineffectiveness,
Iraq provided training and political encouragement to many terror groups, but its main focus was on dissident Iraqis opposed to President Saddam Hussein.
The report noted that Syria and Lebanon cooperated with the United States in the fight against al-Qaida but refused to recognize other groups that conduct terrorism against Israel, such as Hamas and Hezbollah, as terrorists.
Some of the seven listed countries, particularly Sudan and Libya, took steps to get out of the terrorism business, but "none has yet taken all necessary actions to divest itself of ties to terrorism," the report said.
And positive moves in North Korea were halted abruptly, the report said.
Cuban President Fidel Castro, meanwhile, views terror as a legitimate revolutionary tactic but he signed all 12 U.N. counter-terror convention.
Little evidence was offered to justify bracketing Cuba with the six other countries whose support for terror was recounted. At least 20 Basque militants and several other terror suspects are given haven in Cuba, the report said.
On Monday, President Bush denounced the Castro government and said U.S. trade sanctions against Cuba would be extended.
Overall, terrorist attacks claimed a record number of lives -- 3,547 -- in 2001, about 90 percent of them in the Sept. 11 attacks in New York, Washington, D.C. and Pennsylvania, the State Department said.
And yet, the number of international terror attacks declined to 346, down from 426 in 2000.
A little more than half of the attacks, 178, were bombings against an international oil pipeline in Colombia.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, in a preface to the 177-page report, said "the terrorist threat is global in scope, many-faceted and determined."
He said "the world's response must be equally comprehensive, multidimensional and steadfast."
He called the report chilling and said no country "has the luxury of remaining on the sidelines" in countering terrorism.
The report called the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and an airline that crashed in Pennsylvania, "the worst international terrorist attack ever" -- with the four coordinated suicide attacks by Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network killing more than 3,000 people from more than 78 countries.
It was the "bloodiest day on American soil since the Civil War," said Francis X. Taylor, who directs the department's office to counter terrorism, and the most devastating international terrorist attack in world history.
Yet because the attack galvanized an international coalition against terrorism, "ironically, by their own hand, terrorists set in motion their own ultimate demise," Taylor said.
The United States and the coalition it mustered still have a "long way to go to assure final victory in the global war against terrorism," Taylor said.
"But one thing is certain: if terrorists questioned our resolve to defeat them and their nefarious objectives before, they cannot question it now," Taylor said.
The Sept. 11 assault was a defining moment around the world, galvanizing countries to take stronger measures against terror.
All Arab and Muslim countries except Iraq condemned the attack on the United States, the report noted. Belgium, Britain, Germany, Greece, Italy, Poland and many other countries intensified their backing of the United States and stepped up their efforts to track down terrorists.

Load-Date: May 21, 2002


End of Document