Iran is ordered to compensate ex-hostage
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
March 25, 2000, Saturday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 657 words
Byline: New York Times News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- A federal judge on Friday ordered Iran to pay $341 million in damages to former hostage Terry Anderson and his family for the pain and suffering he experienced during nearly seven years as a hostage in Lebanon.
Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson ordered the Ministry of Information and Security of Iran to pay $300 million in punitive damages to Anderson. In addition, the judge ordered the government of Iran and its information and security ministry to pay $24.5 million to Anderson, $10 million to his wife, Madeleine Bassil, and $6.7 million to their daughter, Sulome, 14.
In his ruling, the judge wrote that the "torturous conduct with which both defendants are charged, savage and cruel by any civilized standards, would surely merit such an award."
But whether Anderson and his family will actually receive payment remains uncertain.
Anderson said in an interview Friday that he was delighted by the positive decision issued by Jackson. But the "ironic part" of the case, he said, is that the Clinton administration has been unwilling to support plaintiffs in their efforts to collect millions of dollars awarded in similar cases by U.S. courts.
Anderson filed suit a year ago in U.S. District Court here under a 1996 law that allows legal action against countries that the U.S. government accuses of sponsoring terrorism against American citizens.
The suit asserted that Anderson's kidnappers were members of Hezbollah, or Party of God, "a politico-paramilitary terrorist organization" with ties to Iran. Further, the suit alleged that Hezbollah received money, training and direction from Iran.
"This is not about revenge or payback," Anderson said. "The primary purpose is to hold Iran accountable."
For American victims of terrorism to sue foreign countries in courts here, the State Department must list the country as a sponsor of terrorism. Iran has been on the list since 1984.
Congress passed a measure in October 1998 that called for the State Department and the Department of Treasury to assist victims of terrorism to locate money for judgments. But the legislation contained a waiver that permits President Clinton to decline support in the interest of national security.
Administration officials have voiced concern that the sanctity of U.S. diplomatic property abroad, a right extended to all diplomatic missions under international law, might be compromised if private citizens here seize foreign government property under such court decisions.
"Terrorism should be expensive," Anderson said. And with a nod to other hostages and victims of terrorism, Anderson said, "I am not the only one."
Anderson's case follows others with similar intentions. In March 1998, a federal judge ordered Iran to pay $247.5 million to the family of Alisa M. Flatow, of West Orange, N.J., who was studying at a seminary in Jerusalem in 1995 when she was killed in a suicide bus attack for which Islamic Jihad, with ties to Iran, claimed responsibility.
And in August 1998, a federal court ordered Iran to pay $65 million in damages for its role in the kidnapping of Joseph J. Cicippio, Frank H. Reed and David P. Jacobsen, three Americans held with Anderson in Lebanon.
Thus far, they have been unable to collect on the settlements.
Anderson, 52, a former Marine and Vietnam veteran, was among 18 Americans taken hostage in Beirut in the 1980s. He was held the longest, spending 2,454 days in captivity before he was freed on Dec. 4, 1991.
"It is never a simple task to calibrate an award of punitive damages to the gravity of the offense," Jackson wrote in his ruling. "It is still more difficult in a case such as this, in which the likelihood that any award will ever be paid is minimal."
This month, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright ended some of the United States' economic sanctions against Iran, declaring a commitment to take extensive steps toward ending two decades of hostility "if Iran indicates a desire and commitment to do so."

Load-Date: March 25, 2000


End of Document