Iranian rights activist accepts Nobel Peace Prize;
Shirin Ebadi warned that basic rights were eroding in the name of the war on terrorism.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 11, 2003 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A35
Length: 284 words
Byline: Doug Mellgren ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: OSLO, Norway
Body


Iranian human-rights activist Shirin Ebadi accepted her Nobel Peace Prize yesterday with a warning that civil liberties and human rights must not be allowed to fall prey to the war on terrorism.
Ebadi, the first Muslim woman and the first Iranian to win the award, said that even Western democracies had allowed their strong traditions of freedom and basic rights to be eroded since the Sept. 11 attacks.
"Regulations restricting human rights and basic freedoms . . . have been justified and given legitimacy under the cloak of the war on terrorism," she said, speaking in Farsi.
Without naming the United States, she singled out the world's only superpower for holding prisoners from the war on terrorism at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, "without the benefits of rights."
"The concerns of human-rights advocates increase when they observe that international human-rights laws are breached not only by their recognized opponents" but by "Western democracies . . . which count themselves among the initial codifiers of the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights," she said.
Ebadi said she accepted the prize, which includes a $1.4 million award, on behalf of all women, Iranians, Muslims and others who strive for human rights worldwide.
"Undoubtedly, my selection will be an inspiration to the masses of women striving to realize their rights, not only in Iran but throughout the region," said Ebadi, who was cited for her work on behalf of democracy and the rights of women and children.
In Stockholm, Sweden, meanwhile, 10 Nobel laureates, including six Americans, received Nobel Prizes in medicine, physics, chemistry, literature and economics from King Carl XVI Gustaf, the Swedish monarch.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
JOHN McCONNICO, Associated Press
Shirin Ebadi accepts the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, Norway. She is the first Muslim woman and the first Iranian to receive the award. She said she hoped to inspire others in similar work.

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document