Iran urges end to U.S. sanctions
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 13, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 6
Length: 285 words
Byline: EDITH M. LEDERER The Associated Press
Body


BY EDITH M. LEDERER
The Associated Press
UNITED NATIONS - Iran's foreign minister demanded Thursday that the United States immediately halt what he called a "campaign of economic terrorism" and lift sanctions, saying they have made it increasingly difficult for the country to export oil and virtually impossible to import medicine and medical equipment, including to identify and treat coronavirus patients.
Mohammad Javad Zarif said in a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres that U.S. sanctions have also left thousands of Iranians stranded abroad and severely disrupted air links with Europe. And he said they have led to what he called "Google's immoral censoring" of a new government app designed to help Iranians identify potential symptoms of the COVID-19 virus.
He said it is "imperative" that the government of the United States immediately halt its campaign of economic terrorism against the Iranian people and lift all sanctions it has illegally imposed on my country," in violation of the Security Council resolution that endorsed the 2015 nuclear deal.
The new coronavirus, COVID-19, has swept across Iran, with the Health Ministry announcing Thursday that in the past 24 hours 75 people had died and more than 1,000 new cases had been confirmed.
U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric said Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is "deeply concerned" about the coronavirus outbreak in Iran and the U.N. system is providing support.
But the U.N. chief is also very aware "of the shortage of medicine and medical equipment that makes it much more difficult to contain the outbreak in Iran, and he appeals to all member states to facilitate and support Iran's efforts in this critical moment," Dujarric said.

Load-Date: March 13, 2020


End of Document