IRAN ORDERED TO PAY FOR DEATH;
U.S. JUDGE IMPOSES $ 247 MILLION AWARD TO FAMILY OF STUDENT KILLED IN BUS;
BOMBING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 12, 1998, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 492 words
Byline: PATRICIA WILSON, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a ruling that could complicate U.S. rapprochement with Iran, a judge yesterday ordered Tehran to pay $ 247 million to the family of an American student killed in the 1995 bombing of an Israeli bus.
Vowing to strike a blow against what he called ''state-sponsored terrorism'' with the huge damages award, U.S. District Court Judge Royce Lamberth said: ''We cannot be stronger in condemning this action. It has no place in civilized society.''
The ruling comes as Washington searches for ways to re-establish cordial relations with Iran after almost two decades of enmity following the Iranian revolution in 1979. The election last May of the relatively liberal Mohammad Khatami as Iranian president has raised hopes for an improved atmosphere. The State Department declined comment on the court's findings, but spokesman James Rubin told reporters the best way to resolve the differences between the United States and Iran on terrorism and other issues was through direct dialogue.
''So court opinions, in our view, are not going to change our policy . . . and we have made clear that we are intrigued and encouraged not only by the election of President Khatami, but by the statements that he has made in public,'' Rubin said.
Alisa Flatow, 20, of West Orange, N.J., was killed when a suicide bomber struck an Israeli bus in the Palestinian-run Gaza Strip in 1995. In the civil lawsuit, her family charged that Iran should be held responsible for the attack.
The case was brought under an anti-terrorism law, signed by President Clinton in 1996, allowing U.S. citizens to sue for alleged state-sponsored terrorist acts. The Flatow family said Iran supported Islamic Jihad, a faction of which claimed responsibility for the bus attack.
Tehran did not respond to the suit, which named as defendants the Iranian government, its leaders, the Iranian Ministry of Information and Security and other officials.
The award of $ 225 million in punitive damages and $ 22 million in compensatory damages brought gasps from courtroom spectators, including Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg and Republican Rep. Jim Saxton, both of New Jersey, who sponsored the anti-terrorism bill in Congress.
''This is more than a slap on the wrist of the bloody hands of those who killed Alisa Flatow,'' Lautenberg said. ''This is a slap on the face of all terrorists.''
Lautenberg said he believed the Flatow family would collect money from Iran. ''There are assets here, blocked assets that have been in this country for many years, belonging originally to the Iranian government and they're available for forfeiture,'' he told reporters. ''The court ordered restitution and that's what's going to happen.''
Lawyers for the Flatows also said they expected to collect a substantial majority of the judgment, but declined to say how they would go about it.
The judge concluded from expert testimony that the Iranian government funded worldwide terrorism in the amount of $ 75 million each year.

Load-Date: March 14, 1998


End of Document