IRAN LEADER RAPS WEST ON TERROR THREAT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
September 26, 2014 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 482 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


UNITED NATIONS - President Hassan Rouhani of Iran delivered a searing indictment of Western and Arab states on Thursday in his annual speech to the United Nations, blaming them for sowing the seeds of extremism in the Middle East with "strategic blunders" that have given rise to the Islamic State and other violent jihadist groups.
He also used the occasion to denounce the Western-led sanctions imposed on Iran's nuclear program, and reiterated his government's desire to resolve Iran's protracted dispute with the United States and other nations over its nuclear program.
He implied that the nuclear negotiations were linked to Iran's cooperation in combating the Islamic State and its affiliates, saying that no security cooperation was possible until the sanctions were lifted.
Diplomats leave Yemen
NEW YORK - The State Department is ordering some of its diplomats at the U.S. embassy in Yemen to leave the country.
The department says security is deteriorating amid unrest and sectarian clashes that have left Shiite rebels in control of the capital.
The department says the embassy in Sanaa will stay open with a majority of staff remaining and that the move is temporary.
Police anti-terror sweep
LONDON - A day after Prime Minister David Cameron pledged British support for the U.S.-led air campaign in Iraq, the counterterrorism police in Britain rounded up nine men, ages 22 to 51, suspected of having links to a banned Islamist group and searched 18 buildings across the capital and in the English Midlands.
The men were not identified by name, but news reports citing unidentified sources said they included Anjem Choudhury, an Islamic preacher and organizer who has frequently voiced radical views and was associated with the Al Muhajiroun group before it was outlawed in 2010.
Teenager terror suspect
SYDNEY, Australia - The threat of a locally sown Islamic militancy to a nation about 7,000 miles from the Syrian conflict was underscored by incidents over the past week.
Days after police conducted the country's largest anti-terrorism raid in history, an 18-year-old "known terrorism suspect" stabbed two officers outside a Melbourne police station before being shot dead.
Waves of Middle Eastern migrants have seen Australia's Muslim population surge 69 percent in a decade, with security experts warning that disaffected young men facing fewer job prospects on the fringes of major cities are susceptible to Islamic State propaganda.
Ukraine war ebbs?
KIEV, Ukraine - President Petro Poroshenko said the worst of the war with pro-Russian separatists is over as Ukraine's focus moves to elections, securing winter gas supplies and preparing a bid for European Union membership.
Ukrainian officials are scheduled to hold talks in Berlin today with their counterparts from Russia and the European Union to try to resolve a dispute that led to Russia ending gas sales to its neighbor in June.

Load-Date: September 26, 2014


End of Document