Iran not seeing benefits from nuclear deal; Kerry moves to reassure foreign banks leery of U.S. sanctions and mistrustful of Tehran
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
May 15, 2016 Sunday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2016 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: USA TODAY; Pg. Z4
Length: 743 words
Byline: Oren Dorell ; @orendorell USA TODAY
Body


Secretary of State John Kerry met Thursday with European bankers to clarify rules for doing business with Iran, which complains that continued U.S. sanctions are blocking economic benefits it expects from the nuclear deal signed last July.
 “We want to make it clear that legitimate business, which is clear under the definition of the agreement, is available to banks,” Kerry said after meeting in London with Britain’s top commerce official and representatives from Europe’s largest financial institutions, including Deutsche Bank, Barclays and HSBC. 
“As long as they do their normal due diligence and know who they’re dealing with, they’re not going to be held to some undefined and inappropriate standard here,” he said, according to a transcript provided by the State Department. 
One of the banks represented, BNP Paribas, agreed in May 2015 to pay a record fine for illegally processing funds from Iran, Sudan and Cuba through U.S. financial institutions. The chief legal officer of another, HSBC, issued a statement saying his bank will not do business in Iran, despite Kerry’s reassurances, because Iran remains a violator of too many financial and legal norms. 
“Our decisions will be driven by the financial-crime risks and the underlying conduct,” Stuart Levey, who was undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence at the U.S. Treasury under presidents George W. Bush and Obama, said in an op-ed published Thursday in The Wall Street Journal. “For these reasons, HSBC has no intention of doing any new business involving Iran. Governments can lift sanctions, but the private sector is still responsible for managing its own risk and no doubt will be held accountable if it falls short.” 
Iran reached an agreement with the United States, Russia, China, United Kingdom, France and Germany to limit its nuclear program to peaceful activities in return for the lifting of crippling international sanctions. 
The deal was supposed to release tens of billions of Iran’s dollars that had been frozen in foreign banks and allow the oil-rich country to trade freely with customers around the world. 
The deal did not end U.S. sanctions on other Iranian activities, however, such as its support for terrorism, development of ballistic missiles and violations of human rights. And the U.S. Supreme Court allowed victims of Iranian-sponsored terrorism to collect reparations from $2 billion in Iran’s assets frozen in U.S. banks. 
In March, the U.S. slapped Iran with new sanctions over ballistic missile tests that the White House had said would violate the nuclear agreement. 
Ongoing U.S. sanctions and seizures of Iranian assets cause world financial institutions that use the U.S. financial network to fear running afoul of U.S. laws if they deal with Iran. But that’s not the only factor preventing foreign companies from doing business with Iran, according to a report in April by Iran’s foreign ministry. 
The global banking system has been enlisted in the fight against terrorism, smugglers and money laundering, and now requires more transparency than a decade ago, the report said, according to a translation by the American Enterprise Institute. 
“Unfortunately, other factors such as corruption, lack of transparency, money laundering, difficult laws and other things have added to the problems,” the Iranian report said. “There is a need to oppose such problems in addition to amending laws and fighting corruption.” 
Whether that message is getting through to Tehran is not clear. On Monday, more than 100 members of Iran’s parliament urged President Hassan Rouhani to abandon the nuclear agreement and resume past nuclear activities if the U.S. does distribute the court-approved terror funds, according to Iran’s Press TV. 
Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, last month accused the U.S. of “deception” to obstruct international trade with Iran. The U.S. agrees “on paper” to allow foreign banks to do business in Iran, “but in practice they create Iranophobia so no one does business with Iran,” Khamenei said, according to the Tehran Times. 
Sen. Ben Cardin, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said the Iranian reaction is no surprise. 
Under the nuclear agreement, “we are fully permitted to take independent actions with respect to” ballistic missiles, terrorism and human rights  “and we will,” Cardin said. “Congress is prepared to support the administration, and if it’s needed we will strengthen those tools.”

Graphic

 
GETTY IMAGES">U.S. Secretary of state John Kerry told foreign bankers last weeek that legitimate business can still be done with Iran.

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document