Iran's Assets Now Fair Game
The Forward
December 21, 2007


Copyright 2007 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A6
Length: 588 words
Body


Congress approved new legislation  this week enabling families  of terrorism victims to go after  hidden assets of foreign governments  accused of sponsoring  terrorist groups. The bill, which  passed with overwhelming support  in both the Senate and the  House despite strong opposition  from the Bush administration,  opens the door for the enforcement  of multimillion-dollar lawsuits  against the governments of  Iran and Libya.
The main beneficiaries of the  new legislation are families of  the 241 Marines killed in a 1983  bombing in Beirut by Hezbollah,  but the bill also opens up legal  avenues to compensation for the  families of victims of other attacks  by the Lebanese group as well as  by Hamas. Both groups are sponsored  by Iran.
Although an American court,  after ruling in 2001 that the  Iranian government was liable  for the Beirut bombing, granted  the victims' families $2.65 billion  in damages, until this week the  inability to take over Iranian assets  in the United States had frustrated  the families' efforts to enforce the  ruling.
We need to make those responsible  pay the price, so I'll know my  brother's death was not in vain,  Lynn Smith Derbyshire told the  Forward. Derbyshire lost her brother,  Vince Smith, a captain, in the  attack and now serves as a spokeswoman  for the victim's families. I  loved my brother dearly, she said.  He was my hero, and I think we  cannot allow the criminals who  are responsible for killing him to  get away with murder.
The new legislation is an attempt  to improve and broaden the landmark  1996 Flatow Amendment,  which paved the way for lawsuits  against states sponsoring terrorism.  The amendment was named  after Alisa Flatow, who was killed  by Islamic Jihad in a terrorist  attack in Israel in 1995.
Under the bill, relatives of terrorism  victims will be able to actively  go after assets held in private and  corporate bank accounts linked to  the government of Iran. Lawyers  for the victims estimate that the  value of hidden Iranian assets in  the United States totals some $4  billion to $6 billion.
This legislation significantly  increases the ability of terror victims  to enforce judgments, said  Steve Perles, a Washington attorney  who represents families of the  Beirut bombing victims.
The measures approved by  Congress this week also introduce  uniform federal standard damages  for victims of terrorism, thus overriding  the ability of states to set  damage standards, a practice that  has led to significant variation in  damages awarded to victims from  different states.
While enjoying wide bipartisan  support in Congress, the bill was  strongly opposed by the Bush  administration. In a letter to lawmakers,  the State Department  wrote that the legislation threatens  significant U.S. foreign policy  interests because it undermines  the president's authority to implement  sanctions and obtain leverage  against terrorist states under  the International Emergency  Economic Powers Act.
Congressional sources told  the Forward that the legislation  addresses all concerns raised by  the State Department and that the  bill will actually help in negotiations  with such countries as Libya  once they see the economic consequences  of their actions.
The legislation was sponsored  by two Jewish senators, Democrat  Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey  and Pennsylvania Republican  Arlen Specter.
My bill will allow victims of  state-sponsored terror to have  their day in court, Lautenberg  said in a statement put out after  Friday's vote.

Load-Date: December 20, 2007


End of Document