Iran Court Deliberates on a Cleric Whose Arrest Exposed Arms Sale
The New York Times
August 18, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 830 words
Byline: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TEHERAN, Iran, Aug. 17
Body


A special religious court has begun deliberations on a sentence for Mehdi Hashemi, a radical cleric whose arrest last October was believed to have led to the revelation of American arms sales to Iran.
Teheran newspapers said today that Mr. Hashemi, a relative of the designated successor to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, had pleaded guilty to several charges, ranging from the theft of weapons to espionage.
His arrest and trial, which began Thursday, raised wide interest in Teheran, the papers said.
The severity of the sentence could provide a clue to the power of various political leaders and the course of Iranian foreign policy, political analysts here said.
A Test of Strength
In particular, the sentence will be examined as a test of the strength of the radical political movements, which have been trying to spread Iran's influence abroad, Western diplomats said.
Mr. Hashemi is former head of the Bureau for Liberation Movements Abroad. His brother is the son-in-law of Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri, who is designated to succeed Ayatollah Khomeini, and supervises Ayatollah Montazeri's office in the holy city of Qum.
Ayatollah Montazeri is said to be a passionate exponent of exporting terrorism. The arrest of Mr. Hashemi was originally thought to be a blow to Ayatollah Montazeri and, thereby, terrorism.
But the Iranian press has reported since December that Mr. Hashemi spied on Ayatollah Montazeri as well as on others, in effect exonerating Ayatollah Montazeri.
Mr. Hashemi is facing charges ranging from the theft of weapons and espionage to falsification of documents and cooperating with the Savak, the Shah's secret police.
 
Viewed as Sponsor of Terrorism
He is a low-ranking cleric, or seyyed, and the court of clergymen deciding his case was established for this trial. The deliberations were secret but a few details have been published.
The trial was held at the Evin Prison under a hojatolislam, or senior cleric, appointed by Ayatollah Khomeini. The prosecutor, too, is a hojatolislam.
In the West, Mr. Hashemi was considered a major sponsor of international political violence.
His arrest was interpreted by some as a sign that Iran was trying to restrain terrorism. Shortly after the arrest, his associates are believed to have disclosed to a Lebanese publication details of American talks with Iranians over the sale of arms and the release of hostages.
The disclosure is assumed to have been intended to embarrass Iranian officials who knew about the arms-hostages talks. But the Government pressed ahead with the case against Mr. Hashemi and last December he publicly confessed.
Among the charges against him is ''creating suspicion and pessimism toward the officials of the Islamic Republic of Iran by disseminating fabrication and libel in the form of statements and leaflets unsigned or carrying imaginary signatures.''
Diplomats, speculating why the trial took place in the last week, said the timing might have something to do with Iran's relations with Saudi Arabia.
The relations turned bitter this month after the deaths of hundreds of Iranians in Mecca during a demonstration by Iranians.
Iran has asserted that Saudi police shot at the Iranian pilgrims with no provocation other than their chanting of religious and other slogans. The Saudis say the Iranians rioted, provoking the security forces.
After the Mecca violence, Iranian crowds took over the Saudi Embassy in Teheran, and the diplomats were confined. The diplomatic damage between the two nations has yet to be repaired.
Some people think the timing is just a coincidence.
 
Implicated in Earlier Incident
Mr. Hashemi has been implicated in an episode two years ago in which some Iranians tried to smuggle guns into Saudi Arabia during the pilgrimage. The guns were discovered by Saudi security forces, straining relations between the two nations. The case has not been mentioned in the Iranian press.
At the time of Mr. Hashemi's arrest, relations were on the mend.
Diplomats said it was impossible to predict how the trial's outcome would affect Iran's internal or external politics, given the complexities here.
In a statement to the court Saturday, Mr. Hashemi reportedly said that his actions ''certainly created an unsound atmosphere in society and tainted the otherwise immaculate reputation'' of some officials.
Iranian newspapers specifially mentioned Ayatollah Montazari.
''Mehdi Hashemi admits that he collaborated with Savak and spied on militants, including Ayatollah Montazeri,'' Akhbaar reported Sunday. This may be the most severe of the charges against him. It is hard to say when a verdict will be announced. ''It might be today, it might be five months from now,'' said one person here who is following the case.
Because of the severity of the charges, the fact that Mr. Hashemi has been jailed for months and that Ayatollah Khomeini personally approved the religious trial, a highly unusual event, the sentence is expected to be severe, possibly death.
The Ayatollah must review the case.


End of Document