Iran, Russia, Syria defense chiefs to meet in Tehran
The Bell Ringer: Augusta State University
June 12, 2016 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: GLOBAL-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 582 words
Byline: Gerald Bowen
Body


Iran's top security chief says a trilateral meeting of defense ministers in Tehran indicates that Russia, Syria and Iran are determined in countering Takfiri terrorists.
The three officials agree that a comprehensive ceasefire and humanitarian aids are the first steps to restore regional security.
He criticized the claims of the USA and Saudi Arabia about backing "moderate opposition" which he said is in fact a covert support for terrorists, lashing out at countries claiming to be upholding human rights but remain silent over appalling crimes committed by terrorists against innocent Syrians, Iraqis and Yemenis.
As regards the fighting in Syria, Dehqan underlined that Iran is in favor of a guaranteed ceasefire that would not help reinforce the terrorist groups.
Iran and Russian Federation, known as the main allies of Syria, have been looking for a solution to a crisis that has plagued the Arab country for more than five years.
Dehghan also requested of the Syrian groups now in talks with the Syrian government to "collaborate to take steps to establish peace, calm and expel the terrorist threat".
"For over five years Syria has been confronting Takfiri terrorism led by the United States which exerted vast efforts to fight Syria, making it imperative for us to confront terrorism", he added.
Sharks hope return home turns tide in final vs. Penguins
Crosby has not spoken publicly in response, but Sullivan said Thursday that it didn't merit a conversation. At home, they'll have a raucous crowd behind them and last change so DeBoer can get the matchups he wants.
Dehqan also strongly denounced United States and Saudi support for what they call "moderate rebels" as further proof of the falsehood of their anti-terror slogans.
"For over five years Syria has been confronting Takfiri terrorism led by the USA which exerted enormous efforts to fight Syria, making it imperative for us to confront terrorism", he explained.
Al-Freij described the results of an earlier meeting he held with his Russian counterpart Sergey Shoygu as "excellent", adding that a recent array of measures is expected to yield even better results.
The defense ministers are to exchange viewpoints on the latest regional developments and ways to strengthen and extend the fight against terrorism during the trilateral meeting, the IRNA news agency reported.
It is not clear exactly what the major themes of the meeting were, but most likely one possible agenda have been coordinating offensives and plans now that the Syrian army is nearing Raqqa.
Iran has also been offering advisory military assistance to the Syrian government.
Syria has been the scene of a conflict since March 2011.
Like this:
Gawker files for bankruptcy, to sell itself to Ziff DavisNiger, Chad to fight in Nigeria against Boko HaramCristiano Ronaldo fit, ready to lead Portugal in Euro 2016: CoachCliffs Natural Resources Inc Upgraded to "Outperform" by MacquarieCourt: No right to carry concealed weapons in publicHockey Legend Gordie Howe Dies at 88Keiko Fujimori concedes defeat in Peru presidential voteTurkey blames Kurdish militants for Istanbul vehicle bombingHello, Nihonium. Scientists Name 4 New Elements On The Periodic TableUbisoft reveals list of games that will be presentedUnion head: New Jersey pension ruling is 'theft'Police search for shooter who killed student near schoolEx-astronaut charged with murder in car wreck that killed 2Fearing Zika, Olympic athlete freezes spermSerial winner Mourinho hired to revive fading Man United

Load-Date: January 5, 2017


End of Document