IRANIAN FOREIGN MINISTER DISPUTES ANY LINK TO BLAST
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 28, 1996 Friday SF EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A16
Length: 348 words
Byline: FROM INQUIRER WIRE SERVICES
Dateline: KIEV, Ukraine
Body


Iran's foreign minister yesterday rejected any suggestion that Tehran was behind the bombing that killed 19 U.S. servicemen in Saudi Arabia.
"All these accusations are without foundation. We are totally against terrorism," Ali-Akbar Velayati said at a news conference in Kiev. "We have been victims of terrorism ourselves. We are in no way involved in this."
Two groups have claimed responsibility for Tuesday's blast outside an apartment building housing U.S. troops in Dhahran. Israeli President Ezer Weizman blamed Iran outright for the attack.
Velayati said Israel's current leadership, "at least some people within it, were terrorists at one time when they illegally founded their state. In southern Lebanon, we see constant Israeli bombardments, they kill people and are involved in terrorism."
Velayati was in Kiev to attend talks on economic ties with Ukraine and Turkmenistan.
U.S. officials acknowledged they had no leads on who the bombers were, and said they doubted several anonymous claims of responsibility.
In London, an Arabic newspaper said an anonymous caller had claimed responsibility for the bombing on behalf of a previously unknown group. The caller identified the group as the Legion of the Martyr Abdullah al-Hufaizi - a Saudi citizen beheaded last year for throwing acid at a policeman.
The daily Al-Arab said the caller threatened more attacks if foreign forces "occupying the holy Saudi land" did not withdraw.
It was impossible to determine if such a group actually exists.
American broadcast networks reported a second responsibility claim made by another unknown group calling itself Hezbollah-Gulf. U.S. State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said a claim also was made to a newspaper in Riyadh, the Saudi capital. It wasn't clear whether that was a separate, third claim.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher was not inclined to believe the claims. "Where terrorism is concerned," he said, "first guesses usually are wrong."
Burns added: "We have no leads whatsoever."
Saudi Arabia posted a $2.7 million reward for information leading to the arrests of suspects.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document