Iran must help stop spread of terrorism, pope says; Visit is first to Vatican by Iranian president since '99
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 27, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Times Publishing Company  All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 9
Length: 375 words
Byline: FRANCES D'EMILIO

The Associated Press
Dateline: VATICAN CITY  
Body


Pope Francis held talks Tuesday with Iran's president at the Vatican, calling on Tehran to play a key role in stopping the spread of terrorism as Iran tries to improve its image in the global arena following an agreement on its nuclear program.
The pontiff warmly clasped the hand of President Hassan Rouhani in the first official call paid on a pontiff by an Iranian president since 1999. They held 40 minutes of private talks before Rouhani met with other top Vatican officials.  
The talks delved into the conclusion and application of the nuclear accord, and the important role that Iran is called upon to play, together with other countries of the region, was highlighted, the Holy See said.
It added that the role should foster adequate political solutions to the issues plaguing the Middle East, fighting the spread of terrorism and arms trafficking.
The cordial talks also stressed common spiritual values, the statement said.
Usually it's the pope who asks his audience to pray for him. This time, after the two men spoke with the help of Italian and Farsi language translators, it was the guest who asked the pope for prayers. I ask you to pray for me, Rouhani said. 
The Vatican meeting was a key part of the Iranian effort to take a more prominent place on the world stage after the nuclear deal with Western powers.
Iran, which agreed to limit its nuclear activities in exchange for an end to economic sanctions, is eager to carve out a bigger role in mediating Middle East conflicts. Francis' papacy has emphasized mediation and conflict-resolution, including his role in helping Cuba and the United States to normalize their relations.Rouhani heads to France today on his four-day European trip seeking to boost Iran's image abroad as well as to rehabilitate economic ties with a continent that had been a big trade partner before the sanctions. 
Francis gave Rouhani a medal depicting St. Martin giving his cloak to a poor man in the cold, describing the saint's act as a sign of unsolicited brotherhood.
Rouhani brought a gift of a hand-made rug that he said was made in the Iranian holy city of Qom.
Before going to the Vatican, Rouhani told a forum of business leaders in Rome that Iran is the safest and most stable country of the entire region.

Load-Date: January 27, 2016


End of Document