Iranians Pose a Real Threat to Mideast Security
The New York Times
July 2, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk ; Column 4; ; Letter
Length: 280 words
Body


To the Editor:
Michael Field (Op-Ed, June 28) misses the mark when he dismissively refers to United States and Israeli "paranoia" regarding Iran. To the contrary, the United States and Israel are doing the civilized world an enormous favor by focusing attention on the threat posed by Iran.
The State Department's latest "Patterns of Global Terrorism" report points to Iranian arms, financing and training for Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Hamas "to resist Israel and the peace process through violence and terrorism" and names Iran "the premier state sponsor of international terrorism."
Let's not forget, too, that when Secretary of State Warren Christopher was trying to reach an agreement to end hostilities in Lebanon, Iran was delivering, through Damascus, Katyusha rockets to Hezbollah to fire at Israeli towns and villages.  Paranoia? No, reality.
For years Iran has been intent on developing the ability to manufacture weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. Its Persian Gulf neighbors are worried, as are the United States and Israel.
In an American Jewish Committee study last year, Patrick Clawson of National Defense University in Washington wrote that despite Western restrictions on selling weapons and dual-use items to Iran, that country "is still able to import a great many dangerous items" from Europe and Asia. An Arab foreign minister told me of his fears that Russian arms merchants were seeking to sell nuclear components to Iran.
To deny the dangers Iran poses to regional and global stability is shortsighted.
 
DAVID A. HARRIS
Executive Director
American Jewish Committee
New York, June 28, 1996

Load-Date: July 2, 1996


End of Document