Iraqis fear chaos, more terrorism; Residents appear to lack consensus over Bush's plan
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 30, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Features; Pg. a9
Length: 323 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body


For engineering professor Moayad Yasin al-Samaraie, President Bush's pledge to keep U.S. troops in Iraq until their mission is complete was the promise of order over chaos.
But the assurance rang hollow for Mona Hussein, who woke up Wednesday without electricity or running water after spending the night on her roof trying to escape Baghdad's sweltering heat.
Iraqis on the street and the country's politicians seemed divided over Bush's refusal to provide a timetable for withdrawing U.S. troops, along with his promises for a better life in this country of 26 million people.
"Iraq cannot be stable if the American and coalition forces leave," al-Samaraie said.
The 55-year-old said chaos could result "because Iraqi forces don't have the required level of training to protect the country."
But Hussein, also an engineer, said withdrawing foreign troops might restore the security their presence has so far failed to establish.
"The terrorists will continue to attack the Americans as long as they're here. They should leave so that there will be less explosions and more security," she said. "As long as they're here, we'll remain an occupied country, just like Palestine."
Many Iraqis said they didn't see the speech, which was broadcast just before dawn, and some who viewed excerpts of it considered it tailored to an American audience.
"It will make no difference. (Bush) has given speeches before, but we have not seen any results," said Hussein, a 25-year-old mother of two. "A discussion on electricity or oil would have been better than the Bush speech. Maybe more people would have paid attention then."
Bush's speech came on the one-year anniversary of the handover of sovereignty to Iraqis. Violence has raged despite the political progress since then, including a January election that brought a new Shiite-led government to office. More than 1,360 people have died since Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari took over two months ago.

Graphic

 
AP Photo

Load-Date: June 30, 2005


End of Document