Iraqi who lied at airport is deported;
Though he faced three charges, none was for an act of terrorism.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 30, 2004, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 520 words
Byline: Tony Kennedy; Staff Writer
Body


An Iraqi man who pleaded guilty Wednesday in St. Paul to lying to airport officials about his Mideast travel was deported to his homeland and ordered never to return to the United States.
     Ali Mohammed Abboud Almosaleh, 40, who has been in federal custody since his arrest July 7 at Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, told U.S. District Judge Richard Kyle that he lied to U.S. Customs & Border Protection agents about being in Iraq and about videodiscs containing calls for resistance against America. He said he was in fear about being stopped when he falsely told agents that he had only been in Syria and that the discs contained only music.
   "I beg from you forgiveness," Almosaleh said in court through an interpreter. "I was very scared, and I was very afraid."
     Almosaleh was interviewed several times after his arrest by federal investigators but was never charged with any acts of terrorism. A three-count indictment against him alleged that he made false statements and misrepresented information on immigration forms.
     The videodiscs in his possession contained images of militant Iraqi Iman Muqtada al-Sadr, but his defense attorney has said that the images of al-Sadr and his militia were no different from what has been televised around the world on CNN.
     The court-appointed defense attorney, Manny Atwal, said her client had been living in the Denver area with permanent resident status.
     Back to his family
     Atwal said Almosaleh, who has no known criminal history in the United States, welcomed deportation in order to return to his wife and 2-year-old son in Iraq. She said he is likely to be home in time to vote in Iraq's national election at the end of January.
     At Wednesday's court hearing, Almosaleh told Judge Kyle that the three-count indictment against him was true. Under an agreement with prosecutors, Almosaleh pleaded guilty to one of the counts in exchange for dismissal of the other two charges.
     Kyle followed sentencing guidelines by imposing a 176-day prison sentence and a three-year term of probation. The prison sentence was equal to the time Almosaleh already served at the maximum-security prison in Oak Park Heights. Immediately after the sentencing, he was placed in the custody of immigration officials who were to deport him.
     The probation was ordered in case Almosaleh violates Kyle's order for him to permanently stay out of the United States. The permanent deportation was part of the plea agreement. If Almosaleh reenters the U.S. illegally, federal courts will have authority over him, said Assistant U.S. Attorney David Genrich.
     Almosaleh told Kyle that he left the United States in January 2004 and traveled into and out of Iraq. He returned July 7 on a flight from Amsterdam that stopped in the Twin Cities, and falsely told Customs officials he had been gone for only a month.
     Karen Bailey of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Minneapolis, wouldn't comment on whether the government considers Almosaleh a terrorist. She noted that he was not charged with any crimes of terrorism.
     Tony Kennedy is at tonyk@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: January 4, 2005


End of Document