Iraqi actions spur demand for risk advice
Business Insurance
November 26, 1990


Copyright 1990 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: SPOTLIGHT REPORT; Pg. 3
Length: 1793 words
Byline: By MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


Hostilities in the Middle East are triggering renewed interest from risk managers in insurance that covers terrorist acts and for advice on how to avoid becoming a target of terrorism.
Many security consulting firms report that inquiries about their services have jumped since Iraq invaded Kuwait in August.
However, business looking for kidnap and ransom insurance have been doing more talking than buying.
"There certainly has been an increase in terms of quotations" for terrorism-related coverages like kidnap and ransom, said Albert M. Van Wagen, vp of Professional indemnity Agency Inc., an underwriting manager in Pleasantville, N.Y.
Professional Indemnity writes kidnap and ransom insurance as well as coverages that indemnify policyholders for losses related to property damage or harm to individuals due to extortion.  The coverage is written on behalf of Reliance Insurance Co. and underwriters at Lloyd's of London.
"We've seen an increase in terms of discussions, but not in the number of new policies written," said Benno Friedman, vp-financial services division at Alexander & Alexander of New York Inc.
Jack Willyard, vp with Sedgwick James Inc. in New York, pointed out that while most multinational firms already have coverage in place, the awareness "has trickled down to small and medium-sized companies.
"Smaller companies may not have been aware of this type of coverage or did not want to spend the money on it," said Mr. Willyard, explaining that recent events have heightened their awareness of the potential risks in the Middle East.
Herb Colough, executive vp of international operations at Paul Chamberlain International in Beverly Hills, Calif., said there has been a jump in requests for his company's travel intelligence reports and "more requests for seminars for executives on how to avoid terrorism."
Paul Bhamberlain International is on retainer to Professional Indemnity Agency as its international response team to assist clients that are the target of terrorist acts.
"We have 21 clients whose employees are unable to get out of Iraq and Kuwait," Mr. Clough said.  He could not say what his firm is doing to try to secure the release of these hostages.
Mike Ackerman, managing director of The Ackerman Group in Miami, said Middle East tensions have "created an interest in our ability to extract people from countries" after they have been illegally detained.
While he acknowledged that The Ackerman Group is advising companies with employees held hostage in the Middle East, Mr. Ackerman would not divulge the content of the discussions.
At least one firm that provides anti-terrorist services has not yet noticed a significant rise in inquiries, but acknowledges there may be more inquiries coming.
Philip Huntley, vp of Argen Ltd. in New York, said, "It seems very peculiar but there has not been an increase" in requests for Argen's services.  "Maybe there will be."
Argen, which is on retainer to American International Underwriters, a unit of American international Group Inc., also is advising companies whose employees were recently trapped in the Middle East, he said.
Mr. Huntley and others pointed out that the situation in Iraq, in which hostages were deployed as "human shields" against an attack, is not a classic kidnap scenario.
However, they add, some claims eventually may be filed as a result of the detention of Westerners in the region.
Mr. Friedman of A&A explained that kidnap and ransom policies often cover instances in which "a government body wrongfully detains a company employee."
Such coverage, according to Mr. Friedman, reimburses the policy-holder for an employee's salary during detention and medical and other expenses after release.
Gene Mastrangelo, manager of risk assessment information services at Business Risks International Inc. in Arlington, Va., said it is unlikely that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein will take more capatives because "he's got more hostages than he knows what the hell to do with now."
Future terrorist acts, if they occur, will more likely come in the form of assassinations, bombings and hijackings, he added.
Companies that have operations in the Middle East are tight-lipped about their insurance coverage, partly because some coverages - like kidnap and ransom insurance - can be voided if the policyholder admits they exist.
Hunt Oil Co., for example, refused to discuss its insurance for operations in the Yemen Arab Republic, also known as North Yemen, a nation on the southern tip of the Arabian peninsula that has not been involved in the Iraqi hostilities.
"That is of a confidential nature," said the spokeswoman.
Dallas-based Hunt Oil has evacuated the dependents of workers in Yemen, she said.  "Otherwise, we are continually monitoring the operation."
Traditionally, multinational firms have been able to purchase kidnap and ransom insurance at reasonable rates.  And that cost has not risen in recent years, according to industry sources.
"If anything, the price has gone down slightly," said Mr. Van Wagnen of Professional Indemnity.  "It's been pretty stable."
A&A's Mr. Friedman agreed that prices for kidnap and ransom insurance have fallen, though the scale of the cuts depends on individual exposures.
"Underwriters are eagerly attempting to write (kidnap and ransom policies)," said Mr. Friedman.  "It's still very competitive."
Mr. Willyard of Sedgwick James said the price has remained reasonable because large losses have been infrequent in recent years.  However, there were some big claims recorded last year and "this year looks like it's shaping up to be the same," he added.
Kidnap and ransom rates are based on a number of variables.
"The primary underwriting criteria are the number of employees and where (the risk) is located," said Mr. Van Wagnen.  "Are they in Colombia or New Jersey?  It's how many employees and where they are."
Underwriters also consider corporate assets and revenues and the nature of the policyholder's business, said Mr. Van Wagnen.  "Previous loss experience is also considered, but not too many have had previous losses."
Professional Indemnity writes kidnap and ransom policies covering employees in countries "spanning the globe," he said.  Company policies usually cover all employees in a specific nation.
Mr. Friedman pointed out that "underwriters are looking at international exposure in terms of people stationed overseas and things like the amount of travel" by employees who could be marked by terrorists.
"To the extent that you have high-profile individuals, they could be targets."
He also noted that "rich corporations" with the ability to pay ransoms can entice kidnappers.
Asked to point out the world's "hot spots" for terrorism, experts do not single out the Middle East.
Without hesitation they mention Columbia, where battles constantly rage between drug cartels and the government.
"The pre-eminent one is Colombia," said Mr. Friedman, "although obviously there are other places in South America" that are considered risky.
"The political situation is not always the overriding concern," Mr. Friedman pointed out.  "Like in Colombia, there are a lot of bandits roaming around.  Kidnapping has always been pervasive in that country."
Mr. Ackerman emphasized that "there is a flourishing kidnapping business in South America," especially in Colombia and the Brazilian city of Rio de Janeiro.
Problems also persistent in Bolivia, Peru and Equador, he said.
Meanwhile, social changes in Eastern Europe resulting from the fall of communism are removing some risks of terrorism from companies doing business there, according to some experts.
"The risk has lessened because of the tremendous changeover there," said Mr. Clough of Paul Chamberlain International, though he pointed out "there are still hot areas looked at with caution because of unrest." Some of the Soviet republics are not altogether free of kidnap or terrorism risks, he added.
On the other hand, kidnapping and terrorist acts could actually increase as a result of new-found freedom in Eastern Europe, Mr. Ackerman maintained.
"Those countries are used to being under the boot," he remarked, referring to the strict government and police control that existed in the Eastern bloc nations.  "It will take them a while to start to think about kidnapping."
Companies with operations overseas or that send employees abroad can lessen the risk of terrorism by taking advantage of services offered by a variety of firms.
Mr. Huntley of Argen said his firm specializes in "crisis management services" aimed at preventing a kidnapping or terrorist attack from ever taking place.
"If it takes place, we advise on how a corporation or individual should respond," Mr. Huntley explained.
After an incident is resolved, a "post-incident analysis" attempts to ferret out mistakes and highlight "what lessons were learned," said Mr. Huntley.
Mr. Mastrangelo said Business Risks International relies on more than a decade of experience to "come up with a process that allows us to help reduce vulnerability.  In turn, we reduce the risk.  We can't do anything about the threat, but we can do something about the vulnerability" of a client.
Business Risk International studies the tactics of terrorists with information gleaned from its file of about 40,000 terrorist incidents that have occurred over the last 20 years.  Using the information, recommendations are made for such measures as whether to supply bodyguards and how to alter someone's behavior to make him or her less predictable to terrorists, explained Mr. Mastrangelo.
Mr. Clough of Paul Chamberlain International said, "We always recommend to clients that they develop a crisis management program.  We look at the exposures and make recommendations."
Paul Chamberlain International recommends companies conduct simulated crisis exercises at least twice a year to develop crisis management plans, Mr. Clough said.  The exercise should take into consideration how lives will be saved under certain con ditions, he explained.
"It's pre-planning of everything that can be pre-planned."
The company also can provide security escorts for companies and helps develop a liaison with local law enforcement officials, Mr. Clough noted.
Companies that send proposed itineraries to Paul Chamberlain International get verbal updates, said Mr. Clough.  "We monitor the situation until they leave."
In addition to the services provided by these and other firms, the U.S. State Department provides advisories and information on trouble spots throughout the world.  The information can be accessed by computer and telephone (see related story).
Mr. Clough calls the government service "excellent," but says consulting firms like his can provide more up-to-the-minute information on world events and can inform clients about potential problems.

Graphic

 
Picture 1, One of several Shiite terrorists who hijacked Trans World Airlines flight 847 issues demands during the June 1985 incident in Beirut.  AP/Wide World Photo


End of Document