Iraqi elections, poverty got attention at U.N. session
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 1, 2004 Friday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 307 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


World leaders wrapped up their annual meeting at the U.N. General Assembly on Thursday. The session was dominated by concerns over the upcoming elections in Iraq, the ongoing killings in Sudan's Darfur region and terrorism in poor nations.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan set the stage for the two-week session, which attracted nearly 100 heads of state and government, in a keynote address on the "rule of law."
He warned world leaders that basic laws to protect civilians are being "shamelessly disregarded," citing violations ranging from cold-blooded killings and the abuse of prisoners in Iraq to the seizing of children in Russia and widespread rape in Sudan.
"In too many places . . . hatred, corruption, violence and exclusion go without redress," Annan said. "The vulnerable lack effective recourse and the powerful manipulate laws to retain power and accumulate wealth. At times, even the necessary fight against terrorism is allowed to encroach unnecessarily on civil liberties."
A major theme at the session was the need to close the gap between rich and poor nations, which many developing nations argued was essential to win the war against terrorism.
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva organized a session on ways to finance the alleviation of poverty. In his speech to the world body, he warned that there would be no end to terrorism until a more just economic order was in place.
With the U.S.-led war on Iraq clearly in mind, a number of small countries warned against the use of unilateral military force -- an issue certain to be addressed by a high-level panel appointed by Annan to identify global security threats and determine how to deal with them.
The report, expected in December, will be the basis for Annan's recommendations to world leaders to consider at next September's General Assembly ministerial meeting.

Load-Date: October 1, 2004


End of Document