IRAQ APPEALS FOR WORLD AID ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 25, 2004 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 472 words
Byline: MEGAN K. STACK, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body


Struggling against an increasingly sophisticated kidnapping campaign, interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi made a stark plea to an anxious international community yesterday: Don't abandon Iraq to terrorists.
 "It is time for us to close ranks to fight terrorism," Allawi told reporters in Damascus, on the Syrian leg of his get-acquainted swing through Arab capitals. "There is no way to budge to terrorists and give them what they want."
Pressure to disengage from Iraq -- or stay away in the first place -- is mounting. The Philippines bowed to insurgents' demands last week, pulling its troops out of Iraq to save the life of a captured truck driver. And Egypt swore off the notion of sending soldiers or military officials into Iraq after insurgents nabbed an Egyptian diplomat in Baghdad.
 Even the United Nations, which was set to return to Iraq this month, now says that without a protection force, only a few representatives will be able to start work in the unstable country.
 "For the U.N. to build up a larger presence, we are going to need the security arrangements envisioned by the resolution" endorsing Iraqi sovereignty, Secretary-General Kofi Annan said yesterday. "That is, a dedicated force protecting the U.N. staff and its facilities."
 One violent month into Allawi's tenure as U.S.-backed premier, Iraq's security flaws appear serious enough to drive the country deeper into international isolation.
 Around the world, there is a growing sense of uncertainty over building relations with the new Iraq -- how to help in building security and whether governments can risk intense anger at home by sending troops or officials into a volatile, politically contentious Iraq.
 The newly appointed U.N. envoy to Iraq, Ashraf Qazi, called security "the first priority, the second priority and the third priority."
 The United Nations hasn't stationed staff in Iraq since its Baghdad office was bombed last August. Despite its goal of returning to Iraq as soon as this month, Annan said that only Qazi and a "small staff" will be able to enter Iraq in August.
 Meanwhile, the kidnappings appear to be becoming more deliberate and personal. Allawi's brief appearance in Cairo last week -- and Egypt's pledge to help Iraq fight insurgents -- apparently inspired armed radicals to track down Egyptian diplomat Mohammed Mamdouh Helmi Qutb and kidnap him outside a mosque after Friday prayers.
 In a video aired soon afterward on Al-Jazeera, the kidnappers decried Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmad Nazif's assurances that Cairo was ready to help Iraq restore security. The captors warned Egypt to abandon any plans of cooperating with the interim government.
 "Sending troops or Egyptian military personnel to Iraq is not an issue on the table at all for Egypt," Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit said after the diplomat was captured.

Load-Date: July 27, 2004


End of Document