Iraq and Terrorism Hotly Argued in Staten Island Congressional Race
The New York Times
October 25, 2006 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 824 words
Byline: By JONATHAN P. HICKS
Body


Since he first went to Congress in 1997, Representative Vito J. Fossella Jr. has been re-elected by fairly commanding margins and has slowly become the most influential Republican in his home borough, Staten Island.
  But this year, with Republicans on the defensive around the nation, Democrats are hopeful that they may land a prize by taking the seat. Mr. Fossella's rival, Stephen A. Harrison, a lawyer who has never been elected to public office, has been relentlessly critical of the military involvement in Iraq, and that message, along with other positions, has given Democrats fresh hope that they may give Mr. Fossella his toughest race to date.
 ''This is a race where the people of this district have a real choice in important issues,'' Mr. Harrison said. ''Take the war. Vito Fossella has supported President Bush. And they have said that they want to stay the course. But I say it's time for us to deal with the errors of our ways and to pull out.''
  Mr. Harrison, 57, a lawyer, failed to win a City Council seat in a special election three years ago, and the most prominent items on his resume are a stint as head of a youth athletic program and service as a longtime head of a community board. But he says he believes that he will be propelled to victory because of the opposition to the war in Iraq among most voters in the 13th Congressional District, which includes all of Staten Island and parts of southern Brooklyn. 
  Also, he said, the presence of Eliot Spitzer at the top of the ticket as the Democrats' candidate for governor will lead many voters to pull the lever for him and other Democrats.
  ''There is a strong feeling that there will be a Democratic sweep in the state of New York,'' Mr. Harrison said. ''We just have to make sure that we pull the Democrats out.''
  Just this week, Congressional Quarterly altered its rating on the race from ''Safe Republican'' to ''Republican Favored,'' meaning that it sees the race as having become more competitive.
  The 13th Congressional District has about 170,000 registered Democrats, compared with about 107,000 registered Republicans. Despite those numbers, the district has tended to elect Republicans to Congress for some time, long before Mr. Fossella, 41, was elected.
  To hear officials of both parties tell it, Mr. Harrison still has an uphill battle. Mr. Fossella is a member of a well-known political family and lives on Staten Island, as do two-thirds of the district's residents. Mr. Harrison lives in the Brooklyn part of the district.
  Moreover, Mr. Fossella was re-elected in 2004 with nearly 60 percent of the vote in a race against Frank J. Barbaro, a former assemblyman, retired State Supreme Court justice and onetime mayoral candidate.
  Also, Mr. Fossella had spent $1 million on the race by September's end, when he reported having nearly half a million dollars on hand. Mr. Harrison had spent less than $100,000 and had about $11,000 on hand.
  On the campaign trail, Mr. Fossella highlights his views on fighting terrorism. ''People in this district, I think, see me as an independent fighter,'' he said in an interview. ''And what's most important to me is to never again fight terrorists in our own front yard.''
  With regard to Iraq, Mr. Fossella said that withdrawing American troops now ''would only destabilize that country, help embolden the terrorists and leave the innocent Iraqi people to fend for themselves.''
  He criticized Mr. Harrison as a politician who opposed a number of homeland security initiatives and as being ''among those who want to cut and run'' from Iraq. ''We all want the troops to come home safely as soon as possible,'' he said. ''But it has to be under the right conditions.''
  Mr. Fossella also says he helped secure billions of dollars for New York City to increase security and rebuild Lower Manhattan after the 9/11 World Trade Center attack.
  But many in the district have noted that Mr. Fossella's campaign has taken a harsh tone toward his Democratic opponent.
  One piece of campaign literature carried a photo of Mr. Harrison next to one of Osama bin Laden. It stated: ''If you vote for Steve Harrison for Congress, or don't vote at all, here's what you will be supporting,'' the literature said. ''Steve Harrison opposes key tools in the war on terror.''
  Mr. Harrison criticized the literature as appalling. ''I'm very strong on the war against terror, and I feel that we must bring this man to justice,'' Mr. Harrison said of bin Laden. ''And to imply that voting for me is like supporting terrorism is a vicious thing.''
  While many politicians in the district give Mr. Fossella the edge in the contest, Mr. Harrison said he remained determined to emerge as the victor in the Nov. 7 election. The two men had the last of five debates last night.
  ''I've never been intimidated by money and power,'' Mr. Harrison said. ''I get out there every day and I'm doing my best. And I believe this is highly doable.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Representative Vito J. Fossella Jr., left, and his Democratic challenger, Stephen A. Harrison, right, at a debate in Brooklyn yesterday. (Photo by Mary DiBiase Blaich for The New York Times)

Load-Date: October 25, 2006


End of Document