IRAQ VOWS TO HIT BACK;
GORE: IT WOULD BE UNWISE TO RETALIATE BECAUSE THAT WOULD RECEIVE A RESPONSE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 29, 1993, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 831 words
Byline: MONA ZIADE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


Iraq vowed yesterday to avenge a U.S. missile attack on Baghdad, while Washington cautioned it would respond in kind, fueling fears the turbulent region was headed for a new round of military clashes.
For Saddam Hussein's regime, the attack on its intelligence headquarters before dawn Sunday ended any hope of improved relations with the U.S. administration under President Clinton.
But it could prop up Saddam's popularity, which has sagged due to economic problems caused by U.N. trade sanctions. Crowds of Iraqis took to the streets to denounce Clinton, not the Iraqi leader whose invasion of Kuwait three years ago led to a devastating war and international isolation.
The attack also could hurt U.S. standing in the Muslim world. Islamic nations, including countries that stood with Washington during the war, questioned Washington for punishing Iraq while the West has done little to help outgunned Bosnian Muslims in their fight against Serb aggression.
Clinton ordered the attack in retaliation for an alleged plot to murder President Bush while on a visit to Kuwait in April. He said yesterday that the strike crippled Iraq's intelligence capacity and sent a message to the world of American resolve to be ''very aggressive'' in fighting terrorism.
''The action I took, I thought, was clearly warranted by the facts,'' Clinton told his Cabinet. ''The United States will do what it can to combat terrorism. It is plainly what we ought to be doing.''
Iraq lodged a formal protest with the U.N. Security Council yesterday, accusing the United States of ''state terrorism and blackmail.''
U.N. silence about ''crimes'' committed by the United States against Iraq ''has encouraged the belligerent U.S. regime to persist in this course of action and seek to secure world hegemony by means of armed force, state terrorism and blackmail,'' Iraq's letter said.
Iraq says eight people were killed when some of the 23 Tomahawk missiles fired by the U.S. Navy hit residential areas near the intelligence compound.
The state-run Iraqi News Agency quoted Iraq's intelligence chief, Gen. Saber Abdul-Aziz al-Douri, as telling Saddam in a letter he would not allow the attack to go unpunished.
''The aggressors returned to their evil and blind hatred,'' the agency quoted al-Douri as saying. ''Cursed be what they are doing. We will pursue anyone who dares to attack our dear Iraq and severely punish these evil insects.''
In Washington, Vice President Al Gore warned that the United States was ready to hit again.
''It would be unwise for Saddam to retaliate in any capacity because that would receive a response,'' Gore said.
The aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt headed for the Red Sea to bolster U.S. military forces in the region. Egyptian officials said the carrier would sail from the Mediterranean through the Suez Canal early today.
White House spokesman Mark Gearan defended the administration against criticism by Islamic nations that it applied double standards in dealing with aggression by Iraqis and by Bosnian Serbs.
''That's just an inappropriate comparison,'' Gearan said. ''This was a sophisticated plan of state-supported terrorism against a former president for his actions as president. As such, it is a threat against the country and every American citizen.''
Egypt and Turkey, two Islamic nations that were key supporters of the U.S.-led military operation that drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait in the 1991 gulf war, were among countries that questioned the U.S. missile raid.
''I wish the position of American policies were as strict toward the crimes that the Serbs carry out,'' Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Moussa said Sunday.
Britain, France and Germany issued statements supporting the attack.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev yesterday also defended the attack, saying ''the international community cannot condone the hunting of presidents, no matter whether they are in or out of office.''
But nationalists, including Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, condemned the American strike as another example of what they have called Russian kowtowing to the West. Iraq was a former Soviet ally.
Baghdad has said the allegations of a plot to assassinate Bush was ''fabricated'' by Kuwait and Washington to justify military attacks on Iraq.
For a second day, Iraqi news media railed against Clinton, calling him a ''criminal'' no different from Bush, who put together the military coalition that drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait in the gulf war.
''Clinton ordered this aggression to compensate for his eroded popularity and credibility domestically,'' Iraq's government newspaper Al-Thawra said. ''He wanted to prove he is no less decisive than his predecessor Bush. But what he actually proved is that he is no less barbaric.''
Babel, another government-run daily published by Saddam's son, Oday, said: ''Clinton needs to be reminded of the human rights slogans he raised during the election campaign. The aggression has turned him from a supporter of human rights to a No. 1 criminal.''

Graphic

 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC (2), N.Y. Times News Service: (Before and after the bombing in Iraq), Ty Ahmad-Taylor and John Paspasian/N.Y. Times News Service: (Surveying the damage in Baghdad)

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document