IRAQ WAR COULD SPUR MORE WORLD INSTABILITY, PAKISTANI LEADER SAYS;
MUSLIMS SEE ISLAM AS BEING TARGETED, MUSHARRAF ASSERTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 23, 2003 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 721 words
Byline: Dafna Linzer The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf told an international conference on counterterrorism Monday that al-Qaida had become "a shadow of its past." But he warned that the situation in Iraq could stir more instability in the world.
"There is a growing sense among Muslims that Islam, as a religion, is being targeted and pilloried," he said.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan opened the conference hours after the U.N. headquarters in Baghdad was attacked. Annan said world leaders must deal with the roots of terrorism if they are to fight it more effectively. Like other world leaders, he emphasized that military campaigns were not the only way to fight terrorists.
Nearly 20 heads of state joined Annan, counterterrorism experts and several victims of terrorism in New York to discuss the conference's agenda on the roots of terrorism.
Few spoke in optimistic terms, whether characterizing current cooperation on counterterrorism or projecting future threats. No one, except for the U.S. representative, Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind., saw the Iraq war as part of the anti-terrorism campaign.
Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov challenged what Moscow calls Western "double standards" on terrorism. Russia has often criticized Western countries for condemning Moscow's war in Chechnya, where both Russian forces and rebels have been accused of brutalizing civilians.
French President Jacques Chirac made a thinly veiled reference to the U.S. occupation of Iraq when he discussed ways in which terrorism can take on "the mask of justice and solidarity."
"When a country is under foreign occupation, it unjustly captures the struggle for freedom for its own ends. When a community feels ill-treated, terrorism claims to act in its name," Chirac said.
As he pledged France's continued cooperation in fighting global terrorism, Chirac proposed marking Sept. 11 as "world anti-terrorism day."
Besides Chirac and Musharraf, the leaders of Spain, Italy, Norway, Canada, Afghanistan, Portugal, Brazil and Indonesia were among those attending the conference. Israel and the Palestinians sent their foreign ministers.
President George W. Bush and Secretary of State Colin Powell turned down invitations, leaving U.S. representation to Lugar, who was the only nonpresident or foreign minister to address the conference on behalf of a country. He is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
In his presentation, Lugar concentrated on weapons of mass destruction and the threat terrorist organizations pose as they seek the weapons.
"For the foreseeable future, the intelligence community will face an extensive threat from the intersection of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction," he said. "Addressing this situation will require an unwavering commitment."
The lower-level U.S. presence at the terrorism conference was a disappointment for organizers, though Norwegian Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik, the conference chair, expressed gratitude that Lugar attended.
"Fighting terrorism should be about more than using your military and freezing finances," Bondevik said, alluding to the U.S. efforts.
His comments were echoed by Annan, whose prepared remarks did not mention Monday's attack in Baghdad. The suicide attack, which took place as the United Nations considers expanding its role in Iraq, killed one other person and injured 19, including two Iraqi U.N. workers.
"We delude ourselves if we think that military force alone can defeat terrorism," Annan said. "It may sometimes be necessary to use force to counter terrorist groups, but we need to do much more than that if terrorism is to be stopped."
Security at the conference was tight, and South African Foreign Minister Nkosazana Zuma left the gathering rather than be frisked by security guards.
"You don't treat a foreign minister this way," she told The Associated Press. Conference organizers apologized but said security was in the hands of the U.S. Secret Service.
The session, called "fighting terrorism for humanity," was the brainchild of Bondevik, the Norwegian prime minister, and Elie Wiesel, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and Holocaust survivor.
Bondevik has hoped the gathering would "renew a commitment to the war on terrorism," an effort that has lost steam as the Iraq war and tensions it caused between the United States and its allies took center stage this year.

Notes

WORLD FOCUS; INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON COUNTERTERRORISM

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Nobel Peace Prize laureate Elie Wiesel (left), U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Norwegian Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik talk before an international anti-terrorism conference begins on Monday in New York. Few at the conference spoke in optimistic terms, whether characterizing current cooperation on counterterrorism or projecting future threats.; (2) Photo headshot - (Pervez) Musharraf; Al-Qaida is "shadow of its past"

Load-Date: September 23, 2003


End of Document