IRAQ ORDERS DIPLOMATS OUT RULE OUT TERRORISM, BUSH WARNS LEADER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 1990, SATURDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 542 words
Byline: Lawrence M. O'Rourke Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON - President George Bush warned Iraqi President Saddam Hussein on Friday that the United States would hold Iraq responsible for any terrorism against the United States and its allies in their effort to force Iraq out of Kuwait.  Bush expressed ''deep and growing concern'' over Iraq's conduct in Kuwait.  But although Bush talked tough, he said that the economic embargo against Iraq would ''remain our strategy for resolving this crisis.'' Bush said he was not sending a signal that the United States was moving toward military action against Iraq.  Bush's warning to Saddam followed a meeting in Amman, Jordan, between Iraqi officials and people identified as terroristso.  Bush's warning was first made to members of Congress, then at a news conference. The statement ''highlighted his concern about the new links of the Iraqi government to various terrorist groups,'' White House spokesman Roman Popadiuk said.  Popadiuk said Bush's administration was concerned about the establishment in Baghdad of terrorist groups, including the Abu Nidal organization, the May 15 group and the Palestine Liberation Front.  Bush said that he appreciated the support given him during the Persian Gulf conflict by the Democratic-controlled House.  ''The United States stands determined and united in its quest to see the Iraqi forces withdraw from Kuwait fully and unconditionally,'' Bush said.  Bush said the sanctions would ''take some time to work. I don't know how long that is.'' He said that while he wanted to stress ''right and wrong moral principles,'' he did not ''intend to be sending a signal that I'm shifting towards the military'' option against Iraq.
But Bush said he would not rule out the first use of force.  The president spoke to reporters on the White House South Lawn before he and his wife, Barbara Bush, took off in a helicopter for a weekend at Camp David, Md. Earlier, the president met at the White House with congressional leaders and with British Defense Secretary Tom King.  Bush told the congressional leaders that he wanted quick approval of his plan to forgive $750 million that Egypt is scheduled to pay on its loans to the United States this year.  Bush also urged congressional approval of his plan to sell as much as $21 billion in new weapons to Saudi Arabia, a proposal opposed by Israel. But Bush indicated that he was willing to discuss the size of the arms deal and perhaps pare it.  In his 20-minute meeting with King, Bush expressed ''deep appreciation for British contributions to the multinational effort, particularly the recent decision to dispatch an armored brigade to Saudi Arabia,'' Popadiuk said.  HEADLINE: Saddam's Message Meanwhile Friday, a courier was in Jordan and on his way to the United States with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's message for America's TV audience, The Associated Press reported.  Told the tape would run 90 minutes, Bush dismissed it with the comment: ''No one could stay awake through that.'' The networks said they wanted to see it before saying how much might be shown.  U.S. officials renewed their promise not to hinder showing of the videotape. But Bush said Saddam must understand that ''under our system .  . .  the government can't mandate television time for him.''

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO (COLOR) by AP … A Navy airman from the frigate Brewston peering through binoculars at a gas tanker with a British flag while on patrol this week in the Gulf of Oman. The Navy intercepts about 40 such vessels a day. The ship's name was unavailable. (NOTE: same photo & cutline appeared with different version of story in 5* edition) PHOTO HEADSHOT (COLOR) of George Bush (NOTE: same photo appeared with different version of story in 5* edition)

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document