Iraq war veterans deserve recognition but not a unique campaign medal
Air Force Times
February 16, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 46
Length: 677 words
Byline: Wayde Minami
Body


Last March, President Bush established a campaign medal, the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, to recognize those serving on the front lines of the war on terrorism. In October, the Defense Department designated Operation Iraqi Freedom one such front by authorizing the medal for veterans of the Iraq campaign. That's when the trouble began.
It's the classic clash of world views between those who see the war in Iraq as an integral part of the war on terrorism and those who see it as a separate conflict. Some pundits have gone so far as to claim that including Iraq in the list of campaigns that qualify for the GWOT Expeditionary Medal amounts to political gamesmanship - an attempt to package service in Iraq as service in the war on terrorism, thereby justifying the invasion as a campaign in the war on terrorism.
Insistence from the top that the war in Iraq is a part of the larger struggle against terrorism has done little to mute grumbling that the conflict warrants a unique campaign medal.
While it might seem like a tempest in a teapot, to military traditionalists the debate over the propriety of the GWOT Expeditionary Medal for the Iraq campaign has become a war in its own right. Caught in the middle are those who only want see honorable service duly recognized.
Both sides claim to be upholding military tradition, but when it comes to citing historical precedent, the record is mixed.
Although the United States fought 12 distinct wars and numerous smaller battles against various Indian nations between 1865 and 1898, these campaigns were recognized by but a single award, the Indian Wars Medal. In contrast, the Spanish-American War of 1898, which lasted 11 weeks, resulted in four campaign medals - the Battle of Manila Bay Medal, West Indies Campaign Medal, Spanish Campaign Medal and Spanish War Service Medal - and this doesn't include the three occupation medals troops stationed in captured Spanish colonies could earn.
World War II veterans were eligible for three distinct, geographically based campaign medals rather than some sort of "Global War on Fascism" medal, but this isn't the unequivocal support for a dropping the GWOT Expeditionary Medal one might assume. Each of the campaign medals of World War II covered areas far larger than the whole of U.S. Central Command and none of them specified which World War II enemy - the Germans, Italians or Japanese - one had to fight in order to qualify. So it doesn't provide much support for the twin arguments that the campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq are deserving of separate recognition either because they are geographically separate or because each enemy was a discrete political entity.
The wars in Korea and Vietnam, while both part of the larger global struggle against communism, are considered separate conflicts and were recognized by distinct campaign medals, tending to support the notion that the Iraq and Afghanistan campaigns may warrant separate recognition, even if they're both part of the effort to quash terrorism. But it must be noted that the United States never approved an overarching Cold War Expeditionary Medal - clearly not the case in the war on terrorism.
When one looks at the war in Iraq, there are two possible alternatives: Either the campaign is part of the post-Sept. 11 war on terrorism or it's a continuation of the 1991 Persian Gulf War. When one looks at the rhetoric and the legal justification put forward for invasion, the answer is clear: It was Saddam Hussein's violations of the terms of the 1991 cease-fire that provided the grounds for invasion, not his support of terrorists.
But this doesn't justify a new Iraq campaign medal. What it justifies is a reauthorization of the Southwest Asia Service Medal, which recognized service in the first war against Iraq, for military members who served in theater between March 19 and May 1, 2003, from when the first bombs fell to President Bush's declaration of an end to "major combat operations."
After that, it became a war against terrorists and the GWOT Expeditionary Medal applies.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document