Iraq war plans distract from needed focus on terrorism
USA TODAY
October 22, 2002, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 1001 words
Body

Today's debate: War on terrorism
Our view: USA lacks resources to thwart both Saddam and al-Qaeda's comeback.
Throughout the fall, the Bush administration has kept world attention riveted on its campaign against Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein. Congress has approved a war resolution, the United Nations Security Council is deep in debate on new requirements for weapons inspections in Iraq, and the administration is drawing up plans for a post-Saddam regime. But now, in the midst of preparations for a new conflict, comes a worrisome reminder about setbacks in another war the U.S. is already waging, the higher-priority war against terror.
Last Thursday, CIA Director George Tenet warned Congress that the risk of a new terrorist attack against the USA is as great as before Sept. 11, 2001. Beyond U.S. shores, a spate of terrorism during the past 20 days from Indonesia to Kuwait is a menacing sign that al-Qaeda is regrouping a year after being routed from Afghanistan.
Add to that North Korea's admission that it is developing nuclear weapons, and the growing accumulation of threats raises troubling questions about the Bush administration's wisdom in placing Saddam's ouster at the top of its foreign-policy to-do list. The most obvious concern: Is its preoccupation with Iraq diverting vital attention and resources from a more urgent campaign against al-Qaeda that is far from finished?
To critics who charge that the administration can't fight Iraq and al-Qaeda at the same time, President Bush said last week that the U.S. has "plenty of capacity" to handle both. From a military standpoint, he is right. The Pentagon has enough weapons and troops to wage two wars at once.
But troops, aircraft carriers and missile stocks aren't all that's needed to win dual wars. Keen focus by the White House and Pentagon is key. So is the full capacity of an already-strained intelligence operation, and the diplomatic firepower to prod cooperation out of allies and other countries that oppose war with Iraq.
The administration won its greatest victories -- last year's $ 1.3 trillion tax cut and the ouster of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan -- when it kept a single-minded focus. When the White House tackles multiple issues, its chances for success fall.
Yet the challenge of fighting Saddam and al-Qaeda together requires adept multi-tasking. Among the risks:
 * Alienating Europe. Most European allies are helping to root out al-Qaeda cells in their countries, and some, such as Germany, also have sent peacekeepers to Afghanistan. But the Germans and other Europeans have drawn a hard line against invading Iraq and are less likely to keep cooperating in the war on terror if U.S. forces target Saddam.
 * Angering Muslim nations. Trickier yet is getting cooperation from key Muslim nations opposed to war with Iraq. Saudi Arabia, the main source of money that flows to al-Qaeda through front companies and charities, has resisted U.S. calls to shut off funding. If its top priority becomes persuading the Saudis to support a campaign against Iraq, then the U.S. will lose the diplomatic leverage needed to pressure them to stem their terrorism financing. Similarly, the Pakistani government's help in tracking down al-Qaeda members who may have fled into the country from neighboring Afghanistan is already unpopular with much of the public. War with Iraq raises the threat of more anti-American protests and a stronger backlash against the pro-U.S. regime.
 * Forgetting Afghanistan. Afghanistan remains beset by massive economic woes, political instability and threats from al-Qaeda. Just $ 600 million of $ 4.5 billion pledged by global donors during the next five years has arrived. And there are signs that warlords are teaming up with remnant Taliban forces. Preoccupation with Iraq is hampering efforts to bring stability to Afghanistan.
 * Ignoring Israel's transgressions. Terrorism experts say the war on al-Qaeda requires suppressing the "Al-Jazeera effect," a rise in the number of Muslim extremists who volunteer to fight America when they see the USA and Israel portrayed as twinned evils on the Arab TV network. Bush has pledged to help end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by working with Palestinian moderates and leaning on Israel to withdraw forces from occupied Arab land. But that dispute, which has generated much of the world's terrorism, is suffering inattention because of the Bush administration's focus on Iraq.
 * Constricting the war on terrorism. Al-Qaeda is only one of several terrorist threats, argues Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. Just as dangerous are groups that include Hamas, Hezbollah and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. But war with Iraq would limit opportunities to broaden the anti-terror campaign to such groups because the administration's top priority would be to persuade the Middle Eastern countries harboring them to sit on the sidelines once a conflict with Saddam is underway.
Bush's campaign to rid the world of the Iraqi tyrant has merit and some urgency to keep him from acquiring nuclear weapons. Fighting terrorist groups that pose a more immediate danger has a higher priority, however. Waging both wars at the same time is a challenge the Bush administration has yet to demonstrate it can handle.
Terror timeline
Recent attacks by al-Qaeda or other terrorist groups:
* Thursday: Two bombings in the Philippines kill six and injure 144. Attacks blamed on guerrillas linked to al-Qaeda.
* Oct. 12: More than 180 people die and 300 are hurt in bombings on the Indonesian island of Bali. Top suspects include a regional terrorist group with links to al-Qaeda.
* Oct. 8: Two gunmen attack Marines on a training mission on an island off Kuwait. One Marine dies. Kuwaitis blame al-Qaeda.
* Oct. 6: A French oil tanker near Yemen is crippled by a small-boat attack similar to al-Qaeda's attack on the USS Cole.
* Oct. 2: Nail bomb in Philippines kills three, including an American Green Beret. Suspects are guerrillas with al-Qaeda ties.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Reuters pool photo by Choo Youn-Kong

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document