Iraq, U.S. throw out three envoys each
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 22, 1990, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 300 words
Body


The verbal and diplomatic crossfire in the Persian Gulf crisis escalated Friday as Iraq and the United States expelled three of each other's diplomats, and President Bush declared that Iraqi-backed terrorism would have "serious consequences."
 
    The Iraqi government also expelled dozens of other Western envoys and vowed in its most bellicose TV broadcast yet that it would fight to a "final victory" rather than retreat from Kuwait.
Cox News Service   Bush, at a news conference in Washington, said, "We hold Saddam Hussein responsible if there is any terrorist act against us." The remarks reflected heightened concerns about terrorism expressed in recent State Department announcements.
 
    During a somber meeting with congressional leaders earlier, Bush laid out his "deep and growing concern over what Iraq is doing to Kuwait" as well as to Americans and other foreign nationals held captive by the Iraqi regime.
 
    Refugees have reported that Iraqi forces were looting Kuwait and brutalizing citizens of the country, which Iraq has annexed.
 
    Although positions seemed to be hardening on both sides of the gulf conflict, Bush denied that the situation was edging toward war.
 
    "I don't intend to be sending a signal that I'm shifting more towards the military," Bush said shortly before taking off for a weekend at Camp David, Md.
 
    In Baghdad, Iraq's ruling Revolution Command Council made a surprise interruption of Iraqi television early Friday to warn Iraqi people they were about to face "the mother of all battles" against American and other forces lined up against Iraq.
 
    The stern warning from the ruling council was the first that did not mention any desire for or possibility of peace. It said Iraq never would retreat from Kuwait but would fight on until "the final victory."

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press; Iraqis line up on Baghdad street for rationed bread

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document