IRISH GOVERNMENT SEEKS TOUGHER LAWS ON TERRORISM;
SIXTEEN BOMBING VICTIMS ARE BURIED ON SAME DAY, UNDERSCORE PUBLIC'S PAIN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 20, 1998, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 361 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: OMAGH, NORTHERN IRELAND
Body


The Irish government announced Wednesday that it would sharply tighten its anti-terrorist laws.
At the same time, Catholics and Protestants suffered together the heartbreak of burying 16 victims of Northern Ireland's deadliest terrorist attack.
Columns of grief-stricken residents followed hearses that snaked slowly through the bomb-ravaged center of Omagh. In a sad distinction, more funerals for victims of political violence were held Wednesday than in any other single day throughout Northern Ireland's troubles.
And at every funeral, pews filled to overflowing. Hundreds stood outside in the rain as entire communities - Protestant and Catholic - rallied behind the families.
In Dublin, Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern announced plans to wipe ou t the Irish Republican Army dissidents who planted Saturday's car bomb, which killed 28 people and wounded 220.
The "Real IRA" splinter group, which took responsibility for the bombing, rejects the IRA's truce of July 1997 but announced Wednesday that it had "suspended" its bombing campaign, pending internal debate on future strategy and in light of the Omagh carnage, which it called unintentional. Politicians on both sides heaped scorn on the Real IRA.
The proposals approved by an emergency session of Ahern's Cabinet - most of which are in place in Northern Ireland - included restricting the right to bail for suspected terrorists, allowing judges to infer guilt if a suspect refuses to answer questions, and extending the allowable time to hold suspects without charge from 48 hours to 96 hours. People also could be convicted of belonging to outlawed groups if a senior detective testified that they were members. Ahern said the measures would become law within two weeks.
With controlled anger, Ahern noted his visit Tuesday to the Irish Republic town of Buncrana, where three bomb victims ranging from 8 to 12 were buried Wednesday.
"When you stand . . . in a room with the body of a young boy, a beautiful young boy, who should be out playing football on what was a fine day, who should be looking forward to seeing his boyhood dreams come true . . . it brings home to you what you're dealing with," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Schoolchildren watch the arrival of the first coffin at St. Mary's Church in Cockhill, Ireland, during the funeral services Wednesday for three boys from the town who were killed in Saturday's bombing.

Load-Date: August 20, 1998


End of Document