IRISH QUICKLY HAND TERRORIST TO BRITISH
The New York Times
March 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 734 words
Byline: By JON NORDHEIMER
Dateline: LONDON, March 18
Body


The Irish police today extradited Dublin's most-wanted terrorist, captured Saturday after a shootout with police, to British authorities in Northern Ireland.
 The extradition sets an important precedent in London-Dublin relations. Until now, the Irish courts and government have balked at extraditing fugitives from Northern Ireland who held that their crimes were politically motivated acts against the British Government and its security forces. The condition has antagonized relations between Dublin and London and has led British loyalists in the province to assert that the Irish Republic was a sanctuary for terrorists.
Irish police extradite Dominic McGlinchey, Dublin's most-wanted terrorist, captured on March 17 after shootout with police; extradition sets important precedent in London-Dublin relations; until now Irish courts and Government have balked at estraditing fugitives from Northern Ireland who held that their crimes were politically motivated acts against British Government and security forces; illustration (M)
The extradition of the terrorist, Dominic McGlinchey, the 30-year-old leader of the Irish National Liberation Army, drew immediate fire from some quarters in Dublin.
 
Extradition Is Condemned
The Irish Republican Socialist Party, political voice of Mr. McGlinchey's faction, today condemned the extradition as an act of ''a puppet government subservient to Britain.'' Others said that Irish law on extradition was filled with ''ambiguities and imprecision'' and needed to be clarified.
Mr. McGlinchey formed the I.N.L.A., a Marxist paramilitary group, after splitting with the Provisional Irish Republican Army. He is charged in Northern Ireland with the killing of a postmistress in 1977. From his hideouts in the Irish Republic, he recently boasted to a newspaper editor that he had taken part in 30 killings and at least 200 acts of terrorism, including the 1982 discoth eque bombing that killed 17 civilians and off-duty British soldiers in Ballykelly.
He was captured in a shootout with Irish police who cornered him in a cottage in Ireland's County Clare. His extradition to the north was approved by the Irish Supreme Court in an emergency late-night session Saturday.
Within hours he was taken by armed convoy to the border where he was turned over to officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary in the early morning at a customs station. He was then taken to Belfast where he was reported to be under questioning.
 
Quick Action Was Promised
Quick action on Mr. McGlinchey's extradition upon his capture had been promised by Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald. On his visit to the United States last week, Mr. FitzGerald had made clear that Dublin was doing all it could to cooperate with the British on border security.
Speaking today from Brussels, where he will attend a summit conference of the European Economic Community this week, Mr. FitzGerald said the Irish Supreme Court had established a precedent that some offenses were so grave that they could not be regarded as political and, therefore, extradition was possible under the Irish constitution.
This interpretation was established two years ago when the court first approved the extradition of Mr. McGlinchey. He was free on bail at the time and subsequently went into hiding.
''That principle of looking to the quality of the offense before deciding whether it could be reasonably regarded as political between civilized peoples is now established by the Supreme Court in our law,'' the Prime Minister said in an interview carried on Irish radio. ''One presumes that it will be carried through in subsequent judgments.''
Irish courts are currently considering three other extradition cases, involving charges of murder and terrorism.
Mr. FitzGerald disputed those who said that this St. Patrick's Day was ''a sad day for Irish nationalism.''
''It is a sad kind of nationalism,'' he said, ''to think that people against whom there are charges of murder should not be proceeded against by the normal process of the law, and that murder could be a political offense.''
The first reaction from British officials to Mr. McGlinchey's extradition came from the Attorney General, Sir Michael Havers. ''It is a major step forward when the Supreme Court ordered his extradition two years ago,'' Sir Michael said today. ''I was very pleased to see how quickly the court acted yesterday to see that he was returned to the North.''

Graphic

 
photo of Dominic McGlinchey


End of Document