Irish ire rises over British shootings
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 9, 1988, Wednesday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 7
Length: 413 words
Byline: Julian Baum, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: London
Highlight: Gibraltar deaths leave Dublin asking: Is London trigger-happy?
Body


Almost no one doubts that Britain prevented an act of terrorism when it killed three Irish extremists in Gibraltar on Sunday.
The incident highlighted the cooperation against international terrorism now possible with the improvement of Britain's relations with both Spain and the Republic of Ireland, according to a senior British official.
But it also highlights Britain's predicament that when it takes forceful, unilateral action against the militant Irish Republican Army (IRA), it leaves the government vulnerable to criticism that it is heavy-handed and not contributing to a peaceful settlement of the Northern Ireland problem.
The Gibraltar killings have already stirred a negative reaction in Dublin. The Irish government said yesterday it recognized the need for security forces ''to take all reasonable measures to combat terrorism.'' But it said that the government ''was gravely perturbed that three unarmed Irish people should have been shot dead … when it appears they could have been arrested by the security forces involved.''
''I'm afraid (the incident) will give rise to a further surge of feeling that they're shooting first and asking questions later,'' said a senior Irish official in London. But, the official said, there is also great relief that the British have prevented another major bombing.
The incident took place on Sunday when three unarmed members of the IRA were shot as they were about to return to Spain from Gibraltar.
The two men and one woman were known IRA veterans who had been tracked by British and Spanish police for several weeks. They were quickly identified by an IRA spokesman in Belfast as members of a ''service unit'' who died ''in active service.''
Eyewitnesses reported that the three were killed by young men dressed in casual clothes who suddenly began shooting at close range without challenging the terrorists, according to the Independent newspaper. The British press has speculated they were killed by members of an covert antiterrorist unit of the British military known as the Special Air Service Regiment or SAS.
British foreign secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe told Parliament Monday that the car left behind by the group before the shooting contained no bomb but Spanish police later found a car rented in the name of one of the terrorists which contained bomb-making equipment. In a protest over the killings, the Irish Republican Army staged a series of fire bomb attacks in Belfast on Monday night. No injuries were reported.


End of Document