IRONSHORE CEO DISCUSSES SURPLUS LINES
Business Insurance 
Print Version
January 14, 2013


Copyright 2013 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 20; Vol. 47
Length: 540 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


Kevin H. Kelley is CEO of Ironshore Inc. Before joining Ironshore in 2008, Mr. Kelley served as chairman and CEO of American International Group Inc.'s Lexington Insurance Co. unit. He recently spoke with Senior Editor Mark A. Hofmann about the state of the property/casualty insurance market and the outlook for the surplus lines segment of the market. Edited excerpts follow.
Q What's your assessment of the commercial property/casualty market and where do you see it going in 2013? Do you think the firming in pricing is likely to continue in 2013?
A I think market opportunity is good, if you have the right focus in terms of product, if you know your distribution so that you can broadly see the business in those product areas, and if you have innovation skills that allow you to help clients deal with the change they're seeing. The opportunity will not be the same for every company, and all boats will not rise in this market. I think the firming in pricing is likely to continue.
In September, we saw prices - for the first time since I joined the company - increase across the board. I see that trend continuing through 2013.
Q What's the outlook for the surplus lines market in 2013?
A I think the market will continue to grow in 2013. The reason it will continue to grow - and I'm bullish about the market, the surplus lines market in particular - is because I do think the appetite will shrink in the U.S. admitted market because of their quest for return on equity in a low-interest-rate environment. Also, I think Superstorm Sandy has shown that markets want to avoid volatility in 2013 because of what it does to returns.
Q Where does Ironshore see growth opportunities?
A Our business is pretty well diversified. Twenty-five percent of our business is property, 20% of our business is what we call short-tail lines - and that's pretty much emanating out of our Lloyd's business - and the rest is casualty. I see opportunity in all the lines we're involved in in 2013. In September, we recorded rate increases across our entire portfolio, and I expect to see that continuing through 2013. Our products are very highly focused and specialized. We're not in the commodity product game. We're not in workers compensation; we're not in the commercial automobile business.
Q In the area of public policy, are you concerned about the possibility that the federal terrorism insurance backstop won't be extended?
A We write our terrorism portfolio through our Lloyd's platform. Whether or not the federal backstop isn't renewed really doesn't impact us. We think there's enough uncertainty in the market regarding that, that it actually might create opportunity for us.
We are looking to expand our writings in the U.S. terrorism market and have taken a few steps to do that.
Q Any thoughts on the effect of Superstorm Sandy?
A Obviously, Sandy is a major loss. Depending on how you count it or project it, it's either the second- or third-largest insured loss that the industry has faced. I think, on balance, the industry has faced it quite well. It's provided clients with liquidity without the insurers having to raise capital. I think the industry has performed as one would hope it would. It's been the first responder for policyholders.

Load-Date: January 17, 2013


End of Document