Irrational hatred; Editorial: The irrational hatred must stop
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 26, 2018 Friday
2 Edition


Copyright 2018 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; Pg. 8A
Length: 243 words
Body


STOP IT
As of Thursday morning, nine suspicious packages, addressed to some of the nation's most prominent Democratic leaders, CNN, billionaire George Soros, and Robert De Niro, have been identified. Although none of the pipe bombs contained in the packages have exploded, authorities say all the packages have contained "potentially destructive devices."
 According to the FBI, it is likely that more packages may be out there. No one seems to know who sent these devices or why. We do know the mailings are acts of terror and multiple law enforcement agencies are working as rapidly as they can to find the culprit. Rest assured that American terrorism and bomb investigators are very good at what they do. Whoever is responsible will be caught and we expect them to be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
 Until that happens, however, ugly insults, comments, and accusations as to who is to blame for this tragic situation are irresponsible and nothing more than harmful speculation. President Trump should not be insinuating it's the fault of mainstream media nor should CNN President Jeff Zucker be tweeting that the White House is to blame. The political rhetoric has become hideous and dangerous.
 This has become a national crisis. In the long run, the irrational anger and hatred directed at fellow Americans who think or vote differently may be just as destructive as the damage done by 19 foreign terrorists on 9/11. It must stop - on both sides.

Graphic

 
Authorities remove a suspicious package found at a US postal facility in Wilmington, Del., Thursday, Oct. 25, 2018. THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Authorities remove a suspicious package found at a US postal facility in Wilmington, Del., Thursday, Oct. 25, 2018. THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Load-Date: November 16, 2018


End of Document