IRRADIATION FACILITY CAUSES TERRORISM FEARS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 29, 2003 Saturday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: OBITUARY,
Length: 446 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: QUAKERTOWN, Pa.
Body


Following reports of radioactive cobalt being stolen in Iraq, possibly for a "dirty bomb," opponents of a newly opened irradiation plant are again raising concerns that the plant is susceptible to terrorism and that food irradiation isn't safe.
 People living near the Bucks County irradiator, along with environmental and religious groups, tried to stop CFC Logistics from opening the plant in Milford but were unsuccessful. It started last month, and now opponents say the reported radioactive cobalt theft in Iraq further underscores their concerns.
Jim Beer, who lives in West Rock Hill and is a spokesman for the local Lenape Indian tribe that opposed the project, said he worries the plant doesn't have enough safeguards against terrorism.
 There isn't enough protection and security at the plant, and a terrorist with a shoulder-launched missile could easily blow it up, exposing residents to radioactive material, Beer said. He also worries about irradiated material getting into the ground water.
 One scientist also said the concern over terrorism may not be warranted.
 "I think the concerns are overblown," said Charles Ferguson, a physicist at the Monterey Institute's Center for Nonproliferation Studies, an organization devoted to stopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
 Cobalt 60 isn't that attractive a material for terrorists because it comes in a solid metal that doesn't easily dissolve in water or fly away as a powder, Ferguson said.
 Food irradiators such as the one in Bucks County also aren't attractive to terrorists because the cobalt rods are too "hot" to handle, he said. "Even suicidal terrorists would kill themselves before they could fashion a dirty bomb," Ferguson said.
 The cobalt reported stolen in Iraq was probably much weaker than the rods that are used in Bucks County, according to physicists. Although he said it could be a good idea for CFC Logistics to use barriers or guards to improve security at the plant, Ferguson said it's unlikely that even a powerful bomb exploded at the facility would disperse material beyond the site.
 The cobalt rods, which sit in a pool of water and constantly emit gamma rays, are designed to kill germs in food and on lab equipment. The plant is currently irradiating lab equipment and commercial spices, and the company hopes to start irradiating meat and other foods soon.
 Jim Wood, president of CFC Logistics, said he had no idea early last year that he would be in for such a battle with the plant. He said some groups including Public Citizen, founded by Ralph Nader, have just been trying to frighten people.
 "They scared the hell out of people and did a tremendous job of it," Wood said.

Load-Date: November 29, 2003


End of Document