Is 'terrorism' the new 'communism'?; Letters to the editor; ON YOUR MIND
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 20, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: IDEAS & VOICES; Pg. A8
Length: 475 words
Body


Reader's thoughts on 'terrorism '
It seems to me that "terrorism" has become the new bogeyman that Americans are told we must fight against at all costs. The assumption is that some grand conspiracy among the terrorists exists, the ultimate goals of which are not just local aims, but the complete destruction of the United States. The terrorists are automatically the bad guys, and we are automatically the good ones, so whatever actions we must take are justified, even if that means supporting corrupt and repressive governments. least they aren't terrorists themselves (or at least we haven't officially labeled them as such).
Where have I heard it all before? Now I remember - replace the word "terrorism" with "communism," roll back the clock a bit, and there you have it. Let's hope we don't make the same mistake of getting entangled in another Vietnam-type quagmire as a result of our fears and preconceptions about a poorly understood adversary.
As the saying goes, freedom isn't free, but neither does "terrorism" pose the largest threat to it. For that, we have our own politicians and the apathy of the average American.
RON RODENBURG,
CENTERVILLE
Speak up
Gov. Kasich takes great pride in telling everyone how he balanced the Ohio budget, but fails to provide the details. He shorted the cities and the school districts of the money they had coming from the state, causing them to ask voters for additional revenues to keep the cities and school districts operating.
My understanding is the tea party was claiming tax exemption status as a community do-good organization. The IRS was looking into the possibility the tea party is a political group and not tax exempt. I have no favorable opinion of the IRS and the tax code we are burdened
, , I they were on target with their looking at tea party claims they were not a political party.
The GOP is too slow to provide Americans
with a decent minimum wage, adequate health care, adequate funding for education, and production of jobs. In fact, the GOP has become a relic of a bygone era and no longer required in society.
During the 2008 elections, those in charge
at the time suggested we keep a small number of troops in Iraq for up to 100 years after we left because of our enormous investment in their freedom. So for those of you who voted for change, how did that turn out?
very comforting to know people in the White House subscribe to major newspapers and watch reports of major news outlets. Otherwise, President Barack Obama would have no clue what is going on in his administration, our country or the world.
Only fools would believe the Obama administration would "find" incriminating emails between them and the IRS. Suggestion: President Obama should search the White House foyer. That's where Hillary Clinton "found" her subpoenaed Rose law firm records after being "lost" for two years.

Load-Date: June 20, 2014


End of Document