IS beheads Japanese journalist; Prime minister vows Japan will not give in to terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 1, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 4
Length: 445 words
Byline: ELAINE KURTENBACH and YURI KAGEYAMA

The Associated Press
Dateline: TOKYO  
Body


Japan condemned with outrage and horror today an online video that purported to show an Islamic State group militant beheading Japanese journalist Kenji Goto.
The video posted on militant websites late Saturday Middle East time ended days of negotiations to save the man and heightened fears for the life of a Jordanian fighter pilot also held hostage.
I feel indignation over this immoral and heinous act of terrorism, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe told reporters after convening an emergency Cabinet meeting.When I think of the grief of his family, I am left speechless, he said. The government has been doing its utmost in responding to win his release, and we are filled with deep regret.
He vowed that Japan will not give in to terrorism and will continue to provide humanitarian aid to countries fighting the Islamic State extremists.
The White House released a statement in which President Barack Obama also condemned the heinous murder and praised Goto's reporting, saying he courageously sought to convey the plight of the Syrian people to the outside world. 
Goto's mother, Junko Ishido, told NHK TV her son's death showed he was a kind, gentle man, trying to save another hostage. That hostage, Haruna Yukawa, was shown as purportedly killed in an earlier video.The fates of Goto, 47, a freelance journalist, and the Jordanian pilot, Lt. Muath Kaseasbeh, had been linked by the militants, but Saturday's video made no mention of the airman. Last week, Jordan had offered to free an al-Qaida prisoner for the pilot, but a swap never moved forward.
Saturday's video, called A Message to the Government of Japan, featured a man who looked and sounded like a militant with a British accent who has taken part in other beheading videos by the Islamic State group. Goto, kneeling in an orange prison jumpsuit, said nothing in the roughly one-minute-long video. Abe, the militant says in the video, referring to the Japanese prime minister, because of your reckless decision to take part in an unwinnable war, this knife will not only slaughter Kenji, but will also carry on and cause carnage wherever your people are found. So let the nightmare for Japan begin.
Officials in Japan and the U.S. said they were trying to confirm the authenticity of the video.
We have seen the video purporting to show that Japanese citizen Kenji Goto has been murdered by the terrorist group ISIL, said Bernadette Meehan, a spokeswoman for the White House's National Security Council, using an alternate acronym for the extremist group. The United States strongly condemns ISIL's actions and we call for the immediate release of all the remaining hostages. We stand in solidarity with our ally Japan.

Load-Date: February 1, 2015


End of Document