Is it 2014 or 1984?
The Breeze: James Madison University
September 24, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 514 words
Body


The awaiting CISPA bill "Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act," which was passed in the House of Representatives and is congruent with the president, is yet another erroneous example of our government's abuse treading on the rights and freedoms of U.S. citizens.
We saw the negative effects on Americans' lives through the Patriot Act, which was passed under the Bush Administration during the beginning of this "counter-terrorist" agenda, which has only grown in force. Next was the passing of the National Defense Authorization Act bill that was signed into law by President Obama in 2012. This bill gave $662 billion to, among other things, the growth and militarization of U.S. armed forces, including the growth of the militarization of the police force.
We have very evidently seen this through the recent Ferguson, Missouri, events of last month, resulting from the death of an unarmed 19-year-old boy by a police officer. Yet, isn't our executive administration always lamenting about how citizens should not have guns, because of the cynical view of having to baby and coerce individuals to safeguard them from themselves? Yet, when it comes to advancing tanks, guns and gear for the respective police forces across the country, it's somehow reasonable, and even necessary? Things don't add up.
But back to the NDAA bill, as stated, it authorizes $662 billion in funding for what President Obama described as "an act addressing national security programs, Department of Defense health care costs and counter terrorism within the United States and abroad." There's also military modernization; NDAA has no doubt already added billions of dollars funded to the militarization of localized police forces across the entire country. What's even more controversial about this particular bill, though, is contained in subsection 1021-1022 of Title X, subtitle D: entitled "counter-terrorism." This authorizes the indefinite military detention of persons the government suspects of involvement in terrorism - including U.S. citizens arrested on American soil. What this subsection does is infringe on our basic rights of habeas corpus, which, unlike those who oppose congressional conflict, is written into the Constitution as a right that we should obtain indefinitely as American citizens.
Now this CISPA bill, which is yet again pushed by congressional support of the executive, deals with pre-emptively "defending" against cyber terrorism. What this bill actually does is allow, under law, for private corporations and businesses to give detailed information about our lives such as our search, text, email, online store accounts, word and endless other technological privacies, including complete "cloud" access of each U.S. citizen to the federal government.
Where does the madness end? We are at a period that is beginning to resemble the premise of the book "1984." Unless awareness grows, and people stand up against this growing tyranny, things will get a lot scarier, very quickly.
Louis Gaertner is a junior political science major. Contact Louis at gaertnlp@dukes.jmu.edu

Load-Date: January 16, 2018


End of Document