Is it wrong to be happy bin Laden is dead?
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
May 8, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LIFE & ARTS; Pg. D6
Length: 1050 words
Byline: By Amelia Robinson Staff Writer
Body


Cheryl Levine nearly became ill as she watched TV broadcasts of Americans celebrating the death of Osama bin Laden with song, cheer and boisterous chants of "U.S.A, U.S.A., U.S.A."
It's not that she doubts bin Laden was the fiend who masterminded the Sept. 11 attacks or that he posed a threat to the world.
"He's a human being and there is a spark of God in everyone," the clinical psychologist from Yellow Spring said. "It's the revelry that turned my stomach."
The spontaneous celebrations that broke out following news that Navy SEALs killed the terrorist troubled many in local religious communities.
Joy in an enemy's sorrow
A member of Oakwood's Beth Abraham Synagogue, Levine e-mailed and posted to Facebook the story of God scolding the angels for rejoicing as the Egyptians drowned after their escaping Jewish slaves crossed the Red Sea.
"My creatures are drowning in the sea and you sing songs," says the midrash, an ancient commentary on the Torah.
Levine says scenes of Americans celebrating bin Laden's death reminded her of scenes of people in some Middle East country rejoicing at America's sorrow following Sept. 11.
"I think there is a difference in feeling those things and acting on them. When we act on them, I think we lose our sense of humanity. It is not the face I want to show to the world," she said.
"It felt to me that there was an element of blood lust there beyond the sense of safety and justification."
Complicated reaction
Esam Alkhawaga, a local psychiatrist and chairman of the Islamic Society of Greater Dayton, said, like most of the world's popular religious, unjustified killing is not permitted in Islam.
There are rules of war and bin Laden and other terrorists broke all of them, he said.
"You don't even cut down a tree unnecessarily," he said.
Emotions expressed following the announcement of bin Laden's death are complicated, he said.
"I think what people are celebrating is that there is a victory over terrorism," he said. "People are happy an enemy of the civilized world is ended."
Still many found images of mostly college-age people in Washington, D.C., New York City and several college towns celebrating bin Laden's death counter to religious teachings.
Rev. Mike Castle of Cross Creek Community Church in Centerville said there is a deep sadness in bin Laden's death.
"Our jubilations over the death of Osama bin Laden is not scripture," he said. "Over and over and over the Bible says rejoicing over the death of your enemy is not something that glorifies God. Violence begets violence."
University of Dayton senior Gabrielle Bibeau said she heard cheers and celebrating in the college's student neighborhood for about 15 minutes following the announcement of bin Laden's death. Someone set off fireworks.
The 22-year-old English and religion major from Indianapolis said most of those near her at the time felt the way she does.
"(Revelers) took sort of a childish, not rooted in reality view of this situation," she said, noting that bin Laden's death didn't end the war on terror or the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
"I don't want my comments to be interpreted as unpatriotic. I say these things because I think our country could be a lot better and I expect more from our country and our leaders."
Rabbi Bernard Barsky of Beth Abraham said a congregant wrongly asked Monday for a prayer of thanks to God that bin Laden had died.
"There is a respect of the death. There is a respect of the dead body," he said.
"Once a person dies, we leave the rest to God to decide human fate."
The hatred people feel for bin Laden is understandable, the rabbi said.
"It's been drummed into us for 10 years that he is the enemy and he is the embodiment of terrorism," Barsky said.
"It is always a mistake to personalize the evil in the world. The life of one man is really not so significant to the larger case."
Unknown consequences
Eugene Steuerle, the founder of the anti-terrorism group Our Voices Together (now AIDemocracy), lost his wife, Norma, during the Sept. 11 attacks. The 1968 UD graduate met her at a campus picnic.
Steuerle said the death of anyone, even one who lost his humanity long ago, diminishes him.
"Yes, we should congratulate our military and intelligence services for their accomplishments and sacrifice, and we should be happy about the reduction in future death that will result from this necessary operation," he said via email.
"But we can't be very cheerful about the malfunctioning of Pakistani society and the enormous suffering that will still be endured there as a consequence, the further granting to bin Laden and terrorists the fame that they seek, the inability to bring someone like bin Laden into a true justice system, and the many other deaths that will continue."
Omega Baptist Church Rev. Daryl Ward started a Facebook conversation about the celebration of bin Laden's death. It received nearly 40 responses.
Even justified killings should put sorrow in our hearts, he said.
"He was on the wrong path. This is another person going to hell," Ward said. "I just believe even our worse enemy is someone we should love. Jesus taught us to love. Even bin Laden. I am not saying he shouldn't be killed. I am talking about how we react."
Ward said bin Laden was just one man and not the only enemy of America. Terrorism, he said, is not the only issue the nation and world faces.
"I am glad we got over this. There are other things to come," Ward said. "There are other things we have to deal with."
Human nature
UD religious studies Professor Dennis Doyle said many who celebrated felt America had recaptured a sense of power it lost with bin Laden on the run for nearly a decade.
He said it is human nature to be glad about an enemy's demise, but human nature shouldn't be where it stops.
"Christianity is not out to crush basic human instinct but to redirect it," he said.
Bin Laden wronged the United States in a very deep way, the professor of 27 years said.
"It is natural to want to bring him to justice and it's natural to feel a sense of relief and happiness that this horrible event of 9-11 and other things he's been involved in have in someway been redressed," Doyle said.
"(But) we can't have revenge be our basic feeling."
Staff writer Mary McCarty contributed to this story.
Contact this reporter at (937) 225-2384 or arobinson@DaytonDaily News.com.

Graphic

 
Staff photo illustration

Load-Date: May 11, 2011


End of Document