Is it just me ...
University Wire
July 13, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Titan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 331 words
Byline: By Virginia Terzian, Daily Titan; SOURCE: Cal State-Fullerton
Dateline: FULLERTON, Calif. 
Body


"I live in the most powerful country in the world."
Those were the most conferring words in my life for a long time. They helped fight the monsters under my bed and protected me from the creatures hiding in the dark shadows, but then Sept. 11 happened and I, like many Americans, realized that being a part of the most powerful country isn't enough. Simply having power can't stop individuals from trying to force change.
The dictionary defines a terrorist as a "characteristic of someone who employs terrorism (especially as a political weapon); usually organizes with other terrorists in small cells; often uses religion as a cover for terrorist activities."
So when was it determined that terrorism and the Islamic religion went hand in hand? How can we, as a society, honestly believe that the actions of a handful of extremists, who have warped a book of religion to create a document of hate, represent the thoughts, feelings and belief system of over 1 billion people worldwide? It's ridiculous, yet here we are again, fearing the Arab and the Muslim, when we should really be aware of the terrorist, the terrorist who can look like anyone, sound like anyone and, most of all, believe in any religion or none at all.
We forget Timothy McVeigh; we forget the sniper shootings in Washington, D.C., in 2002; and we forget that terrorism has no color or religion but is an act of hate and desperation by people who feel their opinions are more important then the lives they take in the process.
These terrorists are people who use any means in order to have their political, social and economic agendas forced upon the world.
So the question becomes, what do we, as rational people of the world, do to prevent terrorism? We fight it. We become aware of it. We do not hide our heads in the sand behind a blanket of "it's these kinds of people," and we remember that anyone can be a terrorist and that no one religion or culture holds the corner stone on terror.
(C) 2005 Daily Titan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 13, 2005


End of Document