Is it really a free country anymore?
The Bismarck Tribune
April 17, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. C6
Length: 502 words
Byline: TERRY THOMSEN Bismarck
Body


A few months ago, one of my employees approached me and asked me if it was OK if she joined the Employees for Individual Freedom group to start collecting signatures to put the smoking ban in bars question on the ballot. I told her, "Go for it. It's a free country." Then it hit me.
Free country. Is it really a free country anymore?
I started to wonder what had gone wrong. When did our great country start getting things backward? I wondered to myself, "Why is it that Americans are so willing to fight for freedoms overseas in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya, but then just as willing to let those same freedoms slip away here back in the homeland?"
So I asked my daughter, who served in Iraq, what she though of this, and why this happens. Her answer was simple and spot-on. She told me it was special interest groups. I guess until it affected me personally, I never understood how or why this process worked. Now it is as clear as can be.
Environmentalists are telling us that it is bad to drill for oil in Alaska and offshore. As a result, we pay almost $4 for a gallon of gas and fund terrorism because we have to buy our oil from foreign nations that want to destroy us.
McDonald's is being told in San Francisco that it cannot sell "Happy Meals" anymore because they are "luring children and causing them to be fat."
While in Utah recently, I had two sips left in my beer and tried to order another one, only to be told that I could not order another one until my current one was gone. When I asked why, I was given the line that the government had determined that it promoted binge drinking. Closer to home, they are currently trying to ban happy hour specials in the Fargo bars, sayig it leads to overindulging.
What do all of these examples above have in common? They are all pushed by activist groups. These groups somehow convince governments and voters that they are working to save you from the evils of the world. They regulate, ban, diminish, and close whatever they determine is not good. But I ask this question: Is that the right thing to do? Is it right not to let individuals think for themselves?
I made a personal decision to go into business for myself a number of years ago. It was a right that was given to me by the sacrifices made by every generation that came before me and the many service men and women who have lost their lives protecting the freedom we have become accustomed to.
When our country was attacked by terrorists, the United States answered by waging a war against terrorism to defend our freedoms. Now, as citizens of Bismarck, we need to defend our freedoms right here on our own soil from the activists who want to take them away from us.
Freedom is not free, my friends. It is a continuous struggle. On April 19, the voters of Bismarck will be able to tell this group of activists that we are all adults, capable of making our own decisions, and we don't need the heavy hand of government to tell us what is right and wrong. Freedom.
(Terry Thomsen is owner of the Midway Tavern.)

Load-Date: April 18, 2011


End of Document