IS LIBYA THE RIGHT TARGET?
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 2, 1992, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 351 words
Body


In a less than forceful demonstration of resolve, the United Nations Security Council voted to impose modest sanctions on Libya starting April 15 if Libya fails to turn over two suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988.  Thomas Pickering, the U.S. delegate to the United Nations, wanted the council to define the issue in starkly dramatic terms - whether ''the international community is prepared to back up its own words with actions and demonstrate that it will protect itself against a state that engages in terrorism.'' But the vote and the resolution itself revealed more complexity and ambiguity.  Consensus clearly eluded the Security Council. The vote to cut arms sales and air travel to Libya, which required nine votes to pass, was a close 10 to 0. The five abstentions were all Third World countries, a troubling reminder that U.S. intentions, especially with regard to Libya, may not be trusted.  As long as Iranian and Syrian involvement in the Pan Am disaster cannot be ruled out, the U.S. insistence on punishing Libya may also be viewed as a highly selective maneuver. If the United States and the international community are to stand against terrorism, they cannot just pick and choose politically convenient terrorists. Otherwise, suspicions that the United States is only out to oust Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi cannot be extinguished.  Clearly, the sanctions included in the resolution are those that could be passed. More stringent measures, like an oil embargo, would have been rejected.
So it is questionable just how effective these sanctions will be - whether they're primarily symbolic or meant to put the squeeze on Col. Gadhafi by emboldening internal opposition to his regime. Some Libyan exiles, though, counter that Col. Gadhafi is adept at using international opposition to Libya to quell internal dissent.  Two hundr ed and seventy innocent people died in the Pan Am bombing. That cannot be shrugged off or forgotten. But justice will be incomplete if only the lowest-level Libyan players are being fingered to take the fall for many others in several governments.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document