Is Obama like Carter as Romney says?; GOP candidate, for one, has made comparisons between Iran hostage crisis and Benghazi. But ex-president made bold though unpopular calls.
USA TODAY
November 1, 2012 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 538 words
Byline: Robert Pastor
Body


Whenever Mitt Romney tries to paste a label of weakness on President Obama, he often compares him to Jimmy Carter. Romney has reminded us of the Iran hostage crisis in criticizing Obama's response to the attack on our consulate in Libya. He dismissed the assault on Osama bin Laden by saying that "even Jimmy Carter" would have done it.
Is Obama like Carter?
Both think that war should be the last option, and that a multilateral approach is a better way to share the burden and to strengthen alliances. To rescue our hostages and mete out justice to bin Laden, Carter and Obama took risks. Carter's rescue mission in Iran failed, though he did get all our hostages out safely. Obama succeeded against bin Laden, but we suffered a terrible loss at the U.S. Consulate in Libya with the death of our ambassador and three other Americans.
Of course, being a target of terrorism is not unique to these two presidents. The U.S. Embassy in Beirut was hit by a suicide car bomb, killing 63 officials, in 1983 under President Reagan,  and the worst act of terrorism against the U.S. was 9/11 under President George W. Bush.
In tandem on Middle East
Carter and Obama both understand that peace in the Middle East requires pressure on both sides. Carter paid a political price but succeeded at Camp David. Obama tried but failed. Believing our interests are identical with one side, Romney might not even try.
Threatening war against Iran and Syria as Romney has done might be more satisfying than negotiating with  fanatics, but Carter's goal was to gain the release of U.S. hostages and Obama's is to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon. If we see negotiations as weakness, we will be left with no other option but war. Obama is not Carter, and the times are very different. But Carter's legacy is instructive for both candidates. Strength should be judged by a willingness to make decisions that might be unpopular but would advance the national interest.
Courageous acts
With that criterion, Carter's decision to negotiate a Panama Canal Treaty -- a very unpopular but essential decision -- should qualify. Carter promoted human rights not just against our Cold War enemies, but also against anti-communist military regimes. He was not afraid to negotiate with adversaries, establishing relations with China and securing the release of 3,600 political prisoners and CIA veterans from Cuba.
It's time to re-define what we mean by strength and weakness. Strength should mean the readiness to take necessary but unpopular decisions. Leadership requires understanding the perspective of our adversaries and negotiating with persistence rather than assuming that our interests are incompatible and that only force can achieve our goals. Americans should be reminded of  the many hard, but courageous, decisions Carter made and why we are better off because of them.
Today, as before, our nation faces difficult decisions, and we need to ask which candidate will bend to the popular moment and which will make the far-sighted decisions.
Robert Pastor is a professor at American University and author of The North American Idea. He served as director of Latin American Affairs on the National Security Council during the Carter administration. 

Load-Date: November 1, 2012


End of Document