IS THE SURGE WORKING ?; Certain Elements in Iraq Have Benefited. . .
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 14, 2008 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2008 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-11
Length: 717 words
Byline: JIM WEBB
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


* Editor's note: On the Dec. 2 broadcast of "Meet the Press," moderator Tim Russert asked Sen. Jim Webb (D-Va.), in regard to Iraq, "Is the military surge working?" Below is the senator's response.
There are certain elements in Iraq that I think have benefited from the surge, and I think there are other elements that have had their own momentum. And I think it's important to make those distinctions. There are a lot of pieces in motion over there.
 I would look at four different components that have come together to give us an interval here, a very important interval, where hopefully we can move forward with some of the overarching diplomatic approaches that I and some other people have been advocating for a long time.
 The first element is al-Anbar. And this is a - this is a piece - the awakening, the Sunni awakening, which has been used by the administration as evidence of the fact that the surge is working. This was happening before the surge began, well before the surge began, and it would have been happening even if there wasn't a surge.
 There are three different pieces that were in motion out there in al-Anbar. My son was there fighting as a Marine while this was going on more than a year ago. You had al-Qaida, who had not been operating in Iraq until our invasion, that had developed something of an alliance with the Sunni insurgency, and they overplayed their hand.
 THEY BADLY overplayed their hand before the surge was announced. They were assassinating tribal leaders in the area. And the Sunni leadership made a deal. They decided that, at least for the moment, the al-Qaida situation was worse for them than the American occupation, and they have moved toward us. And in that environment, we have, for the moment, a sense of calm.
 We have a lot of people who were in the insurgency who are now Iraqi police in the streets in Ramadi, where this - where the centerpiece of this took place. Short term, that's good for us. Long term, it could be the same sort of thing that we saw with Osama bin Laden when he was working with us against the Soviets in Afghanistan early on, until that changed. So it's a temporary situation that could benefit us, but not necessarily will.
 The second situation is the rift in the Shia. And we had a period of calm because Sadr, who is the most aligned with Iran, has cut, basically, a six-month deal here where he's looking at the Maliki government. The events of [late November], with respect to this proposal that the Maliki government and the Bush administration had moved forward for long-term reconciliation with the security implications in it, have apparently offended the Sadrists. [We've] got to look at that. Short term, we've got a period of calm, the military's been able take advantage of that. Long term, different situation.
 The third is the elements of international terrorism. International terrorism is a fluid environment. Right now we've done a good job. The American military has done a good job taking advantage of the situation with respect to terrorism in Iraq, but the most dangerous area for international terrorism right now is the fragility of the situation in Pakistan and the events that are going on in the Afghani-Pakistan border. Coalition casualties are actually up in Afghanistan. I think this reflects a movement of international terrorism.
 THE FOURTH piece is what's happening up in the Kurdish areas. We have a situation, as you know, where the Turkish parliament itself has authorized action inside Iraqi territory. One can only imagine what people here would be saying if it was the Iranian parliament that had been authorizing Iranian action inside Iraqi territory.
 But I think this has been a bit of a wake-up call for the Kurds, who have been pretty much independent. They realized that they need to be working with the Iraqi government and with the Americans to forestall some of that sort of situation.
 So those components have come together, they have coupled with the fact that wherever the American military has gone they have done their job tactically, whether it was the initial invasion or now, and they have given us this moment. And I think Secretary [John] Negroponte spoke yesterday of having this interval as well. We need to take advantage of this in a regional way, not simply an Iraq way.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 18, 2008


End of Document