Is this a terrorism alert or a TV drama preview?
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
August 6, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A10
Length: 326 words
Body


"Our nation is a target. Al-Qaida and other deadly enemies are determined to destroy our way of life. An attack could come at any time, from anywhere around the globe. ..."
"The Department of Homeland Security is warning … an attack could take place by the end of the summer. The warning said terrorists may use five-man teams to take over airplanes just after takeoff or before landing and crash them into buildings."
The news can be pretty scary these days.
But only the second paragraph is taken from an Associated Press news story. The first is from a promotion for a new show on the ABC fall schedule, "Threat Matrix."
The ABC Web site promoting the show includes sponsored links -- in other words, ads -- to companies that help you access your FBI file or purchase your very own CIA hats, sweats and T-shirts.
Do we really need a drama with a ticking clock in an arena as deep and complex as today's world"? Do we really need a drama "with stories ripped from today's headlines"? For that matter, do we really need more people running around wearing T-shirts emblazoned with "FBI" or "CIA" on the front? (Hint: Don't expect to get through airport security lines any faster with this attire.)
"Threat Matrix" might turn out to be a captivating show that helps people understand the behind-the-scenes work that goes into protecting this nation's security. Or it might turn out to be oversimplified, over-dramatized drivel that makes the public wonder why the real Homeland Security Department can't capture would-be terrorists in less than an hour, including commercials.
Regardless of the program's quality -- or lack thereof -- the promotions come across as tacky and exploitive, feeding on public fear to promote entertainment.
Saddam Hussein, Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida are in the news enough without being featured in promotions for TV entertainment. This doesn't just blur the line between reality and dramatic license, it crosses the line of good taste.

Load-Date: August 18, 2003


End of Document