Is the word 'terror' starting to lose its punch?
USA TODAY
May 23, 2013 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 460 words
Byline: Rick Hampson, @RickHampson, USA TODAY
Body


The first question after the slaying of a British soldier on a busy street in London on Wednesday was also the first one after the Boston Marathon bombing, the Atlanta Olympics bombing and many other such incidents: Was it terrorism?
In London, the facts seem to suggest the answer is likely yes. There was dramatic violence in a non-military setting with an apparently political purpose. "You people will never be safe," an attacker, holding a bloody knife and meat cleaver, tells a video camera. "Remove your government."
Laura Beth Nielsen, associate professor of sociology and director of legal studies at Northwestern University, has studied the language of terrorism. She says the London case seems to be terrorism under  any definition but that often the word is used so loosely as to be useless.
Nielsen defines terrorism as violence designed to instill fear in a community to achieve a social or political goal: Unless and until we know an attacker's motive, we can't call anything terrorism, or even begin to debate whether it is or not.
That's why she does not regard the Tucson gunman who killed six people and severely wounded U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords a terrorist. Even though he terrorized many with his actions, he also was a paranoid schizophrenic with no capacity for what she calls "rational calculus" about why he did what he did.
The word "terror" has become politically charged. After the Boston bombing last month, President Obama did not use it in his first public statement. The next day, he said that based "on what we now know," the bombing was "an act of terrorism."
Conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer says that there was no new information overnight and that the administration "obsessively adopts language that extirpates any possible connection between Islam and terrorism. ... It even classified the (2009) Fort Hood (Texas) shooting, in which the killer screamed 'Allahu Akbar' as he murdered 13 people, as 'workplace violence.'"
Nielsen says she regards the alleged Fort Hood shooter, Maj. Nidal Hasan, as "profoundly mentally ill" and thus incapable of the intent that must be an element of terrorism.
She says she even withheld judgment on calling accused Boston co-bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev a terrorist until investigators described a note that established that he -- like his brother, Tamerlan -- was motivated by a radical Muslim ideology.
As for Obama, she says, many political officials err on the side of describing attacks as terrorism, possibly because it allows them to mobilize more resources. But without intent, most analysts agree, there's no terrorism.
Anyway, Nielsen says, immediately after a bombing or other attack, what's really important is not what you call it, "it's finding and apprehending who did it." 

Load-Date: May 23, 2013


End of Document