Is the war on terror up for debate? ACU Roundnet returns for a second year
The Optimist: Abilene Christian University
October 31, 2019 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 278 words
Byline: Dillon Daniel
Body


Since the Persian Gulf War, the common depiction of the "enemy of America" has been the Islamic extremists.
Our involvement in the Persian Gulf War, the war in Iraq and the war on terrorism has allowed this idea to blossom into fruition, to allow political candidates to target a growing cultural population in the states.
Many people debate about whether we should have ever been involved in the Middle East. Quite frankly, I believe we do more harm to our image by aiding certain sides in the civil wars that take place overseas.
However, the death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi this last Sunday and Osama Bin Laden in May 2011 reveal that the United States is leading the fight against large terrorist operations.
The United States has learned the art of training well-armed, well-prepared special forces operators. Because of the operations under the reigns of Barack Obama and Donald Trump, the world is now without two of some of the most evil men in recent history.
Even without regarding the media's quick appraisal of 44 and disapproval of 45, it's not hard to miss that we live in a country that makes ease of dispatching threats to the good of others in nations in disrepair.
Again, actions we make prior to and after these operations are still questionable and should be viewed as such. However, operations such as the dispatch of Bin Laden and al-Baghdadi are integral to the prosperity of freedom across the globe.
Organizations like Al-Qaeda and ISIS (or ISIL, depending on who you ask) should not be allowed the opportunity to expand and continue. If people are going to be upset whether or not we get involved toppling their regimes, why is it so hard to pick a side?

Load-Date: October 31, 2019


End of Document