Is U.S. ready for next attack? 9/11 trial raises concern . . .
USA TODAY
March 31, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 529 words
Body


The most chilling testimony at the death penalty trial of Zacarias Moussaoui didn't come from the defendant, despite his surprise claim that he was to fly a fifth plane into the White House on 9/11.
It came from a government witness who attested in heart-rending detail to the stubborn resistance and monumental missteps that kept the FBI from capitalizing on Moussaoui's arrest four weeks before 9/11.
Many of the facts were known, but FBI agent Harry Samit's testimony gave them new detail and poignancy -- and raised questions about the nation's preparedness for the next terror attack.
Moussaoui was arrested Aug. 16, 2001, in Minnesota, after Samit was tipped that an inexperienced student had paid cash to a local flight school to learn to fly jumbo jets. Moussaoui had spoken openly of hating America and of wanting to wage jihad, or holy war.
In the next weeks, Samit wrote memos that referred 70 times to Moussaoui and literally begged for permission to seek a warrant to search his belongings. His bosses rejected every request.
There are many explanations for this, none satisfactory: The FBI's priority before 9/11 was catching and convicting traditional criminals, not stopping attacks. An antiquated system of paper case files kept crime fighters from sharing leads via computer. A legal "wall" built between intelligence and criminal investigators to prevent misuse of information restricted coordination. Incompetence and lethargy among superiors.
Could this scenario happen again?
Some holes have been plugged. The legal wall has been torn down. Surveillance has increased. New laws make it easier to seek a warrant in a case like Moussaoui's. Agencies share more.
But old gaps remain, and new ones have opened -- at the FBI and in other anti-terrorism efforts as well. To identify problems, look no further than recent headlines:
*After five years, the FBI is still hampered by some of the same computer problems. And two of the bosses who obstructed Samit -- Michael Maltbie and David Frasca -- remain employed in other jobs at the FBI; the bureau won't say whether they've been disciplined.
*On Tuesday, the Council on Foreign Relations, a non-partisan think tank, reported that the United States hasn't mounted the high-priority effort needed against the most devastating threat it faces -- nuclear terrorism. Stealing a nuclear device is tough, the author found, but not impossible.
*The same day, government officials testified that undercover investigators slipped through security at the Canadian and Mexican borders with enough radioactive material to make two small "dirty bombs." Border agents were fooled by counterfeit documents, according to the Government Accountability Office.
*On Wednesday, USA TODAY reported a brain drain at the Homeland Security Department, which has lost top leaders for its most crucial missions, including cyber security, technology and disaster response.
The nation has determined foes -- people like Moussaoui who are bent on killing Americans at any cost. Stopping them requires good intelligence, judgment and luck. Unless the government learns from the past and finds smarter ways to fight terrorism, it becomes its own enemy.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Jane Flavell Collins, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: March 31, 2006


End of Document