ISIL-linked video targets Facebook, Twitter CEOs; Threats made over companies’ crackdown on pro-terrorism posts
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 25, 2016 Thursday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2016 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: USA TODAY; Pg. Z1
Length: 273 words
Byline: Jessica Guynn USA TODAY
Body


SAN FRANCISCO A video purportedly made by supporters of the Islamic State makes threats against Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey for fighting terrorism on their Internet platforms.
The 25-minute video was released by a group calling itself “the sons of the Caliphate army.” In it, photographs of both technology leaders are targeted by bullets. The video was spotted by Vocativ deep Web analysts on the social media service Telegram, which is reportedly used by the Islamic State. 
The extremist group says it’s responding to growing efforts by Facebook and Twitter to suspend accounts and remove posts that they say incite violence and promote terrorism. 
The video shows hackers changing profiles and posting Islamic State propaganda. They allege they have hacked more than 10,000 Facebook accounts, more than 150 Facebook groups and more than 5,000 Twitter profiles. 
Sons of the Caliphate is a small offshoot of the Cyber Caliphate that analysts speculate is an “apprentice” division. 
Twitter declined to comment. Facebook could not be reached for comment. 
Internet companies are under growing pressure to more effectively police the presence of the extremist group in the wake of the terrorist attacks in Paris and in San Bernardino County, Calif. 
Twitter said this month that it suspended 125,000 accounts connected to the Islamic State, or ISIL, over the past six months. 
This is not the first time ISILlinked groups have made such threats. 
After Twitter began cracking down on terrorists in 2014, then-CEO Dick Costolo told Vanity Fair that ISIL fighters threatened to “assassinate” him and other Twitter employees.

Graphic

 
EPA">Twitter CEO Jack DorseyUSA TODAY">Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document