ISIS teaching kids the ABCs of terrorism
Daily News (New York)
June 20, 2014 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 293 words
Byline: BY CORKY SIEMASZKO NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE BLOODTHIRSTY Islamic fanatics battling for control of Iraq appear to be preparing kids for a life as cannon fodder.
Kalashnikov-toting children in camouflage uniforms at an ISIS rally were captured in a video grab from a jihadist website.
In them, a black-clad Islamic State of Iraq and Syria official is seen warping the young minds and apparently prepping them to slaughter Shiites.
"Victorious and proud, the (ISIS) recruit armed children to fight against the Western countries and to take back their native land of Iraq," the tagline says in Arabic.
It wasn't clear when or where the photos were taken.
But the Institute for the Study of War, a Washington think tank, said ISIS uses social media to push propaganda, recruit fighters and boost funding.
ISIS is bent on carving out a Sunni Muslim caliphate and has committed mass murders as it has gobbled up Iraqi territory.
Children have been photographed before witnessing ISIS executions of captured Iraqi soldiers and Shiite civilians.
A video posted to YouTube on Monday showed gunmen forcing a bound man in his 20s to kneel amid a gang of masked militants, some of whom recorded the grim scene with video cameras and cellphones.
Two school-age boys were shown standing shoulder to shoulder with the masked thugs - one of them clutching what appeared to be a Kalashnikov-style rifle.
The execution reportedly took place in the major northern city of Mosul, which the Al Qaeda splinter group overran last week.
The new photos - posted on Abacapress.com - suggest that ISIS is now turning kids into killing machines.
Some Shiite groups appear to be doing the same thing as Iraq continues to splinter.
In recent days, photos have surfaced of gun-toting children amid armed Shiite militiamen.
csiemaszko@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
ISIS video shows a terror group leader addressing team of armed, masked children and spreading message of jihad.

Load-Date: June 20, 2014


End of Document