ISIS use of force fight part of larger debate on real threat of terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 12, 2015 Thursday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 675 words
Byline:  By Chuck Raasch St. Louis Post-Dispatch   
Body


WASHINGTON • Behind a looming debate whether President Barack Obama should get new authorization to use military force against the terrorist Islamic State group is a fundamental question: How serious is the threat to everyday Americans?
The Obama administration has increasingly sought to portray the overall threat of terrorism, from ISIS and other groups, as less than that from the Nazis during World War II or the Soviets during the Cold War. More significantly, Obama and his surrogates are portraying current threats of climate change and global warming as more pressing. The president himself told the Internet news organization VOX that he agreed that the news media overstate the threat of terrorism.
It is "entirely legitimate" for Americans to be "deeply concerned with ... a bunch of violent, vicious zealots who behead people or randomly shoot a bunch of folks in a deli in Paris," Obama said. "But we also have to attend to a lot of other issues, and we've got to make sure we're right-sizing our approach so that what we do isn't counterproductive."
His surrogates keep reinforcing that message.
On Tuesday, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest declared: "The point that the president is making is that there are many more people on an annual basis who have to confront the direct impact on their lives of climate change, or the spread of disease, than terrorism."
It came on a day in which the White House confirmed the death of American aid worker Kayla Mueller, held captive by ISIS terrorists. Hers was the latest in a string of horrific killings of Americans and residents of other nations - aid workers and journalists, primarily - who followed altruistic impulses to a stretch of Syria and Iraq that may be the most dangerous place on earth.
Some in Congress are pushing back on the White House characterization.
"Clearly, terrorism and the target we are of terrorists and Americans are of terrorists at home and abroad is something that the president should not equate with the focus we should have on global climate change or pandemic disease," Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., who just rejoined the Senate Intelligence Committee after a two-year hiatus, said Wednesday. "Those are not the same level of the immediate focus that the United States has to have on terrorism."
This disagreement is shaping both how the Senate reacts to Obama's request for approval on use of force against ISIS, along with the overall contours of the fight against terrorism over Obama's final 23 months in office. The resolution authorizes the president to use force against ISIS for three years, while banning "enduring offensive ground combat operations."
Blunt and other members of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who receive weekly top-secret security threat briefings, just spent three days meeting with officials in Turkey and Jordan. The meetings came shortly after ISIS put out videos of a Jordanian pilot, captured after his plane was shot down attacking ISIS targets, being burned alive.
"This continuing to deny what this is all about is not helpful," Blunt said of the administration. Leaders around the world, he said, "are really perplexed by the president's unwillingness to recognize what is really going on with this terrorist threat."
Both points are likely to prompt spirited debate in the Senate, where Arizona Republican John McCain has already called the draft too confining on the president's constitutional war-making powers. Blunt said there would be debates over whether three years is long enough (it is designed to make Obama's successor deal with the issue the first year of his or her presidency), and on the definition of "enduring," among other things.
Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., the assistant minority leader, said some colleagues worried that the language limiting "enduring offensive ground combat" was too vague to adhere Obama's pledge to avoid another ground war in the region.
"There is hardly any military operation that cannot be characterized as a defensive operation, and those are exempt" under Obama's draft, Durbin said.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Jan. 7, 2015 file photo, Senate Minority Whip Richard Durbin of Ill. speaks with reporters on Capitol Hill in Washington. It flew through the Republican-run House in 2012, and a year later 79 of the Democratic-led Senate s 100 members embraced it. With Republicans now controlling both chambers of Congress, the chances for repealing the 2.3 percent tax on medical devices are better than ever. Yet abolishing the tax won t be easy, even though Republicans rank it a top priority and are backed by Democrats from states that rely on the industry for jobs. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin, File)  US Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) delivers remarks during the 2015 Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Statewide Celebration Commission Kick-off Program for Missouri at Harris-Stowe State University in St. Louis Saturday, Jan. 10, 2014. Photo by Sid Hastings  National Security Adviser Susan Rice speaks at the Brookings Institution to outline President Barack Obama's foreign policy priorities, Friday, Feb. 6, 2015, in Washington. President Barack Obama says the US must resist the urge to "overreach" abroad, as he outlined a new national security strategy Friday that is meant to serve as a blueprint for his final two years in office. The 29-page document hews closely to Obama's long-held views of America's role in the world and forecasts no major shifts in the military campaign against Islamic State militants or in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine. Beyond those immediate concerns, he also calls for an increased focus on boosting cybersecurity, combating climate change and promoting gay rights around the world. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite) 

Load-Date: February 12, 2015


End of Document