ISIS Fears Prompt Britain to Raise Terrorism Threat Level
The New York Times
August 30, 2014 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 542 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL; Peter Baker contributed reporting from Newport, R.I.
Body


LONDON -- Alarmed by the suspected presence of hundreds of British jihadists among Sunni militants in Syria and Iraq, Britain increased its assessment of the terrorism threat on its own soil on Friday and said new laws would be introduced to counter what Prime Minister David Cameron called ''a greater threat to our security than we have seen before.''
The tone of the warnings recalled the days after July 7, 2005, when four suicide bombers killed 52 travelers in the London transit system. The show of concern, moreover, seemed intended to bolster the government's case for contentious new legislation to control terrorism suspects.
The terrorism threat level -- an official designation assessing the likelihood of an attack -- had long been considered to be ''substantial,'' meaning that an attack was ''highly likely.'' The new level -- ''severe'' -- indicates that ''a terrorist attack is highly likely, although there is no intelligence to suggest that one is imminent,'' Theresa May, the home secretary, said in a statement.
The new level is one below ''critical,'' which signifies that an attack is expected imminently.
The assessment is made by a panel of security experts and officials, independent of government officials. Several European nations have voiced fears that their citizens who have joined the Sunni militant Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, will return home trained and equipped for terrorist acts. But the British response seemed to be among the most drastic.
''The increase in the threat level is related to developments in Syria and Iraq where terrorist groups are planning attacks against the West,'' Ms. May said, without offering direct evidence of those plans.
''Some of these plots are likely to involve foreign fighters who have traveled there from the U.K. and Europe to take part in those conflicts,'' she said. ''The British public should be in no doubt that we will take the strongest possible action to protect our national security.''
In what seemed a related development, Mr. Cameron said at a news conference that new laws would facilitate the seizure of the passports of suspected British jihadists. He said he would provide more detail in a statement to Parliament on Monday covering what he called legislation to fill ''gaps in our armory.''
He drew a distinction between previous assessments that the main threat to British security came from Al Qaeda, which has broken with ISIS because of its extreme tactics.
The group spilled across the border from Syria in June to strike at north and central Iraq, leaving a trail of executions and beheadings and threatening minority groups. ''What we are facing in Iraq now with ISIL is a greater threat to our security than we have seen before,'' Mr. Cameron told reporters, using another name for ISIS.
The alarm in Britain contrasted with reassurances in the United States, where Mr. Obama told supporters at a fund-raiser in Newport, R.I., that the tumult in the Middle East did not ''immediately threaten the homeland'' and added that the country had hardened its defenses since Sept. 11, 2001, so that it is ''pretty safe.''
Mr. Cameron said British security officials believed that the number of Britons joining jihadist groups in Syria and, potentially, Iraq exceeded 500.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/30/world/europe/britain-raises-terrorism-threat-level-to-severe.html

Load-Date: August 30, 2014


End of Document