ISIS Recruit Gets a 2nd Chance After Years of Cooperation With U.S.
The New York Times
June 29, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 1265 words
Byline: By ALAN FEUER
Body


In the fall of 2014, federal law enforcement and intelligence officials had a problem. A new terrorist group, the Islamic State, had stunned the world by taking over large swaths of Syria and Iraq and was threatening Americans both at home and overseas. And yet, by their own account, terrorism investigators knew little about the group.
But that October, court papers say, the officials caught a break: A young American citizen, a former student at Columbia University, quietly reached out to them from Syria, only hours after fleeing an Islamic State encampment. Disillusioned by his hosts' brutality, the man proposed a deal: If they helped him get home safely, he would tell them everything that he had heard and seen. 
  Thus began a four-year relationship in which the man, who used the alias ''John Doe'' in court, worked with federal prosecutors, sharing documents he smuggled out of Syria and recounting what he learned about the terror network's culture and logistics. The prosecutors asked to keep his identity private, citing risks to his safety.
  On Thursday, the cooperator's bond with the government came to an end, at least officially, when grateful prosecutors persuaded a judge in Brooklyn to sentence him to supervised release instead of prison time -- even though he had initially faced 25 years behind bars.
  ''I don't think incarceration is required, but long-term supervised release is, because of the danger you pose to the United States,'' the judge, Jack B. Weinstein, told the man. Judge Weinstein added that the public would be safer if he were still on hand to assist the government if it needed him. ''In my opinion,'' the judge said, ''you will be doing much more for society than if a prison sentence were imposed.''
  Terrorism suspects who cooperate with the authorities are less rare than they used to be, experts on Islamic extremism said. But most of these cooperators -- men like Najibullah Zazi or Bryant Neal Vinas -- have been veterans of older terror organizations, like Al Qaeda. Fewer have turned against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, if only because the group emerged more recently.
  The efforts of the cooperator, who is now 29, went beyond merely telling the government what he knew about ISIS's field techniques and its propaganda tactics. He was never called upon to testify in court, but he helped the authorities in different ways, going onto television once to condemn the Islamic State and later counseling a 15-year-old boy who was considering fighting with the group. While working with the government, he also met with researchers, journalists and academics, prosecutors said, to help them understand ''the reality of life in ISIS.''
  ''We've watched him closely,'' said Seth DuCharme, a prosecutor who worked with him when he ran the counterterrorism unit of the United States attorney's office in Brooklyn. ''And we have developed -- with a great sense of caution -- trust in him over time.''
  Mr. DuCharme made those remarks on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn at an unusual hearing before Judge Weinstein that, in the iconoclastic jurist's typical fashion, was part judicial process, part legal seminar. Judge Weinstein had scholars of Islamic extremism testify about factors that might push the cooperator to return to the jihadist life -- and those that might keep him from doing so.
  What emerged at the three-hour hearing was a story in keeping with others told by former ISIS members. It began with a dislocating trauma. In mid-2014, when the young man was studying at Columbia, one of his sisters -- seven months pregnant at the time -- came down with an illness that ultimately killed her and her unborn child. Another sister, who testified anonymously on Wednesday, said that he became withdrawn and suddenly renewed his interest in his family's Muslim faith.
  According to court papers, the young man came to the United States from Bangladesh when he was 1 and, as he grew, played sports, attended religious classes and confronted the ''common distractions a teenager faces.'' His life, the papers said, ''was not dissimilar to that of many young people in New York.''
  But his sister's death darkened him, the papers said, and set him on ''a path toward a confused understanding of Islamic extremism.'' Prosecutors said he was especially enthralled with the ISIS rhetoric he found online.
  Unknown to him at the time, agents from New York City's Joint Terrorism Task Force were monitoring his internet activity and in the summer of 2014, court papers said, they went to see him at his family's home in Brooklyn. The agents warned him ''not to pursue a relationship with ISIS.'' But the young man was alarmed by the visit and fearful of arrest, the papers said, and soon left the country. He flew to Turkey then to Syria, he said, where ISIS members picked him up and drove him to a small town north of Raqqa. This was at a moment when the group was declaring itself a caliphate and actively recruiting volunteers.
  He said he had misgivings almost from the moment he reached the ISIS camp. Surrounded by ''endless desert,'' he recalled, ''I just felt, 'Where am I? What am I doing here?'''
  He also said he realized that the Islamic State was not the utopia he thought it was. ISIS clerics falsely justified suicide bombs with quotes from the Quran, he said. He recalled how scared he was when he saw his first vest bomb. ''I quickly realized the hopelessness of my situation,'' he told Judge Weinstein. ''I was surrounded by emptiness, people without goodness and rampant evildoing.''
  And yet he stayed with ISIS, court papers say, avoiding serving as a fighter by exaggerating his prowess with technology. ISIS officials, prosecutors said, gave him administrative duties ''in support of the organization's logistical activity.'' Eventually, they added, the young man was able ''to earn the trust of his minders'' and get access to ''a communication device.''
  It was then -- four months after arriving at the camp -- that he fled, taking with him a trove of stolen documents, according to his lawyer, Gary S. Villanueva. Hours after escaping, he sent a message to the F.B.I., prosecutors said, mentioning his previous encounter with the terrorism task force. As the government vetted his story, he made his way alone from Syria into Turkey, where American officials debriefed him. From there, court papers said, he was flown to New York, where he pleaded guilty to terrorism charges and spent two years in custody while conducting frequent interviews with prosecutors.
  ''I told them that I would be relentless in helping and would do everything I could do to help,'' he said. ''And since this promise, today I have a lifelong friendship with them.''
  The prosecutors did not disclose the details of the young man's cooperation, but they said in a letter to Judge Weinstein that it was ''extraordinarily significant and highly useful.'' At a moment when the government had ''limited visibility'' into ISIS, he helped the authorities understand the group's ''strategies, tactics, techniques, procedures, personnel and logistical operations,'' the letter said.
  At the end of Wednesday's hearing, Judge Weinstein questioned him about his current job (electrician), his romantic status (single) and his education (recently graduated from Baruch College).
  The judge then asked about his future.
  ''I have seen a lot and I have been through a lot of pain,'' he said. ''And at my age, right now, I'm considering what I call retirement. Like, I'm just going to relax, have kids and just live my life.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/28/nyregion/isis-recruit-fbi.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prosecutors submitted a letter in federal district court asking for leniency in sentencing a man who had joined ISIS, become disenchanted, then cooperated with investigators over four years.       

Load-Date: June 29, 2018


End of Document