Islamic Terrorists. In Their Own Words
The Foundation For Research On Equal Opportunity
December 11, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2019 
All Rights Reserved
Length: 2041 words
Byline: Johnny Spooner
Body


         November 16, 2015 johnnyspooner
“The outrage that Muslims feel over U.S. and British foreign policy is primarily the product of theological concerns”
– Sam Harris 
The following list of quotations have been selectively edited to hammer home the dangerous buffoonery of Harris and every other inadvertant tool of Empire.
List not exhaustative. Pattern is consistent in virtually every case:  Prime motive is a reaction to terrible injustices and oppression against perceived kin. Islam is the banner. Radical Islam is the accelerant.
Osama Bin Laden
“Stop spilling our blood so we can stop spilling your blood.”
Al Qaeda’s 2004 Truce Offer
 WTC Bombing, New York
We declare our responsibility for the explosion on the mentioned building. This action was done in response for the American political, economical, and military support to Israel the state of terrorism and to the rest of the dictator countries in the region.
WTC Bomber and KSM’s Nephew letter to NY Times.
Niger Suicide Bombings
We warn all the countries that are intending to participate in the crusader campaign on our land, even if in the name of peacekeeping, that we will make you taste the heat of death and wounds in your homelands and among your soldiers
Mokhtar Belmokhtar
Bali
The reason was to retaliate the killing of Muslims in Palestine
Umar Patel, Bali Bombing “Mastermind”
Boston Marathon
Now I don’t like killing innocent people it is forbidden in Islam.
(…)
The U.S. Government is killing our innocent civilians…I can’t stand to see such evil go unpunished
Dzokhar Tsarnaev’s note written on boat
Virginia
“What I did was a retaliation against the U.S. government” for American policy in the Middle East and its support of Israel, he said. “It had nothing to do with terrorism.”
Aimal Khan Kasi, Islamic Terrorist
Toulouse
He said he had been motivated by the fate of the Palestinians, the French military presence in Afghanistan and France’s ban on the full veil.
Francois Molins, Prosecutor on Mohamed Merah
On Blowback
“The Americans and the Pakistani government do our work for us. With the drone attacks targeting the innocents who live in Waziristan and the media broadcasting this news all the time, the sympathies of most of the nation are always with us. Then it’s simply a case of converting these sentiments into action.”
Terrorist Organiser, Lahore, Pakistan.
Times Square
“Well, the drone hits in Afghanistan and Iraq,” he finally said, “they don’t see children, they don’t see anybody. They kill women, children, they kill everybody. It’s a war, and in war, they kill people. They’re killing all Muslims.”
“Well, I am part of that. I am part of the answer to the US terrorising the Muslim nations. I’m avenging the attacks because the Americans only care about their people, but they don’t care about the people elsewhere in the world when they die. Similarly, in Gaza Strip, somebody has to go and live with the family whose house is bulldozed by the Israeli bulldozer. There’s a lot of aggression…”
Faisal Shahzad, Times Square Bomber.
Detroit
“I carried the device to avenge the killing of my Muslim brothers and sisters… Unfortunately, my actions make me guilty of a crime.”
Umar Abdulmutallab, “Underwear Bomber”.
Shoe Bombing
Your government has sponsored the rape and torture of Muslims in the prisons of Egypt and Turkey and Syria and Jordan with their money and with their weapons. I don’t know, see what I done as being equal to rape and to torture, or to the deaths of the two million children in Iraq.
So, for this reason, I think I ought not apologize for my actions. I am at war with your country. I’m at war with them not for personal reasons but because they have murdered more than, so many children and they have oppressed my religion and they have oppressed people for no reason except that they say we believe in Allah.
This is the only reason that America sponsors Egypt. It’s the only reason they sponsor Turkey. It’s the only reason they back Israel.
Richard Reid, The “Shoe Bomber”
Woolwich, London
“The only reason we have killed this man today is because Muslims are dying daily by British soldiers.
“And this British soldier is one. It is an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
“By Allah, we swear by the almighty Allah we will never stop fighting you until you leave us alone.
Michael Adebolajo, Woolwich attacker
Madrid
It is a response to your collaboration with the criminals Bush and his allies.
This is a response to the crimes that you have caused in the world, and specifically in Iraq and Afghanistan, and there will be more, if God wills it.
You love life and we love death, which gives an example of what the Prophet Muhammad said.
If you don’t stop your injustices, more and more blood will flow and these attacks will seem very small compared to what can occur in what you call terrorism.
(…)
If you don’t stop your injustices, more and more blood will flow and these attacks will seem very small compared to what can occur in what you call terrorism.
Abu Dujan al-Afghani, military spokesman for al-Qaeda in Europe, 
Peshawar School Attack
We targeted the school because the army targets our families. We want them to feel our pain.
Muhammad Umar Khorasani, Tehreek-e-Taliban
Westgate Mall, Kenya
What Kenyans are witnessing at #Westgate is retributive justice for crimes committed by their military
Al Shabab’s Official Twitter Feed
Mumbai
We were told that our big brother India is so rich and we are dying of poverty and hunger. My father sells dahi wada on a stall in Lahore and we did not even get enough food to eat from his earnings. I was promised that once they knew that I was successful in my operation, they would give Rs 1,50,000 [almost USD 4,000] to my family).
If you give me regular meals and money I will do the same that I did for them
“When we asked whether he knew any verses from the Quran that described jihad, Qasab said he did not,” police said. “In fact he did not know much about Islam or its tenets,” according to a police source.
Ajmal Kasab, captured Mumbai Terrorist
Charlie Hebdo Attacks
We can kill. But we don’t kill women. It is you that kill the children of Muslims in Iraq, in Afganistan, in Syria.
Cherif Kouachi
I think of those who had to put up with Bashar al-Assad in Syria. He tortured people. Nobody did anything for years. Then bombers, coaltion of 50,000 counries and all that. Why are they doing that? There was norhtern Mali and Syria. They have to stop attacking Islamic State and stop forcing us to unveil women and stop putting my brothers in prison for nothing.
Amedy Coulibaly
7/7, London
Your democratically elected governments continuously perpetuate atrocities against my people and your support of them makes you directly responsible, just as I am directly responsible for protecting and avenging my Muslim brothers and sisters.
Until we feel security, you will be our target. Until you stop the bombing, gassing, imprisonment and torture of my people, we will not stop this fight.
Mohammed Siddique Khan, 7/7 Terrorist
9/11
I say to you, Allah knows that it had never occurred to us to strike the towers. But after it became unbearable and we witnessed the oppression and tyranny of the American/Israeli coalition against our people in Palestine and Lebanon, it came to my mind.
The events that affected my soul in a direct way started in 1892 when America permitted the Israelis to invade Lebanon and the American Sixth Fleet helped them in that.  This bombardment began and many were killed and injured and others were terrorised and displaced.
I couldn’t forget those moving scenes, blood and severed limbs, women and their children sprawled everywhere. Houses destroyed along with their occupants and high rises demolished over their residents, rockets raining down on our home without mercy.
The situation was like a crocodile meeting a helpless child, powerless except for his screams. Does the crocodile understand a conversation that doesn’t include a weapon? And the whole world saw and heard but it didn’t respond.
In those difficult moments many hard-to-describe ideas bubbled in my soul, but in the end they produced an intense feeling of rejection of tyranny, and gave birth to a strong resolve to punish the oppressors.
And as I looked at those demolished towers in Lebanon, it entered my mind that we should punish the oppressor in kind and that we should destroy towers in America in order that they taste some of what we tasted and so that they be deterred from killing our women and children.And that day, it was confirmed to me that oppression and the intentional killing of innocent women and children is a deliberate American policy. Destruction is freedom and democracy, while resistance is terrorism and intolerance.
This means the oppressing and embargoing to death of millions as Bush Sr did in Iraq in the greatest mass slaughter of children mankind has ever known, and it means the throwing of millions of pounds of bombs and explosives at millions of children – also in Iraq – as Bush Jr did, in order to remove an old agent and replace him with a new puppet to assist in the pilfering of Iraq’s oil and other outrages.
So with these images and their like as their background, the events of September 11th came as a reply to those great wrongs, should a man be blamed for defending his sanctuary?
Osama Bin Laden on 9/11 Motivation
Because war, for sure, there will be victims. When I said I’m not happy that 3,000 been killed in America. I feel sorry even. I don’t like to kill children and the kids. Never Islam are, give me green light to kill peoples. Killing, as in the Christianity, Jews, and Islam, are prohibited. But there are exception of rule when you are killing people in Iraq. You said we have to do it. We don’t like Saddam. But this is the way to deal with Saddam. Same thing you are saying. Same language you use, I use.
Khalid Sheik Muhammed. 9/11 “Mastermind.
What made him most passionate?
Well at that time I remember there were two things made him passionate. One was actually the ongoing war in Yugoslavia, the Bosnian War especially which he considered a war actually of one population against the Muslim part of the population and he didn’t understand why there was no help by the so called International community to prevent this murdering from going on, and this he was always linking to the war going on or the process going on in which he was very critical of because he considered it selling out of the interests of the Palestinian people as what had happened in Oslo.
And he also links it to what had happened during the second Gulf War when the International lines attacked Saddam Hussein and which he was not in favour of Saddam Hussein. That was very clear because he considered Saddam Hussein also a politician but he was not in favour of his people in any way but he would not understand, he was very very angry about the fact that the international community would gather in order to attack Saddam Hussein but they would not gather in order to prevent the Israelis attacking Palestinians. 
Do you think about that? What must have happened?
Yeah, naturally I think about it but I can’t know. I mean I can’t figure it out although from how I knew him, you know the only thing that I believe would have made him do such a thing would have been political reasons and not religious, because from a religious stand he was a very humanist person but he got really upset and extreme in his judgments when it came to politics and so I think it must have been something political rather, and maybe I think Robert Fisk actually he wrote an article these days in which he linked up and he made a very good remark which was that after Mohamed apparently wrote this testament of his, his last will was apparently written in April ’96, exactly the month of the massacre when the Israelis bombed the UN Refugee camp in Southern Lebanon and several hundred civilians had died and there was no big published negative response to it. I mean Israel was like … don’t do this again but nothing more happened. You can understand somebody being upset about this you know there might be a link really because…
Muhammed Atta’s Cairo colleague, Ralph Bodenstein
Reprinted from Drifters and Parking Spaces.com.
Islamic Terrorists. In Their Own Words was first posted on December 10, 2019 at 9:38 pm.

Load-Date: January 27, 2020


End of Document