Islam has no room for terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 7, 2011 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 9
Length: 626 words
Byline: HASSAN SHIBLY, Special to The Tampa Tribune
Body


BY HASSAN SHIBLY
Special to The Tampa Tribune
There are two groups promoting the concept that Islam is tolerant of terrorism. The first is those wishing to hijack Islam for their political purposes and have distorted and misquoted religious text to justify their abhorrent actions. The second are those who wish to spread fear and hatred of Muslims to suit their political or economic agendas, and similarly distort and misquote religious text to claim that Islam condones such abhorrent actions.
However, mainstream traditional Muslims are and always have been very vocal in condemning both such extremist groups.
There is no room for terrorism in Islam. One does not need a religious text to know such acts are reprehensible; nonetheless, the Islamic tradition is clear that there is no room for terrorism. The prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) expressly forbade aggression and the killing of women and children and unarmed men in combat. Maulana Abdul Shakoor writes in his book, "A Brief Account of the Prophet's Life":
"Physical Jihad is permissible only for the persecuted and as a defense against tyranny. In other words, Jihad is another name for defense of independence. To look upon the battles of the time of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) as not conditioned by self-defense and self-preservation is not only un-Islamic but also ignorance."
Even when defending against persecution, the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) gave the commands, "Do not be embittered. Do not be treacherous. Do not mutilate. Do not kill children or those in covenants."
And it is also testified to by the Prophet's companion and third caliphate of Islam, who said in authentic traditions, "The Holy Prophet has forbidden the killing of women and children."
Likewise, the Prophet Muhammad's chief commander and first caliphate, Abu Bakr, ordered:
"Do not betray or be treacherous or vindictive. Do not mutilate. Do not kill the children, the aged or the woman. Do not cut or burn trees. Don't slay a sheep, a cow, or a camel, except for food. ."
Islamic law even forbade the destruction of nature, not to mention absolutely the taking of any innocent human life. The Quran holds all human life so sacred, irrespective of race or religion, that it says:
"If anyone killed a person -- unless it was for murder or for spreading mischief in the land -- it would be as if he killed the whole people," Quran 5:32
It is thus undoubtedly clear that there is absolutely no room for terrorism in Islam. In response to those who wish to justify terrorism based on their political grievances, the Quran very clearly says:
"...let not the hatred of some people [due to them having once oppressed you] lead you to transgression (and hostility on your part). Help ye one another in righteousness and piety, but help ye not one another in sin and aggression." 5:2
Even where the Quran permits self-defense, it clearly forbids aggression and injustice:
"Fight in the cause of God those who fight you, but do not transgress limits; for God loveth not transgressors." 2:190.
It breaks my heart to hear that people commit such disgusting acts in the name of religion. Those who murder unarmed men, women and children anger God and His Messenger.
Religion and humanity have no room for such evil destruction. While political grievances may explain what nourishes terrorism, terrorism is never justifiable and never an answer. Both those who twist Islamic text to justify such abhorrent actions and those who twist Islamic text to claim Islam supports such abhorrent actions are hijacking my faith.
The bloodshed must be stopped.
Hassan Shibly is Tampa Executive Director of CAIR Florida.
Copyright © 2011, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: July 8, 2011


End of Document