Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week
University Wire
October 25, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 The California Aggie via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 630 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The California Aggie; SOURCE: UC-Davis
Dateline: DAVIS, Calif. 
Body


As many readers may already be aware, this week is being recognized in some circles as "Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week," an event organized by the Terrorism Awareness Project, part of the David Horowitz Freedom Center.
The goal of "Islamo-Fascism" may have been constructive at the outset, but along the way any positive message has been lost in a sea of hostility and hypocrisy.
The primary supporters of this cause have called their true motives into question by the manner in which they have gone about supporting it. By choosing a name such as "Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week" they are deliberately playing upon latent fears, bandying about the word "fascism" in an effort to draw parallels between the religion of Islam and dictatorships like Nazi Germany.
Several defenders of "Islamo-Fascism" week have criticized their detractors. One defender, Anthony Quinio, the project chairman for Islamo-Fascism week at the University of California at Berkeley, said that opponents of the event have "succeeded only in condemning a simplified caricature" of it. This can be seen in the best of terms as poorly thought out and in more accurate terms as hypocritical.
The Terrorism Awareness Project's official website makes it very clear what the goals of "Islamo-Fascism" week are: "The purpose of this protest is as simple as it is crucial: to confront the two Big Lies of the political left: that George Bush created the war on terror and that Global Warming is a greater danger to Americans than the terrorist threat."
Nowhere in that statement is the word "Jihad" or "religious extremism" mentioned, leading one to question the decision of naming it "Islamo-Fascism" week. Furthermore, it would seem from this statement that it is entirely acceptable for the Terrorism Awareness Project to create its own caricatures of its opponents, "the political left."
In light of the insensitive way the event has been brought about and sponsored at colleges and universities across the nation, the way in which UC Davis-based student organizations have reacted should be applauded.
The Davis College Republicans have stated that they did not approve of the name of the event, arguing that the real issue at hand was terrorism, not Islam. As such, they decided not to host an event they thought would cause undue controversy. This decision shows maturity on the part of DCR and avoids unnecessary tensions.
The Muslim Student Association, acting in unison with over a dozen other student organizations, decided not to respond directly or angrily to such a divisive event. Instead, they organized and sponsored the first ever Academic Freedom Week on campus, in an effort to divert attention from "Islamo-Fascism" week in a healthy, constructive way that promotes discussion about these important issues.
Global warming and terrorism are completely separate issues, and one should try to compete with the other for the public's attention.
The religion of Islam is much more than just the concept of Jihad and assuming they are the same is unfair. Neither the hundreds of years of religious crusades, the Spanish Inquisition or the bombing of abortion clinics has prompted the formation of "Christian-Fascism" week. Religion and religious extremists are two very different things.
The Terrorism Awareness Project website has put forth a petition that those in favor of the event can sign. Signatories of the petition state their support of "the freedom of the individual conscience; to change religions or have no religions at all" and "The right of all people to live free from violence, intimidation, and coercion."
These are excellent ideals. It is a shame that the supporters of "Islamo-Fascism" week have used tactics such as intimidation to spread their message.
(C) 2007 The California Aggie via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 25, 2007


End of Document