Islamic State battles heat up; U.S.: After Ramadi win, Iraqis must intensify pressure on militants.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 30, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 884 words
Byline: Helene Cooper
Body


WASHINGTON - The Obama administration, eager to showcase a success in the fight against the Islamic State, has sent a flurry of statements and news releases that hailed the Iraqi military's regaining control of Ramadi from the militant Sunni extremist group.
But the accompanying military campaign must now move quickly to capitalize on the success, Defense Department officials said, so the U.S.-led coalition that is fighting the Islamic State does not lose crucial momentum.
That means the Iraqi military must finish clearing pockets of Islamic State resistance out of Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province, turn it over to a holding force of Sunni tribal fighters and move swiftly to the next stages in the war. Those include pushing Islamic State militants out of the Euphrates River valley and the Tigris River valley north of Baiji; retaking the next Anbar province city under occupation, Fallujah; and finally turning to Mosul, whose liberation is likely to be the last piece of the puzzle to defeating the Sunni militancy, at least in Iraq, defense officials said.
And that, administration officials acknowledge, will take months, if not years.
"Don't forget, the enemy gets a vote, too," Col. Steven Warren, the U.S. military's spokesman in Baghdad, said on Tuesday. "This is all about condition setting. We have to be able to have enough territory under our control to create supply lines, and mutually supporting staging areas, to get into Mosul."
The key to the plan is cutting off the supply lines in Syria and elsewhere in Iraq to the Islamic State militants who are in Mosul and Fallujah. On Monday, buoyed by the success in Ramadi, the U.S.-led coalition that is fighting the Islamic State conducted a number of airstrikes around Mosul and Fallujah, destroying tunnel entrances, battle positions and bunkers.
Iraqi security forces, Pentagon officials said, have begun to approach Fallujah from three different directions, and are now in what officials called the "isolation" part of the campaign to retake the city. Iraqi forces are trying to encircle the city
- "like a boa constrictor"
- one official said, and will then move to squeeze out Islamic State fighters, much in the same way they did in Ramadi.
But Fallujah is not Ramadi - it is more densely populated, making the sort of intensive U.S. air campaign backing Iraqi troops in Fallujah more problematic. The same goes for Mosul. And Islamic State militants are far more entrenched in both cities, where they have been for much longer, than they were in Ramadi, and that will make it more difficult to root them out, defense officials acknowledged.
Nonetheless, administration officials in Washington hailed the success of the Ramadi operation. Secretary of State John Kerry said in an email that "enemy forces have suffered a major defeat;" Defense Secretary Ashton
B. Carter called Ramadi's liberation "a significant step forward in the campaign to defeat this barbaric group."
The Pentagon on Tuesday provided a list of 10 Islamic State midlevel officials who it said had been killed in airstrikes in December. Two of those killed, defense officials said, had links to the network behind the of the Nov. 13 terror attacks in Paris: Abdul Qader Hakim, who was killed in an airstrike in Mosul on Dec. 26; and Charaffe al-Mouadan, an Islamic State member with links to Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the suspected ringleader. Mouadan also was planning attacks against the West, Pentagon officials said.
Warren, appearing before reporters in a video call from Baghdad, characterized the killings as "striking at the head of the snake." But he was quick to caution that there is still a long road ahead.
Indeed, it took the Iraqi security forces six months to retake Ramadi, after government troops fled the city in May under an Islamic State onslaught. Islamic State fighters used a sandstorm that delayed U.S. warplanes to help seize a critical military advantage in their attack on the city.
In July, U.S. and Iraqi officials announced a government offensive to retake Ramadi from Islamic State militants, and U.S. officials said around 3,000 newly U.S.-trained Iraqi troops, along with 500 trained Sunni tribal fighters, were being deployed to help in the offensive. Iraqi security forces began isolating and cordoning off the city, but were slowed by hot weather, entrenched Islamic State fighting posi tions and other factors.
In the interim, 2,500 additional Sunni fighters were trained to help hold Ramadi once it was retaken. But that did not happen until Monday - six months later - when the government center was finally seized by Iraqi forces.
The liberation of Ramadi is a "much-needed tactical victory" for the Iraqi government, and one that will erode the territorial integrity of the Islamic State's area of operation in Iraq, said Landon Shroder, an intelligence analyst for corporations in Iraq.
But, he added, "unfortunately, the battle for Fallujah will be just as hard as the fight for Ramadi, given that the Islamic State has maintained a presence in the city since January 2014 and has strengthened their defenses accordingly."
"Fallujah also offers the Islamic State significant tactical advantage in conducting acts of terrorism in Baghdad, which will be used to offset any pressure during the initial assault on the city," Shroder said.

Load-Date: December 30, 2015


End of Document