ISLAMIC TERRORISM; Another hostage beheaded by ISIL, Briton slain; jihadist says American is next
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 4, 2014, Saturday


Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 523 words
Byline: Jon Gambrell and Jill Lawless, The Associated Press
Body


CAIRO - An Internet video released Friday purports to show an Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant fighter beheading British hostage Alan Henning, the fourth such killing carried out by the extremist group now targeted in U.S.-led airstrikes.
The video mirrors other beheading videos shot by ISIL, which holds territory across the border of Syria and Iraq, and ended with a militant threatening a man they identified as an American named Peter Kassig.
"Obama, you have started your aerial bombardment of Shams [Syria], which keeps on striking our people, so it is only right that we continue to strike the neck of your people, the masked militant in the video said.
Two U.S. officials confirmed that Kassig is being held by ISIL but would not elaborate.
The Associated Press could not verify the video's authenticity, although it was released in the same manner as other ISIL videos and the masked militant sounds similar to the one who carried out the other beheadings.
Britain has been supporting U.S. military efforts against ISIL by using British forces to help with logistics and intelligence gathering, as well as recently taking part in airstrikes in Iraq. The Internet video released Friday begins with a news clip announcing British strikes against ISIL.
British Prime Minister David Cameron said Henning's apparent slaying shows "how barbaric and repulsive these terrorists are.
"Alan had gone to Syria to help get aid to people of all faiths in their hour of need, Cameron said in a statement. "The fact that he was taken hostage when trying to help others and now murdered demonstrates that there are no limits to the depravity of these . . . terrorists.
"We will do all we can to hunt down these murderers and bring them to justice.
This is the fourth such video released by ISIL. The full beheadings are not shown in the videos, but the British-accented, English-speaking militant holds a long knife and appears to begin cutting his victims, who included American reporter James Foley, American-Israeli journalist Steven Sotloff, British aid worker David Haines and now Henning.
FBI Director James Comey has said American officials believe they know the identity of the masked militant, though he's declined to name the man or reveal his nationality.
Kassig, the 26 year-old American now threatened by ISIL, enlisted in the Army in 2004 and became a Ranger, ultimately serving in the 75th Ranger Regiment, an Army special-operations unit.
According to his military record, Kassig trained at Fort Benning, Georgia, in 2006, and deployed to Iraq from April to July 2007. He was medically discharged at the rank of private first class in September 2007. His home of record at the time of his enlistment was Indianapolis, Indiana.
His parents, Ed and Paula Kassig, issued a statement through a media relations firm, asking for the world to pray for their son.
The family said Kassig had been working for the relief organization SERA when he was captured on Oct. 1, 2013, on his way to Deir Ezzour, in Eastern Syria. He converted to Islam while in captivity and the family has heard from former hostages that his faith has provided him comfort.

Load-Date: October 6, 2014


End of Document