Islamic terrorism // An unemotional and illuminating look at Mideast terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 22, 1987, Sunday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: PERSPECTIVE; Books; Pg. 6D
Length: 693 words
Byline: KATHLEEN CHRISTISON
Body


HOLY TERROR    Inside the World of Islamic Terrorism    By Amir Taheri    Adler & Adler, $ 19.95   
 
     Very few people, it seems, can discuss terrorism, particularly    Islamic terrorism, these days without becoming emotional about it and    losing some perspective. The Reagan administration's repeated    flip-flops on dealing with Iran are the result of emotional    policymaking and the kind of skewed perspective that follows from it.
 
 Some commentators, also reacting emotionally, see Islam itself as an    inherently evil, violent religion; Leon Uris' 1984 novel The Haj    depicted Islam as a religion that saps the human will and instills    cruelty in its adherents. Further along on the emotional spectrum,    apologists for Islamic fundamentalism blame it all on the West; Robin    Wright's 1985 book Sacred Rage explained Islam's grievances with the    West and seemed to say that greater Western understanding and    compassion would end Islamic terrorism.
     There is a broad area between these two views, an unemotional    middle ground that few scholars and commentators have attempted to    stake out: the recognition that there are indeed some legitimate    grievances at the root of Islamic terrorism but that militant    fundamentalism is an uncompromising opponent of everything Western, the    good and the bad, and that while it is too zealous to be bombed into    submission, it will also not be mollified by kind words and compassion    from the West.
 
     Amir Taheri, who was editor of Iran's largest newspaper under the    Shah, approaches this view in Holy Terror. The book is an unemotional    examination of the origins and motivations of Islamic fundamentalism    and its penchant for terrorism, and it goes a great distance toward    illuminating without tarring all of Islam or excusing fanaticism.
 
        Taheri's objectivity is marred somewhat by what comes across,    largely through omission of almost any mention of the Shah, as loyalty    to the rule of the deposed dictator. He criticizes, for instance,    Middle Eastern leaders who tried to westernize their societies not for    the benefit of society but to strengthen their own positions,    mentioning the Shah's father as a culprit in this regard but not the    Shah himself. Taheri does not take enough account of the grievances -    against the Shah, against the establishment in other Middle East    dictatorships - that have contributed to the rise of fundamentalism and    terrorism. But he examines the phenomenon with a dry enough eye that he    is able to come to a sensible conclusion.
 
     After almost a decade, militant fundamentalism has no answers,    Taheri says, to today's political, economic, and social problems.
 
 Fundamentalism has been unable to adapt to "the facts of life" in a    world that does not permit any nation or group of people to wall    themselves off from outside influences, and Taheri sees the signs of    dissatisfaction growing, not only among the majority of Muslims who    never embraced fundamentalism, but also among many Iranians and    Lebanese Shiites for whom religious fanaticism is no longer enough.
 
     Islam as a whole, Taheri says, is "rich, resilient, and    sufficiently receptive to change not to fear its current political    upheavals." Muslims are growing weary of Ayatollah Khomeini's hatred,    of fundamentalism's intrusion into private life, of endless warfare.    "Unable to offer a life worth living, (fundamentalism) advocates death    as man's highest and noblest goal," Taheri says, and Muslims want    more.
 
     This may all seem too easy. The idea that Islamic fundamentalism    might self-destruct, might simply spend its fury and turn benign, may    strike many as naive. But other similar movements, such as the Cultural    Revolution in China, have indeed spent themselves after years of    upheaval, leaving in their wake not zealotry but some kind of change    for the better. Fanaticism cannot be a permanent phenomenon, in the    Muslim world or anywhere else.
 
  - Kathleen Christison formerly worked for the CIA as a political    analyst specializing in the Middle East. -
 
    

Load-Date: November 19, 1992


End of Document