Islam's holiest month has nothing to do with the scourge of terrorism;
Unfortunately, extremists twist the meaning of this holy time to suit their ends.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
October 5, 2005 Wednesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2005 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Our Views; Pg. A8
Length: 278 words
Body


Ramadan began in much of the world Tuesday, when Muslim clerics announced that the new crescent moon sighted the night before had ushered in the holiest month of the Islamic calendar.
That spiritual moment was sadly and cruelly undermined throughout much of the world by the fact that, for a violent few, a time traditionally devoted to a focus on worship and introspection has become an excuse for terror.
In the Muslim tradition, Ramadan was the month that God began to reveal the Quran, the Muslim holy book, to the prophet Muhammad more than 1,400 years ago. During daylight hours, observant Muslims abstain from food, drink, smoking and sex so that they may concentrate on the spiritual.
It is a time to read the Quran and to perform and be rewarded for good deeds. It is a time of self-denial during the day and festivals at night, a time to contemplate what is holy and to celebrate what is human.
In that, it is a tradition deserving of respect, even emulation, among members of all faiths.
For security forces around the world, however, this is no time for quiet reflection or joyful celebration. From Bali to Cairo, from Lebanon to London, police and soldiers are on special alert, painfully aware that for followers of al-Qaida and other terrorists, Ramadan is an added motivation - an extra excuse - for murder.
Apparently no tradition is so holy, so sacrosanct, that it cannot be used by those who seek to justify their own hatreds.
Such behavior does not do justice to this faith, something that should be apparant to Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
The traditions and truths of Islam are best observed during this month - if only more people would bother to look.

Load-Date: October 5, 2005


End of Document