Islamaphobia and the media: The terrorist attack on Christchurch in New Zeland
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
April 3, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SEARCH; Pg. 1
Length: 754 words
Byline: Yasmine Haiti
Body


Unfortunately, the world has been the victim of many terrorism attacks, specifically the United States on September 11th. The latest is an anti-Muslim terrorist attack in New Zealand.
After attacking two mosques where hundreds of Muslims were praying on Friday, a white supremacist claimed responsibility and live streamed the attack.
The massacre left fifty people killed and another fifty injured. The attack on the worshippers left behind wounded families, widows and orphans.
The suspect was apprehended in his vehicle by two police officers to prevent further deaths, and appeared in court the following day.
At the time of campaigning for the United States presidency, President Donald Trump had a lot to say about Islam in which a lot of rhetoric delivered was divisive and hurtful such as the Muslim ban.
This rhetoric boiled up and fanned the flames of hatred not only in the United States, but also internationally similarly to the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center.
A religion believed to be recognized by countries far away from the modern world; a religion of very primitive people who live in the desert and ride camels; where every man has four wives, women are extremely oppressed, honor killings are a weekly practice, as well as child marriages.
There is nothing positive presented to society about the religion of Islam, and therefore the people whom follow the religion.
It is not fair to hold a preconception and to construct an opinion around negative and false stereotypes in judging a faith while having very little knowledge about the religion.
Thus, with the influence the media can have on perceptions, taking time to read the Quran, the religious text of Islam, cover to cover to understand that a religion of enlightenment and of peace cannot encourage violence or terrorism.
Honor killings are not part of Islam; in fact, they are unlawful by the religion. In Islam, all religions are accepted and respected.
Islam considers Jesus to be a prophet in high regard. And like any other religion, without question, Islam does not permit or admit murder.
Education about Islam can broaden many minds to spread love and tolerance. Knowledge stops the stereotypes and misconceptions post 9/11 and breaks the unacceptable linkage of Muslims and Islam to terrorism.
However, there is a reality many ignore.
The overwhelming majority of victims of ISIL, Al Qaeda, Boko Haram, and all the classified terrorist groups worldwide hands-down are Muslims.
Unfortunately, the media has been portraying Muslims and Islam as the number one proponent in the war on terror, while they are actually the number one victims of the war on terror.
When society is exposed to news stories that bring nothing but waves of negativity about Muslims, they tend to be more acceptant of military and terrorist attacks on Muslims.
Islamophobia is not only the natural response to Muslim terrorism, but it can be a tool of public manipulation contributing to the erosion of the basic principle of a free society.
Is attacking a mosque the solution to the end terrorism?
Or is banning Muslims from entering or migrating to developed countries the way to ensure security of the concerned countries' territories?
Is being mean, rude, or disrespectful to a person from a different background and a different faith make less victims?
It is not!
Fear is a natural uncontrollable response to the unknown, but what we do without fear is a choice.
However, if we are to engage in effective community change and promote a growing relationship, we must dig deeper to understand what triggers our fears.
As a community, if continue to believe a single story of Islam that is portrayed on media, we would be casting these terrorist groups or individuals as a single representation of a faith of over 1.6 billion people.
ISIL has as much to do with Islam as the Gunpowder Plot or the Ku Klux Klan has to do with Christianity. These groups do not represent the entire population of individuals who follow the religion. Brutality and extremism cannot be linked to religion.
Terrorism has no religion!
I express my most sincere condolences at the horrifying terrorist attack that took place in two mosques in New Zealand at Christchurch. Targeting Muslims in their place of worship is despicable.
There should be no place in modern society for the viral ideology that drives and insights hatred and fear.
I stand with the Muslim community at Christchurch and with the residents of New Zealand. I choose courage and compassion over panic and prejudice.
What will you choose?

Load-Date: April 9, 2019


End of Document