Islamic charity in Missouri loses bid to have its assets unfrozen
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 2005 Thursday
MISSOURI THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C7
Length: 616 words
Byline: By Peter Shinkle ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Body


An Islamic charity based in Columbia, Mo., accused of supporting the Al-Qaida terror group, has failed in its bid to unfreeze its assets.
Secret evidence provided by the federal government helped support the Department of Treasury's claims that the charity supported terrorism, a federal judge in Washington ruled last Thursday, nearly a year after federal agents raided the charity and froze its accounts.
U.S. District Judge Reggie B. Walton said the Department of the Treasury's handling of the charity -- the Islamic American Relief Agency -- was "supported by substantial evidence" and "warranted by the facts." The judge issued a summary judgment in favor of the department and a revenue agent, dismissing the case.
Walton said his decision relied on classified evidence that the Treasury Department provided the court, and he acknowledged that defendant group was "at an inherent disadvantage" in that it could not examine the classified materials.
Shereef Akeel, attorney for IARA, said he remains unaware of any evidence that the charity supported terrorism, and he denounced the use of secret evidence. "Democracy dies behind closed doors," he said.
The group is considering whether to appeal, he said.
The Treasury Department hailed the ruling, saying it affirms the department's ability to "publicly designate and financially isolate those bankrolling terrorism," spokeswoman Molly Millerwise said in a prepared statement that also said, "The Treasury is committed to employing our financial tools to identify and disrupt the financial webs of terrorist networks worldwide."
A former employee of the charity had purchased a satellite phone that prosecutors said Osama Bin Laden had used to plot the bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998. That former employee was never charged. He left the country and may have died.
Ibrahim Khaleel, who served as the charity's education officer and now works at a public school in Columbia, could not be reached for comment.
In October 2004, Treasury officials designated the IARA as a supporter of Bin Laden and Al-Qaeda. The department said the group was part of a Sudanese charity, the Islamic African Relief Agency.
Treasury also said international offices of the Sudanese charity provided direct financial support to Bin Laden, and that overseas branches of the charity gave hundreds of thousands of dollars to Bin Laden in 1999. In addition, a leader of the charity in Afghanistan had traveled to Sudan and the Middle East to help raise $5 million in 2000 for Al-Qaeda's predecessor group, Al-Khidamat, the department said.
Beyond fundraising, the department said the charity had helped with operations, having helped relocate Bin Laden to a safe location. The charity's representative in Ireland, Ibrahim Buisir, directed an Al-Qaida cell that "provided support to operations in Europe by arranging travel and accomodations," the department said.
Treasury officials designated Buisir and four other men -- charity officials in Sudan, Pakistan and Jordan -- as supporters of terrorism.
The Columbia group was founded in 1985 by Sudanese students at the University of Missouri, and its original name -- the Islamic African Relief Agency-USA -- mirrored that of the Sudanese charity. Akeel denied the two charities were the part of the same organization.
In his ruling, Walton wrote that there is substantial evidence to support the department's claim that the Columbia charity is connected to the charity in Sudan.
On the same day that the Treasury Department froze the assets of the charity in Columbia, FBI agents raided the offices under a search warrant. FBI spokesman Jeff Lanza said Tuesday that no charges have resulted from the investigation.

Load-Date: September 23, 2005


End of Document