Islamic Extremism And Our Response
The New York Times
September 30, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 580 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Re ''The Grand Delusion,'' by David Brooks (column, Sept. 28):
If, as Mr. Brooks avers, Islamic extremism is not a result of ''short-term historical circumstances, but of consciousness and culture,'' why did the Bush administration and Mr. Brooks believe that 150,000 Western troops, even with billions of dollars, could change that in jig time? 
  Grand delusion indeed.

William W. Goetz
Bedminster, N.J., Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  David Brooks says countries in the Arab world do not define their national glory economically. In fact, their arrogance stems directly from the money they receive from the West for their oil.
  Without the petrodollars flowing into these regimes, they would find themselves quickly at odds with their people, whose anger would be pointed at their leaders, resulting in the overthrow of these totalitarian regimes. 
  The ''grand delusion'' is that we can maintain our present level of oil consumption, attack regimes that were contained (Iraq) and talk about attacking other countries (Iran) when we do not have enough troops to maintain order in a country previously defeated (Afghanistan).
  President Bush said he was the ''decider''; I see him as the ''delusioner.''

Brian Gallagher
White Plains, Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  David Brooks implies that Democrats are as culpable as Republicans for our intelligence failures and the fiasco that is Iraq. 
  While President Clinton viewed terrorism as a grave threat, Republicans, drunk on their own power after the 2000 election, gave terrorism a low priority, preferring instead to focus on tax cuts. 
  After 9/11, it was Democrats who argued that we should focus on Al Qaeda rather than expend resources and international goodwill to oust a dictator. It was only after Republicans fanned the flames of nationalism that Democratic lawmakers acquiesced to Republican demands.
  The lesson is not that both political parties failed but that a government ruled by a single political party blinds us at the very moment when clarity and transparency are most in need.

Mark Cassell
Kent, Ohio, Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  David Brooks acknowledges that modern nations mark their greatness by economic wealth and that ''Islamic extremists will continue to compete and grow until mainstream Islamic moderates can establish a more civilized set of criteria for prestige and greatness.''
  Why, then, does Mr. Brooks continue to support the violence of war as a means of ending the violence of terrorism? Given his reasoning, wouldn't it be far wiser to divert the billions of dollars we are spending on the Iraqi disaster into the economic development of Palestine?
  Wouldn't viable ports, secure water sources, healthy agribusiness and manufacturing plants be more productive in the fight against Islamic extremists than military action?

Janet Ellingson
Salt Lake City, Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  David Brooks, by referring to the ''Wilsonian madness of trying to introduce democracy into the Arab world,'' muddies the water in two ways: he gives an unearned innocence to the neocons' invasion of Iraq while doing a grave disservice to Woodrow Wilson.
  Wilson sought to create the League of Nations in order to promote democracy and world peace; the neocons show disdain for the United Nations and try to impose democracy at gunpoint, threatening world peace. 
  Both projects may be naive, but only one is Wilsonian. The other is indeed madness.

Chris Christensen
Portland, Ore., Sept. 28, 2006

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 30, 2006


End of Document