ISLAM DOESN'T DESERVE 'ENEMY' STATUS; IRFAN ALAN
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
January 19, 1995, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion,; GUEST COLUMN; Column
Length: 626 words
Body


The Cold War is over, yet America needs a new enemy to sell the public on astronomical military spending. What group is far enough away, different enough from the dominant American culture and a conveniently weak enough minority in the United States to take on this imperative role? The perfect choice is Islam and Muslims. But to make it all work, the media have to cooperate. The public fear and hatred for ''the commies'' has to be transferred to this new enemy.
One enormous leap toward this goal was a documentary aired Nov. 21 on Wisconsin Public Television. The film called ''Jihad in America'' propagated a false image of Islam. The producer of the film, Steven Emerson, managed to manipulate the term Jihad to mean terrorism, and the Muslims in the United States were portrayed as potential terrorists.
Alan was born to a Muslim family in Istanbul, Turkey, and has been in the United States for about eight years. He holds a doctorate in electrical engineering from UW-Madison and is working at the university as a post-doctoral fellow.
To put things onto the right track let's make some definitions first.
Islam is the religion of total submission to the will of Allah (the God), and in that submission lies the peace and tranquillity of the heart with the creator and the creation. A Muslim is a person who submits his will to the will of Allah. With these definitions, all the previous messengers of Allah such as Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammed were all Muslims. They all submitted their wills to the will of Allah
Let's also define terrorism. Terrorism is an act of violence committed by a person or a group or a state against defenseless and innocent civilians. Islam never teaches such a thing to its adherents
In the Koran, Allah says: ''We ordained for the children of Israel that if anyone slew of a person -- unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief to the land -- it would be as if he slew the whole people; and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people.''
In another verse Allah commands, ''Fight in the cause of Allah those who fight you but do not transgress limits; for Allah loves not the transgressor.''   An example: Muslims are supposed to fight back against the armed Serbs in Bosnia because the Muslims are persecuted, tortured, killed, mutilated and burned, and their houses and mosques are bombarded and demolished, their women are raped, killed and their kids and animals are not excluded. And in that fight they are commanded not to transgress the limits, but only to restore peace and freedom for the worship of Allah. Those limits as taught by the prophet of Islam are that women, children and old and infirm men should not be molested, nor should trees and crops be cut down, nor should peace be withheld when the enemy comes to terms.
A Muslim cannot base his act of violence on Islam (if he does any against any civilian innocents).
In the meantime, 25,000 homicides per year in the United States signal an ongoing terrorism in the United States. If for every act of terrorism the name of the religion is mentioned, Christians would outnumber any other religion. Of course, Christianity does not teach terrorism either. Nevertheless the media do not cover the news as Christian or Jewish terrorists when it comes to these religions. Why do the media do it when it comes to Islam and Muslims? Why make generalizations?
I, as a Muslim, condemn all types of terrorism against innocent civilians and at the same time condemn Public Television's biased, wrong and false depiction and portrayal of Muslims and Islam. I hope from the mercy of Allah that these types of events will lead many to search more about Islam and find out what a gift Islam has to offer to mankind.

Graphic

 
WSJ graphic Source: American Muslim Council, 1992 Muslims in America

Load-Date: January 20, 1995


End of Document