ISLAMIC TERRORISM; Al-Qaida sparks U.S. alert 'Something serious is being planned,' congressman warns
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 3, 2013, Saturday


Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 501 words
Byline: Hannah Allam, McClatchy Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON - The State Department issued a worldwide travel alert for U.S. citizens Friday as it suspended operations in 21 Muslim countries in response to "current information" that suggests al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist groups might strike within the next month.
Apart from mentioning that an attack might occur in or emanate from the Arabian Peninsula, which is home to one of the most active al-Qaida branches, the State Department's announcement gave few details on the nature of the threat and didn't provide specifics about when or where such an attack might take place.
"They may focus efforts to conduct attacks in the period between now and the end of August," the State Department's travel alert said.
One date in particular - this Sunday - was mentioned in the State Department warning. All embassies that would've been open were ordered to stay closed that day - and perhaps longer. The edict affects embassies and consulates in Muslim countries, where Sunday is a workday, and coincides with a special night in the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.
Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., who was briefed on the threat, said the focus is on Yemen, the chief staging ground for al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. In a phone interview with CNN, King said the plot is something U.S. authorities have monitored for some time, and that additional information might have come from the visit to Washington this week of Yemen's president, Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi.
"There's very little doubt, if any, that something serious is being planned," King said, declining to elaborate because the matter involves classified intelligence.
For Americans, the warning comes in the second-busiest international travel month of the year, after July. According to U.S. Department of Transportation statistics for 2003 to 2012, 9.1 percent of all international travel takes place in August. American, Southwest, Delta and United airlines said they are monitoring the situation but, as of Friday night, none had instituted policies to allow travelers to change their plans without incurring fees.
Analysts who study terrorists said the most popular jihadist online forums haven't indicated that any major operation is imminent.
One discernible trend in the forums, however, is renewed confidence - one analyst called it "jubilation" - after recent prison breaks that freed hundreds of hardened jihadists from prisons in Iraq and Pakistan.
Charles Lister, an analyst at the Terrorism and Insurgency Center of IHS Jane's, a defense research firm in Britain, said the prison breaks have bolstered spirits among militants, who have suffered heavy losses through years of targeting and the advent of a pro-democracy movement in the Arab world.
Now, jihadists are leading the rebel fight in Syria, gaining operational space in the lawlessness of transitional North African states and regrouping in Iraq, where senior members of al-Qaida were among the hundreds of detainees to escape last month from the Abu Ghraib prison during a insurgent attack.

Load-Date: August 5, 2013


End of Document