Islamic militants have a plan.; Our leaders have none for defense or offense
The Loris Scene (South Carolina)
September 10, 2014


Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2014 The Loris Scene


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 796 words
Byline: The Loris Scene staff
Body


Islamic militants have a plan to execute. Pardon the tasteless pun, but the plan is well over 100 years old and has been working to perfection. Too perfect, as the world has been forced to watch as two American journalists have been beheaded. All in accordance to law of Mohammed's sword, Sharia law.
The Islamization of America is accelerating. In tandem with the spread of Sharia law in America's courts, Islamization of the American media, political and education systems in particular, is gaining momentum and confidence, and there is near unanimity that it will continue. The drivers of the accelerating Islamization of America include the following:
Estimated to be five million, the Muslim population in USA today is about the size of the Hispanic population 27 years ago, but it is growing six times faster than the national rate, thanks to high rates of birth, immigration and conversions.
Islam's growth in American prisons is particularly troubling. About 80 percent of Americans who convert to a religion while in prison become Muslims, who now comprise about 20 percent of American prison population. The conversion rate is especially high among African-American inmates.
Even more troubling, Islamic groups, including Muslim Brotherhoods' Council on American Islamic Relations (CAIR), have penetrated the highest levels of the US government. The White House now has a White House Muslim advisor, who has counterpart Muslim advisors at the U.S. Department of Justice, the FBI, and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, whose senior fellow, Mohamed Elibiary recently declared that USA is an "Islamic country."
Members of the Muslim Brotherhood who have penetrated the US government have security clearances and are advising not only on "outreach" programs to the Muslims in the United States, but also classified counter-terrorism programs that are supposed to protect Americans from Islamic terrorism. Their recent 'achievements' include:
Deleting Islam's violent nature and past from FBI counter-terrorism training manuals;
Blocking the planned indictments of CAIR and other American Muslim Brotherhood organizations listed as imindicted coconspirators of Holy Land Foundation (HLF), the Muslim
Brotherhood "charity" convicted in 2008 of financing Hamas;
Requiring written communication from and between government agencies to be more "Islam-Friendly;"
Pushing for the prosecution of criticizing Islam as hate crimes.
And just for many of you unconcerned, non-voting types and just unknowing Americans, here is a small part of the world according to the Sharia law:
Theft is punishable by amputation of the right hand;
Criticizing or denying any part of the Quran is punishable by death;
Criticizing or denying Muhammad is a prophet is punishable by death;
Criticizing or denying
Allah, the moon god of Islam is punishable by death;
A Muslim who becomes a non-Muslim is punishable by death;
A non-Muslim who leads a Muslim away from Islam is punishable by death;
A non-Muslim man who marries a Muslim woman is punishable by death;
A man can marry an infant girl and consummate the marriage when she is 9 years old;
A woman can have only one husband, but a man can have up to four wives; Muhammad can have more;
A man can unilaterally divorce his wife but a woman needs her husband's consent to divorce;
A man can beat his wife for insubordination;
Testimonies of four male witnesses are required to prove rape against a woman;
A woman who has been raped cannot testify in court against her rapist(s);
A woman's testimony in court, allowed only in property cases, carries half the weight of a man's;
A female heir inherits half of what a male heir inherits;
A woman cannot drive a car, as it leads to fitnah (upheaval);
A woman cannot speak alone to a man who is not her husband or relative;
Meat to be eaten must come from animals that have been sacrificed to Allah - i.e., be Halal;
Muslims should engage in Taqiyya and lie to non-Muslims to advance Islam.
The list goes on, but you get my point.
Many Islamic militants are already here in the U.S.
We have educated most of them with talents to use against us.
The lone Malaysia jet and all its occupants disappearing is virtually impossible, but Malaysia is 89 percent Muslim. And now Islamist militias in Libya took control of nearly a dozen commercial jetliners last month, and western intelligence agencies recently issued a warning that the jets could be used in terrorist attacks across North Africa.
We can no longer afford to stand back and watch. Big Brother, that is so busy watching the working American, needs to turn its focus and the power of the United State military at the true adversaries of our way of life. They hate us. They tell us so. What is the hold up? Let's get moving and support Israel and protect our way of life.

Load-Date: February 27, 2016


End of Document