Islamic terrorism and effective leadership
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 12, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 4
Length: 674 words
Byline: Arthur I. Cyr, Carthage College
Body


The murders in Southern California by two Islam fanatics predictably have stoked intense public concern about terrorist dangers, and debate over combatting such threats. President Barack Obama's address to the nation on December 6 was highly revealing, though in ways not intended by the White House.
Traditionally, an address from the Oval Office involves urgent national crisis or major policy initiative. The San Bernardino murders involve neither. There apparently was no comprehensive terrorist plot, in stark contrast to devastating attacks on 9/11.
Consequently, President Obama has transformed a despicable but local crime into a major national and international incident, thereby handing ISIS the opportunity to take credit, which they have readily seized. His ill-advised move equates public speaking with national leadership, while effectively diminishing the important office he holds.
In strategic terms, the position of the U.S. has not been changed by the San Bernardino killings. Our economy remains strong, our society turbulent but stable, with violent crime rates declining overall long-term, our politics unpredictable but law-abiding.
In great contrast, President Vladimir Putin of Russia faces multiple challenges, including Islamic extremism, which is growing more ominous. Since taking control of the nation at the end of 1999, his regime has been seriously challenged by separatism, often Islamic in character and violent in means.
This potentially fatal threat to Russia is reflected in the complex relationships with the Kadyrov family of Chechnya. Akhmad Abdulkhamidovich Kadyrov was Chief Mufti - senior Islamic judge as well as scholar - in the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, and a leader in the First Chechen War of 1994-1996 against the Russian Federation. The Second Chechen War began in August 1999, shortly before Putin became Russia's president, and insurgency continued into 2009. These wars were vicious and bloody.
Moscow persuaded Kadyrov to switch sides. Following his assassination in 2004, he was succeeded by son Ramzan Kadyrov, now president of the Chechen Republic, respected for bringing stability but with an uncertain future.
Russia's military interventions in Crimea, Georgia and Ukraine involved specific concerns, including potentially hostile regimes. There was also the incentive to maintain popular support at home.
Ethnic instability is endemic to the entire old Soviet empire, providing opportunities today for Islamic radicalism and terrorism. During World War II, Soviet despot Josef Stalin suddenly and arbitrarily deported the Meskhetin Turks from Georgia as part of a vast relocation of an estimated 1.5 million people to Central Asia and Siberia.
An estimated 700,000 Georgians fought in the Red Army. Smaller but still substantial numbers joined Hitler's forces. The forces on both sides earned in blood deserved reputations as dedicated warriors.
Ukraine likewise is historically entangled with Russia in complex ways. The beginning of the Russian revolution in 1917 sparked an independence movement. After years of struggle, Ukraine eventually was absorbed into the new Soviet Union.
U.S. government leaders should consider the Southern California murders in the context of a comprehensive national strategy. Russia's combination of economic weakness and ethnic conflicts provides opportunity for greater practical cooperation regarding terrorism, and perhaps other matters. Oval Office morality lectures are pointless.
Germany, economic powerhouse in Europe, is an existing not potential strong member of the anti-terrorist alliance. Russia remains economically weak, dependent on oil revenue while the fracking revolution led by American industry transforms global oil markets. During World War II and the Cold War, U.S. leaders defined, developed and adjusted comprehensive strategies. Today, we face less significant threats but also lack equally disciplined leaders.
Cyr is Clausen Distinguished Professor at Carthage College and author of "After the Cold War.: Contact: acyr@carthage.edu

Load-Date: December 12, 2015


End of Document