ISO filings made in case TRIA expires; Endorsements would allow insurers to limit coverage
Business Insurance
May 10, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 4
Length: 322 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


JERSEY CITY, N.J.-The Insurance Services Office Inc. has taken initial steps to allow insurers to deny or modify terrorism coverage if the federal terrorism backstop program is not extended beyond its current Dec. 31, 2005, sunset.
ISO said it filed optional endorsements with regulators in every U.S. jurisdiction seeking their approval for insurers to limit coverage if the backstop program ends or if Congress modifies it to increase insurers' share of losses or risk of loss from terrorism.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 created a federal coverage backstop-set to expire at the end of 2005-for losses from catastrophic acts of terrorism in the United States. Beginning in September 2004, insurers will start taking action on policies with effective dates of Jan. 1, 2005, and later, according to Jersey City, N.J.-based ISO. Some of those policies include terrorism coverage that extends beyond the law's current sunset, ISO said.
The optional endorsements ''will help insurers and policyholders manage potential coverage problems posed by the Dec. 30, 2005, 'hard ending' of the federal backstop by providing critical tools needed now to make underwriting decisions on terrorism coverage in an uncertain post-TRIA environment,'' ISO said.
If Congress doesn't renew the existing backstop, the endorsements become applicable on Jan. 1, 2006, and would apply to losses on or after that date.
The endorsements provide several options to participating ISO insurers, including allowing them to exclude all terrorism-related losses or just those stemming from acts involving nuclear, biological or chemical causes.
In addition, the endorsements may provide coverage up to a sublimit that is less than the full policy limit.
Meanwhile, risk managers and others have until June 4 to comment on whether the Treasury Department should extend the ''make available'' provision of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act beyond the end of 2004.

Load-Date: May 12, 2004


End of Document