ISRAELI TROOP PULLOUT OK'D, BUT CABINET WON'T SET DATE;
WITHDRAWAL IS CONDITIONAL ON PALESTINIANS TAKING ACTION AGAINST TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 1, 1997, Monday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A3
Length: 354 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Israel's Cabinet voted Sunday to proceed with a promised troop withdrawal from the West Bank - but set no date and made the pullout conditional on Palestinians doing more to fight terrorism.
Sixteen Cabinet ministers approved the move, and two abstained. The ministers made no decision about the extent of the withdrawal.
Critics have said that adding conditions gives Muslim militants a chance to scuttle the pullout by staging attacks in Israel - as they have done in the past, prompting Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to halt peace talks temporarily.
Still, Marwan Kanafani, a spokesman for Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, was cautiously optimistic.
"It's encouraging to finally see the Israeli government decide to abide by the agreements that we spent a long time with them to reach," he told The Associated Press.
Kanafani said the Palestinians would have to "wait and see" what kind of conditions Israel attached to the withdrawal.
But Palestinian Higher Education Minister Hanan Ashrawi said, "This is very clearly a nonstarter." She said the proposal would "strike at the core of the peace process, would destroy whatever little remains and would turn the whole negotiating process into a sham.
 
"We are not willing to accept unilateral Israeli measures."
A statement issued by the Israeli Cabinet indicated it would carry out just one redeployment - rather than the three promised in the existing Israel-Palestinian agreements.
The statement also said Israel would continue "strengthening" its settlements in the West Bank, despite condemnations by both the Palestinians and the United States.
The statement did not give a timetable for the withdrawal, refusing even to say that it would be carried out by mid-1998 - the deadline set in the Israeli-Palestinian agreements for all three redeployments to be completed.
Reports have pegged the pullout as involving between 6 and 8 percent of the West Bank, which the Palestinians reject as inadequate.
Up until now, Palestinians have refused to enter final status talks with the Netanyahu government - mostly for fear that it would not agree to their demand for statehood.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu (center) will begin planning the withdrawal from Palestinian areas approved Sunday by his Cabinet. Palestinians were skeptical of the decision.

Load-Date: December 2, 1997


End of Document