ISRAELI ACCUSES U.S. OF ENCOURAGING PLO
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 17, 1989, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 35E
Length: 648 words
Body


JERUSALEM - The United States is undermining Israel's search for negotiating partners in the occupied territories by saying Israel might have to talk to the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israeli officials said Thursday.  Foreign Minister Moshe Arens, on a U.S. tour, telephoned Secretary of State James A. Baker III to complain about his statement to Congress Tuesday that, if Israel failed to find residents in the territories to talk peace, Israel might have to negotiate with the PLO, an Israeli official said.  ''Statements like this will, of course, encourage the PLO to see to it that Israel will not find non-PLO Palestinian partners ready to negotiate with it,'' said Avi Pazner, spokesman for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.  ''The PLO will do whatever is in its powers,'' he said. ''And as you know, they are not shy in terrorizing Palestinians.'' Deputy Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu suggested that the United States was violating an agreement with Israel. ''There is an agreement between Israel and the United States that we have to advance the process with moderate Palestinians and not with the PLO.  ''. . . The moment you say it will not work and we will have to go forward with the PLO, no Palestinian in his right mind will enter (talks) in this situation,'' Netanyahu said. ''He will wait, stick to his refusal until the PLO gets its negotiations.'' Diplomats said Baker's statement was the second blow Israel had suffered from a major power in a month.
Last month, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A.  Shevardnadze dashed Israeli hopes of renewed diplomatic relations after meeting with Arens in Cairo, Egypt, by linking the restoration of relations to an international Middle East peace conference and Israeli talks with the PLO.  Israeli leaders insist that the PLO is a terrorist group bent on the destruction of Israel. They dismissed as trickery PLO chairman Yasser Arafat's renunciation of terrorism and recognition of Israel's right to exist.  But the Israeli press reported Thursday that Israeli intelligence chiefs had told the inner Cabinet on Wednesday that Israel would face mounting international pressure to talk to the PLO unless it came up with its own peace plan. The papers said the PLO had undergone major change.  The United States ended its 13-year ban on talks with the PLO after Arafat renounced terrorism in December. But Shamir's spokesman, Pazner, said Thursday that three attempts at infiltration this week from Lebanon and Egypt proved that the PLO was continuing terrorist attacks.  Two Palestinian teen-agers infiltrated the border from Egypt on Wednesday and threw grenades at a military post before they were shot and captured.  Israeli military commanders said the teens had acted on behalf of the Islamic Jihad group in coordination with the PLO.  Several radical Palestinian groups have tried to infiltrate the Israeli border from Lebanon in recent weeks, and more than 20 guerrillas have been killed by Israeli soldiers since Arafat renounced terrorism.  The PLO has said the raids are legitimate resistance against Israeli military operations in Lebanon and not acts of terror. But PLO officials, speaking privately, said Syria and its Palestinian allies were using the raids to cause Arafat problems.  ''Militarily they are not useful,'' one PLO official said. ''After all, all the guerrillas have been killed.'' Another PLO official said Syria had directly instigated the operations.  In the Gaza Strip on Thursday, Palestinian witnesses said Israelis had used dynamite to blow up two homes after imposing curfews and ordering family members to remove their belongings.  The homes were owned by two brothers who were arrested earlier this month and accused of belonging to a guerrilla squad linked to the PLO, the army said. The squad is accused of killing two Palestinians suspected of cooperating with Israeli authorities.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document