ISRAEL'S DEADLY RAID DRAWS REBUKE;
ABBAS SAYS PEACE BID UNDERMINED BY SLAYING OF 5 PALESTINIANS IN WEST BANK; ISRAELIS SUSPECT TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 26, 2005 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 406 words
Byline: GREG MYRE, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas yesterday accused Israel of undermining peace efforts with an undercover military raid in the West Bank city of Tulkarm, in which five Palestinians were killed.
 Israel said all five were "armed, wanted terrorists," including an Islamic Jihad leader who had orchestrated two suicide bombings, but Palestinians said three of the dead were unarmed teenagers.
 Israel's evacuation of Jewish settlers from the Gaza Strip and part of the West Bank improved the atmosphere recently, but a series of violent incidents has prompted renewed recriminations. On Wednesday night, a 21-year-old Jewish seminary student from Britain, Shmuel Matt, was stabbed to death in Old City of Jerusalem, and rocket fire hit northern and southern Israel yesterday.
Abbas used unusually sharp language in describing Israel's incursion into Tulkarm shortly before midnight Wednesday. "At a time when the Palestinian Authority is trying to maintain calm, this murder intentionally seeks to renew the vicious cycle of violence," he said in a statement. But he also urged Palestinians "not to respond to provocations by Israel, so as not to give it a pretext to escalate its aggression."
 The Israeli military and Palestinian witnesses agreed that five Palestinians had been shot dead by Israeli soldiers, and that one was a local Islamic Jihad leader identified as Adel Abu Khalil, 26. But the two sides disputed a number of details. Israel's military said all five were Islamic Jihad terrorists that it had been seeking to arrest, and that the Palestinians had fired first.
 Abdelkarim Dalbah, a Palestinian journalist who witnessed the shooting from an apartment balcony, said it had begun when Israeli undercover troops emerged from a van and confronted the Palestinian men, who were sitting at an outdoor table. The Israeli soldiers fired first, he said, and soon additional troops in jeeps arrived. After the initial gunfire that killed the Palestinians, shots were exchanged in the area for about half an hour, Dalbah said.
 Palestinians in Tulkarm said two of those killed were militants, but three were teenagers who were unarmed but might have had loose affiliations with Palestinian factions.
 Israel's military said Abu Khalil orchestrated two suicide bombings this year, an attack in February that killed five people in Tel Aviv and a blast in July that killed five in Netanya.
 Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for both attacks.

Load-Date: August 27, 2005


End of Document