Israel agrees to return half of Palestinian tax revenues
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 15, 1997, Monday


Copyright 1997 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. a 8
Length: 437 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


Goodwill gesture: 123 suspected militants have been arrested
JERUSALEM (AP) - Israel said Sunday it would return half of the tens of millions of dollars in Palestinian tax revenues it is withholding as a "goodwill gesture" following Palestinian steps to battle terrorism.
The move came two days after a stern visit from Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who had pushed Israel's government to release the money.
Israel has been withholding the funds since a July 30 suicide bombing in Jerusalem that claimed 15 lives. Neither Palestinian nor Israeli officials were immediately able to provide the amount, which is rising each day, but it is believed to be more than $67 million.
A statement from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office called the move "a goodwill gesture in light of initial steps taken by the Palestinian Authority in the war against terrorism."
David Bar-Illan, a top adviser to Netanyahu, cited the arrest of Islamic militants and a Palestinian plan to attack the infrastructure of militant groups.
The Palestinians have arrested 123 suspected militants since Albright arrived in the region Wednesday. On Saturday, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Cabinet pledged to tackle terrorism and renew security cooperation with Israel.
Bar-Illan said he also expected that tough travel restrictions on Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip - they were lifted and then reimposed after a Sept. 4 bombing - would be eased Tuesday.
Responding to Israel's decision to return some of the tax revenues, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said it fell short.
"This is our money to begin with. They have no right to it," he said. "We expect them to release all of it. We call for an immediate cessation of all of this nonsense."
Albright, who was in Saudi Arabia on Sunday, claimed little success in three days of talks with Netanyahu and Arafat, during which she urged the Palestinians to do more to wipe out terrorism and asked Israel to temporarily halt settlement expansion.
Albright's visit had been eagerly anticipated. But in its wake, there is a growing sense among Israelis and Palestinians that the peace process might be beyond saving. Israeli security officials have warned that the two sides are close to an armed confrontation.
But Bar-Illan said Albright's mission "was not a failure," and Marwan Kanafani, a spokesman for Arafat, was also cautiously optimistic about prospects for restarting the peace process.
A three-way security meeting was held Saturday between Israeli, Palestinian and U.S. officials. Israel withdrew from the discussions temporarily after a Sept. 4 bombing killed five Israelis.

Load-Date: September 16, 1997


End of Document