ISRAEL SAYS CASUALTIES FROM TERRORISM ARE CUT BY HALF
The New York Times
January 3, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 285 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Jan. 2
Body


Israeli casualties from terrorist incidents dropped by more than half in 1980, according to an army report made public yesterday. The report said that Israel's policy of preventive strikes at Palestinian bases had ''paralyzed'' terrorist activity.
Army report states that Israeli casualties from terrorist incidents have declined by 50% during 1980
In 1980, 19 Israelis were killed and 135 were wounded in terrorist actions or Israeli raids against guerrilla camps, as compared with 23 killed and 326 wounded the previous year.
The report issued by the army spokesman's office emphasized that Israeli forays into Lebanon, which have repeatedly been condemned at the United Nations, were primarily responsible for the fact that terrorist operations from Lebanon amounted to only 7.7 percent of all such activity against Israel last year.
The report said 155 terrorists had been killed and 100 wounded during operations by either Israel or the Palestinians, with the vast majority of the Palestinian casualties occurring in Lebanon.
 
----
 
U.N. Says Israel Destroyed Bodies
 
Special to the New York Times
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Jan. 2 - A United Nations spokesman charged today that Israeli soldiers destroyed the bodies of five Palestinian guerrillas with explosives after killing them in Lebanon. There was no immediate response by the Israeli Government.
The spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force in southern Lebanon said troops from the Netherlands observed the Israeli action at Wadi al-Ain, north of the border with Israel. The Israelis said the guerrillas were trying to cross to attack the Mazrait settlement.
The spokesman apparently released the information after inquiries prompted by Dutch press reports.


End of Document