ISRAELIS DEMAND TIGHTER SECURITY AFTER FOUR ATTACKS IN A WEEK, OFFICIALS FEAR WHAT COULD BE AHEAD. THEY WANT PROTECTION FOR JEWISH SITES.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 28, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 464 words
Byline: Allyn Fisher, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Fearful that bombings in Britain and Latin America could multiply into a deadly wave of terrorism against Middle East peacemaking, Israel yesterday demanded tighter security at Jewish sites around the globe.
Officials in Jerusalem accused Britain of ignoring warnings before two car bombs went off outside the Israeli Embassy and a Jewish charity building. Nineteen people were hurt in the incidents Tuesday and yesterday.
The violence in London came a week after an explosion at a Jewish cultural center in Argentina killed at least 105 people and the bombing of a commuter plane in Panama killed 21, including 12 Jews.
The four incidents prompted concern among Jews that they were facing the worst wave of terror attacks since the mid-1980s, when bombs hit several synagogues and airlines in Europe.
There were no claims of responsibility for the two blasts in Britain. A group called Ansarollah, which is allied with Shiite Muslim Hezbollah guerrillas, said it was responsible for the attacks in Latin America.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has blamed Iran and Hezbollah for the attacks in Argentina and London, calling them attempts to derail peace efforts. The bombings in Britain seemed timed to sour the atmosphere as Israel and Jordan ended a 46-year state of war.
"If the world will not join in coping with these terrible international Islamic extremist movements, we might see attacks not only against Israelis," Rabin said yesterday. "The world will find itself living under a threat of . . . terror."
Yehuda Milo, a deputy director-general at the Israeli Foreign Ministry, said Israeli diplomats would ask governments worldwide for better protection for Israeli and Jewish offices.
"It must be made clear to local authorities everywhere that the peace process has enemies and brutal ones . . . who out of a distorted vision will try to sabotage it," Milo said on Israel Radio.
Rabin's adviser on terrorism, Yigal Pressler, warned Israeli travelers to be alert for suspicious objects and behavior while vacationing abroad.
The radio reported beefed-up security at Jewish offices in France and the Netherlands. Police officials in Paris confirmed that steel barriers and extra agents were posted outside certain buildings to prevent car bombs.
Milo said a keener alert by British authorities, who had been urged to improve security for Israeli and Jewish sites after the July 18 bombing in Buenos Aires, might have prevented the London attacks.
Brig. Gen. Azriel Nevo, the Israeli military attache in London whose car was charred in the embassy bombing, was more blunt. He told army radio that the attacks had been the result of "what was really a true blunder of the locals here."
Police in London later promised round-the-clock protection to more than 100 Jewish and Israeli sites.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document