ISRAELI CRITICIZES MIDEAST REPORTING
The New York Times
February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 932 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Feb. 13
Body


The director of Israel's Government Press Office has charged that the Palestine Liberation Organization and Syria have achieved some success in using terrorism against American and European correspondents to influence reporting on the Middle East.
In an hourlong interview, the director, Zev Chafets, gave several examples of what he termed the effectiveness of the intimidation, especially in Beirut, where correspondents have been assassinated, detained and threatened by Palestinian gunmen in recent years.
As a result, the American-born Mr. Chafets said, some negative reporting on Syria and the P.L.O. has been suppressed, and Israel's image has suffered.
 
'Every Right to Be Afraid'
''I don't think that it's always, or even usually, the newsmen on the spot who are necessarily intimidated, although they have every right to be afraid as well,'' he said, adding:
''But very often organizations acting in the interest of their personnel, which is legitimate, make decisions not to publish a certain thing because it would get somebody in trouble, or get somebody shot at, or to publish or to broadcast a certain item to appease the P.L.O., in order to create a situation in which their correspondent and personnel would be safe and welcome in a city where the relations with journalists are run very often through physical intimidation.
Director of Israel's Government Press Office charges that PLO and Syria used terrorism against Western reporter s to influence reportingon Mid East
''Therefore, this isn't a criticism of particular journalists, it is a criticism of the entire way the American media, the Western media, have reacted to efforts to control or to shape their coverage.''
He took as his prime example what he described as a dramatic shift in the approach of ABC News after the murder last July of its parttime reporter in Beirut, Sean Toolan. He was shot and stabbed on a street after ABC News broadcast a special report by Geraldo Rivera on Palestinian terrorism that Mr. Chafets described as ''a piece which pointed out that Palestinian terrorism threatens Israel, threatens Lebanon and threatens stability throughout the world.''
 
Policy Is Called 'Cowardly'
''It wasn't proven, as far as I know, that he was murdered by Palestinian terrorists,'' Mr. Chafet said. ''But the assumption was, precisely because of the character and the way that the Palestinian terrorists operate, he might have been. That was the assumption at ABC, and it was also the assumption in the press corps in Beirut.''
''ABC, from the time that that happened, in my view, began a policy which I would describe as cowardly,'' Mr. Chafets charged, ''trying to ingratiate itself with the P.L.O. in order to restore its organizational position in Beirut.''
''First of all, they did what amounted to a worshipful interview with Yasir Arafat, who is the leading terrorist,'' Mr. Chafets said, referring to the head of the P.L.O. ''Then in September ABC did a two-part piece on the evening news on the P.L.O., depicting the P.L.O. as some kind of a benevolent, moderate and nonterrorist organization.''
On Feb. 4, ABC News carried a report on Palestinian Arabs living under Israeli occupation in the West Bank, shown on the ''20/20'' program, that was ''intellectually dishonest,'' Mr. Chafets said.
(In New York, Roone Arledge, president of ABC News, said Mr.  Chafets's charges were ''utter nonsense.'' (''Every time we've done a story on the West Bank, we've made someone unhappy,'' Mr. Arledge said. He added, alluding to Mr.  Toolan's murder, ''There is no connection of any kind between that story and that incident or anything else.'')
 
Arabs' Allegations Reported
The ''20/20'' program reported allegations by Arabs in the West Bank that Israel was stealing their land, imprisoning innocent people on vague suspicions and depriving them of vital services.
No Israeli officials appeared on camera because Defense Minister Ariel Sharon refused to be interviewed on the air and refused to allow officials of the military government in the West Bank to appear on the program. Mr. Chafets said ABC News had declined to interview former officials who were willing to explain the Israeli viewpoint.
Mr. Chafets took particular issue with an assertion on medical care, in which the reporter, Tom Jarriel, noted that the Ramallah Hospital in the West Bank had only one inf ant respirator, while Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem had 10. Mr. Ch afets said ABC News knewand chose to ignore that ''Hadassah Hospital treats Arab patient s andJews to the same extent'' and that ''there are hundreds of Arab patients at Hadassah Hospital at any given time.'' He said , and Israeli doctors confirm, that seriously ill Arabs from the West Bank are admitted in large numbers to Hadassah.
(Alan Raymond, a spokesman for ABC News in New York, said, ''The complaint by some Arab doctors was that the level of care at Ramallah was inferior and that there was an attempt to prevent Arabs from creating their own institutions on the West Bank.'')
''They chose to pervert the truth,'' Mr. Chafets charged.  In the summer of 1980, he said, the BBC withdrew its correspondent from Beirut, Tim Llewellyn, after he received a death threat from Syrian sources, who were displeased by his reporting on unrest in Syria. Earlier that year, the Reuters bureau chief, Berndt Debusman, was shot and critically wounded after being warned repeatedly by Syrians about similar reporting.
''The BBC did its best to cover that up,'' Mr. Chafets said, ''and for months Llewellyn covered the Middle East from Cyprus without mentioning that fact to his listeners.''


End of Document