Israel and Egypt vs. terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 6, 1990, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Editorials; Pg. 14A; EDITORIAL
Length: 402 words
Body


Obstructionists on both sides seem eager to use Sunday's cowardly    attack on an Israeli tourist bus in Egypt as evidence of the futility    of negotiations on the fate of Palestinians living in Israeli-occupied    territories.
 
     Actually, just the opposite is true. Unfortunately, sporadic acts    of terrorism are likely to remain a fact of life in the Middle East, as    they are in other troubled regions, for decades to come. However,    diplomacy cannot be held hostage to violence. By pressing forward with    plans for serious discussions on the Palestinian issue, Israeli and    Arab leaders eventually can render the terrorists isolated and    ineffectual.
    The best evidence of the positive long-term impact of Arab-Israeli  negotiations can be found in the official reaction of the Egyptian  government to Sunday's murders. President Hosni Mubarak vowed to track  down those responsible for the "monstrous" attack and promised to go  forward with his efforts to mediate talks between Israeli officials and    Palestinian representatives.
 
     Thanks to the Camp David accords, longtime enemies Israel and Egypt  now stand together in the ongoing war against terrorism in the Middle  East. Their diplomatic partnership obviously has not resolved all of  the Middle East's many historic differences, but it has brought a  degree of stability to the region and created a framework for further    negotiations.
 
     Israelis, Palestinians and other Arabs who genuinely seek peace    will not be deterred by desperate attempts to sabotage their efforts.
 
 Now is a time for other Arab governments, as well as representatives of  the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to condemn Sunday's attack    and reassert their commitment to mutual coexistence.
 
     It also would be appropriate for Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak  Shamir to disavow the criticism of Egypt offered by Trade Minister  Ariel Sharon and other hardline Likud officials who oppose Shamir's  peace plan. Mubarak has carried forward the legacy of Anwar Sadat, and  no single incident should cause Israelis to dismiss the many genuine    dividends of peace with Egypt.
 
     Sharon's wing of the Likud bloc must decide whether it will join  with other Israelis, Arabs and legitimate Palestinian representatives  in establishing ground rules for new peace talks, or whether it will    join Arab terrorists on the outside looking in.
 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, Clay Bennett; Hosni Mubarak; Yitzhak Shamir; cartoon of men holding up a bank in the background while David Paul sits in his office as Centrust Director and observes the robbery and says 'Amateurs'

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document