Israel Shouldn't Give Terrorism a Reward;
Too Great a Risk
The New York Times
February 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 20;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk ; Column 6; ; Letter
Length: 293 words
Body


To the Editor:
Henry Siegman's article "Palestinian Statehood -- Now" (Op-Ed, Jan. 26) is motivated by the recognition that only peace can bring security to Israel and the Palestinians. With that I agree.
He acknowledges that the recent terrorist attacks against Israelis do not "make for rational political discussion." However, I would not have expected his argument to be so flawed when one considers its assumptions.
Mr. Siegman argues that the extension of self-rule, linked to "confidence-building measures intended to show the viability of Palestinian rule," is doomed. The weakness of the Palestine Liberation Organization, he argues, requires Israel to take a "risk" to achieve peace, to consent immediately to the establishment of a Palestinian state and withdrawal of Israeli settlements.
It is a curious argument. If the P.L.O. is too weak to govern the limited territory it now rules, how can it be equipped to rule a Palestinian state comprising Gaza and the West Bank? If Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, is not able to deal decisively with insurgents in areas now under his control, how can he be expected to deal with them when his territory is increased severalfold?
Mr. Siegman expects Israel to offer extraordinary concessions to an organization that he concedes has not demonstrated any ability to deal with that challenge.
Mr. Siegman argues that Palestinian statehood "is a desperate Israeli need." Peace is an Israeli need. But Israel is not desperate. To the extent that statehood requires Israeli concessions and acquiescence, Israel cannot be expected to assent without more credible and tangible demonstrations that the risk is work taking than the say-so of Henry Siegman.
 
(Rabbi) SEYMOUR ROSENBLOOM
Elkins Park, Pa., Jan. 26, 1995

Load-Date: February 1, 1995


End of Document