ISRAEL CHARGES 2 SLODIERS IN A TERRORISM CONSPIRACY
The New York Times
June 24, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 632 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, June 23
Body


Two Israeli soldiers were formally charged today with conspiring to blow up mosques and Christian missionary institutions with explosives stolen from an army ammunition depot.  It was the first time that Israeli authorities had gathered enough evidence of Jews' plotting terrorist acts to seek a criminal trial.
The indictments, filed by military authorities, came as the West Bank and Israel were rocked by a series of bombings, demonstrations and shootings that left three Jews and five Arabs injured.
The bombing-conspiracy case apparently has no relation to the bombings June 2 that crippled two Palestinian mayors. The soldiers were already in jail at the time and no arrests have been reported in those attacks.
AN-A
An army spokesman gave few details of the soldiers' alleged plot, except to say that their targets included public Arab buildings, such as mosques, and unnamed Christian missionary institutions, many of which are in Jerusalem.
In the violence elsewhere, a 22-year-old Arab woman from Bethlehem died this morning from a gunshot wound suffered Thursday when an Israeli border policeman accidentally fired a burst from his automatic rifle. Her death set off a demonstration by Palestinian students at Bir Zeit University, north of Jerusalem, during which Israeli troops who were being stoned fired into the campus, hitting one student in the arm and chest and slightly wounding four others with ricocheting bullets.
 
Israeli Woman Hurt by a Bomb
Earlier this morning, a pregnant Israeli woman was seriously injured by a bomb planted among bottles on an upper shelf in a grocery store in the Tel Aviv suburb of Pardes Katz. The grocer and a male customer were also hurt. Another bomb went off harmlessly before dawn at a bus stop in French Hill, a Jewish neighborhood of apartment houses in the northeastern sector of Jerusalem, which was captured from Jordan in 1967 and annexed to Israel.
The two Israeli soldiers, identified as Acting Officer Moshe Ben-Arye and Pvt. Arye Leibowitz, both 20, were arrested May 9 after the director of a yeshiva in the Jewish quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem alerted the police to the presence of suspicious packages on the school roof. The soldiers had allegedly stockpiled 264 pounds of high explosive, 15 hand grenades, 14 rocket grenades, 160 yards of explosive fuse and two detonators.
A third person, identified as a yeshiva student and a friend of the two others, was take into custody June 8, allegedly in possession of explosive detonators. There has been no further word on possible charges.
Today's violence in the West Bank grew out of an apparent accident in Bethlehem last Thursday, when an Israeli border policeman was jostled and discharged three rounds from his rifle when his jeep was said to have bumped over an obstacle or a hole in the street.
 
Woman Wounded in Neck
A bullet ricocheted and sent a fragment into the neck of Tahrid al-Batma, a student at Bethlehem University. There was damage to her spinal cord, resulting in partial paralysis. She died at Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem. The policeman ''will certainly be punished,'' the West Bank military spokesman declared.
''She was an innocent victim of carelessness,'' said Mayor Elias Freij of Bethlehem. ''I believe that the heavyhanded policy of repression against our people is indirectly encouraging the soldiers to be harsh and careless in discharging their duties against the peaceful Arab population.''
When news of the death spread, angry protests erupted among the 1,500 students at Bir Zeit University, some of whom said they blocked streets in the hillside village near their campus with stones to prevent the passage of Israeli vehicles. They chanted slogans and sang songs of Palestinian nationalism and support for the Palestine Liberation Organization.


End of Document