ISRAEL DOES ITS PART BANNING JEWISH 'TERRORISM' WAS A CRUCIAL STEP
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 15, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10; EDITORIAL
Length: 399 words
Body


Israel's government has taken a necessary and courageous step to deal with Jewish extremists who want to undermine the peace process.
The Israeli cabinet unanimously banned two radical Jewish groups, known as Kach and Kahane Chai, which call for violent expulsion of all Arabs from the biblical Land of Israel, and it outlawed any other group adopting their objectives. The recent massacre at the Hebron mosque was conducted by a disciple of Kach's founder, the late Rabbi Meir Kahane, who preached that Israel must abandon democracy in order to preserve a purely Jewish state.
By calling these groups "terrorist" and applying to them anti-terrorist laws that had long been reserved for Arabs, the government has shown itself ready to take on extremists on both sides. Kach and Kahane Chai have only a few hundred members, but their leaders are openly disdainful of the democratic laws of Israel. Unless confronted, they threaten to ignite a civil war that could be joined by other radical settlers.
These radical settlers are in the minority. The ultimate fate of normal Israeli settlers living in the West Bank and Gaza can only be decided in future negotiations.
But the issue of Jewish "terrorists" was too dangerous to postpone. After the Hebron massacre, peace talks stalled as Palestinian leaders demanded that Israel guarantee security for Jew and Arab alike. Although the Israeli government ordered the arrest and disarming of a handful of Jewish radicals immediately after the Feb. 25 massacre, the orders were carried out slowly and incompletely. This fanned Palestinian skepticism about Israeli intentions and weakened the position of Arab negotiators.
So it is critical that the Israeli government swiftly enforce the new ban on Kach and Kahane Chai, which authorizes arrests and prosecution of members and financial supporters. Strong enforcement measures would help Palestinian negotiators reassure their public. Palestinian leaders should then return to the talks on implementing self-rule that were almost completed before the Hebron massacre. Beginning the self-rule process will give Yasir Arafat more leverage to confront his own violent radicals, who want peace talks to fail.
Toward that end, the Palestinian leader should not hold out for further concessions outside the negotiating table. Both sides need to move quickly before the Hebron killer succeeds in his goal of sabotage.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document