ISRAELI CONSUL HERE DEFENDS ABDUCTION OF OBEID
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 9, 1989, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 378 words
Byline: Philip Dine Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Israel's kidnapping of t he spiritual leader of a Middle Eastern group responsible for several acts of terrorism could mark a turning point in the region and help lead to peace, the Israeli consul to the Midwest said Tuesday.  Consul Uri Bar-Ner said in an interview that the capture of Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid, spiritual leader of Hezbollah, or Party of God, could help reduce terrorism in the area.  That, in turn, would eliminate a major obstacle to peace, Bar-Ner said.  ''It could be a turning point as far as once and for all stopping state terrorism and therefore help the peace process in the area,'' Bar-Ner said.  Progress could be made if Syria and Iran withdrew their support to Hezbollah, he said.  The Israeli action shows that despite the torturing and killing of Western hostages, the West will not surrender to terrorism, Bar-Ner said.  ''I think they understand now that they have reached the end of the road, that the United States, and Israel, of course, are willing to have all options open to stop it once and for all,'' Bar-Ner said.  ''The Hezbollah will understand they can not go unpunished and that (terrorism doesn't pay any more.'' Bar-Ner said that Israel seized Obeid to help the government win the release of the three Israeli soldiers believed to be held by Hezbollah.  Israel also hopes to gain freedom for American, German and Italian hostages, he said.  ''Now we are in a position to help the United States . . . negotiate indirectly through us with the Hezbollah to release the American hostages, '' Bar-Ner said.
He said the Italian and German governments had already asked the Israelis to try to get their nationals released.  Israel has offered to exchange Obeid and 150 Shiite terrorists for the western hostages.  Hezbollah has claimed it killed U.S. Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins on July 31 in retaliation for Israeli's kidnapping of Obeid. Israel has said Higgins probably was killed earlier.  The United States was not consulted so it would not share in the blame for the operation, Bar-Ner said.  He said that those who had criticized Israel for its action, including Sen.  Robert Dole, R-Kan., were mistaken.  ''The finger should be pointed at Iran and Syria, that support the Hezbollah, and not at Israel,'' Bar-Ner said.

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document