Israel Rejects U.N. Chief's Proposals on Deportees
The New York Times
January 27, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 826 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN,

By CLYDE HABERMAN,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Jan. 26
Body


Israel, edging closer to a confrontation with the United Nations, today angrily rejected Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's recommendation for Security Council measures to force the return of roughly 400 Palestinians deported to Lebanon six weeks ago.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, responding to Mr. Boutros-Ghali's move, accused the Secretary General of employing a double standard by "completely ignoring extremist Islamic terrorism" that he said had made the deportations necessary.
Other senior officials reacted sharply to a proposal by Mr. Boutros-Ghali for United Nations' monitoring Israel's treatment of the 1.8 million Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. That was not needed, the Foreign Ministry said, because under international law, responsibility for the Palestinians' "safety, peace and welfare" fell to Israel as the ruling power in the territories.
 Although the Rabin Government struck a combative stance, it was clear that it had lost ground in its fight to head off sanctions for violating Security Council Resolution 799. Approved unanimously on Dec. 18, it demands the return of the hundreds of expelled Islamic fundamentalists and sympathizers.
 
Report on Monday
 Hoping to buy time, the Government has also urged all parties to do nothing until after the High Court of Justice here decides whether the deportations were legal, a ruling that is expected this week. Israeli newspapers have speculated about possible compromises that would shorten the announced exile of up to two years, but all actions have been delayed until the court acts.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali, who gave a report of his findings to the Council late Monday night, did not recommend specific measures against Israel. But some officials here expect the next move to be a United Nations timetable to return the Palestinians from their tent camp in southern Lebanon. The move may be accompanied, they say, by a threat of sanctions, which Israel has never had to face despite having flouted many Council resolutions.
As in the past, the Israelis are counting on the United States to stand by them, even though the United States, too, had voted for Resolution 799, which called the deportations a breach of international law, specifically the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Israelis were encouraged today when the American Ambassador, William C. Harrop, said in a radio interview that it was "most unlikely that the United States would want to see sanctions" imposed. But Mr. Harrop quickly added: "We've not used our veto for two years. We don't want to do that, either."
 
Reluctance to Exercise Veto
 The Ambassador said the Clinton Administration wished "to continue a very close relationship with Israel."
Mr. Rabin echoed those sentiments, telling a parliamentary committee: "Until now, no American Administration has allowed sanctions against the State of Israel. I hope this will continue."
From Mr. Harrop's remarks, it seems that Washington wants the deportation crisis to be resolved before it is forced to choose between voting against Israel and exercising its veto in the Council, an action that has gone out of fashion as the United Nations has become an important vehicle for American foreign policy.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali's report caught the Israelis somewhat off guard. Not that it was a complete surprise, especially after three missions by United Nations emissaries had failed to budge Mr. Rabin from his positions that the expulsions stand and that to bring the exiles back now would be to hand a victory to his primary target, the Hamas group of militant fundamentalists.
The Secretary General warned that the Israeli refusal challenged the Security Council's authority. And he seemed to endorse the arguments of Arab states and some other countries that a double standard had been created in the way resolutions against Iraq were enforced, but not those against Israel.
In the last few days Israel has turned the double-standard argument around, saying that it is the victim, because the United Nations and other international bodies have solely condemned the deportations, and not the Hamas violence that led to them, including the killing of Israeli servicemen in December.
"They are completely ignoring extremist Islamic terrorism, completely ignoring the aim of this terrorism to bring about the end of the peace process," Mr. Rabin said. "The report is an example of double standards." The demand that the Security Council adopt new measures, he said, was almost unprecedented.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said, "If the United Nations wants to control Israel, it must answer how they're going to control the dangers which are facing Israel." Mr. Peres repeated warnings that stern action against Israel could imperil the peace talks by forcing the Arabs into added hard-line positions. But Mr. Boutros-Ghali's report quoted a United Nations emissary, Chinmaya Gharekhan, as having said Israel would be responsible if the talks broke down.

Graphic

 
Photo: Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, above, accused Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of employing a double standard by "completely ignoring extremist Islamic terrorism" that he said had made the deportations necessary. He flew yesterday to Northern Israel. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: January 27, 1993


End of Document