Israel Hezbollah move amounts to terrorism
USA TODAY
March 10, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 669 words
Byline: DeWayne Wickham
Body


When the State Department issues its annual report on worldwide
terrorism next month, seven nations -- Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Syria,
North Korea, Libya and Cuba -- are expected once again to make
the list.
For the past six years, these countries have been accused by successive
U.S. governments of being the sponsors of terrorist acts or the
protectors of those who commit them.
This year Israel should be added to the list.
The Jewish state, which itself long has been a target of such
despicable acts, has joined the ranks of those countries that
condone terrorism.
Proof of this ugly truth surfaced last week when it was revealed
that Israel has secretly kidnapped and held hostage 21 Lebanese
-- some of them for as long as a decade. The men, who were spirited
out of Lebanon by agents of the Israeli government, are being
held as a "bargaining card."
For what purpose?
In the event that Israelis are taken hostage by Hezbollah, the
Islamic movement that has been fighting to oust Israeli forces
from southern Lebanon, Jerusalem hopes to trade these pawns for
their release. That's the reasoning a three-judge panel of Israel's
Supreme Court gave last week when it admitted secretly condoning
the hostage-taking four months ago.
That decision puts Israel in a league by itself.
Officially endorsed
kidnapping
Israel is the only nation whose judiciary has publicly sanctioned
such political kidnappings, the kind of terrorism long decried
by the United States. During the 1980s, the Reagan and Bush administrations
branded as terrorists the Islamic militants who took eight Americans
and many other foreigners as bargaining cards, and slapped the
same label on Syria and Iran, two countries that were thought
to have backed them.
The hostages taken by Israel were "captured to achieve a goal"
and not because they were singled out as targets, Chief Justice
Aharon Barak said in an opinion that was reached in November.
Not surprisingly, the court sought to keep Israel's terrorism
-- and its own weak defense of it -- a state secret. Both became
known only after an Israeli human rights lawyer forced the court
to lower the protective veil.
By taking people hostage and holding them for years as bargaining
chips, Israel has abandoned the moral high ground it once held
in its fight with Islamic militants.
There is precious little difference between those in Jerusalem
who sanction such behavior and the Islamic militants who once
made Lebanon a haven for kidnappers.
Of the seven nations on the list of countries the State Department
says support terrorism, Cuba and North Korea are there only because
they are thought to give shelter to international terrorists.
If that's the case, how can Israel -- which we now know has committed
terrorist acts -- avoid being branded with the same scarlet letter?
It can't, unless the Clinton administration is willing to make
a mockery of its annual report on terrorism.
America's 'double standard'
Of course, there are those who have long argued that the United
States has a double standard when it comes to judging the acts
of its allies and those of others. While nations that back terrorism
by groups or individuals can be placed on the State Department's
infamous list, those that commit such acts themselves cannot.
That's because the State Department's definition of terrorism
pertains only to "subnational groups or clandestine agents."
In other words, when Hezbollah kidnaps persons and holds them
as a negotiating pawn, that's terrorism. When the nation of Israel
does it, it's not.
Such warped logic undermines American credibility in the Middle
East, where this nation has long sought to be the honest broker
of the peaceful settlement of the decades-old conflict between
Jews and Muslims.
News of the Israeli government's terrorism comes at a time when
the Clinton administration struggles to hold together the coalition
that defeated Iraq during the Persian Gulf War.
That task will become more difficult if the State Department's
next report on worldwide terrorism makes no mention of the hostages
Israel now holds as bargaining cards.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Abbas Moumani, Reuters

Load-Date: March 11, 1998


End of Document