ISRAEL SHOULDN'T LET BOMBS TERMINATE PEACE TALKS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
August 1, 1997, Friday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1997 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPED PAGE NEWS,
Length: 311 words
Body


The suicide bombings in Jerusalem on Wednesday were clearly timed not only to block the planned resumption of negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians but to make it more difficult for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to take the risks required to make a permanent peace.
Netanyahu must resist the understandable temptation to freeze the peace effort indefinitely in hopes of enhancing Israeli security and mollifying Cabinet colleagues opposed to further discussions with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
With the help of Egyptian and U.S. diplomacy, Netanyahu has showed new willingness to look beyond the setbacks of the last six months and his own doubts about the Palestinian commitment to peace.
Those doubts are not without foundation. The Palestinian Authority agreed to take specific steps to combat terrorism and to help assure Israeli security. It has done a poor job.
Arafat, at a minimum, has created a climate of tolerance for terrorism. He has condoned, if not instigated, violent Palestinian protests.
After a period of national mourning, Netanyahu should look again to the peace effort, provided Arafat cracks down on terrorism.
The two sides were preparing to negotiate the opening of an airport in the Gaza Strip and the terms of travel between Gaza and the West Bank. If talks are restarted, Arafat must realize that it is difficult for Israel to give the Palestinians ports of entry that can be used for weapons smuggling until it believes Palestinian officials are no longer flirting with terrorism.
The Jerusalem bombings are the deadliest act of terrorism since Netanyahu took office 13 months ago. Having won election on a platform of peace and security, he now faces pressure to put security ahead of peace. It will take courage to return to negotiations in the weeks ahead, but that ultimately is the only way to make Israel secure.

Notes

WHAT OTHER NEWSPAPERS ARE SAYING

Load-Date: August 2, 1997


End of Document