Israel waging its own war on terrorism
University Wire
March 25, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 699 words
Byline: By James Burnham, Daily Texan; SOURCE: U. Texas-Austin
Dateline: AUSTIN, Texas 
Body


This week an Israeli missile ended the life of one of the world's most well known terrorists, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. In 1987 Yassin helped found Hamas, a terrorist organization with the explicit purpose of waging "war" against Israel until the entire country capitulates and is driven into the ocean.
Hamas sympathizers in Europe and America take pains to distinguish between the organization's political wing, which coordinates activities in Palestine and administers basic civil services, and the organization's terrorist wing, which murders Israeli women and children in buses and coffee shops. However, the charter of the organization is very explicit about their goal stating, "Israel will exist and will continue to exist until Islam will obliterate it, just as it obliterated others before it." It is foolhardy to ask the government of Israel to stand idly by as the minions of Yassin and his violent ideology murder its children with no thoughts of peace.
Israel's detractors also cite the long and tumultuous history that exists between the people of Israel and the people of Palestine. Yes, there have surely been grave injustices perpetrated by both sides in this conflict. However, the moral relevance of today lies in current intent. Hamas terrorists do not attack armed Israeli soldiers in any sort of military operation with an explicit purpose -- they seek only to murder and maim innocent Israelis through residential bombing. Israel's army, however, restricts its operations to target only those members of Hamas or their ideological kid brother, Islamic Jihad, in an effort to rid the region of the violence and murder that these organizations spread. Their operations target only those who wish to destroy Israel and are, thus, morally sound actions, as they are the direct result of continued violence by Palestinian terror organizations.
Israel has the military capability to destroy every man, woman and child living in the Palestinian territory. Its government could wipe our Hamas in one day if it was willing to accept countless innocent deaths. It is this restraint, despite the danger to its own people, that evidences the moral superiority of Israel in this conflict. By showing a restraint entirely foreign to Hamas, Israel demonstrates its humanity and desire to someday obtain a lasting peace. Only the most naive would argue that, were it presented with the opportunity, Hamas would not destroy all of Tel Aviv or murder all of Israel.
Most troubling in recent years are the organizations that are dedicated to exporting America's young and foolish to Palestine, where, in all their youthful fervor and ignorance, they are used as human shields to protect terrorist hideouts and strategic locations. The most recent example of one of Lenin's "useful idiots" was Rachel Corrie, a person who has become something of a hero to America's disaffected, anti-Israel suburban youth. This woman is a terrorist supporter at worst and an extremely confused person at best. She was killed because she was standing in front of an Israeli bulldozer (not exactly the fastest moving vehicle) to protect a tunnel that Hamas uses to smuggle in weapons from Egypt! While her intentions may have somehow been pure, how can we revere this person who gave her life for what? For Hamas to have fresh dynamite?
Israel is confronted with a situation more severe than anything our nation has had to face. We have had one major terrorist attack on our soil in a few years and consider ourselves stricken, Israel has had scores and considers life normal. Our war against the progenitors of hatred and radicalism is no different from the war being waged by Israel. al Qaeda seeks our destruction; Hamas seeks Israel's. Whether the strike that killed Yassin hurts Hamas or simply inflames its recruits, it was Israel's right and duty to demonstrate to all those who seek to murder its women and children that they will not go unpunished. Appeasement is a deceased doctrine; there can be no peace with terrorists by showing weakness. Just as America must show resolve and determination in the face of al Qaeda, Israel will only be able to obtain peace through strength.
(C) 2003 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 25, 2004


End of Document