ISRAEL-SYRIA PEACE PACT WITHIN REACH
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 28, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 1101 words
Byline: Terence Hunt COPYD
Body


Promising signs
While President Clinton stressed that a peace treaty between
Israel and Syria was not at hand, U.S. officials believed Syrian
President Hafez Assad showed new and promising signs of flexibility.
He has also privately renounced terrorism, Clinton said.
JERUSALEM (AP) _ In extraordinary talks in
Syria, President Clinton said Thursday that President Hafez Assad
"went beyond anything he said before" on making peace with Israel
.  Clinton then sped to Jerusalem to meet with Israeli officials who
said progress, indeed, had been made.
Assad, who has built his career on confrontation with Israel,
spoke anew of "full peace" in return for the Golan Heights and
Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon.  Clinton told the Israeli
Knesset, "Something is changing in Syria."
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin expressed confidence Israel
could overcome differences with Syria and Lebanon, the last two
holdouts to peace among Israel's neighbors.
"It might take time.  One has to be patient," Rabin said.  "I
believe that it will not take long and hopefully we'll find ways and
means by which to overcome these gaps."
Clinton announced Secretary of State Warren Christopher would
return to the Middle East in a few weeks on a followup peace mission
While Clinton stressed that a peace treaty was not at hand, U
.S. officials believed Assad showed new and promising signs of
flexibility.
After the first trip to Syria by an American president in 20
years, Clinton observed that Assad spoke openly about transforming
the region from a state of war to a state of peace enabling Arabs
and Israelis to live in security, stability and prosperity.
"We have been urging President Assad to speak to you in a
language of peace that you can understand," Clinton said in an
evening address to the Knesset.  "Today he began to do so."
Clinton's assurances were welcome news in a nation where
tensions are high after a surge of terrorism by Muslim extremists.
Israeli officials expressed disappointment that Assad did not
publicly renounce terrorism, though Clinton said he had done so
privately.  In public, Assad heatedly denied that his country
supports terrorists.
"Perhaps there's been a softening, but a softening of opening
positions is still required and that still hasn't happened," Israeli
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said after being briefed by Christopher
Christopher cautioned, "There's long, tough negotiations ahead
."
Midway through his rugged three-day trip through six Mideast
countries, Clinton bade farewell to King Hussein in Jordan, flew to
Syria for talks at Assad's hilltop palace and then went on to Israel
where he placed a wreath at a monument outside the Knesset to
Israel's fallen soldiers.
En route to Israel, Clinton admitted, "I'm really tired."
Nevertheless he popped into the plane's conference room with a
cake to celebrate Christopher's 69th birthday.  Clinton revealed that
Jordan's Hussein and Queen Noor had tricked his wife, Hillary, on her
47th birthday Wednesday with a cake lighted by candles that couldn't
be blown out.
Clinton decided against visiting Jerusalem's holy places after a
tentatively planned tour stirred up a political ruckus between
Israelis and Palestinians, who dispute jurisdiction over the areas
However, Mrs. Clinton visited the Western Wall, bowing her head
and slipping a written prayer into a crack between the ancient
limestone blocks of Judaism's holiest shrine.
Today, Clinton flies to Kuwait to visit American troops and then
to Saudi Arabia before returning home early Saturday.
Damascus was Clinton's most difficult stop on a trip highlighted
by celebration over a historic peace agreement between Israel and
Jordan, ending 46 years of animosity.
Remarking on his talks with Assad, who has ruled Syria with an
authoritarian hand for two decades, Clinton said, "He drives a hard
bargain.  He's a tough man."
Clinton and Rabin adamantly refused to reveal specifically what
encouraged them about the talks with Assad.  Rabin said it was
obvious that there are important changes in attitude in the Arab
world.
"Don't ask me today about details on this part or that part of
the negotiations," Rabin said.  Speaking in Hebrew, he also
reaffirmed that "in principle we have agreed to withdraw" from the
Golan Heights but that "there's no agreement on the border with
Syria."
Clinton said he had found changes in Syria's position on key
issues, but Rabin said Clinton "did not tell me there is a historic
breakthrough."
At a joint news conference with Clinton in Damascus, Assad
flashed anger, first at questions about the sincerity of his
commitment to peace with Israel and then when asked if Syria sponsors
terrorism, as the United States charges.
"There's nothing we have that proves our design for peace
except our saying we want peace," Assad snapped.  Questioning
Israel's intentions, he said, "What also makes us believe that they
want peace?"
Although Assad denied any role in terrorism, Christopher said
later, "It continues to be an issue between us and Syria." He said
the United States believes Syria gives safe harbor and support to
terrorists.
Clinton softened Assad's comments by saying the Syrian leader
told him he opposed the killing of innocent civilians, in last week's
bus bombing in Tel Aviv as well as in the massacre of Muslim
worshippers in Hebron by a Jewish extremist.
Despite questions about visiting a country on the terrorism
list, Clinton said, "I'm certainly confident I did the right thing
."
Negotiations between Israel and Syria broke off in February
after more than two years of inconclusive talks.  The major obstacle
is Assad's insistence that Israel withdraw completely from the Golan
Heights, which Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 war. Israel has
offered a partial withdrawal over several years.
Syria also wants Israel to withdraw from Lebanon, where Syria is
the de facto power, and to dismantle Jewish settlements in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip.
Standing alongside Clinton, Assad stressed the principle of
"full withdrawal for full peace."
He made a somewhat similar comment last winter after meeting
with Clinton in Geneva.  However, American officials felt it was
particularly significant that Assad did not mention the West Bank and
Gaza or the status of Jerusalem on Thursday.  Moreover, they were
encouraged by his direct references to Israel within the context of a
"peaceful, normal relations."
"His statement plainly went beyond anything he had said before
and he very carefully prepared it to go beyond what he had said
before," Clinton said.  "In the Middle East every phrase has a
certain weight, a certain significance."
Clinton said Assad "calibrated it, I think, to advance the
public diplomacy."

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document