ISRAELIS ADMIT LAXITY ON OFFENSES BY SETTLERS
The New York Times
February 8, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 666 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Feb. 7
Body


The Israeli Justice Ministry made public an internal report today that documented a pattern of official leniency toward Jewish settlers suspected of violent crimes against Arabs on the occupied West Bank. The report, written in 1982, was issued in response to public pressure in view of suspected Jewish terrorism.
 Of 70 offenses that were studied, the report, written by Assistant Attorney General Judith Karp, found that 33 had not been investigated fully and the police had not shown proper diligence.
It said the police, often under instructions from the military government, had dropped investigations, failed to execute arrest warrants and released suspects from custody. The report described settlers as refusing to cooperate with the authorities.
Israeli Justice Ministry makes public internal report that documents patern of official leniency toward Jewish settlers suspected of violent crimes against Arabs on occupied West Bank, report, written in 1982, is issued in response to public pressure in view of suspected Jewish terrorism (M)
The 33-page document was the first acknowledgment that Jewish settlers had been deliberately spared from prosecution for offenses against Arabs.
Based on a yearlong study by a committee representing the army, the police, the Jerusalem district attorney's office and the Justice Ministry, the report said, ''Something should be done without delay to find an urgent solution to this situation.'' The committee had been set up by the Attorney General's office after appeals by Israeli law professors. Last April, after a year of inaction by the Government over the report, Mrs. Karp resigned as chairman.
Two days ago the Cabinet said in a statement that no resident of the West Bank and Gaza was exempt from the law and that the police presence would be strengthened. A spokesman for The Justice Ministry, Yitzhak Feinberg, declined to say whether the situation had improved since the report was written. The committee has been dissolved, he said, and the Justice Ministry is not monitoring the problem.
The Justice Ministry issued the report in reponse to months of demands by the Law Committee and the Interior Committee of Parliament.
Israel Harel, chairman of a council of West Bank settlers, denounced the document for limiting itself to offenses committed by Jews.
''It is an unjust report,'' he said. ''It takes things out of all context and out of all proportion.''
Apparently for balance, the Justice Ministry also listed 54 unsolved cases of violent offenses by Arabs in which 23 Jews were killed and 227 wounded in the last six years.
The period covered by the report about Jewish offenses - one year ending in the spring of 1982 - was one a heightened violence on the West Bank, with stone-throwing Arab youths rioting against Israeli soldiers and border policemen, who fired into crowds. Settlers whose cars were stoned also used weapons against the rioters.
On two incidents in which settlers killed Arab boys, the report said:
''The suspects received a summons to present themselves to the police station. They announced that they would not appear and that they would speak only with the military authorities. The police did not do anything to bring the suspects to the police station despite the grave suspicion.''
In one of these cases, an 18-year-old Arab, Farha Ali Essa el-Khdour, was shot to death in Bani Naim, near Hebron, after stones had been thrown. According to accounts in the Israeli press, the shooting took place an hour or more after the stoning, when people from the nearby Jewish settlement of Qiryat Arba returned with reinforcements.
''The investigation of the suspect was not started until six days after the event,'' according to the Karp report, ''and that was because during those days a delegation of Israelis from the region came to the police and informed them explicitly that the residents would not cooperate with the police and would act only according to the instructions of the military government and the minister.''


End of Document