Israeli court bars torture;
 Some call the ruling a serious blow to the fight against Mideast terrorism.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
September 7, 1999, Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 1A
Length: 984 words
Byline: Larry Kaplow, Staff Correspondent
Dateline: Jerusalem
Body

In a landmark decision, the Israeli Supreme Court on Monday outlawed the systematic use of sleep deprivation, violent shakings and other physical abuse of Palestinians under interrogation.
The decision by a nine-judge panel led by Chief Justice Aharon Barakby strikes at widely used tactics born of decades of Middle East conflict, and one of the most criticized aspects of Israel's democracy. While many countries use even harsher methods and deny it, Israel has been unique in setting up legal procedures and attempting to justify what most human rights groups call torture.
The official Israeli term is ''moderate physical pressure,'' and most Israelis consider it necessary to prevent terrorism. Immediately after the ruling Monday, politicians said the decision weakens the country's ability to thwart terror attacks and called for new laws to circumvent the ruling.
Constitution
They noted that just a day before, car bombs were detonated in two Israeli cities, although no Israelis were killed.
Prime Minister Ehud Barak said in a statement after the ruling that he " respects" the court's decision but that it will cause difficulties for the country's security services.
"A way must be found to allow for interrogation when bombs may be detonated in order to save lives,'' he said.
''It may cause real damage to our ability to fight terror,'' Israeli Deputy Defense Minister Ephraim Sneh told Israel Radio. ''It's very nice to have liberal legislation, maybe it is good in Scandinavia or Western Europe or North America, but in our part of the world, where we have fought terrorism so bitterly, such a verdict is almost completely irrelevant to the world we live in."
But the court, in the opinion, addressed the ''difficult reality in which Israel finds herself security-wise.''
''Although a democracy must often fight with one hand tied behind its back, it nonetheless has the upper hand,'' the ruling stated. A democracy's rule of law and protection of liberty ''strengthen its spirit and strength and allow it to overcome its difficulties.''
Monday, civil rights lawyers were stunned when, years after the lawsuits were filed but only four months after their hearing, the court not only ruled decisively that the interrogation methods were illegal but immediately enjoined the government from using them.
The ruling leaves security officials immune from legal prosecution if they can show that mistreatment was committed out of a lifesaving necessity.
Despite such a large loophole, human rights activists considered the ruling a major victory.
They have long disputed the security establishment's assertion that the physical abuse is used to find ''ticking bombs.''
Instead, they say the mistreatment is usually used to fish for information and extract confessions. They note that interrogations frequently stop during weekends when interrogators take a day off, a sign they are not seeking to stop attacks.
Several right-wing members of the Knesset, Israel's parliament, condemned the court Monday, saying it had given improper weight to the human dignity of terror suspects compared with the security of Israel. Members of the opposition Likud Party said they would draft legislation to bypass the high court decision.
''I think this response is dangerous, even absurd,'' said Yuval Steinitz, a Likud lawmaker. ''Israel is setting a precedent as a country losing its ability to defend itself.''
Since 1987, 10 Palestinians have died under interrogation and thousands have been subject to torture, according to the Israeli human rights group B'Tselem.
''What it has become is a whole bureaucracy of torture, a whole army of bureaucrats and doctors and lawyers,'' said B'Tselem Executive Director Eitan Felner. ''Finally, the High Court of Justice said, even in the name of security, there are some things that cannot be justified.''
Felner said other countries facing terrorism, including the United States and Britain, outlaw torture. But, he said the practice has grown in Israel out of the ''siege mentality that Israel developed over the last 30 years.''
At least since the early 1970s, Israel has used physical mistreatment against Palestinians. The techniques are infrequently used against Jewish Israelis.
Israeli law forbids physical abuse of inmates. But, since 1987, regulations from the prime minister established procedures, including court oversight, under which the abuse could take place.
Part of Monday's ruling, issued in response to an appeal by six Palestinians who reported being abused during interrogation and four human rights groups, stated that regulations cannot be used if they go against the country's law.
Often, according to a government commission, security services have lied to judges about the methods being used. Other times, they have gotten court approval by arguing that there was an emergency security need for extreme treatment.
The most dangerous treatment is violent shaking while an inmate's hands and feet are cuffed. It leaves the prisoner dazed, nauseous and sometimes with spinal injuries.
Many inmates are made to squat on the ground while their hands are cuffed behind their backs at head level.
Some are handcuffed hanging from pipes so they must spend hours on their toes.
Inmates frequently are hooded for hours or days, forced to stay awake for days and subjected to loud music or screaming.
Palestinian Abed Ahmar, of Bethlehem, said he was subjected to interrogation for two months in 1996, after being arrested for reasons never explained to him. He was never charged.
He said interrogators shook him for three to five seconds at a time. Sometimes he passed out and awoke in the infirmary. Sometimes, security agents brought a mirror to show him his bloodshot eyes and ashen face.
''You don't look like yourself'' after such treatment, he said.
''Sometimes a person feels like it's three hours they've been shaken.''
--- The New York Times contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo
An interrogation technique allegedly used on Palestinian prisoners is demonstrated by an Israeli human rights group. A prisoner's head is covered with a sack while his arms and legs are chained to a chair for hours. / RINA CASTELNUOVO / New York Times

Load-Date: September 7, 1999


End of Document