ISRAEL MERITS PRAISE FOR DECISIVE ACTION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 10, 1989, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 724 words
Byline: Moshe Arad
Body


The United States and Israel confronted terrorism this past week and held fast. For this, all who cherish freedom should be grateful. That confrontation, between humane concerns and forces of darkness, presented these two democratic friends with a grave moral crisis and an acute political dilemma.  What lessons can be derived from this painful episode?  From Israel's perspective, the incident highlights the principles that guide our response to terrorism. Our policy, even when it has political ends, is fundamentally humanitarian: It aims to save life and to salvage ravaged spirits.  Our captives, victims of either terrorism or war, must be rescued by all available means. They must be delivered from the demoralization and psychic pain that protracted captivity inescapably inflicts.  Terrorists must be made to pay for their acts. They must know that retribution is certain. If all else fails, force is justified, both as a moral imperative and according to international law. And the effective use of force can deter further terrorist acts. Negotiation for the release of hostages and captives is politically and morally valid only when other recourses have been exhausted.  Israel stands on the front line of terrorism. If we don't take action, no one will. And the most dangerous thing is to exclude the use of force. We must be willing to use a varied range of measures, some unorthodox.  Terror reigns on our northern border, in an area of Lebanon that no government controls. One of its main practitioners is Hezbollah.
The group is backed by Iran and Syria, which use these assassins as an instrument of state policy - a policy that is nothing short of state terrorism.  Hezbollah has killed about 300 Americans, more than 70 Frenchmen and dozens of Israelis. It holds three of our soldiers captive, and the fate of three others is unknown.  The man we apprehended, Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid, is no ordinary Shiite cleric. He was at the heart of planning and execution of terrorist acts.  Under interrogation, he has confessed that he was directly involved in the kidnapping of Lt. Col. William Higgins.  Israel's apprehension of Obeid was a legitimate exercise of law enforcement in self-defense. That right is based on a widely recognized principle of international law - the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction in countering terrorist violence.  We should remember that the terrorists seek to exploit the hostages cynically, for maximum political advantage, for publicity, to pressure Israel and to drive a wedge between the U.S. and Israel.  Some say that before placing American lives at risk, Israel should have consulted the United States. But that would have confronted Washington with the dilemma of approving or disapproving the action.  Approval would have required the U.S to undertake a course of action it was not prepared to follow. Disapproval could have derailed action that Israel regards as vital to its interests and security. It was the better part of wisdom to act independently.  These terrorists recycle their horrors in a policy of disinformation aimed at deceiving and disrupting the free world. Thus, they tortured and killed the CIA station chief in Beirut, William Buckley, but announced his execution much later to gain whatever advantage they could.  Now they have treated the cold-blooded murder of Higgins the same way. The strong probability, in the view of Israeli and American intelligence, is that Higgins was assassinated last December and that Hezbollah exploited the killing at a propitious moment. To blame Israel for the murder is to ignore the evidence of the recent past.  Perhaps the most harrowing aspect to the situation - more despicable somehow than the actual killings - is the terrorists' cruel, cynical manipulation of human desperation. Nothing we can say or do can assuage the anguish felt by the families of Higgins and the other hostages. We in Israel, who have for so many years borne the trauma of terrorism, feel that anguish with them.  But the democratic world must not be held hostage by the terrorists, submit to their blackmail or weaken our resolve and our unity in the war against terror. We can succeed only if we remain strong in our determination to resist terror.  Moshe Arad is Israel's ambassador to the United States.  Copyright 1989 The New York Times

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document