Israel-Syria talks to resume in U.S.
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 10, 1993, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 23A
Length: 464 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


The campaign for a broad Middle East peace settlement advanced on two levels  Thursday with the announcement that President Clinton will meet Syrian  President Hafez Assad and that negotiations between Israel and Syria will  resume in Washington early next year.
The Syrian-Israeli talks have been stalled since September, principally  over the future of the Golan Heights, a strategic plateau that Israel seized  in 1967. Syria wants a total Israeli withdrawal; Israel will not say how much  it will vacate until Syria makes a commitment to a total peace.
Compiled from Times WiresCHRISTOPHER-
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in Damascus, the Syrian capital,  that Clinton's direct involvement "is important to our role as full partner  and active intermediary in the Arab-Israel peace process."
In the hope of achieving a breakthrough, the administration bypassed its  own assessment of the Assad regime as a terrorism sponsor involved in drug  trafficking.
Christopher said the United States had "no plans at the present time" to  change that official assessment of Syria. A senior administration official on  the trip, commenting only on condition of anonymity, said a peace agreement  between Syria and Israel would largely resolve the problem of Syrian support  for terrorism.
The Clinton-Assad meeting will take place in Geneva next month, probably  after Clinton attends a NATO summit in Belgium. The last U.S. president to  meet Assad was George Bush, who met the Syrian leader before the 1991 Persian  Gulf war.
Earlier this week, Assad promised to cooperate with a U.S. team coming to  the Middle East to investigate the fate of six Israeli soldiers missing in  Lebanon. He also promised to grant exit permits by the end of the year to any  Syrian Jews that request them.
Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Sharaa said Syria is "committed to peace;  this is a strategic option for us." U.S. officials traveling with Christopher  cited Sharaa's comment as a significant advance.
However, Sharaa restated in firm terms that on the issue of the Golan  Heights Syria will accept "nothing less than a total withdrawal from the  Golan for the establishment of free and comprehensive peace in the region."
Christopher said that Syria and Lebanon will send delegations to Washington  in early January for preparatory consultations. On Jan. 18, the heads of the  delegations for those two countries as well as for Israel, Jordan and the  Palestine Liberation Organization will participate in what he called  "simplified and streamlined talks" in preparation for formal bilateral  negotiations a couple of weeks later.
A senior administration official said the talks would be one-on-one and  held in private - to provide a better opportunity to air positions without the  glare of publicity.

Load-Date: December 13, 1993


End of Document