Israel may delay peace plan implementation implementation implementation
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
November 03, 1998, Tuesday tuesday tuesday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A P3A P3A
Length: 730 words
Byline: Hugh Dellios Chicago Tribune tribune tribune
Body


JERUSALEM - The renewed Middle East peace plan faced an unexpected
hitch Monday when Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked for
several days' delay in implementation so he could seek approval by his
divided Cabinet and the parliament.
As the Palestinian Authority met its first deadline by presenting an
anti-terrorism plan to U.S. officials, Netanyahu telephoned
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat and said it could take Israel
several extra days to withdraw troops from an additional portion of
the West Bank, as stipulated in the Wye River agreement the two men
signed last month in the United States.
Netanyahu reassured Arafat he was committed to implementing the
land-for-security deal, and the prime minister repeated that assurance
later in a telephone call to Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
"He asked for some days to delay the implementation," Arafat said in
the West Bank city of Ramallah, adding that he had agreed to the
request.  request.  request.
In Washington, State Department officials said the Palestinians had
met their first requirement under the interim peace accord by
submitting the anti-terrorism plan. Israeli officials said late Monday
that they had not seen a complete plan but hoped to have it before
Netanyahu's Cabinet was scheduled to discuss the peace agreement at a
meeting today.
"We do not think the schedule is going to be thrown off," State
Department spokesman James Rubin said. "Whatever technical, legal,
political issues arise, we expect and anticipate that each side will
have the necessary time to complete its responsibilities."
Rubin said details of the Palestinians' anti-terrorism plan were
supposed to remain secret.
U.S. mediator Dennis Ross and his deputy, Aaron Miller, were scheduled
to depart for the Middle East as early as today "to have a revolving
presence" in the region, Rubin said.
The Wye agreement was supposed to have taken effect Monday. But in a
statement, Netanyahu argued that Israel's land transfer is contingent
upon the Palestinians first implementing several steps to reinforce
Israel's security. He said that once those steps had been taken,
Israel would hand over the land on the deadline date of Nov. 16 "or at
least complete the process within a few days."
Under the 12-week interim plan, Israel has agreed to return 13 percent
of the territory seized from Jordan in the 1967 Six-Day War. In the
first of three phases, Israel will give up 2 percent of the land, and
a further 7 percent that has been under joint jurisdiction will come
under full Palestinian control.
Among the Palestinians' obligations - as noted in Netanyahu's
statement - are implementing a working plan against terrorism,
presenting a framework for the confiscation of illegal weapons,
nullification of anti-Israel wording in the Palestinian charter and
establishment of a committee to prevent provocation against the
Israelis.
Netanyahu said his request for a delay was for "technical" reasons.
The Israeli government will need to close military bases and reassign
and transport troops out of the West Bank under the agreement.
But the prime minister's main problem has been winning political
support for the agreement he signed, even within his own Cabinet. Many
of his aides and political supporters come from religious, right-wing
and immigrant parties that do not support the 1993 Oslo peace process,
either because they do not trust the Palestinians to protect Israeli
interests or because they oppose ceding Israeli land on historical
grounds.
The Cabinet was supposed to have met last week to discuss the Wye
plan, which restarted the peace process after a 19-month delay. The
Cabinet is now scheduled to discuss the plan today and Wednesday. It
then will be submitted for debate in the full Knesset, or parliament,
next week.
Netanyahu has insisted he cannot implement the accord he signed until
it is ratified by the Knesset. And he did not want to place it before
the members of his coalition government until he could lay the
Palestinian anti-terrorism plan on the table.
"He's going to be asked a lot of questions," said government
spokesman Moshe Fogel. "There's not an effort to get out of anything
here."
Arafat responded Monday to a threatening leaflet that was allegedly
distributed Sunday by the radical Hamas movement. "It is not the first
time and it will not be the last time," he said.
"You know, I have faced many things like that. I don't care [about]
it." it." it."

Load-Date: November 3, 1998


End of Document