ISRAELIS INTERCEPT ATTACK, KILL 4
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 31, 1990, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 556 words
Body


NIZZANIM, Israel - Israeli soldiers killed four Palestinian guerrillas and captured 12 on Wednesday as the guerrillas sped toward the coastline in speedboats to begin attacks coinciding with the Jewish holiday of Shavuot.  The guerrilla faction of Abu Abbas, mastermind of the Achille Lauro hijacking, claimed responsibility. It said that all the boats had reached their targets and that 11 guerrillas had escaped and rocketed the coast at Tel Aviv and nearby towns.  The attacks were in retaliation for the killing of seven Palestinians by an Israeli civilian last week and for the assassination of a Palestinian military leader two years ago, the group said.  The Israeli army said the guerrillas had planned to attack beachfront hotels filled with people celebrating Shavuot, which marks the giving of the Ten Commandments. The six small speedboats were sent from a mothership that sailed from Libya, the army said.  No Israelis were killed or injured, although one of the guerrillas' speedboats outran an Israeli patrol boat and splashed ashore near a crowded Mediterranean beach club, the army said.  Police evacuated a 30-mile stretch of coast south of Tel Aviv; the area had been jammed with people on vacation.  Only two of the six guerrilla vessels got near shore, authorities said.  One, carrying 11 Palestinians, was attacked by helicopters and troops as it pulled onto an almost empty beach near Nizzanim, 18 miles south of Tel Aviv.  Four guerrillas were killed and seven captured there, the army said.
Five other guerrillas surrendered aboard another boat that was intercepted by Israeli vessels near a beach north of Tel Aviv. The other vessels broke down or were abandonded at sea, the army said.  The mothership fled toward Port Said in Egypt; Egyptian authorities were notified, the Israeli army said.  The armed forces chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Dan Shomron, said the attack boats had been armed with rockets, machine guns and anti-aircraft missiles.  Deputy Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu accused the PLO of violating its pledge not to engage in terrorism. It was unclear whether the attack had the endorsement of PLO chief Yasser Arafat, who promised in December 1988 to abandon terrorism.  The faction that claimed responsibility is the Palestine Liberation Front, a pro-Arafat faction. Its leader is Mo hammed Abbas, whose nom de guerre is Abu Abbas. An Italian court convicted him in absentia of masterminding the hijacking in 1985 of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro, during which an American, Leon Klinghoffer, was killed.  Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens said he hoped the incident would convince the United States of the need to abandon its talks with the PLO.  State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said in Washington: ''The United States is horrified at this terrorist attack.'' If it is determined the attackers had PLO connections, ''we would view this as a very serious matter,'' she said.  In Baghdad, Iraq, Palestine Liberation Front representative Hussein el-Abed said the attack had been in revenge for the killing of PLO military chief Khalil Al-Wazir, whose death in Tunis in April 1988 was widely blamed on Israel. The front, in statements issued in Lebanon and Iraq, said the raid also was in retaliation for the killing of seven Palestinians by an Israeli civilian last week.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO by Reuters … Israeli soldiers standing in the surf on Wednesday next to a boat that was used by Palestinian guerrillas to attack an Israeli beach.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document