Israeli lecturer: Terrorism can be seen as opportunity for peace
University Wire
October 18, 2001


Copyright 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-Wire
Length: 461 words
Byline: By Bryan O'Connor, Montana Kaimin
Dateline: Missoula, Mont.
Body


Israel had much hope for the peace negotiations with the Palistinian Authority, but the assassination of a senior Israeli official threatens to negate recent progress, an Israeli diplomat said at the University of Montana on Wednesday.
Yossi Amrani, the consul general of Israel for the Pacific Northwest region, spoke Tuesday night at UM as part of the 2001 Mansfield Conference. He was invited by the Montana World Affairs Council to speak about Israel's future stability in light of recent events.
U. Montana
Rehavam Ze'evi, a cabinet member of prime minister Ariel Sharon, was shot and killed Wednesday in a hotel in Jeruselem. The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization, claimed responsibility hours later.
On Tuesday, Amrani said he saw the attacks of Sept. 11 and the aftershocks as an unfortunate way to bring countries together. He said he believed that it was a chance to bring peace to the Middle East as countries unite against terrorism.
"This is a window of opportunity for a breakthrough in Middle East peace negotiations," Amrani told the Kaimin on Tuesday.
After Wednesday's assassination, the Israeli government announced that it was halting negotiations with the Palistinian Authority. Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres later said Yasser Arafat needs to control the situation.
"Where was Arafat a year ago when Israel told him to put (the PFLP) behind bars?" Amrani told the Kaimin on Wednesday.
Amrani said the Palistinian Authority has not responded to Israel's pleas to stop the terrorist group which operates under the umbrella of the PLO. He said he is frustrated with the support that Arafat has gotten lately from the United States and Great Britain.
"Why does he deserve to be applauded when he is involved in terrorism?" Amrani said.
Amrani said that before Arafat can join an international coalition to fight terrorism, he must eradicate terrorism in his own backyard. Amrani went on to say that Arafat must be held accountable for his actions, and follow through with his promises.
The Palistinian Authority condemned the killing of Ze'evi on Wednesday, and Arafat said the act damages the Palistinians' position.
Amrani said he did not know Ze'evi personally, but watched him all his life in Israel. He said Ze'evi translates to "wolf" or "wolfish" in English.
"He fought in most of the wars since 1948," Amrani said. "He was a very courageous man."
Amrani said he is disappointed by the setback in the peace process, something he has worked closely with for a better part of his life.
"We were on the verge of reaching a better world," Amrani said. "Dark forces of the past are trying to pull us centuries back in time."
(C) 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 18, 2001


End of Document