ISRAEL USES VEILED THREATS IN BID TO FOIL ARAFAT'S EVACUATION PLAN
The New York Times
December 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 817 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Dec. 12
Body


Israeli officials have been using veiled threats and brinkmanship in an effort to foil a plan for evacuation of Yasir Arafat, head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, from the northern Lebanese port city of Tripoli.
 Public and private statements by officials in recent days appear to have been carefully calculated to suggest the possibility that Israel might attack Mr. Arafat and his guerrillas, even if they are aboard Greek ships flying the United Nations flag.
Defense Minister Moshe Arens, asked in an ABC News interview from Tel Aviv whether Israeli forces would fire on the ships, said, ''I hope that we won't have to get to that point.''
Another knowledgeable official said in an interview that Israel reserved the right to attack Mr. Arafat wherever and whenever the opportunity presented itself.
Israel makes public and private statements carefully calculated to foil evacuation of Yasir Arafat from Tripoli by implying attack could occur even against Greek ships flying UN flag; disgust at UN protection of 'cutthroats' cited (S)'These People Merit Punishment '
''We want to serve notice to the U.N. and the countries involved that we oppose this operation, and we oppose safe conduct, period,'' the official said. ''We don't go beyond that. We think that these people merit punishment. Our policy is to punish them wherever and whenever we can.''
Under former Defense Minister Ariel Sharon, Israel is reported to have tried to kill Mr. Arafat during the invasion of Lebanon in June 1982 by bombing buildings where the P.L.O. leader was thought to be hiding. Mr. Sharon said last week that Mr. Arafat should not be allowed to leave Tripoli alive.
At the same time, the impression prevails in Jerusalem that Israel would not actually attack the Greek passenger ships that are scheduled to carry the P.L.O. fighters, and would not confront French naval vessels that are to provide an escort. The purpose seems to be to deter the Greeks from sending their ships in the first place, and to frighten Mr. Arafat away from an attempted evacuation by suggesting that he might be a target just before he boards a ship and comes under the protection of the U.N. flag.
Mr. Arafat, whose forces are trapped in Tripoli by pro-Syrian Palestinian factions, called on the Soviet Union and Syria today to provide air cover for his departure.
 
Israeli Motives Are Varied
Israel's motives in this complex game of psychological warfare seem varied.
One is a matter of principle. An official described the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir as ''disgusted'' by the United Nations' decision to give such a ''band of cutthroats'' safe conduct, especially just after the P.L.O. took responsibility for planting a powerful bomb in a Jerusalem bus last week, killing 5 people and wounding 42.
Both sides in the internal P.L.O. conflict at first took responsibility for the bus bombing, but the pro-Arafat faction quickly disclaimed its avowal. The anti-Arafat group has let its avowal of responsibility stand.  After the bombing, the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, rejected an appeal by Mr. Shamir for withdrawal of the offer of the world organization's flag.
''It's incomprehensible, unbelievable, that the United Nations and some Western powers should now try to provide assistance to them,'' Mr. Arens said in the television interview. ''Terrorists would move out of Tripoli with their arms and move to another place so they could engage in terrorism again.''
 
Violation of Accord Seen
Another consideration is that Mr. Arafat received assurances of safe conduct from the Israelis in August 1982 when he left West Beirut, on the condition that he not return to Lebanon. Israel contends that having brought his men back to Tripoli, and having infiltrated some of them back into Beirut, he has violated this arrangement, which was worked out through the United States.
In addition, the Israelis say they are concerned about reports that the P.L.O men might be allowed to take heavy weapons with them when they leave Tripoli, and that they could then reconstitute themselves as a terrorist force operating against Israel.
Less important in explaining the Israeli efforts are the longer-term calculations about what kind of P.L.O. would be produced either by Mr. Arafat's survival or by his demise.
As a matter of formal policy, Israel has never distinguished between various factions under the P.L.O. umbrella, reasoning that since they are all hostile to the Israelis, it makes no difference which one is dominant.
 
Syrian Domination Held Likely
Consequently, one official asserted, policy is not being shaped by efforts to influence the ultimate form of the P.L.O, despite the fact that some Israeli experts on Arab affairs believe a P.L.O. without Mr. Arafat would be under such complete Syrian domination that Syria could serve as ''an address'' for Israeli retaliation when terrorism occurs.


End of Document