Israel protests papal remarks on terrorism;
While decrying attacks in four nations, he did not mention Israel. The Vatican issued a clarification.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
July 26, 2005 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A05
Length: 465 words
Byline: By Victor L. Simpson; Associated Press
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body


Pope Benedict XVI faced the first major conflict of his three-month papacy when Israel summoned the Vatican envoy yesterday to express outrage that the pontiff had "deliberately failed" to condemn extremist attacks against Israelis.
Benedict, who has consistently reached out to Jews since assuming the papacy, was criticized by Israel for remarks Sunday from his Alpine vacation retreat in northwestern Italy.
He prayed for God to stop the "murderous hand" of terrorists and referred to the recent "abhorrent terrorist attacks" in Egypt, Britain, Turkey and Iraq but did not mention attacks in Israel.
"The Pope deliberately failed to condemn the terrible terror attack that occurred in Israel last week," the Israeli Foreign Ministry said.
A July 12 suicide bombing in the seaside city of Netanya killed five Israelis. Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.
"We expected that the new pope, who on taking office emphasized the importance he places on relations between the church and the Jewish people, would behave differently," the Israeli statement said. It called on the pontiff to condemn attacks "against Jews in the same way he condemns terror attacks against others."
Later, Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom appeared to soften the criticism, saying he hoped the failure to mention the attack in Netanya "was a mistake and not a deliberate omission."
Vatican spokesman Joaquin Navarro-Valls, accompanying Benedict on vacation, issued a one-line statement saying the papal envoy "has already replied to the Israeli government." It did not elaborate.
Later, Navarro-Valls released a second statement in which he noted that Benedict's words expressly referred to attacks in "recent days."
"It's surprising that one would have wanted to take the opportunity to distort the intentions of the Holy Father," Navarro-Valls said in the statement. "Obviously the other week's grave attack in Netanya referred to by Israel falls under the general and unreserved condemnation of terrorism."
Benedict has issued a series of condemnations of deadly attacks since the July 7 London bombings.
Speaking to reporters yesterday at his vacation retreat in Les Combes, Italy, Benedict said he did not see an anti-Christian motive in the recent wave of attacks for which Islamic extremists have been blamed, attributing them instead to "a much more general intention."
Benedict also said it was important to seek dialogue with the best elements of Islam.
After visiting a church, the Pope brushed off a question about whether he believed Islam was a religion of peace. "I wouldn't want to label [it]," he said. "Certainly there are elements that favor peace. It also has other elements."
Benedict said last week that terrorism was not the result of a clash between the West and Islam but the action of "fanatics."

Load-Date: July 26, 2005


End of Document