Israel on the alert;
Prepared for the worst: 'We have indications that there will be more attempts at terrorism,' Benjamin Netanyahu said, referring to last week's suicide bombing.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 4, 1997, Monday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 04A
Length: 667 words
Byline: Larry Kaplow; STAFF CORRESPONDENT
Body


Jerusalem ---Israel tightened security Sunday as officials warned there could be another terrorist attack like last week's suicide bombing that killed 15 people.
Israeli authorities arrested 37 Palestinians Sunday after receiving more threats of violence, including one threat purportedly from the radical Islamic group Hamas demanding the release by midafternoon of all Palestinian prisoners.
"We have indications that there will be more attempts at terrorism," Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said in a broadcast interview. "We are unfortunately prepared for the worst."
Police spokeswoman Linda Menuhin said authorities had received more than 200 reports of suspicious packages by late afternoon throughout the country, much more than double the average number. None was a bomb.
"All of them have been checked," Menuhin said, adding that in some cases robots were used to remove suspicious objects.
 
"The police are taking every threat seriously," she said.
Sunday is the first day of the workweek here, and Israelis appeared to be out in the usual numbers.
More than the usual number of heavily armed police and soldiers were on street corners, occasionally demanding identification from passers-by. Although the U.S. Embassy warned Americans to stay out of crowded places, tourists also gathered in the usual downtown areas.
"It's important to not let it change your behavior. That's giving in to what (the bombers) are trying to accomplish," said Morty Schaja, 42, an investment manager who came with his family from New York.
"The presence of Israeli soldiers has made me feel better," said Michael Klieger, 43, a postal supervisor visiting with his family from Pembroke Pines, Fla.  Funerals were held Sunday for the last two victims of the twin suicide bombings in the Mahane Yehuda vegetable market Wednesday ---including one whose funeral was postponed because his mother was not Jewish and therefore had to be buried in a cemetery for people of mixed religious backgrounds.
The explosions killed 15 people, including the bombers, and injured more than 150 others. About 40 were still in hospitals Sunday.
In addition to reminding Israelis of a wave of terrorist attacks last year that killed 57 people, the bombing derailed new attempts to begin p peace talks over the fate of the occupied territories.
U.S. special envoy Dennis Ross is expected to visit the region this week in order to restore the security links that Israel and the Palestinians have used to curtail terrorism.
As tension between the two sides remained high, Israelis have closed off travel between most Palestinian cities, calling it a necessary move while they investigate the bombing.
According to Israeli media, the Israeli army arrested at least 116 Palestinians in search of clues to the bombing. Security forces have not ruled out that the bombers could have come from abroad.
A leaflet distributed after the bombing demanded that Israel release Palestinian prisoners by 9 p.m. Sunday ---a deadline that apparently passed without incident. Security officials question the authenticity of the leaflet.
Palestinians complained Sunday about the Israeli military clampdown in the West Bank and Gaza territories that they have occupied since the 1967 war.
"The situation here is very difficult. The people here are divided into two groups ---those who support the bombing and those who reject it," said Elham Khatib, 23, a Jerusalem political activist with Fateh, the m majority Palestinian party.
She said she had not been able to go to her classes at nearby Bethlehem University because of the closure.
"How do you suppose I can support the peace process when I can't even get to my university 10 minutes from here?" Khatib said.
Some merchants in Arab sections of East Jerusalem received leaflets encouraging Palestinians to attack Israeli soldiers and telling merchants to close their shops one day a month.
Those were the kinds of actions taken in the Intifada uprising, which helped prompt Israel to begin returning land to Palestinians.

Graphic

 
Israeli soldiers pass a soft-drink seller near the Damascus Gate on Sunday
 in Jerusalem. / RICK BOWMER / Associated Press
 Chart: UPDATE ON THE MIDDLE EAST
 National Security Adviser Sandy Berger said Sunday that there is no
 evidence so far of a connection between the two men suspected of plotting
 to bomb a Brooklyn subway and Middle Eastern terror groups.
 The FBI, New York police and international intelligence agencies were c
 conducting "a very intensive investigation," but "have not established any
 direct relationship," Berger said on CBS' "Face the Nation."
 Gazi Ibrahim Abu Mezer, 23, and Lafi Khalil, 22, were captured during an
 early morning raid on their Brooklyn apartment Thursday. Authorities said
 they were hours away from pulling off a suicide bombing at a busy subway
 station.
 Both men were shot and wounded when police say they tried to detonate one
 of the devices. Their injuries were not considered life-threatening.
 Palestinian Authority President Yasser Arafat grappled Sunday with a new
 crisis ---how to meet his payroll after Israel made good on a threat to
 withhold millions of dollars from his government in the wake of last
 week's devastating market bombings.
 The action, one of several punitive measures Israel announced after W
 Wednesday's attack, left the Palestinian Authority unable to meet its $ 40
 million payroll, now overdue to about 80,000 Palestinian police officers
 and civil servants. On Friday, Israel withheld $ 25 million in tax revenues
 it owed the authority.
 "The Palestinian Authority was barely making it even before this," said S
 Salam Fayyad, the International Monetary Fund's representative in the Gaza
 Strip and West Bank. "I don't see how this can be sustained."

Load-Date: August 5, 1997


End of Document