Israel Accusing Muslim Militants in Recent Bombings in the West
The New York Times
July 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 670 words
Byline: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, 

By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: JERUSALEM, July 27
Body


Israeli officials asserted today that a recent terrorist campaign of bombings directed at Israeli and Jewish targets in Britain, Argentina and Panama was the work of radical Muslim fundamentalist forces. Military strategists here also believe that the fundamentalists are taking aim at secularist Arab governments.
Yigal Pressler, an adviser on terrorism to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, today blamed what he described as "extremist Islamic fundamentalist terrorism" for this new wave of terror.
Upon arrival at Ben-Gurion International Airport from his meeting in Washington with King Hussein of Jordan tonight, Mr. Rabin reiterated those assertions.
Mr. Rabin had earlier said Iran and radical Muslim fundamentalist groups with the support of Syria were moving to counteract the peace effort in the Middle East with terror outside the region, primarily against Israel and Jewish organizations around the world.
 
Rabin Blames Iran
 On Tuesday in remarks made at a White House news conference, Mr. Rabin told reporters that the militant Muslim fundamentalist Government in Teheran had set up an international terror network overseas. It is operating in Lebanon from Syrian-controlled bases of the Party of God against Israel and Arab secularist governments, he said.
"There is no doubt in my mind we face a wave of extreme Islamic radical terrorist movements," Mr. Rabin said in commenting on the London and Buenos Aires bombings, which have killed about 100 people and wounded about 250.
"They have infrastructure all over the world -- in the United States, in Europe and in Latin America," Mr. Rabin asserted.
He offered no specific evidence for these assertions, but Israeli officials who have monitored the Party of God for years say there is ample circumstantial and firm physical evidence that Iran is now sponsoring acts of terror by the Party of God and other radical Muslim organizations outside the Middle East, particularly in Europe and Latin America.
Today, Israeli Government-owned television gave prominent coverage to a British Foreign Office statement that it had intercepted a call from an official purporting to be a member of the radical Muslim fundamentalist group Hamas. The call claimed responsibility for two bombings in London that damaged the Israeli Embassy and the headquarters of a prominent Jewish fund-raising organization, the Joint Israel Appeal.
Israeli officials have put the overall blame for these terror acts on two Islamic fundamentalist movements in addition to Iran: the pro-Iranian Party of God, which operates from Lebanon, and Hamas, which is based in the Gaza strip and the West Bank of Jordan and is known to benefit from Iranian financial and logistical support.
 
Denials by Hamas and Iran
 Officials of Hamas, which is still permitted to operate in Jordan, have denied responsibility for the terrorist acts, as did Iran.
Hamas was founded by Muslim radicals in the Israeli-occupied territories back in the mid-1980's primarily with Saudi Arabian financial assistance but has established firm ties with Iran in the last few years after the Persian Gulf war when the Saudis cut off their funding to all Palestinian groups.
Commenting on this surge in anti-Jewish terrorist actions, Gerald Steinberg, a senior research associate at the Center for Strategic Studies at Bar-Ilan University said they were partly a response to the peace effort and also to Israeli actions in southern Lebanon against the Party of God.
In the last month, Israel staged several raids inside Lebanon aimed at crippling the Party of God forces. These included the kidnapping of a senior official of the pro-Iranian militia, Mustapha Dirani, followed by air raids on Party of God training camps that killed at least 30 members of the militia.
Mr. Steinberg said the Party of God probably found it easier to hit targets outside the region in such places as Argentina or Britain. "It is a sign of frustration, of militancy," Mr. Steinberg told The Jerusalem Post today. "It is not a rational response with a specific goal."

Load-Date: July 28, 1994


End of Document