ISRAEL MOBILIZES TROOPS, BOMB SQUADS;
MORE TERRORISM EXPECTED AFTER FATAL EXPLOSION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 4, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 06A
Length: 482 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


On guard for more suicide bombings, Israel blockaded Palestinian areas Sunday and deployed soldiers, bomb squads and extra police in major cities.
A suicide bombing in a Mehane Yehuda market in Jerusalem Wednesday killed 15 people and wounded more than 150.
"We have indications that there will be more attempts at terrorism," Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said. "We are unfortunately prepared for the worst."
Israel has detained 116 Palestinians for questioning in the bombing.
Leaflets in the name of the Muslim terrorist group Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack, but Hamas leaders have cast doubt on the authenticity of the claim.
Palestinian officials, meanwhile, refused to cooperate with the investigation. The head of Palestinian Preventive Security Forces in Gaza, Rashid Abu Shback, said the Palestinians would not assist the investigation or hand over information that could prevent further bombings until the border closure and other measures were eased and talks resumed.
"There is no security coordination, and there will not be any," said Abu Shback. "We are linking it to political coordination."
Without Palestinian official cooperation, peace talks are in peril, White House national security advisor Sandy Berger said Sunday.
"The security cooperation has been uneven," he said on on CBS' "Face the Nation." "One can't expect 100 percent results when you're fighting terrorism. But there can be a total, 100 percent unrelenting effort. I think the effort's been uneven. It has to intensify."
Israel's national police chief, Asaf Hefetz, acknowledged on Israel radio that it would be hard to prevent bombings without intelligence cooperation with the Palestinians.
In the meantime, Hefetz said, Israel has reinforced security in crowded, urban areas. Intelligence sources said terrorists could be disguised as tourists or businessmen.
The U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv issued a warning to Americans in Israel, recommending that they avoid downtown areas, especially bus stations and markets.
The army not only barred travel into Israel but also prevented movement between Palestinian cities. A Palestinian wedding had to be postponed Sunday when the bride was unable to get to the ceremony in her husband's village of Aboud from her home in the West Bank town of Ramallah.
"It is very cruel of them to prevent a bride from going through a checkpoint. What wrong have we done?" asked the bride, dressed in her wedding gown and holding a bouquet, as she stood stranded at a roadblock.
Police believe the bombers were Palestinians in their early 20s, and Hefetz said Sunday that police were investigating the possibility that the bombers came from outside Israel.
Israeli news organizations reported that the explosives used were associated with the Iranian-backed Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon and that bombers had torn the tags from their clothing to prevent tracing their origin.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO, (1) Photo by AP - An Israeli border policeman stands guard at the central bus station in Jerusalem Sunday. The nation is on high alert, watching for any sign of terrorist activity. A market was bombed Wednesday, killing 15 people.
 (2) Photo by AP -  Border police check Palestinians' identity cards Sunday at the northern entrance to Jerusalem. Some were barred from the city.

Load-Date: August 4, 1997


End of Document