ISRAEL BANS 2 ANTI-ARAB KAHANE SECTS IT WAS THE FIRST TIME AN ANTI-TERRORISM LAW HAD BEEN APPLIED AGAINST JEWS IN THREE DECADES. THE AIM WAS PARTLY TO SMOOTH THE WAY FOR RENEWED PEACE TALKS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 14, 1994 Monday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 819 words
Byline: Alan Sipress, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Using an anti-terrorism law applied only against Palestinians for the last three decades, the Israeli government yesterday banned two Jewish extremist groups that preach violence against Arabs.
The cabinet voted unanimously to crack down on the Kach and Kahane Chai groups after their members publicly praised the Feb. 25 massacre of Muslim worshipers in Hebron by Baruch Goldstein, who had belonged to Kach.
While the cabinet's action was intended partly to clear the way for a resumption of Israeli-PLO peace talks, ministers said it also was aimed at a domestic Israeli audience.
"The main result we expect is that it will stop the encouragement we heard in the public media of such massacres, of such killings. This is the main aim," Economic Development Minister Shimon Shetreet said.
The cabinet reportedly was informed by law enforcement officials and secret police that members of the groups, which follow the vitriolic teachings of the late Rabbi Meir Kahane, might be implicated in other killings of Arabs now under investigation. The groups publicly urge that Palestinians be expelled
from Israel and the occupied territories, and believe that Jewish violence is inherently good because it empowers Jews after years of oppression.
Under a law dating to the British mandate before Israel's independence, the cabinet unanimously directed that the two groups be equated with Arab extremist movements such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
Leaders of the groups are liable for up to 20 years in prison and members face five-year sentences, according to legal experts. Providing support for the groups, whether with money or public statements, can be punished by up to three years in prison.
The ban also applies to any organizations formed to replace Kach and Kahane Chai. Israeli television reported that it could affect up to 400 Israelis who are members.
The impact of the decision will depend on how seriously the ban is enforced, according to Ehud Sprinzak, a Hebrew University expert on Jewish extremists.
"If you close their offices . . . and confiscate all the printing machines and make it impossible for the people to act, to propagandize, it's a beginning," Sprinzak said. "If, in addition, you put them in jail through several legal measures, it will be a major blow. In general, it can easily be done."
David Axelrod, a spokesman for Kahane Chai, said his group would continue its activities with members unknown to Israeli authorities. Kach leader Baruch Marzel, currently on the run from police, called Israeli radio shortly after the cabinet vote, vowing that his group could continue its activities underground or from jail if necessary.
But Kach issued a statement later in the day saying that it would cease operations while it appealed the government order in the courts.
"We are appalled by the fascist decision of the government and its partners, which is a typical decision of the darkest regime ever and a surrender to the PLO," the statement said. "The material can be oppressed, but the spirit cannot be crushed."
The cabinet decision was called a positive step by Abu Alaa, the Palestine Liberation Organization official who negotiated the Oslo agreement with Israel on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories. But he said the action was still far short of the security measures required in light of the Hebron massacre of more than 30 Palestinian worshipers on Feb. 25. Palestinians are asking for the protection of an international force, the disarming of settlers in the occupied territories, and a move toward dismantling Israeli settlements there.
The use of the anti-terrorism law has been directed exclusively at Palestinian groups since 1960, legal experts say. But in the years after Israel's 1948 indepedence, the government used the law against Jewish militants, such as the Lehi underground, which was blamed for the assassination of a Swedish diplomat, Count Folke Bernadotte, who was trying to broker peace between Israel and the Arabs.
Kach's violence dates to the 1970s. During that time in Hebron, Kahane's followers stoked tensions between Arabs and Jews. A secretary-general of the movement was arrested several times for provoking Muslims inside the Tomb of the Patriarchs, the site of the Feb. 25 massacre, according to Sprinzak.
A group of younger Kach militants has emerged in recent years. Some of those, in their 20s and 30s, are now atop the government's most-wanted list.
Kach and Kahane Chai include only a slight fraction of right-wing Israelis, but are much more heavily represented in extremist West Bank settlements such as Kiryat Arba, Goldstein's home.
In addition, Kahane's demand for expelling Arabs has won favor with a broader audience. Kahane, who was assassinated in New York in 1990, was elected to the parliament in 1984 on this issue and his party appeared on its way to further gains in the 1988 election before it was disqualified for preaching racism.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document