Israel has right to protect its citizens
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 4, 2012 Tuesday
State Edition


Copyright 2012 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-08
Length: 757 words
Body


Israel has right to protect its citizens
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
The letter from Stephen Warren, "Israel provokes much of the violence," misses the point.
The idea that any country should tolerate fire from outside its borders is astounding. Israel totally withdrew from the Gaza Strip in 2005, yet more than 13,000 mortars and rockets have been fired on its towns and cities since -- more than 1,900 this year alone. These weapons have increased in range and sophistication because Hamas is aided by Iran, the largest state sponsor of terrorism. Israelis have been living in a state of terror for far too long.
No government should accept a situation where more than a million of its citizens live under constant threat of rocket fire. Israel's defense forces pushed forward with Operation Pillar of Defense to target terrorist infrastructure in Gaza, while seeking to minimize casualties among non-combatants.
Israel does not target civilians. More than 2 million leaflets were dropped onto Gaza and multiple phone calls were made warning Gazan civilians of the imminent targeting of militants. Gaza citizens are not the problem.
Israel has the inalienable right and obligation to defend its citizens from attack. Yet, inexplicably, some still question that, which leads us to pose the following questions:
If Hamas has the best interests of the Palestinian people at heart, why does it engage in terrorism that is counterproductive to peace?
Why smuggle thousands of rockets and missiles into Gaza and deliberately place them in civilian homes, schools and hospitals?
Why, despite total Israeli withdrawal from Gaza seven years ago, does Hamas leadership remain focused on targeting innocent Israelis?
The answer is simple. Hamas targets Israel because it refuses to accept Israel's right to exist.
Martin A. Shor.
President,Jewish Community
Federation of Richmond.
Richmond.
Face it -- the Civil War is over
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Regarding Kevin Mowle's letter, "The Confederacy - it's a Southern Thing": My wife and I were born in Richmond and we have raised our children here. My ancestors in Virginia date to the early 1700s. My father's relations made it out of Georgia a few days before Sherman's arrival. I hope this demonstrates my Southern bona fides.
That said, I would appreciate if Mowles and others would stop speaking for the whole of the South. I consider Abraham Lincoln one of the country's greatest statesmen. Whatever I might say in the South's favor, I cannot deny it allowed some of the most brutal racism in our nation's history. Mowles' defense seems petulant at best. This is 2012. Continuing to fight the battles of 1861 is not regional loyalty -- it's willful ignorance.
David Stevens.
Midlothian.
Israel must end Gaza occupation
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Charles Krauthammer was right in his Op/Ed column, "Hamas will make sure any peace is temporary." The reason for the Israel-Gaza war is resistance to the occupation. Having just returned from four weeks in the Holy Land with Interfaith Peace-Builders and the International Solidarity Movement, I saw that the root cause of the violence is Israel's ongoing violation of Palestinian human rights in the name of security, by occupying the West Bank and strangling Gaza.
A woman in a West Bank village told me, "The Israeli soldiers fire tear gas in my windows before breakfast every morning." In another village, I was nearly overcome by tear gas at a demonstration against the occupation. I saw soldiers threaten to bomb their way into a Palestinian home. Bedouins said they face forced relocation for ever-expanding Israeli settlements. Farmers told me settlers poisoned their sheep and took over their springs. Families recounted interminable legal battles to keep their land. Palestinians are harassed, intimidated, and humiliated at Israeli checkpoints.
I am ashamed and angered that my government is complicit in this by giving $3 billion of unconditional military aid to Israel every year. It is time to resist the pervasive pressure of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) and lean on Israel to end the occupation.
George Meek.
Arlington.
Lowering revenue won't fix deficit
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
In 2002, we had the next-to-largest tax cut in our history. Its purpose was to create jobs. In 2004, we had the largest tax cut in our history - again to create jobs. Where are those jobs? Henry Ford understood that the backbone of capitalism is a customer with money in his or her pocket. Attacking debt and deficit by lowering revenue isn't a good idea.
Tex Wood.
Stuart.

Notes

Letters to the Editor Copyright © 2012, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: December 12, 2012


End of Document