Israeli Jets Destroy Lebanon Base Linked to Party of God Terrorism
The New York Times
July 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 593 words
Byline: By IHSAN A. HIJAZI, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 8
Body


Israeli jets destroyed a base in southern Lebanon today that belonged to the pro-Iranian Party of God.
The police said that two members of the Shiite group had been killed and seven wounded. But casualty figures were incomplete because some victims were buried under the rubble of a three-story building that had served as local headquarters for the organization.
The Israeli air raid followed reports that kidnappers linked to the Party of God might release one of the 16 Western hostages they hold.
In a communique, the Party of God said that it had placed all its forces in Lebanon on alert against further attacks.
The statement did not give casualities in the raid, which targeted positions in the hilltop village of Jarjuh, in the district of Iqlim al-Toffah east of Sidon.
The Israeli radio, monitored here, reported that the planes had scored direct hits and returned to base safely. It said the target area had been used for organizing hit-and-run raids inside the Israeli-designated ''security zone'' a few miles south of Jarjuh.
The military wing of the Party of God has claimed responsibility for many such raids.
 
Guerrillas Fire Missiles
Eight hours after the air strike, Party of God fighters fired three surface-to-surface missiles from the foothills of Mount Hermon toward the Israeli border, the police said. The rockets exploded but there was no immediate word of damage or casualties. Israeli forces struck back with artillery at the village of Ain Atta, from where the missiles had been fired.
The air strikes today followed raids on Friday against bases in southern, eastern and northern Lebanon of a radical Palestinian guerrilla group, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command.
Seven people, including five guerrillas, were wounded in the Friday raids.
The Party of God communique said that the raid today were carried out by four planes as combatants from the fundamentalist group were engaged in artillery duels in Iqlim al-Toffah with a rival Shiite militia force, the Amal.
It accused Amal gunners of shelling Jarjuh and a neighboring village, Ain Buswar, as ambulances were rushing to help victims of the Israeli attack.
 
Destabilizing Presence
The Amal leaders insist that the Party of God's presence is destabilizing to the southern region, inviting Israeli reprisals and threatening the United Nations peacekeeping force.
United Nations officials said that the Finnish battalion in the 9-nation, 5,800-member peacekeeping force had been put on alert to guard against attacks by Palestinian guerrillas.
The move followed criticism by the Palestine Liberation Organization of a decision by Finland last week to allow Soviet Jews emigrating to Israel to use a transit airport near Helsinki.
 
Hostage Release Predicted
BEIRUT, July 8 (Reuters) - Pro-Iranian informants said today that Lebanese kidnappers, under pressure from Teheran, are preparing to release another Western hostage, but that he is unlikely to go free before Tuesday.
Islamic fundamentalists said that Iran, backer of the fundamentalist Party of God, which is believed to be holding the hostages, was making arrangements with the hostage holders.
''The Iranians have informed the kidnappers about their desire to see one of the hostages free, but have not indicated the name or the final date yet,'' an informant said.
A pro-Syrian militia official said that Brian Keenan, who has dual British and Irish nationality, would go free.
The informants said the release would be a good-will gesture toward Western Europe for help after the Iranian earthquake last month.

Graphic

 
Map of Lebanon showing location of Jarjuh


End of Document