ISRAEL: TERROR IS BACK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 1989, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 494 words
Body


JERUSALEM - Two Israeli leaders accused PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat on Monday of breaking a pledge to end terrorism, and they began a campaign to persuade the United States to halt its talks with the group.  In a speech before the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, Foreign Minister Moshe Arens cited a weekend clash with five guerrillas as evidence that the Palestine Liberation Organization had resumed terrorist actions.  ''This incident is a clear violation of the conditions that the United States established for contact with the PLO,'' Arens charged.  Israeli soldiers killed the Palestinian guerrillas Saturday night in Israel's self-proclaimed security zone in southern Lebanon.  Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, in what he called ''the worst terror,'' told the group that Arafat had threatened Palestinians who might negotiate peace with Israel.  U.S. officials opened talks with the PLO in December after Arafat renounced terrorism and said he accepted Israel. Israeli officials were shocked at the U.S. move, which ended a 13-year boycott.  Israel considers the PLO a terrorist group and refuses to talk with it.  The army said the guerrillas slain Saturday were en route to carry out an attack against targets inside Israel. The guerrillas had hand grenades, a pistol equipped with a silencer and wire cutters, army officials said.  Three of them were identified as members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a Marxist PLO faction, and two others were identified as members of the radical Palestine Liberation Front of the PLO.
On Sunda y, the groups issued a statement saying the target was within the security zone in Lebanon.  On Monday, Israel radio reported that the groups had issued another statement that said the failed attack was ''an answer to the attempts by some Palestinian leaders to put an end to military struggle against Zionism.'' The statement was reported to have said that the two groups would not stop anti-Israeli attacks from Lebanon as instructed by Arafat.  The PLO said Monday that the guerrillas were on a military mission and did not violate the group's renunciation of terrorism.  ''It was a military operation. It was a response to Israeli terrorism, and the aim was to attack Israeli soldiers,'' a PLO official said in Tunis, Tunisia.  Arens said the guerrillas had planned to attack civilians, but he gave no evidence for this.  In his address, Arens said the U.S. conditions for a dialogue with the PLO ''as they were set forth by the State Department have been clearly and unequivocally violated.'' ''I presume that in Washington they also noticed what happened, but to the extent that somebody there may not have noticed, we will draw his attention to it,'' Arens said.  In Washington, Charles E. Redman, a State Department spokesman, said the guerrilla incident ''involved is the kind of thing that we would look into, and we'll do that.'' He declined to comment further.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document