ISRAEL BEGINS TO NOTE JEWISH TERRORISM
The New York Times
January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk
Length: 844 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Politically motivated, indiscriminate attacks on innocent civilians have long been a danger of life in the Middle East. The terrorism has been practiced most steadily by Arabs against Jews or other Arabs. But now and then, there have been flickers of terrorism by Jews, followed by spasms of self-criticism by other Jews about the ills they see in the Zionist movement and in Israeli society.
 In the past, Jewish terrorism has often been aimed at the powerful, such as the British in pre- independence days, from a mood of profound vulnerability. Now, however, it derives from strength. It has been directed at the minorities in Israel: the Arabs, the Christians and, in one instance, a group of liberal Jews. It has begun to stir concern among political and religious leaders and has stumped the police, who have not made arrests in most of the cases. Israeli leftists charge political interference with the police investigations of Jewish settlers in the West Bank. Some police officials talk, in turn, of interference from the army in the occupied areas. Defense Minister Moshe Arens has asked for more police in the West Bank.
Comment on emergence in Israel and occupied West Bank of Jewish terrorism against Arabs, Christians and liberal Jews; photo (M)
There is no hard proof that the terrorism in Israel and the occupied West Bank in recent months has been the work of Jews. There are only assumptions based on the targets and the weapons - assumptions so widely held that last week, they became the subject of a Cabinet discussion and of a declaration by Israel's Chief Rabbinate expressing ''sorrow and pain over the bad spirit current in the country, of reconciliation to the use of violence.''
Methods have varied from amateurish booby traps rigged with hand grenades outside mosques and churches to a professional-looking attack with automatic weapons on an Arab college. Some operations appear to have been run by organized groups, some by fanatical fringe elements acting alone out of religious and ethnic zeal.
The violence has been facilitated by apparently large-scale thefts of hand grenades and other weapons from Israeli Army depots - including arms captured during the Lebanon war - and their widespread sale in the Israeli underworld.
Ten days ago, the police announced the arrest of a 20-year-old Jew, David Shemtov, on charges of theft and sale of grenades. He led the authorities to Yona Avrushmi, 28, the man the police now believe threw a grenade last Feb. 10 into a Peace Now demonstration outside the Prime Minister's office, killing a man and wounding nine others. Mr.  Avrushmi, who lost a brother in the 1973 war and a brother-in-law in the Lebanon war, had worked at a West Bank settlement, where his former boss recalled his speaking of Peace Now members as ''traitors.'' ''It was an expression of a sentiment harbored by a sizable section of the community,'' The Jerusalem Post editorialized last week. The paper noted that former Defense Minister Ariel Sharon, referring to a left-wing member of Parliament, had recently remarked, ''Yossi Sarid and his friends won't be happy until the enemy marches into Tel Aviv.'' Observing that the phrase was obviously ''a euphemism for Peace Now and its sympathizers,'' The Post declared: ''Those big-time political operators who helped foster that sentiment cannot now evade their responsibility.'' Indeed, the idea of a Jewish organization to combat terror with terror was endorsed earlier this month by 18.7 percent of 1,292 Israeli Jewish adults who did not live in the West Bank, according to a poll published by The Jerusalem Post.  Some of the terrorism and vigilantism against Arabs has apparently been meant as retaliation for terrorism against Jews. On July 26, after a Jewish settler, Aharon Gross, was stabbed to death in the Hebron market in the West Bank, three or four masked men ran into the Islamic College in Hebron, threw a grenade and sprayed crowds of Arab students and professors with automatic weapons fire, killing three people and wounding 33. They made a clean getaway and have not been arrested.
A rash of anti-Arab attacks began after a bomb was placed on a Jerusalem bus on Dec. 6, killing six Jews, including an American tourist, and wounding 41. On Dec. 8, a Jewish settler whose car may have been hit earlier by stones ran down a side street of the West Bank city of Nablus and fired into a bakery, killing an 11-year-old girl and wounding her 9-year-old sister. Two Jews from Elon Moreh, a nearby settlement, have been arrested. The day after, four booby-trapped grenades of Israeli Army issue were found at the entrances to Christian institutions on Mount Zion in Jerusalem, and a fifth near a Jerusalem mosque. Most Christians here are Arab. There were at least four other incidents apparently directed against Arabs during the month.
Each time, news organizations have received calls from a man claiming responsibility on behalf of ''Terror Against Terror,'' whose initials in Hebrew are T.N.T. ''When Jewish blood is spilled,'' he says, ''Arab blood is spilled.''

Graphic

 
photo of mourners at funeral for Emil Grunzweig


End of Document