Israeli Alleges P.L.O. Terror
The New York Times
February 7, 1989, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 390 words
Byline: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Feb. 6
Body


Foreign Minister Moshe Arens lashed out today at the United States and other Western nations, asserting that an attempted guerrilla raid on Sunday proved that the Palestine Liberation Organization had not truly renounced terrorism.
Speaking to a convention of leaders of American Jewish organizations here, Mr. Arens said he and others in Israel were ''aghast to see the world's great leaders lining up to pay homage'' to the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat.
The State Department is not expected to find it easy to decide whether the incident is a violation of Mr. Arafat's vow not to shun terrorism, as the clash involved Palestinian guerrillas confronting Israeli soldiers who were occupying a third country, Lebanon.
State Department officials said they expected such incidents, which the Israelis label terrorism and the Palestinians call legitimate warfare between armies, to bedevil the United States-P.L.O. dialogue. The talks were begun by the Reagan Administration in December after Mr. Arafat recognized Israel and renounced terrorism.
On Sunday morning, Israeli troops in southern Lebanon said they killed five guerrillas who were on their way to the Israeli border. The guerrillas, four Palestinians and one Lebanese, reportedly carried pistols and automatic rifles, rocket-propelled grenades, anti-tank rockets and other arms.
The Israelis said identification on the bodies indicated that the men belonged to two radical wings of the P.L.O - Dr. George Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the Palestine Liberation Front headed by Abul Abbas, who masterminded the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achillo Lauro in 1985. Both groups are members of the P.L.O., but it is not clear how much Mr. Arafat controls them.
Mr. Arens said both P.L.O. factions were at the Palestine National Council meeting in Algiers in November when Mr. Arafat renounced terrorism. Dr. Habash has renounced the remarks.
At P.L.O. headquarters in Tunis, an official endorsed the attempted infiltration, Reuters reported. ''It was a military operation,'' he said.
 
Israeli Request to U.S.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 (Special to The New York Times) - The Israeli Embassy today appealed to the State Department to end its dialogue with the P.L.O. A State Department official said Washington was taking the matter ''very seriously'' and would review it.


End of Document