ISRAEL BURIES MORE SOLDIERS AND GRAPPLES WITH TERRORISM MORE TROOPS WERE LOST THAN IN ANY ONE DAY OVER THE LAST DECADE. RABIN SAID BORDERS MUST BE SECURED.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 24, 1995 Tuesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 542 words
Byline: Arieh O'Sullivan, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Stunned, embittered and enraged, Israel buried more young soldiers yesterday than it had in any single day over the last decade.
The government grappled with how best to deal with 52 deaths the last four months at the hands of Islamic extremists, including 19 in Sunday's suicide bombing.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said clear boundaries must be drawn between the Jewish state and Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
"We will divide between us and you and not according to the basis of the pre-1967 borders," he said.
Television reports said the government was weighing a security defense border between Israel and the West Bank, under Israeli military rule since the 1967 Six-Day War. Rabin said a frontier heavily patrolled by soldiers and police could be established within months.
The idea brought immediate condemnation from Aharon Dombe, spokesman for the estimated 140,000 Jewish settlers in the occupied territories, saying the government was abandoning them.
Meanwhile, the spiritual leader of the faction that claimed responsibility for Sunday's bombing and opposes the September 1993 Israeli-PLO peace accord vowed to continue the attacks.
"The Jihad (holy war) against the enemy will continue," said Sheik Abdullah Shami, whose group, Islamic Jihad, wants to destroy Israel and establish an Islamic empire throughout the Middle East.
Shami spoke during a wake attended by about 200 people at the Gaza City home of Anwar Sukar, 23, one of two suicide bombers held responsible for Sunday's double blast in central Israel.
The larger Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas was more conciliatory, renewing a call for a truce with Israel if it withdrew from the occupied West Bank and Jewish settlements.
That's unlikely, said the health minister, a former West Bank commander considered close to Rabin. "We have chosen to fight and by all means. There are no limitations for the security services - a free hand. We have taken off the gloves," Efraim Sneh said.
Israel Radio said a close circle of Rabin's security advisers decided to extend a "special dispensation" for agents of the Shin Bet security service in fighting terrorism.
The measures stopped short of right-wing demands to halt peace talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization, gaining increasing currency amongst a public losing its sense of security.
"We have become hostages. There is no safe public place," said Tal Hanan, joining scores of Israelis stopping to light memorial candles and pray at the site of the bombing, 18 miles northeast of Tel Aviv.
"We are saturated with empty promises. What kind of peace is this? We are sitting ducks."
In Jerusalem's forested Mount Herzl military cemetery, clods of earth thudding onto five coffins mixed with cries of "God protect us."
At the funeral of Sgt. Maya Coopstein, 19, one of two women killed, three people fainted. A paratrooper captain sobbed dry heaves, and a general hugged him and stroked his cheek.
Staff Sgt. Damian Rosovski, a combat medic just returned from Lebanon, had rushed forward after the first blast and was struck down by the second. He was one of those buried.
"We immigrated five years ago from Argentina," said his father, Alberto. "We were willing to give everything to the country. And we did. We gave our son."

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document