ISRAEL DEFENDS CRACKDOWN, CITING 'DRAMATIC INCREASE' IN TERRORISM
The New York Times
March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 900 words
Dateline: TEL AVIV, March 9
Body


The Israeli crackdown in occupied southern Lebanon was a policy forced upon Israel ''by a dramatic increase in terrorist acts'' against its forces since the decision was reached in mid-January to withdraw those forces, an army spokesman said here Friday.
''At a time when we could have expected a decrease in such acts due to the fact that we are on our way out, terrorist leaders apparently preferred to score points in their intercommunal fights by using Israeli soldiers as an expedient and convenient target,'' the spokesman, Brig. Gen. Ephraim Lapid, said in a written statement.
Under the circumstances, he added, ''we had no choice but to introduce an appropriate response.''
General Lapid said the decision to send troops into any village was based on intelligence information. In each case, he asserted, ''we found substantial quantities of weapons and explosives including antitank missiles, shoulder-fired surface-to-air missiles, sophisticated detonators, remote-control mechanisms, automatic weapons and guns with silencers.''
Israeli army spokesman says crackdown in occupied southern Lebanon waspolicy forced upon Israel by 'dramatic increase in terrorist acts' against its forces since decision was reached to withdraw those forces from Lebanon (M)
The general said that relatively few people had been seized and that ''all those who have been arrested were either identified terrorists or members of various hostile organizations.'' He also said that ''the few buildings demolished in some of these villages'' had been used as hiding places for terrorists and their explosives and ammunition or as sites for staging attacks on Israeli soldiers.
General Lapid reacted strongly to assertions that Israelis may have been involved in an explosion that killed 15 people at a Shiite center in the southern Lebanese village of Marakah last Monday. Some Lebanese Moslems have accused the Israelis of planting a bomb; the allegation has been denied by the Israeli Government.
Israel and its army, the military spokesman said, respect the sanctity of religious sites. Therefore, he said, it is ''inconceivable that we would intentionally inflict damage on holy places or injure people in such sites.''
The ''insinuations of Israeli involvement'' in the Marakah bombing ''are despicable and insulting to me as a Jew and an Israeli soldier,'' he said, adding, ''Throughout our military history, we have made every possible effort to secure and prevent damages and casualties in holy sites at the cost of the lives of our soldiers.''
General Lapid voiced confidence that ''the facts concerning the incident will eventually be found out.'' But he noted ''the grim reality that in Lebanon indiscriminate killing is, unfortunately, institutionalized.''
 
'Indiscriminate Killings' Cited
He said that ''political, commercial or religious rivals'' used an ''almost infinite variety of means, including bomb blasts,'' to eliminate one another in ''indiscriminate killings''that ''on many occasions have claimed the lives of scores of innocent bystanders.''
The general said that in southern Lebanon, ''there has been much fomentation of the otherwise calm local population by violent Khomeini-supporting elements who have exploited the situation for their own ends.''
An example of that, he said, ''was the violent demonstration which occurred outside the Tyre hospital immediately after the wounded from the Marakah explosion had been brought in.''
''Hundreds of local residents were whipped into a frenzy by agitators,'' he said, and Israeli troops were ''required to restore order.''
''Anti-Israel propagandists tried to distort these facts'' by claiming that the Israeli forces ''sought to prevent individuals from donating blood at the hospital,'' the general added, ''but this was not the case.''
''We are determined to continue with the pullback of our forces in accordance with the Israel Government decision,'' he said. ''Concurrently, however, we will do everything necessary to insure the safety of our troops and the security of the Israeli border population.''
General Lapid also responded to a protest by the Foreign Press Association in Israel about the army's treatment of Beirut-based journalists in southern Lebanon and Israeli restrictions on news coverage in the area. On Wednesday the Israeli military detained five reporters from the north and confiscated their materials, and others were detained and expelled the next day.
The general said 50 foreign correspondents had entered the Israeli- controlled part of Lebanon recently and dozens would be allowed in every week. But he said that ''for understandable reasons,'' correspondents may not accompany Israeli units on their ''operational activities.''
General Lapid also said that journalists entering dangerous areas posed risks to Israeli personnel assigned to escort them, and that the army, being ''responsible for events in the area,'' could therefore not allow uncontrolled movement.
He reaffirmed the policy of keeping Beirut-based journalists out of southern Lebanon. But he said the army was providing ''fast and reliable information about events in the field'' and would continue to do so.
In its protest Thursday, the board of the 220-member Foreign Press Association said the barring of reporters from Beirut and a lack of access to southern Lebanon for Israel-based correspondents constituted ''a serious encroachment on press freedom.''


End of Document