ISRAEL: END TALKS WITH PLO
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 1989, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 532 words
Body


JERUSALEM - Israel formally asked the United States on Monday to stop talking to the PLO, and top Israeli leaders began a campaign to convince the U.S.  administration that PLO chairman Yasser Arafat had broken a pledge to end terrorism.  An Israeli diplomat delivered the request to the State Department's Bureau of Near East Affairs, sources in Washington said on the condition of anonymity.  Israeli leaders cited the case of five Palestinian guerrillas who were killed Saturday night by Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, near the Israeli border. Israel's embassy in Washington submitted information ''identifying details and additional facts linking the PLO to that squad,'' Israel television said.  Charles E. Redman, a State Department spokesman, said the United States was looking into whether the encounter Saturday had violated Arafat's renunciation of terrorism. Other officials said the United States was seeking additional information.  In Jerusalem, Foreign Minister Moshe Arens accused the Palestine Liberation Organization of breaking a promise to refrain from terror and gave the firefight as evidence.  In a speech to the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, Arens said Israel was urging the United States to reconsider its talks with the PLO on the ground that the conditions for such contact had been ''clearly and unequivocally violated.'' Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin told the American Jewish leaders that threats by Arafat against Palestinians who might negotiate with Israel were ''the worst terror . . ., more important even than an attempt to infiltrate from Lebanon.'' U.S. officials opened talks with the PLO in December after Arafat renounced terrorism and said he accepted Israel.
Israeli officials were shocked at the United States' move, which ended a 13-year boycott.  Israel considers the PLO a terrorist group and refuses to talk with it.  The army said the guerrillas who were slain Saturday had been en route to carry out an attack against targets inside Israel. The guerrillas had hand grenades, a pistol equipped with a silencer and wire cutters, army officials said.  Three of them were identified as members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a Marxist PLO faction, and two others were identified as members of the radical Palestine Liberation Front of the PLO.  On Sunday, the groups issued a statement saying the target was within the security zone in Lebanon.  On Monday, Israel radio reported that the groups had issued another statement that said the failed attack was ''an answer to the attempts by some Palestinian leaders to put an end to military struggle against Zionism.'' The statement was reported to have said that the two groups would not stop anti-Israeli attacks from Lebanon as instructed by Arafat.  The PLO said Monday that the guerrillas had been on a military mission and had not violated the group's renunciation of terrorism.  ''It was a military operation,'' a PLO official said in Tunis, Tunisia.  ''It was a response to Israeli terrorism, and the aim was to attack Israeli soldiers.'' Arens said the guerrillas had planned to attack civilians, but he gave no evidence for this.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document