Israel's Likud Passes Torch, Naming Netanyahu Leader
The New York Times
March 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Column 3;; Biography
Length: 897 words
Byline: Benjamin Netanyahu

By CLYDE HABERMAN,

By CLYDE HABERMAN,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, March 25
Body


Israel's main political opposition changed generations today, from the founders of the Jewish state to their heirs, when Benjamin Netanyahu resoundingly won a nationwide primary to become leader of the Likud Party.
Mr. Netanyahu, born in 1949, a year after Israel came into being, succeeds former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, 77, who led the party for the last decade.
As winner today, Mr. Netanyahu will automatically become the Likud candidate for Prime Minister in the next national election, which is not scheduled until 1996 but could come sooner should the current Labor-led Government fall.
In that election, the Israeli Prime Minister will be chosen for the first time by direct popular vote, with personalities and images likely to count at least as much as party policies. It is clear that as the political culture changes, a majority of Likud members consider Mr. Netanyahu -- well-spoken, attractive and savvy in television techniques -- to be their best hope to recover the power they lost nine months ago.
 
Sounds a Campaign Theme
 Mr. Netanyahu, a Member of Parliament and former Deputy Foreign Minister, pledged this evening that the right-wing opposition would unseat Labor and its leader, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, 71. And he left no doubt that he would make the most of a recent surge of anti-Israeli violence to accuse the Rabin Government of being weak-kneed against Arab terrorism and of endangering Israeli security by offering territorial concessions in the Middle East peace talks.
"This Government says that it is impossible to fight the knifings, that it is impossible to fight terrorism," he told an auditorium filled with supporters rythmically chanting his nickname, Bibi. "How do they put it? Terrorism has only one solution: a political solution. In other words, there is no solution to terrorism except retreat."
In the peace negotiations, the Government only offers concessions, he said, and the consequences for Israel will be "to bring the Syrian Army on the Golan Heights closer to us, to shrink and reduce the size of this country, to bring the border to the outskirts of Petah Tikvah," a town just outside Tel Aviv.
Probably no Israeli politician of his generation is better known in the United States, where Mr. Netanyahu lived as a teen-ager, graduated from the Massachussetts Institute of Technology and later served as Israel's delegate to the United Nations and as No. 2 at the embassy in Washington.
 
A Master of Sound Bites
 No modern politician here has logged more time on American television than Mr. Netanyahu, explaining in idiomatic English Israel's positions on international terrorism and the Persian Gulf war. And no Israeli politician has adopted a more American campaign style, from his crafted sound bites to his cross-country barnstorming by bus.
So successful is he at reducing his pragmatically hawkish opinions to manageable television proportions that some in Likud -- allies as well as foes -- worry that he is prey to accusations that he is not a deep thinker. One task before him now, these Israelis say, is to prove that he is more than glib.
A former Army commando, he also gained reflected glory from his older brother, Jonathan, who led and died in the 1976 raid at Entebbe, Uganda, in which Israeli commandos rescued the passengers of a hijacked airliner.
The Likud primary was a bruising four-man race, complicated and spiced by a sex scandal that had swirled around the thrice-married Mr. Netanyahu but that inflicted no lasting damage. His wife, Sara, stood by him during the campaign, and she was at his side today -- getting a kiss from him -- during a victory rally at which supporters sang out, "Bibi, King of Israel."
 
Wins 52% of Vote
 A final tally of the 145,000 votes, cast on Wednesday but only counted today, showed Mr. Netanyahu with 52.1 percent, far more than the 40 percent he needed to avoid a runoff. David Levy, a former Foreign Minister, was second with 26.3 percent, followed by Benjamin Begin, a Member of Parliament and son of the late Prime Minister Menachem Begin, with 15.1 percent, and Moshe Katsav, a former Transportation Minister, with 6.5 percent.
Underlining the generational change is the fact that Mr. Netanyahu is only the third man to lead the Likud. The other two had been underground fighters against the British rule in Palestine: Mr. Begin, who died a year ago, and Mr. Shamir, who announced after Likud's defeat last June that he would step down as the party's leader.
Mr. Shamir, who had served seven years as Prime Minister, was expected to leave politics entirely, but trouble within Likud persuaded him to keep his seat in Parliament and stay on as an elder adviser.
He leaves behind a party hobbled by severe debt and internal divisions, highlighted by Mr. Levy's refusal today to join the party's other defeated candidates in congratulating the winner.
Mr. Levy, who has a history of sulking in defeat, feels he was wrongly accused by Mr. Netanyahu of attempted blackmail in the sex scandal. And although he said today that he would stay in Likud, he added that he would not work with the new leader or help him.
Moreover, the challenges to Mr. Netanyahu's primacy may not be over. Former Defense Minister Ariel Sharon, for one, says he considers very much alive the issue of who the next Likud candidate for Prime Minister should be. Mr. Sharon's preferred candidate is himself.

Graphic

 
Photo: Benjamin Netanyahu with his wife, Sarah, after he was elected leader of the Likud Party. (Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: March 26, 1993


End of Document