ISRAEL TO RETURN MILLIONS IN REVENUE TO THE PALESTINIANS;
EFFORTS TO CUT TERRORISM SPURS GESTURE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 15, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 06A
Length: 628 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Israel said Sunday that it would return half of the millions of dollars in Palestinian tax revenue that it was withholding. The move came as a "goodwill gesture" after Palestinian steps to curb terrorism.
The action followed by two days a visit from Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who had pushed Israel's government to release the money.
Israel has been withholding the funds since suicide bombings July 30 in Jerusalem that claimed 15 lives. The total amount withheld is believed to be more than $ 67 million.
A statement from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office called the move "a goodwill gesture in light of initial steps taken by the Palestinian Authority in the war against terrorism."
David Bar-Illan, a top adviser to Netanyahu, cited the arrest of Muslim militants and a Palestinian plan to disrupt militant groups. The Palestinians have arrested 123 people suspected of being militants since Albright arrived in the region Wednesday.
On Saturday, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Cabinet pledged to tackle terrorism and to renew security cooperation with Israel.
Bar-Illan also said he expected that tough travel restrictions on Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip would be eased Tuesday.
Responding to Israel's decision to return some of the tax revenues, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said it fell short.
"This is our money to begin with," he said. "They have no right to it. We expect them to release all of it. We call for an immediate cessation of all of this nonsense."
 
In related developments:
*A three-way security meeting was held Saturday among Israeli, Palestinian and U.S. officials.
*During her visit, Albright arranged for Israeli and Palestinian diplomats to meet later this month in Washington and New York. Political talks between the two sides broke down in March when Israel began building a housing project for Jews on land in Jerusalem claimed by both sides.
 
Albright In Jordan
In Amman, Jordan, Albright urged wealthy Arab countries on Sunday to deny financial aid to Muslim militants waging terrorism against Israel.
She also made a pitch for women in Arab societies, telling foreign ministers from Saudi Arabia and five other Arab states that they should put the issue high on their agenda.
Albright's appeal to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates to deny money to Hamas and other militant Muslim groups was aimed at contributions raised in the countries.
"The Arab states have a responsibility . . . to support the peace process and work against the enemies of peace," Albright said, "to do your utmost to ensure that no assistance of any kind reaches the practitioners of extremist violence such as Hamas."
The speech to the foreign ministers was coupled with an appeal for help from the Palestinian Authority. James Rubin, a State Department spokesman, said Saudi Arabia immediately had pledged $ 10 million to the authority.
"It is our belief these governments do not support Hamas with official funds," Rubin said. But the United States would like to dry up fund raising and improve intelligence exchanges with the Arab governments.
It was at the session with the foreign ministers that Albright raised the women's issue. The first woman to serve as secretary of state, she was received by the Saudi royal family correctly, even with some warmth.
Known for her outspoken style, Albright told the six foreign ministers, according to Rubin, "You may all have noticed, I am not like previous secretaries of state in one way obviously. I hope that in our future discussions in New York (at U.N. General Assembly meetings), and when we meet again, we can speak about the role of women in your societies and a round the world."
 
The foreign ministers received the statement amiably.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Photo by AP - Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Jordan's King Hussein after their joint news conference Sunday. Albright urged Arab countries to help the Palestinian Authority but to deny financial aid to terrorists.

Load-Date: September 16, 1997


End of Document