Israeli terrorism fuels Palestinian violence
University Wire
April 10, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Collegiate Times via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 307 words
Byline: By A. Omar Tamimi, The Collegiate Times
Dateline: Blacksburg, Va.
Body


The first comparison an Israeli supporter will say about the conflict in the West Bank is that it is equivalent to the United State's hunt for bin Laden.
The sure thing is that the Israeli army has made an Afghanistan out of the West Bank towns and refugee camps. As Israeli Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer addressed the Knesset, "Whoever thinks the Israeli Defense Forces operations can stop terrorism is mistaken."
Virginia Tech
The sieges of Arab cities in the West Bank are an act of desperation by Sharon's government, critically needed to show Israeli citizens some sort of response to Arab attacks.
His government's strategies to invade cities and round up Arab men between 18 and 60 years old in search of terrorists have proven fruitless.
It has been in action for months and violence has just reached its highest point.
Arafat has been sealed off from the world, and in the week he has been caged, there have been six suicide missions against Israel -- a surge in attacks.
Although Israel prefers to put the blame of Arab violence solely on him, it will not admit that this violence is a reaction from people filled with utter desperation and helplessness in the face of Israeli terrorism and aggression.
Peace will come with justice. The United Nations in 1967 passed Resolution 242 calling on Israel to end its occupation of the West Bank, among other crucial issues.
Although the whole world agreed with it, Palestinians are still waiting for this to be enacted.
As long as America continues to hold Israel without blame for its actions and sponsor them with billions of dollars and high-tech weaponry, Israel will never feel the need to account for what the world deems as justice.
Until Israel abides by international law, violence and armed resistance will continue.
(C) 2002 The Collegiate Times via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 10, 2002


End of Document