Israeli professors speak on democracy at U. Texas
University Wire
February 5, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 409 words
Byline: By Taylor Magenheim, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Democracy can stand against terrorism, two prominent Israeli lawyers said Wednesday during their visit to the University of Texas-Austin.
The Dean of Haifa University's Law School Ariel Bendor and Vice-Dean Eli Salzberger conducted a discussion at the U. Texas School of Law about the challenges democracy faces when a country is battling terrorism. The law school dean and professors were invited to attend the discussion, as well as local lawyers and judges.
U. Texas-Austin
Concerns about civil liberties in the United States were raised when legislation such as the Patriot Act was passed to battle terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks.
The visit was a part of the professors' efforts to raise funds for Haifa's law school, as well as to make connections with university faculty in the United States.
"We would like to set up a program to exchange students and faculty between America and Israel," Bendor said.
The Israeli Consulate's Academic Affairs Officer Courtney Lipsitz said the professors had contacted them to help connect with other universities.
"Our job as a consulate is to make connections between Israeli and American institutions," Lipsitz said. "Obviously, with UT being one of the top law schools in the country and largest in the states, we set them up to meet."
The law professors visited the university after appearing at a conference in Chicago on constitutionalism and liberties.
The talks are about how to preserve human rights while fighting terrorism, Salzberger said.
"Israel is 66 years old," Salzberger said. "Since its establishment, it has been in a state of emergency."
Israeli courts are involved in trying to balance democratic values and human rights, Salzberger said.
"This is a different approach from America's administration by which, in times of emergency, human rights are suspended, democracy is suspended," he said. "One of the values of liberal democracy is that it grants tolerance to those who don't believe in it."
Governments should always take precautions to protect civil rights, said Nick Schwellenbach, a history senior and former co-ordinator of Students for Democracy.
"The government needs heightened powers at times to fight terrorism, but ultimately, you should never compromise someone's liberties in the process," Schwellenbach said.
The professors will hold their last discussion in Texas at Southern Methodist University in Dallas today.
(C) 2003 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 5, 2004


End of Document