ISRAELI SHOW OF FORCE PRESSES ARAFAT TO COMBAT TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 19, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 286 words
Byline: MARY CURTIUS AND TRACY WILKINSON, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body


Enraged Palestinians buried their latest martyrs yesterday as Israel said its deployment of more troops and tanks in the West Bank is not a prelude to invasion but a means of putting pressure on Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
 Army checkpoints sprung up on West Bank roads controlled by Israel, and a cluster of seven newly positioned tanks could be seen at an army base in Gush Etzion, a block of Jewish settlements south of Jerusalem.
The army said it also deployed additional tanks and troops north of Jenin, a Palestinian-controlled town in the northern West Bank.
 "This is a stop sign, a warning to Arafat," said government spokesman Avi Pazner. "Time and again they [Palestinian leaders] have done nothing to stop terrorism. This is an intolerable situation."
 Arafat, the Palestinian Authority president, was quick to condemn the military buildup.
 "What is happening now with Israeli escalation shows their intention to continue their aggression," he declared in Cairo, Egypt, where he was attending a meeting of Arab foreign ministers.
 The show of force did not quell Palestinian demands for revenge following Israel's killing Tuesday of four men during a helicopter gunship attack on a Bethlehem home.
 Thousands of mourners filled Nativity Square outside the Church of the Nativity, built on the spot where Christians believe Jesus was born. The crowd accompanied the four men, who were declared martyrs by leaders of the uprising against Israel, to their graves.
 Speakers vowed to step up attacks. Their words were punctuated by the crack of thousands of rounds of ammunition fired by hundreds of masked gunmen who were honoring one of the slain men, Omar Saadeh, a local leader of the Hamas Islamic movement.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Elizabeth Dalziel/Associated Press: A Palestinian man weeps during yesterday's funeral for the four victims of Tuesday's Israeli helicopter attack in the West Bank town of Bethlehem.

Load-Date: July 20, 2001


End of Document