ISRAEL TELLS SYRIA IT HAS NO INTENTION OF ATTACKING
The New York Times
November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 537 words
Byline: By TERENCE SMITH
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Nov. 7
Body


Israel assured Syria today that it had no intention of mounting an attack against Syrian forces despite the increased tension in Lebanon.
 Israeli officials said the message had been sent ''through our own means'' after word was received this morning of the Syrian decision to mobilize its reserves. A similar announcement was broadcast tonight by the Israeli radio and television.
Israel assures Syria that it has no intention of mounting attack against Syrian forces despite increased tension in Lebanon; Israel conveys message after learning of Syrian decision to mobilize its reserves; photo (M)
''We don't want Syria to use any action of ours as a pretext for an attack,'' a senior Israeli Government official said tonight.
 
Israel Plans a Mobilization
Israel has announced plans for a mobilization of its own forces later this week, but officials said today that it was a routine maneuver conducted twice a year and was ''in no way connected with events in Lebanon.'' The mobilization is expected to last for about five days at a cost in excess of $20 million.
For the last three days, Israeli officials have been publicly accusing Syria of at least tacit complicity in the truck- bomb attack last Friday against Israeli installations in Tyre, Lebanon, that killed 60 people and wounded 23. The dead included 28 Israelis from the border police and Shin Beth, or general security services, and 32 Arabs who were being held in detention cells for questioning or who worked at the center.
Government sources said today that their intention in the recent public comments was to stress the Syrian role in terrorism in Lebanon rather than to confront Syria directly.
 
A Sense of Apprehension
Nonetheless, the sense of apprehension in the area has been increased by the transfer of several additional American ships and aircraft to the eastern Mediterranean.
In the Israeli Parliament today, Defense Minister Moshe Arens read a Government statement concerning Lebanon in which he warned that the residents of southern Lebanon ''will be able to live in peace and quiet if they cooperate with us in our war against terrorism, which threatens them no less than the soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces.''
Mr. Arens added that the Israeli forces would remain in Lebanon as long as ''there is a danger the area will be taken over again by terrorist gangs.''
 
Israelis Reopen a Bridge
SIDON, Lebanon, Nov. 7 (Reuters) - Israel reopened a bridge linking southern Lebanon to the rest of the country today, but only to limited traffic, an Israeli military spokesman said.
He said that pedestrians could walk south across the Awali River bridge on the coastal road north of Sidon from 4:30 P.M. and that automobiles could travel south ''on a selected basis.'' He did not outline the criteria to be used in selecting automobiles.
A senior Israeli military officer said that permits would be issued to cars to cross the bridge and that the new measures would continue until further notice.
The spokesman said northbound traffic might be permitted Tuesday on the same basis.
The Israelis closed the bridge on Friday after a truck packed with explosives crashed into an Israeli base near the Lebanese port of Tyre, killing 60 people, including 28 Israelis.

Graphic

 
photo of Yitzhak Shamir and Moshe Arens


End of Document