ISSUE NOT NETANYAHU ANY MORE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 27, 1997, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1997 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL PAGE,; EDITORIAL OPINION
Length: 313 words
Body


New terrorism against Israelis reignites an old and awful debate: Is it most important to denounce the terrorism or to recognize what is causing it?
When Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is accused of undermining peace through provocative actions - most recently, building a housing complex in East Jerusalem, on territory that Arabs hope to use for a capital - he says his accusers are implicitly justifying terrorism and are criticizing the wrong side.
That response is fair to this extent: The Palestinian cause has won international recognition and has become embodied in negotiations that have brought real change, real progress. If there were ever a time for terrorism - a big if - this is not it. The Arab cause cannot reasonably be called hopeless in the absence of terrorism. Indeed, what terrorism threatens to do now is not to advance the Palestinian cause, but to undermine the peaceful efforts to advance that cause.
A week ago, the Clinton administration was vouching for Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's opposition to terrorism. Now, embarrassed by that, it is calling upon him to send clear anti-terrorists signals. Mr. Arafat claims to reject terrorism, to be a genuine partner for peace. But he doesn't want to look completely out of control. The international community must pressure him to assert control.
Mr. Arafat has to respond to that pressure publicly by blaming the Israelis for the terrorism. That's part of the game. But he, along with other forces in the Arab world, must respond privately by taking pains to bring the extremists under control.
The Netanyahu government is not like its predecessor, that's for sure. It is provocative. But terrorism is not an acceptable response to nonviolent measures that don't breach any accords. If that premise isn't accepted - if every controversial action is to provoke terrorism - then there is no hope.

Graphic

 
@aol.com  

Load-Date: March 28, 1997


End of Document