ISWAP executes captives on Christmas Day, gives reasons
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 27, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 352 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The so-called Islamic State West Africa Province , which is an offshoot of IS, executed the group of captives, the majority of whom were Christians.
Ahmad Salkida, a journalist renowned for his monitoring of terrorism activities, reported the killings on Thursday.
President Muhammadu Buhari condemned the killings, which he described as an attempt to divide Muslims and Christians in Nigeria.
Reuters reports that the group also claimed responsibility for an attack on a military outpost in Burkina Faso earlier this week.
"However, a careful assessment of the video revealed that Suwaiba Kashimu from Nasarawa state, and one other male, were apparently not amongst those killed on Christmas".
ISWAP said two additional Muslim hostages were spared from execution.
ISIS said the executions were part of its effort to "avenge" leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and spokesperson Abul-Hasan al-Muhajir, both killed within 24 hours of each other in Syria in October.
Almost 50 suspected migrants rescued in Channel by officials
Forty-nine people in four boats were met by Border Force and brought to England, while a further two boats were dealt with by French authorities.
"The decision to execute the captives was rather swift, abrupt and shocking".
The Nigerian government has repeatedly said that the insurgency is defeated but the jihadists maintain the ability to strike across swathes of territory.
The video, released on December 26, is said to be timed to coincide with Christmas celebrations.
Baghdadi committed suicide in October during a United States special forces operation in Syria.
Earlier in the month, four abducted aid workers of the Action Against Hunger, an global non-government organisation, were killed by the Islamic State in West Africa Province .
On Tuesday, the United Nations released a statement condemning the group for increasingly targeting civilians, including Christians, aid workers and security officials, in northeastern Nigeria.
"The Secretary-General recalls that attacks by a party to an armed conflict that target civilians, aid workers, and civilian infrastructure violate global humanitarian law".

Load-Date: December 27, 2019


End of Document