It Is Our Duty To Stand Up To Acts Of Terrorism
The Daily Campus: University of Connecticut
January 25, 2015 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 461 words
Byline: Kathleen McWilliams
Body


Tagscharlie hebdoparisterrorismuconn
Editorial
On Wednesday Jan. 7, 2015 two masked gunmen broke into the offices of the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo. The gunmen, later identified as brothers Cherif and Said Kouachi, killed eleven people within the Charlie Hebdo offices as well as a police officer. The brothers were motivated to avenge the prophet Muhammad whom Charlie Hebdo frequently portrayed through offensive, and often vulgar, cartoons. Two days later on January 9, a third gunman, Amedy Coulibaly, entered a kosher supermarket and took the customers hostage, asking for the police to end their pursuit of the Kouachi brothers. These heinous acts of terrorism have shocked the world, leading to sympathy for the victims and their families as well as outrage over the attacks. Perhaps more than anything, these attacks have led many to affirm the values of freedom of speech and religious tolerance.
Charlie Hebdo is a satirical leftist newspaper that frequently mocks religions by portraying religious figures in offensive ways. If any Christian, Muslim, or Jew were to read Charlie Hebdo they would likely be deeply offended. However, those who cherish liberty understand that the freedom to express oneself necessarily includes the freedom to offend. Tolerance of the beliefs of others, especially those we personally find offensive or disagreeable, is a bedrock principle for every free society. There is no greater freedom than that of the individual mind and soul; every individual should have the right to form their own opinions and share them without fear of reprisal. The Paris gunmen have challenged these principles by massacring those who have offended them. It is the duty of all freedom-loving people to stand against the enemies of personal liberty.
The targeting of the kosher supermarket marks another opportunity for us to stand firm in our values. Coulibaly likely targeted this supermarket because it was likely to be frequented by Jews, a group many Muslims in the Middle East feel enmity toward due to their opposition to the state of Israel. Political disputes should not lead to religious intolerance. It is wrong to profile members of an entire religion, whether it be Judaism, Christianity, Islam, or others. To commit an act of violence, such as attacking a supermarket, out of enmity for a religious group is something that must be condemned. We must respect the freedom of others to worship as they wish and ensure we do not permit animosity toward individuals on the basis of their religious affiliation.
It is our duty to stand against those who challenge these values by acts of terrorism. Though the struggle may be long and difficult these principles of freedom of speech and religious toleration are worth fighting for.

Load-Date: February 6, 2015


End of Document