It is time to end oil addiction
University Wire
October 12, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 566 words
Byline: By Kristen Trotter Chick, The Crimson White; SOURCE: U. Alabama
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala. 
Body


Another nation jostled its way into the nuclear club this week and added another crisis to a U.S. plate already full from fighting a dual-fronted war on terror. Two years ago, we thought that war would soon be over, but today the end is hardly in sight.
But what if we didn't have to deal with terrorism anymore? What if we took the fanatics' reason for killing off the table? What if our anti-terrorism strategy was a new energy policy?
Al-Qaida's war against the United States began in 1998 when Osama bin Laden issued a fatwa urging Muslims to start a war with Americans. The bombings of the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Dar es Salaam and Tanzania followed several months later, and the USS Cole was bombed in 2000.
"The ruling to kill the Americans and their allies - civilians and military - is an individual duty for every Muslim who can do it in any country in which it is possible to do it," bin Laden's fatwa said.
His rationale for the violent order was the U.S. presence in the Arabian peninsula.
"For over seven years the United States has been occupying the lands of Islam in the holiest of places, the Arabian Peninsula, plundering its riches, dictating to its rulers, humiliating its people, terrorizing its neighbors, and turning its bases in the Peninsula into a spearhead through which to fight the neighboring Muslim peoples," he said.
Most Americans don't agree with most of that propaganda, but no one can deny one part of it: U.S. soldiers on the Arabian peninsula. The United States, cursed by oil dependence, needs a stable Middle East to ensure a smooth running economy and country, and consequently even before this second Iraq war we had thousands of soldiers on the Arabian peninsula.
Evidently this offended bin Laden and fanatic Muslims everywhere, and led ultimately to the attack on Sept. 11, 2001. Putting the pieces together to solve the puzzle seems simple: our dependence on oil led to our military presence in the Middle East. This offends fanatic Muslims and caused them to declare war on the United States. The simplest thing to do would be to simply leave, but we can't because of oil.
The easiest way to exit this violent cycle is ending U.S. dependence on oil. Our anti-terrorism policy should be a new energy policy. If we can use ethanol or hydrogen or some other alternative fuel instead of oil, we no longer need a military presence in the Middle East and can simply walk away from the troubled region once the war in Iraq is over.
Nicholas D. Kristof recently reported from Brazil, where ethanol is almost as common as gasoline, that a few technological breakthroughs will make ethanol just as efficient as gasoline. The United States should be pouring money into developing such technology to get rid of our oil addiction.
Eliminating our slavery to oil would not be "giving in" to bin Laden, it would simply be smart. Why continue to feed our addiction, and fuel terrorism, when we could develop a cleaner, better, more efficient way to power our country that eliminates foreign entanglements?
Of course nothing is ever as simple as it sounds, especially in the Middle East. But a concentrated effort to speed the shift to a new energy source would do more than just clean up the environment - it could change the war on terror, too.
Kristen Trotter Chick is student life editor of The Crimson White. Her column runs Thursdays.
(C) 2006 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 12, 2006


End of Document