IT'S A BIG COUNTRY TO SECURE;
 RIDGE BEGINS UNDERTAKING HIS ROLE AS PROTECTION CHIEF AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 8, 2001 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 879 words
Byline: JERRY SCHWARTZ, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


You are Tom Ridge. Your job is to ensure that our homeland is secure from terrorism. This is what you must protect:
 Almost 600,000 bridges, 170,000 water systems, more than 2,800 power plants (104 of them nuclear), 190,000 miles of interstate pipelines for natural gas, 463 skyscrapers (each more than 500 feet tall), nearly 20,000 miles of border, airports, stadiums, train tracks, the food supply, schools, industry.
 More than 285 million people, spread out over 3,717,792 square miles.
"If you start out defending the homeland with the premise that you're going to defend every high profile, highly vulnerable target -- you lose," says Donald Hamilton, deputy director of the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism, in Oklahoma City.
 "If you can't fill a yellow legal pad with hard-to-defend targets in 30 minutes, you're not thinking very hard. Oil pipelines, the Holland and Lincoln tunnels, the food supply … you could sink the whole national budget into trying to defend these things very quickly."
 But this is not to say that Ridge -- the former Pennsylvania governor who takes charge today as the first head of the Office of Homeland Security -- is on a fool's errand. Experts on terrorism and on domestic security say the new department can accomplish a lot. It can coordinate the agencies already at work against terrorism; it can focus public attention on what needs to be done.
 And most likely, it will lead the way to a less defensive approach to protecting Americans on these shores.
 This will not be the old idea of civil defense -- the one that sent New York Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia running around the country, warning of air raids in the days before World War II; the one that featured an animated creature, Burt the Turtle, telling children to "duck and cover" in the event of nuclear attack in 1950.
 Nor are we likely to hear instructions on how to dig our way to safety from nuclear attack, as we did early in the Reagan administration. "Everybody's going to make it if there are enough shovels to go around … Dig a hole, cover it with a couple of doors and then throw three feet of dirt on top. It's the dirt that does it," said T.K. Jones, deputy undersecretary of defense, in 1981.
 There has been a surge of interest in civil defense. The Starke, Fla.-based American Civil Defense Association, an advocacy and resource group, had seen its membership drop below 1,000 in recent years, but its rolls have increased 30 percent since Sept. 11, says executive director Kathy Eiland.
 "They're wanting to do something," Eiland says.
 The fact is, much has been done already.
 Michael Greenberger, a law professor at the University of Maryland, was principal associate deputy attorney general from 1999 to 2001; he planned a simulation in which top Cabinet and government officials responded to a crisis in three cities.
 Ridge's most important role, Greenberger says, is to coordinate the activities of 40 federal agencies devoted to public security. In the past, they've often been competitors.
 Greenberger likens Ridge's position to that Condoleezza Rice, the president's chief national security adviser. He will get things done because he has the president's ear, Greenberger says.
 A Homeland Security bureaucracy, he says, "would just waste a lot of valuable time."
 Ridge can be an advocate for the funds and resources needed to face the threat. The FBI has long sought more translators; now, the urgency is apparent. Ridge can help recruit the brainpower needed to make America secure, perhaps turning to a technology industry that has been ravaged by the downturn, Greenberger says.
 There are overlaps to eliminate, gaps to fill. There are cultural differences to transcend.
 "Different agencies go about their tasks very differently," says Ric Stoll, a political science professor at Rice University in Houston.
 He recalls that during riots in Los Angeles, the National Guard was called in to help police. At one point, police asked the guardsmen to cover them as they went in for an arrest; they were surprised when the guard raked the area with gunfire.
 To the police, "cover" meant "watch our backs." To the soldiers, it meant "lay down fire."
 The very origins of the phrase "homeland security" are a clue to the road we are following. William Martel, a professor of national security affairs at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., says "homeland defense" was a concept that was often used in recent years by the military in connection with the missile defense system supported by the Bush administration.
 Martel says the first reaction to the Sept. 11 attacks is defensive, to rachet up security wherever we are vulnerable.
 This is what has happened -- as National Guard troops have patrolled airports, backpacks have been forbidden at football games, drivers who transport hazardous materials have undergone background checks, more surveillance cameras have been posted on rail platforms, campers and mobile homes were detoured from places like the Hoover Dam.
 Martel says the second reaction, a prime responsibility of the Office of Homeland Security, is offensive. The job will be to marshal every tool available -- legal, financial, diplomatic, military, and especially intelligence -- to thwart terrorists before they can strike.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE U.S. RESPONDS

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Kalim A. Bhatti/Associated Press: Former Gov. Tom Ridge, who takes charge today as the first head of the Office of Homeland Security, and Pennsylvania Gov. Mark Schweiker salute the flag during the dedication of a new veterans memorial yesterday in Fort Indiantown Gap, Lebanon County. Americans shouldn't expect to see quick results in the war against terrorism, Ridge told thousands of veterans and spectators. "I think we'll have to be patient. It will take a while to root them out."

Load-Date: October 9, 2001


End of Document