It's called 'policing'
Daily News (New York)
May 14, 2014 Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22
Length: 502 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


A salute to Police Commissioner Bill Bratton for standing foursquare behind the NYPD's practice of seeking anti-terror intelligence from criminal suspects.
The department's tactics for seeking leads in the Muslim community have come under unjustified fire since an Associated Press series falsely depicted cops as "spying" simply by mapping neighborhoods where immigrants from Islamic countries concentrated. Bratton scrapped the program, which had largely completed its work and had been reduced to three detectives.
Bratton's move left the unfortunate impression that he was bowing to an exaggerated sense of political correctness. Now, though, in his defense of seeking Muslim informants, he has made clear that he intends to maintain necessary vigilance in the face of exaggerated sensitivities.
Formed after 9/11, the Citywide Debriefing Team applied a tried-and-true investigative tool to terrorism. Here's how it works:
When a person is arrested whose country of origin is a place of interest, say Yemen or Afghanistan, a detective with the right language skills (often one from that same country) talks with the suspect to elicit whatever can be learned, and gives him or her an NYPD business card.
The goal is to pick up useful tips, which the effort has. While some people declined to help (and complained in The New York Times), others have aided the police - producing busts for guns, sex trafficking, drugs and even selling false passports. The debriefings were critical in finding the informant who helped nab convicted terrorist Jose Pimentel.
It is the exact same approach the NYPD used decades ago during the Irish Troubles by questioning criminal suspects with Irish backgrounds and to seek info in the Puerto Rican community when the FALN was setting off bombs here.
In Israel, Bratton told the Jerusalem Post he has long relied on interviewing arrestees about a wide range of criminal activity, not just terrorism. He called it "an essential element of policing."
"I created this policy back in 1994, in New York City last time I was commissioner, where every person arrested was interviewed by detectives about not necessarily the crime they committed but do they have information about other crimes and is there an ability to develop these people into confidential informants," Bratton said.
Deputy Commissioner for Intelligence John Miller told the paper that detectives question suspects based on country of origin, not religion, adding, correctly, "I understand that the controversy is driven by how the program is characterized."
Meaning standard police work can be rhetorically contorted into religious-based abuse.
Miller continued: "I think the basic tenet of policing is that when you take people into custody, you try to get information from them. This is how we take guns. This is how we seize narcotics. This is how we solve murders every single day. In the area of counterterrorism, this is how you are going to gain insight and visibility where you would otherwise have very little." Right on.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: May 14, 2014


End of Document