It's an 'economic' summit, but terrorism is key topic
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 28, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 1
Length: 807 words
Byline: By David T. Cook Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Honolulu
Highlight: Tokyo meeting also to cover trade, arms race
Body


After a two-day rest stop in sun-drenched Hawaii, President Reagan today resumes his marathon Asian journey. Final destination: the forthcoming Tokyo economic summit.
While the May 4-6 economic parley is the ostensible reason for the 13-day trip, political subjects - especially terrorism - are expected to dominate discussions at each of Mr. Reagan's stops.
The President will spend almost 14 hours on Air Force One today as he flies via Guam to the Indonesian island of Bali. During his four days on Bali, he will meet with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN - made up of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Brunei), have a bilateral meeting with Indonesian President Suharto, and meet with Philippine Vice-President Salvador Laurel. The meeting with Mr. Laurel will be the first personal contact between Reagan and a top Philippine official since the ouster of Ferdinand Marcos in February.
Methods of dealing with terrorism will be a key topic in the ASEAN meetings (Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand, have condemned the United States raid on Libya). Reagan will also consult with ASEAN leaders on continuing efforts to locate US military personnel still missing in Southeast Asia.
But perhaps the hottest economic issue on the agenda in Bali is the impact on the ASEAN nations of a new US farm law that subsidizes American rice growers. Rice is a major crop for several ASEAN countries and they are concerned that the availability of cheaper US rice will hurt their own exports.
(For related story on the Japanese yen's record rise, see Page 8.)
In recent years, political topics have nudged economic news from the top of the headlines at economic summits. Last year it was President Reagan's visit to a German military cemetery at Bitburg that caught the headlines. This year the hot topic is expected to be terrorism.
Over the weekend there were further reports of terrorism in France aimed at American corporations and their employees. Admiral John Poindexter, assistant to the President for national security affairs, said that in Tokyo ''terrorism will be a good part of the conversation'' between allied leaders. He noted that ''we're more interested in action than rhetoric.''
Secretary of State George Shultz hinted at what kind of action the US favors. In an interview with the Los Angeles Times published Saturday, Shultz said the US should consider using covert action to weaken the regime of Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi. He also said that Libya's economy ''is on the fragile side right now,'' and indicated that President Reagan will push at the summit for joint economic and political sanctions against Colonel Qaddafi.
Of the six other nations participating in the summit - Britain, Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, and Japan - only Britain supported the US raid on Libya. But recently other nations have stepped up their efforts to combat terrorism.
Other key political issues at the summit will include superpower relations, particularly the prospects for a US-Soviet summit later this year, and Reagan's decision to continue compliance with the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.
Also on the table will be a proposal by Israeli Prime Minster Shimon Peres that an economic aid plan - a so-called Marshall Plan - be mounted for the Middle East. White House officials have downplayed the immediate prospects for such a plan, saying it ''needs a great deal of study, discussion, and consultation.''
Despite the long list of political topics, there are still major economic items on the summit agenda. One key topic is trade friction between the allies. US officials have said that Japan's $50 billion trade surplus with the US is ''politically intolerable.'' US policymakers also have warned that the European Common Market risks setting off a trade war with the US unless it changes plans to impose new restrictions on sales of US farm products.
The US also wants other summit nations - especially West Germany and Japan - to take steps to get their economies moving faster and thus draw in more US exports.
Finally, the dollar's recent rapid drop against the yen and other currencies is starting to worry some financial market participants, who fear the decline may go too far. The risk is that the drop could set off inflation in the US and trigger a plunge in export sales of US suppliers.
Before leaving Washington Friday, Reagan called Philippine President Corazon Aquino, informing her of his backing for a $150 million package of new economic and military aid for the Philippines and inviting her to visit the US. The visit probably will occur this fall, officials say. Reagan was criticized on Capitol Hill for waiting so long to call Mrs. Aquino. Friday's call appeared timed to avoid further criticism over a weekend call by Mr. and Mrs. Reagan to the Marcoses.

Graphic

 
Picture, Reagan will be busy in Bali. SVEN SIMON; Map, Reagan's Route. From mainland US to Honolulu, to Guam, Bali, Tokyo, Washington., JOAN FORBES -- STAFF


End of Document