IT'S HARD TO FEEL SAFE ANYWHERE;
Oklahoma blast shows terrorism's ultimate evil
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 25, 1995, Tuesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL,; William Raspberry
Length: 615 words
Byline: William Raspberry
Dateline: Washington
Body


I've just made an appointment to give blood at the local Red Cross. This feeble gesture is the only logical response that comes to mind for the madness that lately reduced to rubble a federal office building in Oklahoma City - and with it our sense of safety against terrorism.
Wednesday's car-bombing of the nine-story Alfred P. Murrah building was not our first experience of terrorism, of course. There was - has it been two years already? - the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York and, a decade before that, the bomb that killed 241 Marines in Beirut. But the one happened in New York City - that place, in the minds of many Americans - and the other involved servicemen serving overseas.
This one happened in Oklahoma City, and its victims were civilians, including babies. It's hard now to feel safe anywhere. Another random attack or two, and it may be impossible.
That, of course, is the terrorist's point. An attack on particular people or institutions - even if the method of attack is a car bomb rather than a military weapon - is more nearly an act of war than of terrorism. By that standard, even the bombing of the Marine barracks was not quite a terrorist act.
Oklahoma City was. Those who planted the bomb may have intended it as a generalized assault on the U.S. government, but probably not an attack on any particular agency or group of people. The purpose, one has to assume, is to show their capacity to strike anywhere, at anytime - to terrorize.
Anybody can rent a van, as the Oklahoma City terrorists apparently did. The materials used to turn the vehicle into a massive bomb can be had almost anywhere. All it takes, as The New York Times put it, is "a book (of instructions), a blender, an alarm clock and a few sacks of fertilizer."
It also takes a grievance, of course, but those are hardly in short supply these days.
The terror these simple ingredients can wreak is massive. But some of the most insidious damage comes long after the terrorist is gone: the copycat attacks, the phony calls claiming that bombs have been planted, the generalized uneasiness.
And all of it is made worse by the fact that, though we feel constrained to act, we don't know what action to take. In the present case, the authorities will reconstruct the crime scene, hoping to discover the precise nature of the explosive device and any possible "signature" that might link it to known terrorists. Sooner or later, there will be more arrests - maybe even convict and sentence and execute somebody.
Other officials will tighten security at federal buildings all over the country - and probably close off Pennsylvania Avenue while they're at it - even while recognizing the futility of the effort. There's nothing to suggest that the next terrorist act, when and if it comes, will involve a federal building. And even if it did, what good would it do to check ID cards and have employees put their keys in a plastic dish? The Oklahoma City bombers may never have entered the building at all; the minivan that contained the explosives apparently was left at the curb.
Nothing I can think of is likely to make much difference, aside from the prag matic (and heroic) labors of those digging through the rubble for long-shot survivors, or the efforts of those who are collecting food, clothing, building materials and cash for the victims. It is the natural response of some people that, when catastrophe strikes, they do what they can to ease the misery - even while understanding the inadequacy of what they do.
 
Somebody says they're short of O-Negative, so I'll give blood.
William Raspberry is syndicated by the Washington Post Writers Group. His column runs in The Journal occasionally.

Load-Date: June 27, 1995


End of Document