It's terrorism, not Nazism
University Wire
September 8, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Indiana Daily Student via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 472 words
Byline: By Wadell Hamer, Indiana Daily Student; SOURCE: Indiana U.
Dateline: BLOOMINGTON, Ind. 
Body


Say what you will about the members of the Bush administration, but they are wordsmiths. That's a title that neither myself nor most people would normally bestow on someone such as "W," but if you look at the administration's history, I think that it's a fair word to use to describe them. The administration has used the power of words to make Democrats out to be homosexual lovin', baby killin', un-American softies on national security.
With words, they have crafted this war on terror into not just a war against terrorism but into the greatest threat to democracy and freedom the world perhaps has ever seen. Bush's latest gem with words has been to compare this war to World War II and particularly comparing Osama bin Laden to a man so evil that it seems like the history channel has dedicated the entire network to him.
This man I speak of is Adolf Hitler. And I just can't fall for this latest masterpiece of words.
I will be the first to admit that Osama bin Laden is no Mr. Rogers. The man is evil by any stretch of the imagination. He has dreams and plans on bringing the Islamic world and America to its knees with the use of reckless violence. He wants to rule the Middle East with an Islamic iron fist. For his actions on Sept. 11 -- let alone his plans for the world -- the man should be caught and brought to justice. But is he the next Hitler? No!
A few things put Hitler over bin Laden:
* Hitler was the leader of a country. After 1934 Hitler basically had Germany in the palm of his hands. With sick thoughts like his, you can do a lot of damage. Bin Laden never has and never will have that kind of access to a powerful nation. Some would say he was practically the leader of Afghanistan, but there is no comparison between Afghanistan and Germany.
* Hitler had an Army. Before World War II, the German army was considered one of the best in the world. Bin Laden's army is, well, a guerrilla army at best. It's very small and has little supplies in comparison to Hitler's mighty forces. This will severely damage his dream of taking over the world.
* Hitler was a lot more organized. He had to be. At one point, he controlled almost all of mainland Europe, excluding Russia. Bin Laden seems to be going about initiating terrorist attacks without a logical plan. True, he might have plans that we don't know about, but what he has done so far annoys me more than scares me.
Bin Laden reminds me of that little kid from elementary school who responds to everything with violence and more violence. After a while you become more annoyed by his actions instead of fearing him, and you know a good butt-kicking would do him a world of good. Despite all of Bush's mishaps, hopefully we can continue along the path to doing that. But to say bin Laden is the next Hitler is an exaggeration.
(C) 2006 Indiana Daily Student via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 8, 2006


End of Document