It's terrorism, stupid
University Wire
November 5, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Illini via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 737 words
Byline: By Bill Cleeland, Daily Illini
Dateline: Champaign, Ill.
Body


Riddle me this: What do you call 19 guys who hijack some planes, slam them into buildings and kill thousands of people? If you said they're "terrorists," most sensible folks would agree, but the head honchos at the Reuters news agency might beg to differ.
The British-based wire service is barring correspondents from referring to the attacks of Sept. 11 and subsequent anthrax mailings as "terrorism" or the perpetrators as "terrorists." Stephen Jukes, Reuters' head of global news, justified this by insisting "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter" and that it's not up to journalists to "evaluate the moral case" of the situation.
He's right in one sense -- the primary job of journalists is to inform the public of what's going on in the world in as unbiased a way as possible. Moral judgments have their place in the media in the forms of columns, commentaries and editorials, but straight-up reporting usually requires a balanced account of a given situation.
U. Illinois
Sometimes, though, news stories don't have two sides to them. Sometimes an event happens that's so indefensible that the only way to properly report it is by showing how heinous the action was, no matter how one-sided the coverage might seem.
Such is the case of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon -- there's no justification for what happened on Sept. 11, any more than one could justify the Holocaust. Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda thugs are the modern equivalents of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi party. Both targeted massive numbers of innocent civilians for death, both believed in warped ideologies that fostered genocidal hatred toward a particular group of people. Of course the Holocaust killed far more individuals, but that's somewhat irrelevant -- bin Laden would kill just as many people if he had the means to do it.
But all that aside, how is referring to the hijackers and anthrax attackers as "terrorists" being too judgmental? It's simply calling them what they are. According to the World Book encyclopedia, terrorism is "the use or threat of violence to create fear and alarm." The Merriam-Webster dictionary says to terrorize is to "coerce by threat or violence."
So keeping those definitions in mind, let's take a peek at what al-Qaeda's spokesman recently said regarding his group's role in the Sept. 11 attacks:
"Americans must know the storm of airplanes will not stop. There are thousands of our young people who look forward to death just as Americans look forward to living."
Hmm … now I might not be the brightest bulb, but isn't he clearly trying to use the "threat of violence to create fear and alarm"? I could be wrong -- after all, I'm probably the only person on the planet who likes "Fletch Lives" better than "Fletch." Now take a gander at the anthrax letter sent to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle:
"You can not stop us. We have this anthrax. You die now. Are you afraid? Death to America. Death to Israel."
It should be clear to even the village idiots among us that "terrorist" is the proper word for these people. I mean, if they're not terrorists, what should we refer to them as? The rationally challenged? Pyrotechnic performance artists? It starts to get ridiculous.
Reuters prides itself in its long history of impartiality in world affairs. As Jukes said, "we're trying to treat everyone on a level playing field." But in this case, they're not only wrong but breaking their own supposed neutrality. Not calling the bin Laden bunch what they obviously are -- terrorists -- gives them an added credibility they don't deserve. This is especially true considering how Reuters didn't hesitate to characterize past attacks, such as the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, using the "t-word."
In the war against terror, there's no middle ground. The situation is clear cut: One group of people is trying to destroy the lives and livelihoods of a second group of people. All these angsty philosopher wanna-bes, who try to morally equivocate the situation and bemoan America as "just as bad" as the terrorists, need to remember that it's our way of life, our Constitution, that allows them to express their asinine views. If they lived in a country run by people like bin Laden and the Taliban, they'd be shot for speaking out against the government. It's that respect for freedom that makes America truly greater than our enemy.
(C) 2001 Daily Illini via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document