It's time to rethink terrorism
University Wire
October 25, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 500 words
Byline: By Jamie Anson, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


American culture is one that prides itself on righteousness. It is this sense that enabled our founding fathers to generate the Declaration of Independence, and it is arguably this same sense of righteousness that fostered an oppressive system of slavery, dividing American culture for more than two centuries. Clearly, America's passion for being right has existed since its founding day.
When the behavior of righteousness is incorrectly ascertained, the consequences can be dire. Conceited righteousness is the state of mind that history has shown sends the United States down the path to disaster. The Salem Witch Trials, The Trail of Tears, Black Slavery, Jim Crow Laws, the WWII internment of Japanese Americans, McCarthyism, The Vietnam Conflict-all are subject to the argument of conceited righteousness, and all brought about the suffering of its cruelty.
As true as it has been in the past, this theme of righteousness is familiar to contemporary American society as well. In fact, since "the day of fire" as President Bush put it in his inaugural address, the search for righteousness is more evident than ever. Modern American society is consumed with the idea of terrorism -- what makes terrorism wrong and what makes it righteous in comparison.
In the words of James Alison, here lies the problem: "There is no meaning to the act of destruction caused by hijacking planes full of people and crashing them into buildings. It is not an act creative of anything at all, any more than any other suicide is a creative act." How does one appear righteous in comparison to an act that by its very definition is symbolic of nothing?
Alison concludes, "The terrifying result is a snare and an illusion, meaning nothing at all, but leaving us prey to revenge and violence, our judgments clouded by conceited righteousness." It's as if someone strikes you and then falls dead on the floor. A gut reaction may be to strike back, but how do you strike at nothing? The anger begs to come out somewhere, to invent a target, anything to swing back at.
It is still a scary phenomenon to hear people talking about Ground Zero of the terrorist attacks as a "sacred ground," which must serve as a rallying point. In reality that ground is representative of chaos and destruction. It is the antithesis of sacred. Ground Zero, as it's been termed, may be able to teach us a lesson, but it must not be confused with anything remotely sacred. It is hate, it is destruction, it is a dark hole of nothingness in the ground of American democracy. Democracy, order, organization -- these are the thing capable of symbolism and what they symbolize is progress toward peace.
So what happens when terrorism is allowed to parade in the guise of something symbolic, or worse yet, sacred? Take a look around you. If what you see looks strikingly similar to vengeance, to the invention of an enemy to make us feel better than if we were simply swinging at air, then you may have found your answer.
(C) 2005 Daily Evergreen via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 25, 2005


End of Document