It's time to account for the cost of war;
The emergency has passed. Budgets should reflect the new reality.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
February 6, 2006 Monday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2006 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8
Length: 420 words
Body


An emergency, says Webster's, is a "sudden, generally unexpected, occurrence." The definition seems lost on the Bush administration.
When terrorists attacked the United States on Sept. 11, 2001, it was sudden and unexpected. The nation's priorities necessarily had to shift, and rapidly so. There was an emergency of great proportion, and it was up to the president to respond.
And respond he did. Whether one agrees with Bush's strategy in the war on terror, the president cannot be faulted for not taking the threat seriously and reacting strongly.
Now, more than four years after that tragic day, there is nothing sudden or unexpected about our need to confront global Islamic terrorism, especially in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Quite the opposite. Last week, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said in a speech before the National Press Club that America had entered into what he dubbed "The Long War." Fighting terrorism, Rumsfeld said, would be a commitment similar to that made to the Cold War, and the conflict could be with us for years.
At just about the time Rumsfeld was defining the war on terrorism as a more or less permanent state of affairs, the White House was announcing yet another special request for funding military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The new request was for an additional $120 billion. More than half, $70 billion, would cover operations through the close of the current fiscal year. The rest, $50 billion, was described as a "place holder" for expenses for the year that starts Oct. 1.
This brings the total cost of the two wars to more than $400 billion.
Set aside the debate over whether these operations have been worth the expense. There are good arguments on both sides of that question.
Focus instead on the fact that, even as one member of the administration declares the war to be here to stay for a while, others in the White House continue the guessing game with regard to the war's cost.
This is harmful in a couple respects. First, by budgeting for the war with one special appropriation after another, it's difficult for Congress to debate the cost of the war relative to its effect on our national security.
Second, these special appropriations make getting a handle on the national debt and deficit nearly impossible. The White House has made some rosy budget deficit projections in the past, but never do these account for the cost of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
It is time the administration spelled out our long-term commitment to the war on terror in dollars and cents.

Load-Date: February 6, 2006


End of Document