It's time to dismantle the CIA
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 6, 1991, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 14A; COLUMN
Length: 597 words
Byline: Vincent Cannistraro
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Recent international events have rendered the CIA an obsolete tool of national security policy. The CIA should be disbanded and its necessary functions spun off to the rest of the national security bureaucracy.
 
    The intelligence community, at the center of which is the CIA, is a result of the 1947 National Security Act, devised in response to threats from an international environment that no longer exists. Its initial justification was to draw intelligence under one centralized authority to avoid the catastrophe represented by the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor, when critical intelligence was not disseminated to key policy-makers.
   But the community grew from its 1947 roots without a grand design, and intelligence responsibilities were increasingly defined by parochial interests, with the result that duplication is a major problem.
 
    Articulated threats to national security in the years since 1947 included the attempts of Soviet communism to extend hegemony over Europe and, later, large parts of the Third World. As the nature of the threats changed, and the challenges to democracy shifted, the basic structure of the intelligence community has survived intact.
 
    Large resources have been devoted to the analysis of the Soviet political and military dynamic, to uncertain result. Academia and think tanks specializing in Soviet studies have at least an equal record in forecasting significant trends and developments in the Soviet Union. Some have done better despite the lack of access to sensitive intelligence data.
 
    The clandestine services, the operating arm of the CIA, is still in search of a vital mission following the collapse of Marxism-Leninism. The unit evidently lacks a vision of how to adapt to a rapidly changing world and is ill equipped to deal with the problems of the 21st century.
 
    It is time to confront the core question: Is the CIA relevant in the contemporary world?
 
    Conflict will be as much a hallmark of the 21st century as it has been of this one, but the nature of the threats continues to change, with nuclear proliferation, biological- and chemical-warfare capability, narcotics production, technology transfer and economics issues as national-security concerns.
 
    Requirements on the capabilities of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons will remain matters of vital concern, whether the focus is the Soviet Union, China or the Third World. Monitoring arms control will continue to be a necessary intelligence function. But all of these activities can be managed outside the CIA.
 
    What can be done? Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan introduced the "Cold War Act of 1991," which would subsume the CIA's intelligence collection responsibilities under the Department of State. It is a start.
 
    The removal of the KGB as a serious threat is removing many of the imperatives behind the CIA's intelligence operations. Third World political and economic collection can be more coherently managed from the State Department.
 
    Military intelligence is far better collected by the Pentagon and its service organizations. The political and diplomatic aspects of anti-terrorism can continue to be professionally handled by the State Department's Counter Terrorism Office.
 
    The CIA's paramilitary capabilities have belonged in the Pentagon for several years, and now that Special Operations has found delayed recognition from the joint chiefs, the time to move that mission is now.
  Vincent Cannistraro is former chief of counterterrorism for the CIA and former director of intelligence at the National Security Council.

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document