IT'S LIKELY TERRORISTS WILL GO UNKNOWN AND UNPUNISHED
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 8, 1998 Saturday D EDITIONCorrection Appended


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 828 words
Byline: Murray Dubin, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


They probably won't be caught. International terrorists rarely are.
According to antiterrorism experts, it is unlikely that the criminals who set the bombs that exploded yesterday in front of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania will ever be identified. And it's even less likely that they will have to pay for their crimes.
"Terrorism has changed. People are no longer demanding attribution for their evil deeds," says Omar Kader, a terrorism specialist who formerly taught international politics at Brigham Young University.
"They're willing to bomb something and not let a soul know who they are."
President Clinton angrily denounced the "cowardly attacks" yesterday and said that the United States "will use all the means at our disposal to bring those responsible to justice no matter what or how long it takes."
Similar words have been heard before. After the 1996 attack on American servicemen near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, Clinton said: "America takes care of our own. Those who did it must not go unpunished."
No one has been arrested or punished for that crime.
After the Pan Am bomb explosion over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, President George Bush declared that the United States would "seek hard and punish firmly, decisively, those who did this." The two Libyan agents believed to be responsible for planting the bomb remain at large.
And in 1983, after a bombing killed 241 U.S. servicemen at a military base in Beirut, President Ronald Reagan also said the attackers would be punished. No one has been arrested in that terrorist attack, either.
Despite the efforts of law enforcement, no country has really been successful in eliminating terrorism from within its borders.
"Underground movements protect themselves by using cell organizations so that an infiltration only infiltrates one small part," said Michael Dunn, a board member of the Middle East Policy Council in Washington and the publisher of a biweekly newsletter on Islamic issues.
"The Israelis, who have fewer legal restrictions than the United States, have been unable to stop terror bombings inside Israel. Similarly, the British. It is very, very difficult, even for a totalitarian government, to root out and crush these movements. You never get them all."
And today, national borders mean less to terrorists.
"Now, if the Chechens are angry at the Russians, they don't have to go to Russia. They can go anywhere in the world that Russia has an embassy," Kader said. "That makes everyone's vulnerabilities that much greater."
Anyone suspecting that some dissident anti-American East African terrorist group committed these bombings is making a bad guess, said Nelson Kasfir, an East African expert teaching African politics at Dartmouth.
"There are no guerrilla movements and there is nothing going on internally in either of these countries against Americans," he said.
The fact that two bombs were set off within minutes of each other in two countries leads experts to conclude that they were not the work of a crazed madman, or even two.
"My guess is that it is very unlikely that this happened without state support. Libya, Iraq, some state," says Yonah Alexander, director of the terrorism-studies program at George Washington University.
And, if true, that would complicate the efforts to apprehend the bombers even further.
The bombers of the World Trade Center were apprehended and brought to justice. So were the two men responsible for the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City. But the success rate diminishes precipitously when the crime occurred outside U.S. borders.
In the Dhahran bombing, which killed 19 Americans, conflict between Saudi and American officials about how to conduct the investigation has been cited as a reason for the lack of success.
"Some countries say, 'Just come in and do what you want,' and some countries say, 'You can't do anything,' " Harry "Skip" Brandon, a former deputy assistant FBI director for international terrorism, said last year.
And complicating the issue even further are the strange and sometimes unpredictable motivations that can lead to terrorism.
Ian Lustick, chairman of the political science department at the University of Pennsylvania, said he was aware of an attack against an Argentine synagogue that was more about revenge for the capture of terrorist leaders than it was about ideology or anti-Jewish feeling.
In June, the State Department announced that security was being tightened at embassies and other facilities in the Middle East and South Asia because of a renewed threat from an exiled Saudi militant now living in Afghanistan.
The militant, Osama bin Laden, told ABC News that he would target all Americans in his holy war against U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia because of U.S. support for Israel.
Last year, bin Laden was named as a suspect in the 1995 car bombing in Riyadh that killed five Americans and in the 1996 Saudi bombing that killed 19.
Heightened security for embassies in Africa was not part of the announcement.

Notes

The Embassy Bombings

Graphic

 
PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
Prudence Bushnell, the U.S. ambassador to Kenya, is shielded and escorted from the area of the embassy explosion. She sustained a cut lip. (Associated Press, SAYYID AZIM)

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document