Italians Outraged by French Mercy to Ex-Member of Red Brigades
The New York Times
October 15, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 546 words
Byline: By ELISABETTA POVOLEDO
Dateline: ROME 
Body


A decision by President Nicolas Sarkozy of France not to extradite a former member of the Red Brigades, the group that terrorized Italy throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s, has provoked outrage in Italy and stirred dormant tensions between the countries.
  The decision also raised questions about the role played by the first lady of France, Carla Sarkozy, who had visited the former member, Marina Petrella, last week and personally assured her that she would not be extradited.
  Ms. Petrella was convicted of involvement in murder and other crimes in Italy, and in 1993 fled to France, where President Francois Mitterrand had a policy of granting asylum to leftist Italian militants if they renounced violence. But later French governments moved away from that policy, and she was jailed in August 2007. 
  This August she was released after her health deteriorated because of severe depression. She had stopped eating, her lawyer, Irene Terrel, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday. ''She just wanted to die,'' Ms. Terrel said. 
  Mr. Sarkozy announced over the weekend that Ms. Petrella, 54 and hospitalized in Paris, would not be extradited, for what he called humanitarian reasons. 
  Sabina Rossa, a center-left Italian lawmaker whose father was killed by the Red Brigades in 1979, said on a morning radio talk show on Tuesday that Mr. Sarkozy's justification was unacceptable. ''It's saying that Italy is a country at risk, without democratic certainties, where a person's health is not evaluated seriously,'' she said.
  Ms. Rossa said France had a distorted view of what life was like in Italy during the years of terrorism. ''There are people who committed atrocious crimes and left a trail of blood, but in France there are those who see them as victims of political persecution, with an aura of the romantic hero,'' she said. 
  The Red Brigades' most notorious crime was the kidnapping and killing of a former prime minister, Aldo Moro, in 1978.
  Ms. Petrella was convicted of involvement in Red Brigades activities in Rome from 1977 to 1982, including the kidnapping and murder of Mr. Moro;  the murder of Gen. Enrico Galvaligi, the head of antiterrorist forces in northern Italy; the murder of a police commissioner and the kidnapping of a magistrate. 
  Since her arrest, groups in France have protested her expected extradition. Several high-profile personalities, including Mrs. Sarkozy  and her sister, the actress Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi, have sympathized with her. 
  Last Wednesday, Mrs. Sarkozy visited Ms. Petrella in the hospital to personally reassure her that she would not be extradited. ''We could not let this woman die,'' she told the French newspaper Liberation this week. 
  A group representing victims of Italian terrorism said they would protest in Paris this month and demand that Mr. Sarkozy reverse his decision. The president of the group, Bruno Berardi, whose father was killed by a Red Brigades member in 1978, said he had already initiated a hunger strike. ''Let's see if a protest on the part of a victim of terrorism has the same effect on the French president,'' he said.
  Ms. Terrel said Ms. Petrella was still too weak to be happy about the turn in her fortunes. ''If anything, she's relieved to be staying in Paris,'' she said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 15, 2008


End of Document