Italian Police Charge Imam and 2 Aides With Training Terrorists
The New York Times
July 23, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 472 words
Byline: By PETER KIEFER
Dateline: ROME, July 22 
Body


The Italian police were hunting for a fourth suspect on Sunday after arresting the imam of a mosque in central Italy and two of his aides over the weekend on suspicion of running a ''terror school'' that trained children in bomb making and guerrilla combat.
  The police said they  confiscated as many as 60 types of chemicals from the home of the imam, materials that they suspect could have been used for bomb making. All three of the men arrested were Moroccan.
  The police identified the imam as Korchi el-Mostapha, 41, and his two aides as Mohamed el-Jari, 47, and Driss Safika, 46. The raid was part of a two-year investigation that involved monitoring  of telephone and Internet communications.
  Arturo De Felice, the police chief in Perugia, where the men were arrested, said  investigators raided  the mosque on Saturday morning.   He said the imam's home was near the mosque.
  The police said they found computer files including  video and documents on weapons training and instructions on how to prepare poisons and explosives, pilot a Boeing 747 and send encrypted messages.
  The police also said the suspects had contacts with members of the Moroccan Islamic Combat Group who were arrested two years ago in Belgium. The Islamic group is believed to have ties to Al Qaeda and has been linked to the 2004 train bombings in Madrid and the 2003 suicide bombings in Casablanca, Morocco.
  Chief De Felice said he did not believe that those arrested Saturday were planning an attack but rather were focusing on training. He said he was confident that the fourth suspect would be caught within days.
  Investigators are looking into whether the chemicals found could be used for bomb making. According to Italian news reports, the chemicals included acids, nitrites, nitrates and iron cyanide.
  Twenty people who attended the mosque were placed under investigation for various charges, including violating Italy's immigration laws.
  In the past, the Italians have shown an aggressive attitude toward policing and disrupting suspected terrorist activities, but that has not always resulted in convictions.
  Last August, in its annual report on crime, the Interior Ministry said that in the previous 12 months, more than 21,000 possible terrorist suspects had been investigated, nearly 83,000 people had been stopped and identified, and 618 had been arrested on terrorism charges. Expulsion procedures had been initiated against 2,000 of the  foreign terrorism suspects, with 55 expelled. 
  According to statistics previously provided by the prosecutor's office in Milan, there have been about 80 convictions in Italy related to international terrorism since an antiterrorism law was passed in December 2001.
  Interior Minister Giuliano Amato praised the arrests on Saturday  as proof that Italy's antiterrorism tactics were working.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 23, 2007


End of Document