Italy Judge Disqualifies Classified Evidence in Trial on Rendition
The New York Times
May 21, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 527 words
Byline: By ELISABETTA POVOLEDO
Dateline: MILAN 
Body


A judge here ruled Wednesday that the trial of Italian and American intelligence agents accused of kidnapping an Egyptian cleric suspected of terrorism would  continue even though critical evidence had been ruled inadmissible, severely undermining the prosecution's case. 
  The judge, Oscar Magi, rejected a defense motion to throw out the charges, based on an Italian Supreme Court ruling issued  this year that barred the use of classified information in the proceedings. He ruled that the prosecution could resume its case but that it could not refer to top secret information, including joint operations involving Italian and American spy  services.
  The Supreme Court ruling has resulted in the exclusion of much of the prosecution's evidence, including material seized from Italian and American intelligence operatives, narrowing the chances of a ruling in favor of the cleric.
  ''We're continuing, but it is more of a formality,'' said the lawyer for Nicolo Pollari, the former chief of Italian military intelligence, who is among those on trial.
  The case is the first to test the contentious American program of ''extraordinary rendition,'' in which terrorism suspects are sent for interrogation to other countries, some of which use torture. On trial are 26 Americans, all but one of them operatives of the Central Intelligence Agency, and 7 members of the Italian military intelligence agency. 
  They are accused of abducting the cleric, Osama Moustafa Hassan Nasr, known as Abu Omar, in Milan on Feb. 17, 2003. Prosecutors say that the cleric was flown from an American air base in Italy to a base in Germany and then  to Egypt, where he claims he was tortured. Classified material had been at the heart of the case.
  All the Americans are being tried in absentia.
  Reading from his 15-page ruling on Wednesday, Judge Magi spoke of ''very slippery ground, setting two constitutional principles against each other -- the security of the state and the right to defend oneself.''
  Matilde Sansalone, the lawyer for several American defendants, was uncertain that in delivering a verdict the judge would be able to extrapolate what was covered by state secrecy from what was not from the mound of documents put together by the prosecution. ''It will be difficult to surgically remove the inadmissible elements,'' she said.
  The trial has been politically embarrassing for a succession of Italian governments that have supported the United States in the fight against terrorism. The proceeding, begun two years ago, has been dealt legal and constitutional challenges.
  ''More than a political trial, the case is a piece of international history, a phenomenon that marks our time, with the upsurge of terrorism and the reaction to the trauma of 9/11,'' said Alessia Sorgato, the lawyer for three American defendants. ''In the future it will be studied by historians as closely as opinion makers.''
  Last week, one of the defendants, Sabrina De Sousa, filed a lawsuit in United States District Court in Washington demanding that the State Department invoke diplomatic immunity to halt the prosecution and pay her legal bills and costs associated with the case.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 21, 2009


End of Document