Italian Court Upends Trial Involving C.I.A. Links
The New York Times
March 12, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 604 words
Byline: By RACHEL DONADIO
Body


MADRID -- In a decision that seriously weakened the most high-profile prosecution in Europe involving the seizure of terrorism suspects, Italy's highest court ruled Wednesday that Italian prosecutors had violated state secrecy in their case against American and Italian intelligence operatives.
The decision by the Constitutional Court was a blow to a case of extreme political delicacy between Italy and the United States, in which 25 operatives from the Central Intelligence Agency, an American Air Force colonel and several Italian intelligence officials are charged with the seizure of an Egyptian terrorism suspect in 2003.
The Americans are being tried in absentia.
The ruling did not throw out the original indictments, but it deemed inadmissible much of the evidence on which the case had been built, including material seized from Italian and American intelligence operatives. The lead prosecutor said he intended to move forward with the trial, which began in 2007 in Milan.
The suspect, Osama Mustafa Hassan Nasr, an imam known as Abu Omar, was seized on the streets of Milan in an instance of what has become known as extraordinary rendition, in which terrorism suspects are sent for interrogation to other countries, some of which use torture.
Prosecutors contend that the defendants, who include the former head of Italian military intelligence, kidnapped Mr. Nasr, took him to American military bases in Italy and Germany, and eventually to Egypt. Among the unanswered questions is who in the Italian government made the decision to cooperate with American intelligence operatives.
At stake for Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and his center-left predecessor, Romano Prodi, is whether the government broke Italian laws.
The former head of Italian military intelligence, Niccolo Pollari, once said that he would call Mr. Berlusconi as a witness. Mr. Pollari's lawyers have said that higher-level officials made the decision to cooperate with American intelligence operatives.
The court's ruling might defuse somewhat a source of tension and embarrassment between Italy and the United States, even though the trial appears likely to continue. According to lawyers for the prosecution, the court deemed inadmissible files that had been seized from the Rome apartment of an Italian intelligence operative, the Italian news media reported.
The court also threw out some testimony from an Italian police officer who said he had participated in Mr. Nasr's seizure at the request of Robert Seldon Lady, who was then the Central Intelligence Agency's station chief in Milan.
But the ruling appeared to admit evidence gathered from wiretaps of intelligence operatives, which the Italian government had filed motions to dismiss.
Both the Italian government and the Milan prosecutors, who are independent from the executive branch and in this case are adversarial, declared victory after the ruling.
A lawyer representing the Italian government, Ignazio Francesco Caramazza, called the ruling ''a full victory,'' the ANSA news agency reported.
Armando Spataro, a domestic terrorism prosecutor who leads the prosecution in the case, said he, too, was satisfied. ''The interrogations and wiretaps were all regular,'' Mr. Spataro told ANSA.
When he was seized in 2003, Mr. Nasr had been under investigation by the Italian police, who suspected that he had connections to the financing of terrorism in Europe. Agents grabbed him while he was walking to a Milan mosque, which was believed to be at the center of radical Islam in Italy.
After his release in Egypt in 2007, Mr. Nasr said that he had been tortured while in custody there.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 6, 2011


End of Document