ITALY'S PREMIER FORCED OUT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 25, 2008 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-3
Length: 555 words
Body


ROME -- Italian Premier Romano Prodi resigned yesterday after his center-left coalition lost a Senate confidence vote, a humiliating end to a 20-month-old government plagued by infighting.
Calling early elections or asking a politician to try to form another government are among President Giorgio Napolitano's options as head of state. Until he decides, Mr. Prodi will stay on in a caretaker role.
Elected in April 2006, Mr. Prodi has had a shaky government from nearly the start. It lurched toward collapse this week after a small Christian Democrat party, whose votes were vital to his Senate majority, yanked its support in the latest coalition spat.
Tougher terrorism laws
LONDON -- The British government revealed sweeping plans yesterday to toughen terrorism laws, including a proposal to increase the limit for detaining suspects without charge from 28 days to 42 days and urge judges to impose stiffer sentences on criminals whose offenses are linked to terrorism.
The proposal also calls for creation of a specialist national database to store DNA samples from suspected terrorists. Samples are not currently added to a national database holding DNA information on criminals, meaning officers cannot search quickly for potential matches to other evidence.
Castro reflects on illness
HAVANA -- Fidel Castro revealed yestersday he thought he was dying when he fell ill in July 2006, and was so worried about his legacy that he ordered last-minute editing of his memoirs even as doctors struggled to save his life.
"When I fell gravely ill the night of the 26th and dawn of the 27th of July, I thought that would be the end," the ailing 81-year-old wrote in an essay published on the front page of state newspapers.
More rehab for Winehouse
LONDON -- Amy Winehouse, the jazz-pop diva best known for refusing to enter drug rehab in her hit song entered a treatment facility yesterday. The announcement came just days after the 24-year-old was pictured in British tabloid The Sun inhaling fumes from a small pipe. Police are investigating. The announcement by Universal Music Group indicated Ms. Winehouse still planned to attend and perform at the Grammys, to be held Feb. 10 in Los Angeles.
Protecting the Amazon
BRASILIA, Brazil -- Brazil will combat rising deforestation in the Amazon by sending extra federal police and environmental agents to areas where illegal clearing of the rain forest jumped dramatically last year, officials said yesterday.
Authorities will monitor the areas in an attempt to prevent anyone from trying to plant crops or raise cattle there, Environment Minister Marina Silva said.
The clearing of Brazil's Amazon rain forest jumped in the final months of 2007, spurred by high prices for corn, soy and cattle.
FDA expands inspections
WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration intends to post inspectors to embassies and consulates throughout the developing world in hopes of improving the quality of the food and medicines flowing to the United States.
The agency's commissioner, Dr. Andrew C. von Eschenbach, said yesterday that he wanted to have "boots on the ground" in nations like India and China and regions like Central and South America and the Middle East.
In recent years, as more food and drugs have been produced abroad for sale in America, the FDA has been less able to ensure the products' safety.

Load-Date: January 25, 2008


End of Document