ITALIANS ASK IF DETENTION STILL PREVENTS
The New York Times
October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk
Length: 972 words
Byline: By HENRY KAMM
Dateline: ROME
Body


The ''Bulgarian connection'' - the allegation that Bulgarian secret services masterminded a Turkish gunman's attempt on the life of Pope John Paul II in 1980 - grew more tenuous last week. The situation raised new questions about whether tough Italian laws used to combat terrorism can be justified after the terrorists apparently have been smashed.
 The investigating magistrate who 10 months ago ordered the arrest of a Bulgarian Airline official here because of charges by the gunman, Mehmet Ali Agca, reportedly notified Mr. Agca that slander charges would be brought against him for false accusations. Sergei I. Antonov, the accused airline manager, remains in prison, presumably because the magistrate, Ilario Martella, is still investigating other accusations by Mr. Agca, who is now serving a life sentence.
Italian political leaders across spectrum question effectiveness of preventive detention laws, enacted to give police and courts sweeping powers to act against terrorism; continued imprisonment of Bulgarian Sergei I Antonov, whom Mehmet Ali Agca has implicated in attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, cited; Antonov illustrated (M)
The developments are fueling a debate in Parliament and the press about the most significant carry-over of ''the years of lead,'' the years in which terrorist groups kept much of Italy in a virtual state of siege. At issue are the exceptional laws and administrative measures that gave police and the courts sweeping powers to act against terrorist suspects.
Under these laws, Judge Martella could keep Mr. Antonov in prison for two years while a magistrate's inquiry continues. Such an investigation combines some of the functions of an American grand jury with those of a district attorney. The magistrate examines accusations, outlines the prosecutor's case and rules on whether trial is warranted, an action similar to an indictment. In cases as grave as an assassination attempt, the magistrate can obtain extensions to keep a suspect in what is called preventive detention for more than five years without trial.
Preventive detention is so widely used that Stefano Rodota, an Independent Left deputy and juridical specialist, estimated that half of Italy's 34,000 prison inmates had never been tried. Inmates protested this state of affars in a series of hunger strikes throughout the prison system last month.
The special laws were challenged only by libertarians while terrorism was scaring the wits out of many Italians. Today, the issue divides much of the political establishment along party lines. The parties to the left are more or less favorable to far-reaching liberalization, the Socialists more favorable than the Communists, who take a stern view of what they consider ''left-wing deviations.'' The centrist and right-wing parties remain skeptical about reducing the length of preventive detention and the categories to which it can be applied. But they are ready to discuss the issue.
 Centering on Negri
 Since the parliamentary elections of last June, talk has centered on the case of a particularly prominent suspect, Antonio Negri, a 50-year-old political science professor from Padua University and a theoretician of left- wing radicalism. Mr. Negri was arrested in 1979 on suspicion of having been involved in the Red Brigade kidnapping and murder of former Premier Aldo Moro in 1978.
Accusations against the lean and bespectacled academic were raised and dropped and replaced by others, but for four years he remained behind bars without trial. Earlier this year he was finally brought to court, charged with participation in two murders unconnected to the Moro case, armed insurrection and membership in an armed gang. He pleaded not guilty.
During the June Parliamentary election campaign, the small maverick Radical Party, a nettlesome bother to major parties left and right, put Mr. Negri high on its list of candidates. It appeared the subsequently victorious candidate might go to Parliament instead of prison.
But last month, Parliament voted to lift the new deputy's statutory immunity to enable the courts to resume his trial. In the closely divided house, the unpredictable Radicals deserted their fellow member, abstained and thus surrendered Mr. Negri to the penal authorities. Mr. Negri foiled the vote by fleeing, perhaps to France, although he had earlier pledged to face justice.
The Negri case precipitated debate across a basic dividing line. On one side are those who feel that detention for several years without trial was difficult to defend during the terrorist onslaught and is indefensible now.  On the other are those who contend that to relax the exceptional laws now would signal terrorist bands to resume their attacks or invite the next politically frustrated generation to form new Red Brigade-style groups.
The problem is exacerbated, in the view of many analysts, by the tendency of the highly independent Italian magistrature - including public prosecutors, investigating and trial judges - to make liberal, some say frivolous or abusive, use of their right to start investigative proceedings and perhaps put behind bars almost
 
 anybody against whom a charge has been made.
While the Negri case is viewed as an example of excessively long detention without trial, the Antonov case appears as one of deprivation of liberty on the accusation of a single witness of doubtful character, an assassin convicted of murder in Turkey and attempted murder of the Pope and of uncertain emotional stability to boot.
The debate is not limited to Italy. This year for the first time, American officials, usually generous in their assessment of their allies' records on civil rights, are considering whether to make Mr. Negri's case an issue in the yearly human rights report on foreign countries that the Administration must provide to Congress.

Graphic

 
photo of Sergei I.Antonov in police custody


End of Document