ITALY HALTS TALKS ON LIBYAN DEALS
The New York Times
February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 516 words
Byline: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Feb. 1
Body


Italy is moving toward invoking economic sanctions against Libya, and President Reagan has sent Prime Minister Bettino Craxi a message praising Italy's anti-terrorism efforts, senior Italian officials said today.
Several Italian state enterprises have been ordered to halt negotiations with Libya on new contracts in an effort to emphasize the Craxi Government's anger at Libya's support of terrorism, Antonio Badini, a foreign policy aide to the Prime Minister, said.
Meanwhile, in a statement issued today, Mr. Craxi's office said Mr. Reagan had sent a message praising the clarity and courage of Italy's response to the terrorist attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports Dec. 27, in which 20 people were killed.
Since those attacks the Reagan Administration has repeatedly but unsuccessfully pressed its European allies to adopt economic and diplomatic measures punishing Libya for what the United States calls Libyan support of terrorism. Italy is Libya's largest single trading partner, and with the freeze on contract negotiations Mr. Craxi has moved closer to the policy sought by Washington than any other European leader.
 
To Halt Contract Discussions
The new measures, not yet announced publicly, require state enterprises to halt discussions already under way with Libya on a number of major contracts while the Government examines long-term policy options, Mr. Badini said.
Although he would not disclose the number of contracts involved or their potential value, Mr. Badini said they were important enough to Libya to send a clear signal.
The message written on behalf of Mr. Reagan by Secretary of State George P. Shultz and delivered Friday night contrasted Italy's policy toward Libya with that of other European nations.
According to the statement from Mr. Craxi's office, the American message noted that an anti-terrorism declaration by European Common Market foreign ministers on Monday did not mention Libya by name but that Mr. Craxi had given names.
At a news conference Tuesday, Mr. Craxi said he had evidence that both Libya and Syria sustained a collaborative relationship with the Abu Nidal organization, the Palestinian group that was said to have carried out the airport attacks as well as several other recent terrorist actions.
 
'Willing to Name Names'
Mr. Badini said one reason for Mr. Craxi's public castigation of Libya and Syria was to try to ''push our fellow Europeans to be a little more courageous in confronting nations we suspect are supporting terrorism.'' He added, ''As a first step you have to be willing to name names.''
The praise from Mr. Reagan is taken by Mr. Craxi's aides as a vindication of their Middle East policy after the tense period that followed the hijacking of the Achille Lauro cruise ship in October. Some American and Italian officials questioned Mr. Craxi's committment to fighting terrorism when he permitted the release of Mohammed Abbas, who has been accused of organizing the hijacking.
Mr. Craxi's Middle East policy is to encourage the isolation of radical nations while encouraging moderate Arab leaders to seek negotiations with Israel.


End of Document