Italy Braces for Legal Fight Over Secret C.I.A. Program
The New York Times
June 8, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1535 words
Byline: By IAN FISHER and ELISABETTA POVOLEDO; Paolo Biondani contributed reporting from Milan, and Elaine Sciolino from Florence.
Dateline: ROME, June 7 
Body


There is no dispute over the central event of Feb. 17, 2003, on Via Guerzoni in Milan: an imam, known as Abu Omar and eyed as a terrorism suspect, vanished while walking to his mosque. 
  And no one is seriously denying what he and Italian prosecutors now allege: that this was the work of the Central Intelligence Agency, part of the contentious American program of ''extraordinary rendition,'' in which terrorism suspects are seized and sent for interrogation to other countries, including some in which torture is practiced. A hundred or more terrorism suspects have similarly disappeared worldwide since the 9/11 attacks.
 The real dispute has played out over the attempt here in Italy to call this a crime. 
  On Friday, the same day that President Bush arrives here, a trial opens in Milan charging not only 25 C.I.A. operatives but Italy's former intelligence chief with breaking Italian laws by abducting the imam. If it goes ahead -- legal challenges could delay the start until the fall -- it will be the first such trial anywhere. 
  But even if it does go ahead, it is far from certain that there will ever be any legal conclusion to a secretive and complicated case that risks poisoning ties between the United States and Italy, deep embarrassment for both countries and, possibly, full-scale scandal here. 
  American officials have stated blankly that they will never extradite the C.I.A. operatives. And the government of Prime Minister Romano Prodi, trying to derail the case, has charged that the chief prosecutor, Armando Spataro, overstepped his bounds and violated state secrecy laws as he gathered evidence. The suggestion is that a trial risks exposing Italy's most closely held security secrets. 
  Mr. Spataro fired back, saying he had an obligation to prosecute law-breaking even in the name of fighting terrorism. Investigators say the abduction also ruined a long investigation by the Italian police into Abu Omar, whose real name is Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, and a suspected network of militants.
  ''Kidnapping Abu Omar was a serious crime,'' Mr. Spataro said, ''and did serious damage to our fight against terrorism.'' 
  Now, the nation's Constitutional Court is deciding whether Mr. Spataro did, indeed, violate secrecy laws by wiretapping Italian secret agents and using documents from a safe house used by agents. Mr. Spataro contends that his work complied fully with the law. 
  The decision could have a decisive impact on the trial, suppressing crucial evidence or halting the proceedings. 
  With a decision not expected until the fall, one of the first orders of business on Friday will be arguments on whether to suspend the criminal trial in the abduction until then. 
  If the trial does go forward, it will tantalize with a possible glimpse of the darker side of the American fight against terrorism -- broadly, whether the Bush administration overreached, overstepping the laws of allies like Italy, since the 9/11 attacks. There has been no similar trial, and for the United States, it risks exposing details of a program it has acknowledged only broadly and refuses to discuss specifically. 
  For Italy, the stakes are perhaps more immediate. Among those charged is Nicolo Pollari, who was in charge of the nation's military intelligence, a powerful defendant whose job was roughly equivalent to that of the C.I.A. director. 
  As might be expected from such a figure, Mr. Pollari is playing for keeps. His list of potential witnesses includes Silvio Berlusconi, who was prime minister at the time of the abduction, and Mr. Prodi, along with top aides to the two men.
  Mr. Berlusconi and three aides could testify, Mr. Pollari's lawyer wrote in a legal brief, that Mr. Pollari opposed, ''with absolute firmness, any possibility of projects for illegal activity even with the aim of fighting terrorism (and particularly any activity of renditions).'' 
  Asked whether someone higher in the Italian government than Mr. Pollari had assented to the abduction, the lawyer, Titta Madia, said dryly, ''Evidently, it wasn't the doorman.'' 
  In fact, the case here is the only documented rendition in Western Europe in which suspects were not handed over outright to American officials. The reason it seems to have happened only in Italy is not clear, and officials here broadly agree that there were more dangerous militants in Europe at the time. 
  But Mr. Nasr represented enough of a threat that he also was under investigation by the Italian antiterrorism police at the time. Suspected of being a veteran of Afghan training camps and the Balkan wars, he was said to have had a role in recruiting and financing militants in Europe. 
  ''He was involved in activity that represented a serious danger to our national security,'' said Claudio Scajola, chairman of the parliamentary committee on the secret services. 
  On Feb. 17, 2003, Mr. Nasr disappeared on his way to a mosque considered then to be the center of radical Islamic activity in Milan. There was little news of him until he was released from prison in Egypt in February. He said he had been jailed all that time, apart from a few weeks in 2004. He said he was tortured after the C.I.A. flew him to Cairo. 
  ''Egypt's government did what it always does: carry out Washington's orders,'' Mr. Nasr told the German magazine Der Spiegel. ''The dirty work to get me to talk was to be done here. That is why they tortured me, hooked up electric wires to my genitals, hung me on the wall in a solitary cell for days, subjected me to unbearably loud music through headphones. 
  ''In the first 14 months, I would have confessed to anything,'' he said.
  (Shortly after his release, Mr. Nasr agreed to a request from The New York Times for an interview but then canceled the night before because, he and his lawyer said, an Italian television station had offered to pay for an exclusive interview.)
  But during the time Mr. Nasr's whereabouts were unknown, prosecutors in Milan, led by Mr. Spataro, a veteran of domestic terrorism cases, meticulously pieced together the case. In the end, he won the indictment of 25 C.I.A. operatives, plus an American Air Force colonel, Mr. Pollari and other Italian agents. 
  The work was simplified to some degree by the sloppiness of the American intelligence operatives, who were traced through cellphones, bills for rental cars, expensive meals and $500-a-night hotels. 
  Legal experts speculate that this sloppiness was a sign that the Americans had no fear of getting caught, meaning that there was high-level permission from the Italian government for Mr. Nasr's abduction. 
  But secret recordings and testimony made public have not provided concrete suggestions of the culpability of any official higher than Mr. Pollari. He contends that other documents exist proving his innocence, which the government says cannot be released on state secrecy grounds. 
  Testimony also shows some resistance in the C.I.A., specifically from the station chief in Milan at the time, Robert Seldon Lady. A deposition from a military intelligence agent, Stefano D'Ambrosio, recounts a conversation he said he had with Mr. Lady before the abduction, in which Mr. Lady said he opposed the rendition. Mr. Lady's stated reason was that the Italian police, already investigating Mr. Nasr, could keep watching him for more information. 
  Some bureaucratic infighting appeared to exist, too. In the conversation, Mr. Lady blamed the top C.I.A. officer in Italy at the time, Jeffrey Castelli, for the rendition.
  ''I believe that he spoke to me about it as a personal outlet and to manifest to me, for future reference, his objection,'' Mr. D'Ambrosio said in his deposition about Mr. Lady's conversation with him. 
  Mr. Lady, through his lawyer, refused a request for an interview. 
  Given the level of detail that could emerge about one of America's most secret programs, the trial has potentially deep ramifications for ties between the United States and Italy. 
  Mr. Berlusconi's staunchly pro-American government refused to demand the extradition of the C.I.A. operatives, but so, too, has Mr. Prodi's government, which has generally cooler relations with Washington.
  Some Italian critics argue that it is not in the national interest to have such a trial, and they hope that the Constitutional Court kills the case. 
  ''No foreign secret services will speak to Italian secret services, because the Italian secret services are no longer secret,'' argued Luigi Pannella, a lawyer for one of the Italian defendants. 
  Others argue that the C.I.A. operatives, and possibly Mr. Pollari, were merely acting on orders, and that any trial should focus on those who ordered the abduction. 
  But many say the trial must go forward on one basic ground: an Italian law may have been broken in the case of Mr. Nasr's disappearance, and the question of any links Mr. Nasr had to terrorism groups should have been settled in a trial by the laws of Italy, not by a foreign power kidnapping him. 
  ''It's a question of principle,'' said Caterina Interlandi, the judge who issued the indictments. ''Today, it's Abu Omar. Tomorrow, it could be my daughter. These are fundamental human rights, and we have to respect them.''  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr has accused the C.I.A. of playing a role in his abduction in 2003. (Photo by Nasser Nasser/Associated Press) 

Load-Date: June 8, 2007


End of Document