ITALIAN COURT FREES KURD;
TURKS ASSAIL LETTING TERRORISM SUSPECT LEAVE THE COUNTRY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 17, 1998, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 342 words
Byline: VANIA GRANDI, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ROME
Body


A Kurdish rebel leader is free to leave Italy after a court lifted restrictions on him yesterday - a decision condemned by Turkish leaders, who consider Abdullah Ocalan a terrorist.
The ruling followed a decision by Germany to withdraw the international arrest warrant it had issued for Ocalan on terrorism charges.
A spokesman for Ocalan, Ahmed Yaman, said the Kurdish leader has no immediate plans to leave the Rome villa where he has been kept under police surveillance.
The leader of the Kurdistan Workers party, or PKK, was detained in Rome on Nov. 12 when he arrived on a flight from Moscow.
He is wanted in his native land of Turkey for trial on terrorism charges. Nearly 37,000 people have been killed since Ocalan's rebel group began fighting for autonomy in southeast Turkey in 1984.
But Italy has refused to return him to Turkey because its constitution doesn't allow it to extradite people to a country where they might face the death penalty.
That has sparked tensions between the two countries and prompted an unofficial boycott of Italian products by Turks.
Turkey threatened to retaliate against Italy for freeing Ocalan.
"It is an unlawful decision and a violation of the international consensus to fight against terrorism," Turkish Deputy Premier and Defense Minister Ismet Sezgin told private NTV television by telephone from Brussels, Belgium. "If Germany does not want him, he has to be extradited to Turkey where he committed murders."
Sezgin said "the necessary response will be given."
Ocalan has asked Italy for political asylum, but the country's center-left government, led by former Communist Massimo D' Alema, is split over what to do.
Italy has indicated it might try Ocalan or expel him to a third country. Those mentioned include Pakistan, Libya and North Korea. Italy yesterday denied reports that it planned to send Ocalan to Albania.
Italy also has appealed to the European Union to help it set up an international tribunal to try Ocalan.
The United States has repeatedly said that the Kurdish leader needs to be brought to justice.

Load-Date: December 18, 1998


End of Document