Its safer to travel than stay at home; The Joy of Travel
Stillwater Journal (Oklahoma)
April 24, 2014


Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Stillwater Journal


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 495 words
Byline: Stillwater Journal staff
Body


Are you afraid to travel, or for that matter even stick your head out of your front door after watching the evening news for half an hour?
Terrorism, assaults, plane crashes, thievery. Any reasonable person would assume you are far better off staying home, and they would be wrong.
Statistical evidence from no less than Harvard and reprinted by Conde Nast, proves that teenage drivers are a far greater statistical risk to your safety than is terrorism. Terrorism has a one in 9.3 million chance of causing a fatality. Just read the traffic report in today's paper to' see what your local odds are. Nationally the odds are one in 18,800 of dying while driving your car.
Australia has advised its citizens that travel in the United States is not safe. Evidently they are concerned about our chances (one is 9,450) of dying from a gunshot wound. Our country is considered unsafe in many parts of the world.
For those of you with a fear of flying, the chance of dying while flying is one in 8.5 million.
Riding bicycles is one is 341,000.
Falling down at home is one in 20,000.
Car accidents are ranked as our fourth leading cause of death.
Going for a walk? Odds are one in 42,200 that you don't come home alive.
You are more likely to die from lightning or an avalanche than from air travel. But every day someone tells me how petrified they are about flying. Not me, I'm scared to death about the drive to the airport. That's a realistic fear.
I've read numerous reports about the thievery that goes on in Europe, especially Italy. Vatican City actually has the highest crime rate in the world due to the number of tourists who get pick-pocketed daily averaged by the actual population of Vatican City.
Last October one of my clients left her passport and her money on top of an ATM machine in Venice. By the end of the day both the passport and all of the money had been delivered to the Venice police station near St. Marks where she picked them up. You can imagine her relief. There was a kind note from a Spanish tour guide who said he'd found the items and hoped she had not suffered undue alarm from their loss. Denise, you are the luckiest woman I know, and there's a Spanish tour guide who earned extra stars in his crown.
I read the crime report in the local papers. I'll take my chances in Italy.
Your life expectancy actually increases when you travel by a plane going anywhere. Know why? Because you aren't driving on one of our highways nor are you capable of being hit by a bullet in one of our crime ridden neighborhoods.
I am not letting you know about these startling statistics in an effort to trivialize anything that causes a human being to lose their life. I just want us all to keep things in perspective.
So, go ahead, plan your next vacation! Think of it as a form of self-preservation!
Joy Gawf-Crutchfield owns and operates The Joy of Travel LLC. Stacy Buck is the local agent for The Joy of Travel and can be contacted at (405) 742-8609 travelwithstacy@ymail.com

Load-Date: November 29, 2015


End of Document