J. WARNER URGES CADETS TO BACK TERRORISM FIGHT
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 17, 2002 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-2; PHOTO WITH STORY IN TWO STAR EDITION ON PAGE B-1
Length: 376 words
Byline: Calvin R. Trice, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, * Contact Calvin R. Trice at (540) 574-9977 or ctrice@timesdispatch.com,  
Dateline: LEXINGTON
Body


At home or abroad, in the military or as civilians, Virginia Military Institute graduates should be citizen-soldiers in the war on terrorism, U.S. Sen. John W. Warner told VMI graduates.
Warner addressed 245 graduates and thousands of supporters who gathered inside VMI's Cameron Hall for commencement yesterday.
The senator compared the challenge facing this year's graduating seniors to those who volunteered for service in World War II, as Warner did.
While that war exacted much heavier casualties on those in uniform, today's conflict threatens noncombatants, Warner said, pointing to the students' friends and family in the audience.
"No longer do the mighty oceans protect us, [nor does] the long distance protect us," Warner said. "It is here at home, and you are marching forth today in homeland defense."
Warner credited VMI Superintendent Josiah Bunting III for his analysis of military leadership in the Vietnam War. Shortly after service in Vietnam, Bunting wrote a best-selling novel, "The Lionheads," that was critical of the military hierarchy during the war.
Warner was serving in the U.S. Defense Department at the time the book was published in 1972.
He has reflected on that period, and on the conflict, and now believes Bunting was right, Warner said.
Turning to Bunting, seated behind the podium, Warner said, "Sir, your views were more [correct] than those that we held in the Department of Defense."
VMI awarded Jackson-Hope Medals for highest scholastic achievement to John E. Sloan, of Powhatan, and Jeffrey N. Prausa, of Great Falls, Mont. Seventy-two graduates received commissions in the armed forces, VMI said in a release.
Seniors chose classmate Caleb A. Sylvester, of Charlottesville, to give the valedictory address. Sylvester urged his peers to be flexible with equals and subordinates while working together for common goals.
"Just remember, if for no other cause, we will be required to flex, adapt and tolerate - at least for the sake of productivity," he said.
During a humorous moment in Warner's speech, the four-term senator urged the cadets to run for office and put him out of a job.
"Now I charge you that someone in this class . . . had better challenge me, kick me out of this seat and become United States senator," he said.

Load-Date: May 18, 2002


End of Document