JACKAL APPEARS DEFIANT, COCKY
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
August 16, 1994, Tuesday


Copyright 1994 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World;
Length: 453 words
Body


PARIS (AP) A defiant Carlos the Jackal, accused terrorist-for-hire, was taken to Paris' central courts today under heavy guard to face accusations that he engineered a lethal bomb attack in Paris.
Carlos, 44, had eluded Western intelligence agencies for 20 years until his arrest in Sudan. The bomb charge was among the lesser of the crimes he is suspected of committing around the world.
Escorted by five policemen carrying assault rifles and wearing bulletproof vests, Carlos arrived at the Palais de Justice in chains and wearing white pants, a beige sweater and brown slip-on shoes.
He had a cocky exchange with Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere, France's renowned judge of terrorism cases who travels with a bodyguard and carries a concealed pistol.
Carlos had been talking with his escorts about guns when Bruguiere stepped out of his chambers.
"Ah, here's the judge, how's it going?" Carlos said to Bruguiere, according to witnesses.
"And you?" Bruguiere replied.
"Still alive, for a long time to come," answered Carlos, whose death had been rumored numerous times in recent years. Then, to his escorts, he added, "This guy, he's a star."
Carlos was expected to be charged with masterminding a 1982 bombing on Paris' Champs Elysees that killed one person and injured 63.
He also will be charged later with the fatal shootings of two counterintelligence agents in 1975. A French court convicted him in absentia in June 1992 and sentenced him to life in prison for the slayings, but under French law he will have to be retried.
Carlos was to be represented by three court-appointed attorneys. He was being held at La Sante prison in southern Paris.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, announcing the arrest Monday, said Carlos claims to have killed 83 people around the world.
"I rejoice that one of the most dangerous terrorists in recent years is now in the hands of justice," he said.
Pasqua said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for killing at least 15 people in France and injuring 200.
As a free-lance terrorist, Carlos reportedly teamed up with Germany's Red Army Faction, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various Palestinian organizations.
He was most often linked to the murky world of Middle East terrorism. Intelligence reports connected him with the 1975 attack on OPEC headquarters, and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda.
Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, got his nom de guerre after British tabloids learned that a copy of Frederick Forsyth's 1971 thriller, "Day of the Jackal," was found in one of his early London safehouses. The novel tells the story of a professional killer hired to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.

Load-Date: October 30, 1994


End of Document