Jamaica jails Athens man for bullet in bag
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 19, 2011 Thursday
Main Edition


Copyright 2011 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 8B
Length: 293 words
Byline: Ty Tagami

Staff
Body


A vacation in Jamaica for a Georgia couple turned into a nightmare Tuesday when the husband was arrested at the airport after security officials found ammunition in his bag.
Steven Carter, 26, could face several years in prison on a terrorism charge after a .22-caliber bullet was found in the seam of his bag, his employer told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution on Wednesday.
"They don't know how it got there," said Carter's employer, the Rev. Jeff Williams. "Steve doesn't own a gun."
Carter is a preacher at the Church at Southside in Athens, where Williams is the pastor.
Williams said Carter's 22-year-old wife, Erin, called him in a panic Tuesday night. She told him that her husband was detained after customs officials found the bullet. Steven Carter reportedly spent the night in an open jail cell with several hundred other men.
Erin Carter told Williams that her husband expects to be charged with possession of illegal ammunition and terrorism or terroristic threats. Williams said an attorney advised the couple that the ammunition charge would result in only a fine but that Steven Carter could face at least seven years in prison if convicted of the terror charge.
Williams said he has contacted congressmen, including U.S. Rep. Paul Broun of Athens. Broun's office had no immediate comment when the AJC called Wednesday. Williams also said Erin Carter had spoken with U.S. Sen. Johnny Isakson of Georgia.
"We have been contacted by the family and are working to try to help our constituent," Isakson spokeswoman Lauren Culbertson told the AJC.
Williams said Carter has owned the bag most of his life, but that he hadn't used it in five years. He said he was told that the last time Carter fired a gun was when he was about 10 and went squirrel hunting.

Load-Date: May 19, 2011


End of Document