Jammu and Kashmir never was an Indian territory, never will be
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 26, 2020 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 568 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"The same leader who spewed venom today" had himself publicly admitted a year ago that Pakistan had 30,000 to 40,000 terrorists trained by it and they have fought in Afghanistan and in the Indian Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, Vinito said.
"India is compelled to use naked force to impose its occupation on an unwilling and oppressed people", he added.
Prime Minister Imran Khan will address the 75th session of theUnited Nations General Assembly via video link today (Friday), Dunya News reported.
Vinito, an Indian Foreign Service diplomat of the 2010 batch who had walked out during Khan's speech, took him on exercisingNew Delhi's right of reply.
"Pakistan has always called for a peaceful solution".
"The Indian right of reply was another shameful attempt to deflect attention from the real issues". The reason behind it is the RSS ideology that rules India today, he said.
"Just like the victims of Gujarat, the victims of Delhi will no doubt search in vain for justice in this new bastion of fascism".
Zack Snyder's Justice League Reshoots Set for October
While speaking to Collider , Henry Cavill was asked if he would be returning to do any reshoots for Zack Snyder's Justice League . While it was assumed that HBO didn't need to spend too much to finish this movie, it looks like conditions have changed.
"There will be no durable peace and stability in South Asia until the Jammu and Kashmir dispute is resolved on the basis of global legitimacy".
India asserted in its Right of Reply that Khan, "who spewed venom today", admitted in 2019 in public in the USA that his country still has about 30,000-40,000 terrorists, who have been trained by Pakistan and have fought in Afghanistan and in the Indian Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
He said the Kashmiri people have a legitimate right to resist the Indian occupation by all means at their disposal. This just struggle can not be denigrated or described as terrorism. He said the Indian government was trying to change the demographic of the state in order to "affect the outcome of a plebiscite envisaged in the U.N. Security Council resolutions". Our shrines are being destroyed; our Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him) insulted; the Holy Quran burnt - and all this in the name of freedom of speech", Khan said in his unsual demeanour, adding, "and the one country in the world today where, I am sad to say, the state sponsors Islamophobia, is India.
Pakistan was characterised as "someone who professes to be a champion of Islam, this is also a country that has encouraged killing of fellow Muslims merely because they belonged to a different sect, or to a different region in Pakistan, and through sponsoring terrorist attacks against its neighbours", he added.
India on Friday hit back at Pakistan for raking up Jammu and Kashmir in the UN General Assembly, sayingIslamabad peddled another litany of vicious falsehood, personal attacks, war mongering.
Indian spy Kulbhushan Jadav has confessed to spying in Pakistan, Cheena said, accusing Indian state institutions of spreading Hindutva agenda. While discussing Pakistan's record in terrorism, Vinito said that Khan had hailed Osama Bin Laden as a "martyr".
"The worldwide community must investigate these grave violations and prosecute the Indian civil and military personnel involved in state terrorism and serious crimes against humanity, being perpetrated, I am sad to say, with complete impunity".

Load-Date: September 27, 2020


End of Document