Jammu & Kashmir: 11 injured in clashes near Pulwama gunfight site
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 30, 2018 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 293 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The bodies of four fighters were found following the encounter, a defence spokesperson said.
The youths reportedly pelted stones at the security forces soon after hearing about the gunfight with militants.
Indian troops in a fresh act of state terrorism martyred four more youth in Pulwama district in Indian Occupied Kashmir on Saturday. "The area has been cordoned off", it added.
According to the police, all four of them were affiliated with the Jaish-e-Mohammad militant outfit and were wanted for their involvement in a series of terror crimes including attacks on security establishments and civilian atrocities.
OR hotel staff call police on black guest taking call in lobby
Massey was publicly humiliated", attorneys Gregory and Jason Kafoury of the law firm Kafoury and McDougal wrote in a statement. Massey for his treatment this past weekend, and deeply regret the experience he endured, ' the follow-up statement read.
The identity and the affiliations of the slain militants are being ascertained, police said in a statement after the encounter.
Following the gun battle, clashes broke out at the encounter site in which 16 persons were injured.
Police identified the three local militants as Muzamil Ahmad Dar of Rahmoo, Waseem Akram Wani of Tiken Batapora and Muzamil Nazir Bhat of Prichoo Pulwama.
Brief exchange of fire between Security forces & #terrorists at Hanjan #Pulwama. CNN-News18 reported that the security forces have been launching their regular search and sanitisation operations late in night or early morning when temperature falls to sub-zero temperatures so as to avoid interaction with the civilian population. "This should be immediately stopped", Umar had tweeted after addressing the Friday gathering at the Jamia Masjid inSrinagar.

Load-Date: December 30, 2018


End of Document