JAPAN EXPANDS MILITARY POWERS;
 BILL ALLOWS NONCOMBAT HELP IN TERRORISM WAR
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 19, 2001 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 742 words
Byline: KATHRYN TOLBERT AND DOUG STRUCK, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: TOKYO
Body


Japan's House of Representatives approved an anti-terrorism bill yesterday that was painstakingly crafted to define a narrow role for its military in supporting the U.S. attacks on suspected terrorist camps in Afghanistan.
 But while the bill spells out that Japan can only provide logistical support in noncombat areas, it is widely interpreted as a turning point in Japan's security policy. For the first time, the Self-Defense Forces would take part in military action clearly not in areas surrounding Japan.
 The powerful lower chamber's passage of the bill -- which will not take effect until the upper house votes later this month -- gives Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi something to take with him to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in Shanghai, where he is scheduled to meet with President Bush tomorrow. Bush is holding a series of high-profile talks with Asian leaders to cement the anti-terrorism coalition.
In an interview with Asian newspaper editors released Wednesday, Bush said, "We're not going to ask nations to contribute in ways that their people won't understand or accept. So there are going to be some nations that will contribute in this area, and won't be able to help here."
 Japan's post-war constitution renounces war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force to settle international disputes. So when the United States led an international coalition to force Iraq out of Kuwait in the Persian Gulf War of 1991, Japan made a financial contribution -- eventually reaching $13 billion after its initial offers were criticized as paltry.
 But it got little thanks and was left feeling isolated in international politics.
 Koizumi has avoided casting the expanded scope of Self-Defense Force activities as having anything to do with the constitution, saying it is Japan's role as a member of the United Nations and the international community. The law will enable Japan's military to ship supplies, provide medical services, communications, and repair and maintenance services, help with search-and-rescue operations and use their weapons to protect themselves and anyone under their care.
 They cannot transport arms or ammunition on foreign soil, and the government must get Diet approval within 20 days of their dispatch. The bill expires in two years if it is not renewed.
 Many constitutional scholars are opposed to the new legislation, saying it violates the spirit if not the actual wording of the constitutional ban on taking part in war.
 But the public favors the bill by a narrow margin, according to opinion polls this week.
 The passage is an important step toward Japan becoming a "normal country," said Toshiyuki Shikata, professor of crisis management at Teikyo University. "My view is that this law should have been prepared right after the end of the Gulf War. The 1990s was a lost decade for Japan not just economically but also politically."
 A spokesman for Koizumi promoted the legislation this week as "a big step forward." But the government remained vague about what practical steps to aid the U.S.-led coalition would result from the bill.
 Four Japanese military ships that three weeks ago were expected to be sent to help the coalition remain docked in Japan, and Koizumi's spokesman, Tsutomo Himeno, said "the decision has not been taken yet [whether to send the ships]. Legally, they are not linked with the legislation. … What exactly Japan will do needs to be coordinated with the U.S. and others."
 Despite Koizumi's strongly worded vows to be a part of the coalition, some critics have said Japan's slow pace and cautious restrictions on its military will mean it provides little practical assistance to the effort.
 James Steinberg, former deputy national security adviser under President Bill Clinton, said the White House is pressing Japan to pass the bills for longer-term goals other than the immediate conflict. Key Bush advisers want to nudge Japan closer to changing its constitution to loosen restrictions on its military, he said.
 Japan is preoccupied with how its contribution is being seen, "while the reality is that nobody is paying any attention, with the exception of [Deputy Secretary of State] Richard Armitage and a few Japan specialists who have their own agenda," said Steinberg.
 Armitage has argued for revisions in Japan's constitution and "if you are Richard, and you've tried to crack that nut before, this is a great opportunity," he said.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE DIPLOMATIC FRONT

Load-Date: October 19, 2001


End of Document