Jay Bookman; Change that even Bush's top people can believe in
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 3, 2008 Wednesday
Online Edition


Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Length: 448 words
Byline: JAY BOOKMAN

Staff
Body


Wednesday, December 3, 2008, 06:29 AM
With the Bush administration in its waning days, its own top national security people are publicly embracing positions much closer to those of Barack Obama than to George W. Bush.
For example, Obama and his nominees have stressed the importance of "soft power" --- diplomacy, outreach, and other ways of winning hearts and minds --- rather than relying so heavily on hard military power.
Michael Chertoff, Bush's hard-nosed secretary of Homeland Security, now embraces that position as well, says the Wall Street Journal:
WASHINGTON --- The Bush administration's point man in protecting America against terrorism says U.S. investments in safety should not be restricted to airport screening machines or border fences. Michael Chertoff says the U.S. also should spend more on foreign-aid programs, scholarships for foreign students and other tools of so-called soft power....
Mr. Chertoff said he came to his views over the past six months or so, when he finally had time to think about big-picture challenges. Now, he said, "a lasting victory in the safeguarding of the country" can be achieved only by marrying traditional security with winning "a contest of ideas, and a battle for the allegiance of men and women around the world."
"I don't believe you can placate your way out of threat by terrorism," Mr. Chertoff said. But at the same time, "if you can affect the recruiting and the sympathy and the pool of people in which terrorists recruit, from a long-term standpoint, that's the effective strategy."
And Robert Gates, who replaced Donald Rumsfeld at the Defense Department and injected some much-needed sanity into our military policy, has made it clear he will feel right at home staying on in an Obama administration:
WASHINGTON --- Defense Secretary Robert Gates said closing the U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay is a "high priority," and he called on Congress to work with the new administration on legislation to make it happen.
Mr. Gates also said he is now comfortable with President-elect Barack Obama's call for U.S. combat forces to leave Iraq by the middle of 2010, after earlier questioning Mr. Obama's withdrawal timeline during the presidential campaign.
Mr. Gates, who will remain in his post in the Obama administration, was one of the first senior members of the Bush cabinet to push publicly for the Guantanamo prison's closure, but his calls largely fell on deaf ears.
---
Some people, particularly on the right, claim to wonder where Obama's much-promised change might be found. I think it's pretty damn obvious myself.
http://www.ajc.com/blogs/content/shared-blogs/ajc/bookman/entries/2008/12/03/change_that_even_bushs_top_peo.html

Load-Date: December 20, 2008


End of Document