Jeb Bush Assails Obama on Removing Cuba From Terror List
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
May 29, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 257 words
Byline: ALAN RAPPEPORT
Highlight: Former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida continued to take a hard line against normalizing relations with Cuba on Friday. 
Body


Former Gov. Jeb Bush continued to take a hard line against normalizing relations with Cuba on Friday, accusing the Obama administration of capitulating to an oppressive regime by            removing it from a state-sponsored terrorism list.
"Neither continued repression at home nor Cuba's destabilizing activities abroad appear sufficient to stop President Obama from making further concessions to the Communist regime in Havana," Mr. Bush, who is considering a run for president,            said in a statement.
The statement came as Secretary of State John F. Kerry rescinded Cuba's designation as a terrorism sponsor on Friday. The move came after a 45-day congressional notification period that began on April 14 when President Obama  said he wanted to remove Cuba from the list. The removal marks an important step at normalizing ties between the two countries.
Mr. Bush, a Republican from Florida who is popular with Cuban exiles in the state, has said that the United States should continue supporting dissidents and faith groups in Cuba but should not changes its policies toward the Castro regime. He said on Friday that removing Cuba from the terrorism list was "evidence that President Obama seems more interested in capitulating to our adversaries than in confronting them" and suggested that Iran's leaders are taking note.
"I call on Congress to keep pressure on Cuba and hold the Administration accountable," Mr. Bush said.
 Follow The New York Times Politics and Washington on Facebook and            Twitter, and sign up for the            First Draft politics newsletter. 

Load-Date: May 29, 2015


End of Document