Jehadi Terror Outfit LeT Not Yet On Pakistan's Radar: Gen Petraeus
RTT News (United States)
March 17, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 343 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A top American Army General says that jehadi terror outfits, including Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT), are not yet on the radar of the establishment in Islamabad though the Islamic country is waging a "serious war" against terrorism in the tribal areas of the country bordering Afghanistan.
Appearing before the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee Tuesday, General David Petraeus, Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Central Command under whose area of operations both Pakistan and Afghanistan come, said elements including LeT were not yet on the radar of Pakistan, "which is waging a serious war against terrorism in the tribal areas of the country bordering Afghanistan, in particular the Taliban and Al-Qaida."
The four-star General said the need to take action against the organization, blamed for the November 2008 Mumbai attacks, was Washington&apos;s "source of dialogue" with Islamabad. The Obama Administration had quite a bit of interaction with the government of Pakistan over the LeT&apos;s activities after the Mumbai attacks--blamed on the LeT--that killed 166 people, including many Americans, he added.
"Obviously, India has expressed its concerns as well (on LeT)," he said replying to a question.
His observations came close on the heels of the suggestion of U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asia Robert Blake that Pakistan rein in the LeT, given its increasing capacity to target other countries, including the U.S.
He said Saturday in an interview: "Lashkar-e-Taiba is a terrorist group based in Pakistan that has increasingly global ambitions and global scope--and so it&apos;s in the interests of Pakistan to rein in its activities."
In a sign of growing concern in the U.S. over the rise of the LeT, his comments came a day after a hearing on the Capitol Hill where Congressmen noted, "The LeT has put the world on notice that they intend to escalate the carnage and spread it worldwide."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document