Jeremiah Sage
The Bismarck Tribune
July 25, 2012 Wednesday


Copyright 2012 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 638 words
Body


HALLIDAY - Jeremiah Eastwood Sage, 30, Halliday, passed away July 20, 2012. Services will be held at 11 a.m. CDT Friday, July 27, at Twin Buttes Memorial Hall, Twin Buttes.
A prayer service will be held from 1 to 7 p.m. CDT today at the New Town Civic Center and a wake will be held at 5 p.m. CDT Thursday at Twin Buttes Memorial Hall.
Jeremiah Eastwood Sage, Iidohda' Xubaa (Sacred Plume), was born May 20, 1982, in Stanley, to Thomas Sage and Cindy Driver. He passed away on July 20, 2012.
Jeremiah was a member of the Prairie Chicken Clan and a child of the Low Cap Clan and a proud member of the Three Affiliated Tribes. He was raised in the Twin Buttes and New Town areas of the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation. "Miah" as referred to fondly by relatives and friends, attended elementary school at both New Town and Twin Buttes and later attended Golden Valley High School, graduating in the class of 2000. Jeremiah was a strong athlete and excelled in track and field, cross country and basketball.
After graduating from high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps and was sent to boot camp at MCRD San Diego, (Platoon No. 1081) in San Diego, graduating on Aug. 31, 2001. He was then stationed at Camp Lejeune, N.C. In 2003, he was deployed to Iraq, where he served two tours of duty with the Second Marine Division and Amphibious Assault Crewman.
Jeremiah also took part in the search and rescue of Pfc. Jessica Lynch.
Jeremiah was an outstanding Marine and earned numerous decorations, medals and badges during his service, which included: Combat Action Ribbon (Iraq), Iraq Campaign Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Sea Service Deployment Ribbon (second award), Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal (Iraq), national Defense Service Medal, Presidential Unit Citation-Navy, Letter of Appreciation, Meritorious Mast and Rifle Qualification Badge (expert). Jeremiah was also a member of the USMC Pistol Shoot Team at Camp Lejeune. He was honorably discharged in 2008 and remained active in the reserves.
At the time of Jeremiah's passing, he was employed as a compliance officer with the Three Affiliated Tribes TERO Office.
Miah was described as always having a smile, handshake and hello for everyone. He was a dedicated and always faithful - Semper Fidelis - a son, grandson, nephew, uncle, brother, friend and Marine Corps Veteran.
He enjoyed spending time with his many friends and always had a joke for them. He liked to hunt, fish, golf, play horseshoes and played a mean game of pool! Miah loved his family and especially enjoyed spending time with his nephews, Tristin and Noah and his niece, Taylor Otter Sage.
He will be fondly remembered as a courageous young man with a kind and generous spirit who will be greatly missed by those who knew and loved him.
Jeremiah is survived by his mother, Cindy Driver (Claude); his father, Tom Sage (Denise); three brothers, Sheldon Sage, Dwight Sage (Tomika) and Jordan Danks; one adopted brother, Dillon Fox; one adopted mother, Doris Fox; one maternal grandmother, Wanda Driver; seven uncles, Gil Star Jr. (Nork), Willis Sage (Corrine), Josh Sage, Jodi Brugh, David Holding Eagle (Ivetta), Jerry Driver (Stacy) and Randy Driver (Tammy); one aunt, Camille King (Kris); two nephews, Tristin and Noah Sage; one niece, Otter Taylor Sage; and many other relatives and friends.
He was preceded in death by his paternal grandfather, Alfred Leonard Driver Jr.; his paternal grandparents, Sylvan and Louise Otter Sage; his maternal great-grandparents, Alfred and Charlotte Driver and Stanley and Julia Dalby; his paternal great-grandparents, James and Katherine Malnourie Holding Eagle and Matt Sage; his grandmother, Louise Holding Eagle; grandpa, Amos Holding Eagle; grandmother, Naomi Beko; and his aunt, Lydia Sage Chase. (Barbot-Seibel Funeral Home, Beulah and Hazen)

Load-Date: July 25, 2012


End of Document