Jersey City attack probed as domestic terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 14, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 8
Length: 414 words
Byline: DAVID PORTER and MICHAEL R. SISAK The Associated Press
Body


BY DAVID PORTER and MICHAEL R. SISAK
The Associated Press
JERSEY CITY, N.J. - The couple who burst into a kosher market in Jersey City with assault weapons appear to have acted alone even though they had expressed interest in a fringe religious group that often disparages whites and Jews, New Jersey officials said.
Attorney General Gurbir Grewal said the
attack was driven by hatred of Jews and law
enforcement and is being investigated as an act of domestic terrorism.
The two killers were armed with a variety of weapons, including an AR-15-style rifle and a shotgun that they were wielding when they stormed into the store in an attack that left the scene littered with several hundred shell casings, broken glass and a community in mourning. A pipebomb was also found in a stolen U-Haul van.
"The outcome would have been far, far worse" if not for the Jersey City Police, Grewal said Thursday. Authorities noted that a Jewish school is next to the market, and a Catholic school is across the street.
The attackers killed three people in the store, in addition to a police officer at a cemetery about a mile away, before dying in an hourslong gunbattle with police Tuesday afternoon, authorities said.
"The evidence points toward acts of hate. I can confirm that we're investigating this matter as potential acts of domestic terrorism fueled both by anti-Semitism and anti-law enforcement beliefs," the attorney general said.
Grewal said the attackers, David Anderson, 47, and Francine Graham, 50, had expressed interest in a fringe religious group called Black Hebrew Israelites, whose members often rail against Jews and whites. But he said there was no evidence so far that they were members, and added that the two were believed to have acted alone.
The pair brought their cache of weapons in a U-Haul van they drove from Bay View Cemetery, where they shot and killed Jersey City Detective Joseph Seals, according to the attorney general.
The Tunnel2Towers organization, formed after Sept. 11 to support police officers killed in the line of duty, said Friday it would pay the mortgage of Seals, who left behind a wife and five children.
Director of Public Safety James Shea called Seals "the ultimate detective or officer we would point to to tell young officers, 'This is how you should behave.'" He said Friday that he doubted Seals would have been ambushed by the pair. Authorities haven't disclosed why Seals was in the cemetery or details of the confrontation that led to his death.

Load-Date: December 16, 2019


End of Document