Jersey City shooting: 6 dead, including officer and gunmen, investigated as domestic terrorism
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 12, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Dayton Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 796 words
Byline: Cox Media Group National Content Desk
Body


JERSEY CITY, N.J. —
Six people, including a police officer and two gunmen, are dead after shots were fired near a cemetery and later at a kosher supermarket Tuesday in Jersey City, New Jersey, authorities said.
 Photo: The Associated Press
 Here are the latest updates:
 Update 7:04 a.m. EST Dec. 12: The third civilian killed in Tuesday's shooting has been identified as 49-year-old Douglas Michael Rodriguez, who worked at the kosher grocery store, according to The New York Times.
 Update 2:55 p.m. Dec. 11: The New Jersey Attorney General said the two suspects who opened fire in the Jersey City Tuesday were also the main suspects in the killing of an Uber driver in Bayonne, New Jersey, News 12 reported.
 A man was found in the trunk of a Lincoln Town Car Saturday, WABC reported.
 Law enforcement officials have also confirmed that a pipe bomb was found in the stolen U-Haul sued by the alleged shooters, WABC reported. The device was detonated by a bomb squad.
 Update 1:36 p.m. EST Dec. 11: The deadly shootout is now being investigated as domestic terrorism, WABC reported.
 Officials believe the kosher supermarket was specifically targeted, The New York Times reported.
 David Anderson, according to the Department of Corrections in New Jersey, had a prior criminal record for weapons offenses dating back to 2004, 2007 and 2011, WABC reported.
 The victims have not been confirmed by law enforcement, but the President of the United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg and North Brooklyn identified two of the victims, who were Orthodox Jewish, as Moshe Deutsch, 24, and Mindel Ferencz, 33, WABC reported.
 Another victim has not been identified.
 Update 9:48 a.m. EST Dec. 11: Police have identified the gunmen as David Anderson and Francine Graham, WNBC reported.
 Anderson was a follower of the Black Hebrew Israelite movement and a message with religious writings were in the truck he and Graham drove to the scene, WNBC reported.
 Officials told WNBC Anderson's social media page had anti-police and anti-Jewish posts on it, but they are not sure if Anderson himself made the posts.
 Update 7:12 a.m. EST Dec. 11: In a series of Wednesday morning tweets, Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop said the two gunmen specifically targeted a kosher market during Tuesday's shooting.
 "Last night after extensive review of our CCTV system it has now become clear from the cameras that these two individuals targeted the Kosher grocery location on MLK Dr - the 2 JCPD officers that were on a foot post one block away immediately responded/engaged and prevented the perpetrators from leaving that location and harming any further civilians," the tweets read.
 Although there are "no credible further threats from this incident," Fulop added that the city "will be increasing our police presence."
 The Hudson County Prosecutor's Office and the Attorney General's Office continue to investigate the case, Fulop said.
 Update 9:06 p.m. EST Dec. 10: Detective Joseph Seals, 40, was identified as the officer killed in a shootout Tuesday, The Associated Press reported.
 Seals was known for getting a number of illegal guns off the street. It is believed he was working to remove such weapons when he was gunned down.
 "It's a really tough day for the city of Jersey City," Mayor Steven Fulop said. "(Seals) was one of the best officers for getting the most guns off the streets. He was a good cop."
 Update 6:06 p.m. EST Dec. 10: Six people, including a law enforcement official and three bystanders, were killed in a shootout Tuesday in Jersey City, The Associated Press reported.
 Officials said two other officers were injured but were later released from a hospital.
 The shoot out started at a cemetery and ended at a kosher supermarket.
 Update 4:16 p.m. EST Dec. 10: Multiple people were killed, including a law enforcement official, The Associated Press reported.
 Update 2:46 p.m. EST Dec. 10: One officer was shot in the head in an attack that is being described as an ambush, law enforcement officials told WNBC.
 There are reports that several officers were shot, but police have only confirmed one officer was injured, PIX reported.
 Original story: Details are still being released, but police are looking for at least two men who opened fire from a bodega anytime anyone would get near the business, NJ.com reported.
 Multiple media outlets are one officer was injured but there are conflicting reports as to the severity of the injuries.
 Area schools are in lockdown, WCBS reported.
 Federal authorities from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) are on the scene along with SWAT teams from both the Jersey City police and the State Police, The FBI has also responded, WNBC reported.
 Check back for the latest on this developing story.
 Photo: AP Photo/Seth Wenig/AP

Load-Date: December 13, 2019


End of Document