Jerusalem Post Writer Visits CCSU To Talk About Middle Eastern Media
The Recorder: Central Connecticut University
October 23, 2013 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 499 words
Body


By Jacqueline Stoughton
Writer and reporter Herb Keinon visited the Central Connecticut State University campus last week to talk to students about what it's like living in modern-day Israel while also explaining how the media portrays Israel.
According to Keinon, the portrayal differs from what the country is like in reality.
"Israel is a country that is fundamentally different from what you read about," said Keinon.  "The media is interested in portraying positive things about Israel.  They set an agenda and decide themselves what they think is important."
Keinon is a native of North America, being born and raised in Denver, Colorado.  He moved to Jerusalem 30 years ago, and currently works for the Jerusalem Post.
"The media is restricted in what it presents to the public and is unable to present the most salient aspects of life in Isreal," said Keenan.  Of course, Middle Eastern media focuses mainly on the Israel-Palestinian conflict and the continuous war and terrorism that the country has been facing for years now.  "What you focus on isn't necessarily the most significant or the most important," said Keinon.
"You have to understand the insecurity to understand modern Israel," said Keinon.  "These are real fears that people live with every day."
Keinon focuses on the Israel versus Palestinian conflict throughout the majority of his speech.  Especially since he was directly affected by it, not only had he himself fought 15 years in the Reserves during the Lebanese war, but his son as well.  Keinon's son was sent to fight in Gaza, an experience Keinon describes as "the worst experience I've ever faced."
March 2002 was the most difficult month for war in Israel.  During that time about 135 civilians in Israel were killed.  It wasn't until 2005 that things went even more downhill for the country; Israel was plagued with constant, intense fighting on public streets.  Keinon says that throughout all this terrorism, the biggest stress for him was the constant worry for the safety of his family.  "I was more worried about how my teenage daughter was going to take the bus to school into the city."
"Israel's Prime Minister does actually want peace with the Palestinians," said Keinon.  "But the Palestinians need to realize that Israel is the homeland of the Jews and Jews have a religious right to be there."
Keinon says he is optimistic about the country, especially since he believes that nobody solves short-term problems better than Israel.  The country has continued to grow and develop even in the midst of war and terrorism, and has grown to become a strong and resilient country.
"The components of happiness include proximity to friends and family and a sense of purpose," said Keinon.  "All of these components apply to the people of modern day Israel."
"Terrorism in Israel is real and immediate and it effects everyone," said Keinon.  "Although things are better, that fear remains with you.  You have to understand that mentality and mindset to understand Israel."

Load-Date: October 23, 2013


End of Document