Jets Grounded in U.S. and Ireland; Alert Raised at Houston Airport
The New York Times
August 26, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 738 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON, Aug. 25 
Body


In a sign of continued jitters after the London bombing alert, an Aer Lingus passenger jet flying from New York to Ireland was evacuated and searched at Shannon Airport on Friday after an anonymous caller told the police that a liquid explosive had been planted on board.
  The alarm was one of several on Friday, two weeks after British authorities scooped up two dozen suspects accused of planning to bomb trans-Atlantic flights.
Among the other cases, federal authorities temporarily shut down the customs area of Bush Intercontinental Airport in Houston after finding a stick of dynamite in a passenger's luggage, The Associated Press reported. The passenger, Howard McFarland Fish, 21, a Connecticut college student on a Continental Airlines flight from Argentina, was charged with carrying an explosive aboard an aircraft and was in the custody of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
  Federal authorities have determined that his actions were not acts of terrorism, Luisa Deason, an agency spokeswoman, said in a statement. Mr. Fish said he worked in the mining industry. The authorities were checking his explanation. 
  An American Airlines flight from Manchester, England, to Chicago was diverted to Bangor, Maine, after a security threat to the aircraft was reported, according to a spokeswoman for the Transportation Security Administration, Andrea McCauley. She said that F.B.I. agents were questioning the passengers and crew members and that the plane was being searched.
  The Associated Press reported that three other flights were diverted, held or delayed for various reasons, including a disruptive passenger on one flight who was subdued by a federal air marshal. It said that a utility knife had been found on the vacant passenger seat of another plane that had landed. 
  The police in Ireland said the Aer Lingus flight, with 239 passengers, landed at Shannon around 8 a.m., about four hours after the anonymous call. The passengers and their luggage were checked by security officials before passengers left the airport or flew on to Dublin on another aircraft, the police said. The airplane that had flown from New York remained on the ground at Shannon, and the police did not say whether suspicious articles had been found.
  Airport operators in Britain and the United States have tightened security since the bombing plot was uncovered in London, including placing restrictions on cabin baggage and banning most liquids onboard flights.
  The British police on Monday charged eight suspects in the plot with conspiracy to murder and planning to detonate explosives onboard airliners. Four other people have appeared in court charged with failing to tell the police what they knew about the plan. The latest person to appear, on Friday, was Umair Hussain, who was accused of failing to disclose information about his brother, Nabeel Hussain. Another brother, Mehran Hussain, was accused of the same offense last Monday. 
  Additionally, eight suspects -- reportedly including Nabeel Hussain -- are still being held under counterterrorism laws permitting detention without charge for 28 days.
  In a court hearing not related to the bombing plot, a closed-door immigration tribunal on Thursday approved the deportation to Algeria of an Algerian terrorism suspect, despite the fact that the man, who has not been identified, had been cleared by a court of terrorism charges. In public he is known only as ''Y.'' He had been charged last year with conspiring to use the chemical ricin in terrorist attacks. But a court acquitted him and seven other North African men, finding only one man, Kamel Bourgass, guilty. 
  Thursday's ruling was significant because it endorsed the government's contention that it can send suspects to home countries with poor human rights records without offending European human rights laws forbidding deportation to lands where they might face abuse.
  The British government has sought assurances from several Middle East and North African countries that they will shield deportees from abuse. But civil rights groups say the assurances are flawed. Amnesty International said on Thursday, moreover, that the hearings against ''Y'' were ''profoundly unfair'' since the immigration tribunal, which meets in secret, may consider evidence to which defendants have no access.
  The tribunal's decision represented a rare legal victory for the authorities in their handling of terrorism cases. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 26, 2006


End of Document