JEWISH STUDENTS UNSURE ABOUT DEAL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 14, 1993, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 655 words
Byline: MARK BELKO, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Some students at the Hillel Academy of Pittsburgh probably had to blink twice yesterday when they saw the impossible on TV -- an Israeli leader shaking the hand of his most bitter foe, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
But even as Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO chairman Yasser Arafat clasped hands twice, some students at the school couldn't quite shake their lingering doubts about the ramifications of the historic peace accord the two leaders had negotiated.
In fact, when Rabbi Moshe Kletenik, the principal of the Squirrel Hill school for Jewish youths, asked for a show of hands by those who supported the agreement, not one student in a group of about 70 who had gathered to discuss the accord raised a hand.
The majority appeared to be opposed. The rest were undecided.
Even as they hoped for the best, some students found it tough to embrace the prospect of peace with the memories of violence and death still so fresh in their minds.
Others wondered about Israel's security and whether Arafat could deliver on his promise to end the bloodshed, particularly since Palestinian militants were opposed to the accord.
Eric Wasosky, 17, a senior, said that announcement of the agreement, reached last week, hadn't stopped acts of terrorism against Israelis in the occupied territories, despite the PLO's commitment to end the violence.
''Arafat can believe what he wants but I don't see how he can control so many fundamentalists. No matter what he thinks, it's not necessarily the opinions of all the other Arabs and Palestinians,'' added Rebecca Kentor, 16, a junior.
Another junior, Ranisa Rubin, 16, said, ''I kind of have mixed feelings (about the agreement). It gives me a lot of hope but I'm still not sure what's going to happen with the terrorism. I don't think that's going to stop (with the accord). But I think it's a first step and we'll see what happens.''
Rubin and some other students opposed Israel's decision to give up the Gaza Strip and the biblical town of Jericho, captured in war, to Palestinian self- rule. They wondered how far it would go.
''I think this is going to bring about talk about giving back Jerusalem (which both Palestinians and Jews claim as their own). People are going to want back Golan (Heights),'' said junior Elana Rosenberg, 16.
''It seems that these people are only happy when you're giving them land. How much can you give away before there's no Israel left?''
Kletenik, who's as undecided about the agreement as many of his pupils, said the students' fears were understandable.
''Number one, it's not easy to forget what occurred in the past. It's not so easy to forget the massacre of Israeli athletes at the Olympics'' in 1972 and other acts of terrorism against Jews and Israel, he said.
''Also, we have to recognize that Israel is the only democratic state in the Middle East. The Arab states … are not democratic states and there are question marks in terms of their commitments.''
But despite his reservations, Kletenik saw a certain hope and symbolism in the fact the signing of the agreement occurred on the eve of Rosh Hashana, the Jewish New Year, which starts at sundown tomorrow.
''We believe that everything that occurs in this world has a reason and has a pattern and that there is divine providence. And there must be a reason that this was chosen,'' he said.
''We hope that it will be an auspicious time to pray for peace and to usher in a new era of peace. At the same time, we would be less than honest if we wouldn't say that we have serious concerns and questions, which remain to be answered.''
But things like land considerations and questions of commitment were not on the mind of Michael Mimouni, a fourth grader at the school who viewed yesterday's events through the eyes of a nine year old.
''I'm real happy for Israel because now they don't have to go into a lot of wars. It's dangerous,'' he said.
''Now there's peace. A lot of them are safe.''

Graphic

 
PHOTO (2), Peter Diana/Post-Gazette: Students at Squirrel Hill's Hillel Academy watch yesterday's signing on TV. (REGION EDITION), Bob Donaldson/Post-Gazette: Reason to celebrate/Milton Zelkowitz blows the Shofar, a ram's horn, to mark the beginning of a service celebrating the peace accord and demonstrating ''solidarity with peace'' at the Jewish Community Center in Squirrel Hill last night. (SOONER EDITION)

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document