Jihadists called brilliant, resilient
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
June 14, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 519 words
Byline: David Brown
Body


The enemy that attacked the United States on 9/11 is coming into sharper focus, and the foe is bigger than just al-Qaida, terrorism experts say. 
The role of a jihadist ideology in fostering groups such as al-Qaida poses a much broader problem than defeating a single terrorist organization, according to Glen E. Howard and Stephen Ulph of the Jamestown Foundation. 
Howard, president of the Washington-based group, and Ulph, a senior fellow at the nonprofit, spoke with editors and reporters at the Tribune-Review on Friday. The two-hour session covered international issues ranging from developments in China and Russia to the war on terrorism. 
The type of Islamic ideology that motivates terrorists is more sophisticated, complex and difficult to fight than suspected in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, according to research by the Jamestown Foundation, which monitors terrorist Web sites. 
"Ideology has a very important role," Howard said. "It's not just our image of guys sitting up in caves in Afghanistan talking on a cell phone. It's a virtual world library of information. Everything they do they provide some type of doctrinal justification for it." 
Much jihadist literature is written with intellectual brilliance, Ulph said. 
"It is quality literature. These are not flakes. These are not ignorant people. They've got some of their best-thinking minds" at work, he said. 
Literature produced during the Marxist and fascist movements in the 20th century "doesn't compete with the ideology of jihad in terms of potential longevity," Ulph said.  
"This ideology has a thousand years on it, which means that when people dismiss this ideology, they are dismissing a thousand years of books that they don't even know the existence of. It looks a bit of a dangerous policy. When I was looking at these Web sites, I got quite scared, realizing that all these people are more resilient than we ever imagined."  
While the United States and its allies are predominantly focused on the security side of the threat, "the ideological and education side of jihad ... is running at full and increasing speed and we haven't worked out how to stop it," Ulph said. 
"It's ideology, ideology, ideology. This is a factory," he said. 
Howard said most Westerners don't understand the Internet's role in terrorism. 
"These guys can go into a Web site to learn how to avoid cell phone detection, how to avoid surveillance, how to make a bomb, everything they need -- A to Z -- a whole encyclopedia of jihad that they are constantly improving. It's amazing. This is a very important part of what Jamestown reports." 
Jamestown Foundation, founded in 1984, has about 200 analysts in 50 nations. The foundation's Web site recorded visits by 1.6 million people in 2007. The foundation has about 15,000 subscribers to its print publications, including several focusing on terrorism. 
The next president of the United States, whether it is John McCain or Barack Obama, will need to carefully monitor the situation between Russia and neighboring Georgia, a U.S. ally, Howard said. Escalating tensions might well erupt in a war there, he said. 

Load-Date: June 14, 2008


End of Document