Jihad, Terrorism is baffling
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 8, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 564 words
Body


HISTORY is in the throes of a remarkable phase: the era of the human bomb. Fanatical Muslim jihadis (holy warriors) eager to blow themselves up to kill unsuspecting strangers have become a powerful driving force in world events.
However, even as the daily news chronicles recurring massacres, the trend still seems bewildering. Why on earth would anyone want to kill himself to slaughter alleged infidels, apostates or religio-political foes? It's almost impossible to comprehend.
Some light on this mystery is shed by a new book by psychiatrist Marc Sageman, a former CIA agent. Understanding Terror Networks, published in May by the University of Pennsylvania Press, contradicts popular ideas about terrorism.
President Bush endlessly calls terrorists "evil" - which they are, of course, but this simplistic label explains nothing. Most Americans assume that suicide bombers are mentally ill, or that they're desperate, hopeless, poor, lonely, uneducated, jobless young men with nothing to lose. However, Dr. Sageman studied the case histories of nearly 400 al-Qaida members and found largely the opposite.
The vast majority of the terrorists came from affluent, middle-class families. Seventy percent attended college. Nearly 75 percent were married, many with children. None showed signs of mental illness or criminality, he found. They seem to be admirable young men - except for their eagerness to kill.
Last year, when he was halfway through his research, Sageman told the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks that al-Qaida is part of "a violent Muslim revivalist social movement, which I call the Global Salafi Jihad."
"It is the violent culmination of Muslims' attempts to come to terms with their fallen glory," he said. "Just a few centuries ago, Islam was the most vital and dominant religious force in the world. Now, the lands of Islam are under Western political and economic dominance. Western cultural, social and technical achievements have eclipsed past Muslim grandeur and now challenge core Islamic beliefs. Over the past three centuries, revivalist Islamic movements have tried to answer this challenge. One of their answers is to return to pure and authentic Islam, as practiced by the Prophet and his companions. To them, 'Islam is the answer,' and only a re-creation of the practices of the devout ancestors - 'salaf' in Arabic - will bring glory and prominence back to Muslims."
Starting with Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, who launched gory holy wars that eventually established Saudi Arabia, various Muslim firebrands have loosed bloodshed on Westerners and Muslim moderates.
Young Arab men are lured into secretive jihad groups because they feel humiliated by weakness and backwardness in their homelands, Sageman says. They often share apartments with like-minded friends, and attend radical mosques where angry imams preach hatred of the West. They become so passionate that they volunteer to throw away their lives in mass killings they think will lead to a restoration of Islam's glory days.
Sageman suggested two cures for the terrorism nightmare: infiltration of secret groups by planted agents, and encouragement of compassionate Muslim congregations to change Islamic attitudes, so that murder never will be considered righteous.
We don't know if either tactic can succeed - but every possible strategy should be employed to end this era of the human bomb.

Load-Date: July 8, 2004


End of Document