Jittery nation sees terrorism everywhere
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 6, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 755 words
Byline: By David Crary AP national writer
Body


Greyhound screeches its bus fleet to a halt. A plane explodes over the Black Sea. A Florida man's rare disease raises fears of bioterrorism. Everywhere, people trying to recover emotionally from the Sept. 11 attacks find new reasons to worry almost daily.
In skyscrapers and airports, at stadiums and bus terminals, uneasiness surfaces more quickly than a month ago. A fellow passenger, a package, a small plane on the horizon -- all might now rouse suspicion.
"Normally, most people deal with horrible things -- a plane crash, an earthquake -- by rationalizing to themselves, 'It couldn't happen to me,' " said Jerilyn Ross, who runs an anxiety-disorder center in Washington.
"But those are one-time events -- they happen and then they're over. Now, people don't have closure. There's this sense of 'When is the next shoe going to drop?' "
Federal authorities have been sending mixed messages, urging Americans to go about their daily lives while cautioning that more terrorist attacks could occur. The result for some is that fear is compounded by mistrust.
Reid Wilson, a psychologist in Chapel Hill, N.C., said some of his patients no longer believe government statements.
"When that trust erodes, individuals are going to have even greater trouble," he said.
Wilson, author of a book called "Don't Panic," said a new wariness has affected both him and his patients. He heard a small plane recently, and his first thought was of reports that terrorists might spray toxic chemicals from a crop duster.
"The body and mind have now been cranked up to another degree of sensitivity, and our defensive wall has dropped down to our knees," he said. "We have that startled response to so many things." --
At home and abroad, each jarring news report seems to bring terrorism to mind, even without any concrete link.
Greyhound, for example, pulled more than 2,000 buses off the nation's highways Wednesday after an assailant slashed a bus driver's neck and caused a crash in Tennessee that killed six people. Authorities later determined the attacker was a "single deranged individual."
Russian authorities swiftly suggested terrorism after a chartered plane crashed Thursday off the Black Sea coast. The true cause remains murky; U.S. officials said the plane may have been downed accidentally by a Ukrainian missile.
In France, the environment minister now says a Sept. 21 chemical plant blast that killed 29 people may have been a terrorist attack. Authorities initially said it was almost certainly an accident.
In Florida, a man died in a hospital Friday from pulmonary anthrax, a highly lethal disease mentioned as a possible biological weapon. Authorities say there is no evidence of a terrorist link, but are investigating all possibilities.
Jitters are evident nationwide: at the U.S. Military Academy, as new identity checks are instituted for the first home football game; in Utah, as organizers rethink security for the Winter Olympics; and at the 110-story Sears Tower in Chicago, as new concrete barriers are installed to thwart a car-bombing.
"It's good they put these up to prevent anything that might be planned," said Julie Welch, a health-care consultant who works in the tower. "But I don't know if it's going to stop a bad intention. If someone wants to hit it, they'll figure out a way."
Dan Hetman, an accountant from Fridley, Minn., said he actually feels safer now, thanks to arrests and security measures. But he admitted having suspicions about the Russian plane crash and the bus attack.
His way of coping: "Just getting back to normal. You can't just live in fear and stay in your house and not go about your business."
Ross agreed.
"We as a country, as individuals, have to adapt to living with this uncertainty," she said. "The way the terrorists really win is if they psychologically paralyze us."
Americans wondering if their stress and anxiety is severe enough to warrant treatment have a chance to be screened next Thursday at any of 1,800 sites participating in National Depression Screening Day. Details can be obtained by calling 1-800-520-6373.
Dr. Douglas Jacobs, a Harvard Medical School psychiatrist who developed the free screening program, says an extra component has been added this year to help people determine if they are suffering post traumatic stress disorder in the aftermath of the attacks.
"Some of what people are feeling is a normal response to a horrible situation -- other people develop disorders that do require treatment," Jacobs said. "The need now is something we've never experienced before."

Load-Date: October 6, 2001


End of Document