Jo Cox murder accused appears at crown court under 'terrorism protocol'
The Lion's Pride: Saint Leo University
June 25, 2016 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MEDICINE; Pg. 1
Length: 401 words
Byline: Edmund Collier
Body


Ahead of his court appearance, during Friday's Hunstanton town council meeting, resident Yvonne Bridger called for members to honour her memory by doing more to help people fleeing dangers elsewhere.
He wore beige pants and a white long-sleeved t-shirt.
Mrs Cox's three-year-old daughter Lejla played as she sat on her father's knee, while her son Cuillin, five, snuggled up to his grandmother.
"An attack like this strikes not only at an individual but at our freedom", said Speaker John Bercow, who recalled the House from recess to allow lawmakers to honor their colleague. "Any death in such bad circumstances is an outrage and a tragedy", Bercow said.
Police charged a man with suspected ties to far-right groups yet who neighbors described as a loner who showed no signs of being radicalized with the murder of British politician Jo Cox early Saturday.
"Her humanity was powerful and compelling and we would do well to recognise her as an unbelievable example, a 21st century Good Samaritan", he said.
He added: "An MP dies and it is an attack on all of us".
Several legislators choked back tears as they spoke, and many recalled Cox's words in her first Commons speech: "We are far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us".
"Quite simply there are people around the world who are only alive because of Jo", he said.
Her long-time friend Labour MP Rachel Reeves told how Mrs Cox shadowed her when she was thinking about becoming an MP.
"We express our anger at the sickening and despicable attack that killed her as she did her job serving her constituents on the streets of Birstall".
Prayers are expected to be said for Mrs Cox at church services across the country on Sunday.
The Rev Paul Knight told the congregation: "Her humanity was powerful and compelling and we would do well to recognise her as an unbelievable example - a 21st century Good Samaritan".
Mr Kinnock shared an office with Mrs Cox, who had worked with his mother Baroness Kinnock in Brussels.
The emotional response to Cox's death, and the halt in campaigning, has shifted the public focus away from the debate over immigration and economics that had characterized media coverage of the referendum.
Britain has been in mourning since her death, which made her the first sitting lawmaker killed in Britain in a quarter century.
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website.

Load-Date: January 5, 2017


End of Document