JOHN PAUL, ENDING TRIP TO FRANCE, APPEALS FOR AN END TO TERRORISM
The New York Times
October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 32, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 427 words
Byline: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Oct. 7
Body


Pope John Paul II returned here today from a trip to France that he ended by calling on ''all of mankind'' to reject terrorism.
Speaking at a farewell ceremony in Lyons that was attended by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, the Pope also thanked the security force that gave him ''shelter from the risks that caused some people to fear for the person of the Pope and the large crowds that gathered.''
John Paul's visit was marked by the discreet but noticeable presence of the 10,000 policemen mobilized for the occasion. The security effort was prompted in part by concern that the Pope's visit might cause a reprise of the terrorism that killed 10 people and left more than 160 wounded during bombings in Paris last month.
Vatican officials expressed relief throughout the trip that the security measures did not inhibit John Paul's followers from turning out to see him in large numbers.
During this trip John Paul faced a challenge that a senior aide described as one of the most difficult he has faced. ''The Pope has tried to rekindle a sense of enthusiasim for the church in a country that was once a bastion of the faith and that now is becoming Catholic in name only,'' the aide said.
Speaking to students and professors at the Catholic University of Lyons this afternoon the John Paul concentrated on St. Irenee, a second-century bishop who fought early heresies. Like this saint he urged modern theologians to base their ideas on a genuine reading of scriptures and not on ''premises foreign to the faith.''
Earlier today the Pope dedicated a mass attended by 80,000 people on the shores of Lake Annecy to remembering St. Francis de Sales and St. Jeanne de Chantal, two 16th-century saints of the region who were influential during the counter-reformation.
Holding up St. Francis as an example for today's Catholics the Pope said changes enacted by the church during the Second Vatican Council 20 years ago ''will not obtain their effect unless they are accompanied by a profound spiritual renewal.''
While appealing to the considerable cultural pride of the French, John Paul made only a few references to his fiercely held positions on sexual morality. Still, resistance to his traditional views by many French Catholics, and the threat of terrorism seemed to intrude at times on his effort to recall France's glorious past.
A two-part cartoon published today on the front page of Le Monde first showed the Pope being frisked by a policeman who asked: ''No arms? No bombs?'' Then it depicted the Pope frisking the policemen asking: ''No divorce? No contraception?''

Graphic

 
Photo of spectators (Reuters)


End of Document