John Hinckley seeks one-day releases
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 5, 1996, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 3A; DIGEST
Length: 561 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


For the first time since he shot then-President Ronald Reagan and three  others, John W. Hinckley Jr. has "recovered his sanity" and wants to have  monthly one-day visits with his parents off hospital grounds, his attorney  said Wednesday.
In papers filed in U.S. District Court in Washington, Hinckley's attorney,  Barry Wm. Levine, contends Hinckley is not a threat to himself or others. But  he stopped short of calling for Hinckley's unconditional release from the  mental hospital because of the public outcry that would create, Levine said in  an interview.
Compiled from Times WiresNATION BRFS
Hinckley, 41, has been confined to a facility in Washington since June 1982  after being found not guilty by reason of insanity in the March 30, 1981,  attack that he launched to impress actor Jodie Foster.
U.S. District Judge June L. Green agreed to hold a hearing Nov. 20 on the  request. 
 
Airport security still lacking, report says 
 
   WASHINGTON - U.S. airports and airlines continue to have "serious  deficiencies" in security despite changes ordered by regulators in 1993,  according to a government report.
The Federal Aviation Administration has improved its ability to accurately  test the safety of air travel in recent years, the inspector general for the  Department of Transportation found.
"Unfortunately, more realistic inspection has identified significant  failures and shortcomings in both airport and air carrier security programs,"  said DOT deputy inspector general Mario Lauro in a letter summarizing the  report.
Federal inspectors "were able to penetrate secure areas," the report  said, and "FAA tests demonstrated some airports and air carriers were not  complying with access control" and other security requirements imposed after  the 1993 study.
The report was completed in early July, before the explosion of TWA Flight  800. Vice President Al Gore is expected today to announce recommendations for  improving airport and airline security. 
 
FBI to reassign agents 
 
to deal with terrorism 
 
   WASHINGTON - The FBI will reassign at least 500 agents to contend with the  heightened threat of domestic and international terrorism, the Wall Street  Journal and Washington Post reported.
The decision to shift the special agents to the counter-terrorism program  from other duties followed several incidents this summer that have stretched  the capacities of the existing program, senior federal law-enforcement  officials said.
The number of agents assigned to the counter-terrorism program is  classified. The FBI divides its investigative resources into seven programs  including civil rights, organized crime and counter-terrorism. 
 
Supreme Court denies redistricting appeal 
 
   WASHINGTON - The Supreme Court refused Wednesday to block a federal  judicial panel's ruling ordering new elections in 13 of Texas' 30  congressional districts this fall.
The justices, without comment, denied requests by Texas House Speaker Pete  Laney and six Democratic House members to block the panel's order and allow  elections to proceed under old boundaries in the 13 districts.
The affected districts, in the Houston and Dallas areas, were redrawn by  the judicial panel after the Supreme Court in June declared three of the  districts unconstitutional because the lines were drawn to favor minority  candidates. The judges also redesigned 10 neighboring districts.

Load-Date: September 5, 1996


End of Document