Jon Tumilson
The Northwood Anchor (Iowa)
August 17, 2011


Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2011 The Northwood Anchor


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 376 words
Byline: The Northwood Anchor staff
Body


Petty Officer Jon T. Tumilson, 35, a native of Rockford, died Saturday, Aug. 6, 2011, while conducting special operations combat in Afghanistan. He was born July 1, 1976, at Osage, Iowa.
He joined the U.S. Navy on July 17, 1995, following graduation from the Rudd-Rockford-Marble Rock Community School. He graduated from Recruit Training Command, Great Lakes, 111., in September 1995. He completed Basic Underwater Demolition/ SEAL School, Coronado, Calif., in April 2002. He served in three west-coast based Special Warfare units and in two east-coast based Special Warfare units.
Petty Officer Tumilson was posthumously awarded the Purple Heart and Defense Meritorious Service Medal. His awards include the Purple Heart, Defense Meritorious Service Medal, Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, Joint Service Achievement Medal, Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals, Presidential Unit Citation, Combat Action Ribbon, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Afghanistan Campaign Medal, Iraq Campaign Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, four Sea Service Deployment Ribbons, and Rifle Expert and Pistol Expert Medals.
He deployed on multiple deployments to include Afghanistan and Iraq.
He is survived by his parents, George and Kathleen Tumilson of Rockford; two sisters, Kristie Pohlman (Brad Hartgraves) of Cedar Rapids and Joy (Scott) McMeekan of Taylor Ridge, 111.; six nieces and nephews, Kobey Pohlman, Kamryn Pohlman, Kelsi McMeekan, Kai-tlyn Pohlman, Sydney McMeekan and Isabella McMeekan; 21 aunts, uncles and cousins; and his trusted canine friend, Hawkeye.
Petty Officer Tumilson was preceded in death by his paternal grandparents, Thomas and Nell Tumilson; maternal grandparents, John and Leona Jacobs; a friend, Kevin Reiter; and his Brothers in Arms.
Funeral services will be held 10 a.m., Friday at the Rudd Rockford Marble Rock Community School Gymnasium. Burial will be in Riverside Cemetery at Rockford.
In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the Frogman238 Memorial Fund, First Security Bank and Trust, Rockford, Iowa, (641)756-3361.
The Hauser Funeral Home, (641) 228-2323, in Charles City, is in charge of arrangements. Online condolences may be left for the family at www.hauserfh.com.

Load-Date: August 4, 2012


End of Document