Jordan's king urges global battle against terrorism; He calls people who carried out attacks 'insane'
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 13, 2005 Sunday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a9
Length: 525 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body


King Abdullah II called for a global fight against terrorism Saturday as Jordan acknowledged for the first time that al-Qaida in Iraq used three foreign suicide bombers to attack Amman hotels, killing 57 others.
The devastating strike was masterminded by Jordanian-born militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, signaling his group is able to launch terror attacks outside war-ravaged Iraq. Abdullah called al-Zarqawi a growing threat to the Middle East and put the international community on notice that it must cooperate to fight terrorists.
"Terrorism is a sick and cross-border phenomenon. Therefore, eradicating it is the whole world's responsibility," he told the state-run Petra news agency. "The body parts we saw in Amman we see everyday in brotherly Iraq and have also seen in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Morocco and other countries around the world."
Abdullah later told CNN that four suicide bombers carried out Wednesday's attacks, suggesting one was the "spouse" of another militant. His remarks seemed to confirm al-Qaida in Iraq's claim that a husband and wife were among the bombers.
"I think that to walk into the lobby of a hotel to see a wedding procession and to take your wife or your spouse with you into that wedding and to blow yourself up (showed) these people are insane," Abdullah said.
He said initial findings coupled with the al-Qaida claim suggested the bombers were Iraqi. Police said Saturday that the bombers who attacked the Grand Hyatt and Days Inn hotels spoke with Iraqi accents.
"So there are only two logistical places that they could have come across - either the Iraqi or the Syrian borders," he said.
Earlier, deputy premier Marwan Muasher said the attackers were three "non-Jordanians" belonging to al-Zarqawi's group, but he ruled out any being women.
It was not immediately possible to resolve the discrepancy between Abdullah's and Muasher's remarks.
Muasher said police still were interrogating 12 suspects believed linked to the attacks on the Grand Hyatt, Radisson SAS and Days Inn hotels, while "many others" currently detained - mostly Jordanians and Iraqis - might soon be released.
Security forces have scrambled to step up security in hotels in Amman and across the country as police detained more people in Jordan's largest manhunt in modern history. Police also are searching for eight vehicles - two with Iraqi license plates - believed linked to the attacks, Jordan's deadliest ever.
Al-Zarqawi, who slipped into northern Iraq from Afghanistan before the U.S.-led invasion of 2003, has long held ambitions to emerge as a global Islamist leader and to spread his anti-American campaign to other Mideast countries.
Last month, Iraqi Interior Minister Bayan Jabr said during a visit to Amman that his government had intelligence that al-Zarqawi had ordered some of his fighters to leave Iraq to set up cells in other Arab and Islamic nations.
"Al-Zarqawi has proved a very fundamental point that the Americans can't control al-Qaida in Iraq and now they have begun exporting terrorism outside of Iraq. The Americans have failed," said Mustafa Alani, an Iraqi senior security analyst with the Dubai-based Gulf Research Center.

Graphic

 
Mug - King Abdullah II

Load-Date: November 14, 2005


End of Document