Jordan charges radical Muslim cleric Preacher with reported links to bin Laden faces terrorism charges after long extradition battle with Britain.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 8, 2013 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 529 words
Byline: Associated press
Body


AMMAN, Jordan • A radical Muslim preacher described as a key al-Qaida operative in Europe rejected terrorism charges Sunday linked to alleged plots targeting Americans and Israelis in Jordan, his lawyer said, hours after Britain deported him to bring an end to a decade-long legal saga over his extradition.
Jordan first submitted an extradition request to U.K. authorities for the militant cleric known as Abu Qatada in 2001, but it was blocked in British and European courts over human rights concerns. Last month, Britain and Jordan ratified a treaty on torture aimed at easing those worries, paving the way for the preacher's deportation.
Abu Qatada, 53, arrived at Amman's civilian airport early Sunday on board a British aircraft and was immediately whisked away by heavily armed anti-terrorism police for questioning at a nearby courthouse. Police sealed off the area as the convoy drove against traffic to the court building, just across the street from the airport. Armed police officers kept a crush of journalists at bay.
After nearly two hours of questioning, Jordanian prosecutors charged Abu Qatada with conspiring to carry out terror attacks in Jordan twice - once in 1999 for a foiled plot against the American school in Amman and another time in 2000 for allegedly targeting Israeli and American tourists and Western diplomats during new year celebrations.
In both cases, Abu Qatada was convicted in absentia years ago and sentenced to life in prison. With his return, those sentences have been suspended and he will receive a new trial.
Abu Qatada's lawyer, Tayseer Thiab, said his client "told military prosecutors that he is not guilty of terrorism and rejected the charges against him."
Jordanian authorities ordered Abu Qatada held for 15 days pending further questioning, according to one of the prosecutors. He said the cleric will be held at Muwaqar I, a prison in Amman's southeastern industrial suburb of Sahab. The military district attorney banned the publication of the prosecutors' names.
Thiab said he would try to free his client on bail today.
Outside the courthouse, Abu Qatada's father, Mahmoud, said that his "son is innocent and I hope the court will set him free."
The cleric's younger brother, Ibrahim, said that he and his father met with Abu Qatada for 15 minutes in the prosecutor's office and that his brother "looked well and in high spirits." He said that the three prayed together and that the cleric "kissed my dad's hands and feet when he saw him." He told them British and Jordanian authorities had not used handcuffs.
"How do you think I felt seeing my brother after 22 years?" Ibrahim said. "Look at my eyes and you'll know the answer."
Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, has been described in courts in Britain and Spain as a senior al-Qaida figure in Europe who had close ties to Osama bin Laden.
Britain accused him of links with Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person charged in the United States over the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and with shoe bomber Richard Reid. Audio recordings of some of the cleric's sermons were found in an apartment in Hamburg, Germany, used by some of the Sept. 11 hijackers.

Graphic

 
 Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, sits in the back seat of a police vehicle, as he leaves to Jordanian military court, in Amman, Jordan, Sunday, July 7, 2013. A Jordanian military prosecutor says he has charged a radical Muslim preacher with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks on Americans, Israelis and other Westerners in this key U.S. ally. Abu Qatada, 53, arrived in Jordan earlier Sunday after being deported from Britain. (AP Photo/Mohammad Hannon)  Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, wearing a white head scarf sits in the back seat between two policemen, as he leaves the Jordanian military court, in Amman, Jordan, Sunday, July 7, 2013. A Jordanian military prosecutor says he has charged a radical Muslim preacher with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks on Americans, Israelis and other Westerners in this key U.S. ally. Abu Qatada, 53, arrived in Jordan earlier Sunday after being deported from Britain. (AP Photo/Mohammad Hannon)  Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, sits in the back seat of a police vehicle, moments before his arrival to the Jordanian military court, in Amman, Jordan, Sunday, July 7, 2013. A Jordanian military prosecutor says he has charged a radical Muslim preacher with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks on Americans, Israelis and other Westerners in this key U.S. ally. Abu Qatada, 53, arrived in Jordan earlier Sunday after being deported from Britain. (AP Photo/Mohammad Hannon)  In this photo released by Ministry of Defense, Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, left, prepares to board a private flight bound for Jordan, at RAF Northolt in London Sunday, July 7, 2013. Abu Qatada was deported early Sunday from Britain to Jordan to face terror charges, ending over a decade-long battle to remove a man described as a key al-Qaida operative in Europe. (AP Photo/Ministry of Defense, Sgt. Ralph Merry)  Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, sits in the back seat of a police vehicle, background, as he arrives to the Jordanian military court, in Amman, Jordan, Sunday, July 7, 2013. A Jordanian military prosecutor says he has charged a radical Muslim preacher with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks on Americans, Israelis and other Westerners in this key U.S. ally. Abu Qatada, 53, arrived in Jordan earlier Sunday after being deported from Britain. (AP Photo/Mohammad Hannon)  In this photo released by Ministry of Defense, Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada, left, prepares to board a private flight bound for Jordan, at RAF Northolt in London Sunday, July 7, 2013. Abu Qatada was deported early Sunday from Britain to Jordan to face terror charges, ending over a decade-long battle to remove a man described as a key al-Qaida operative in Europe. (AP Photo/Ministry of Defense, Sgt. Ralph Merry)  In this photo released by Ministry of Defense, Radical Muslim preacher Abu Qatada boards a private flight bound for Jordan, at RAF Northolt in London Sunday, July 7, 2013. Abu Qatada was deported early Sunday from Britain to Jordan to face terror charges, ending over a decade-long battle to remove a man described as a key al-Qaida operative in Europe. (AP Photo/Ministry of Defense, Sgt. Ralph Merry)  A police van carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada arrives, under escort, at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for his alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  A police van carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada arrives, under escort, at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for his alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  A police van carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada arrives at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for his alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  A police van carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada arrives, under escort, at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for his alleged involvement in terrorism plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  People board a plane carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  A plane carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada takes off from RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan)  A plane carrying radical cleric Abu Qatada prepares to take off at RAF Northolt in London for his deportation to Jordan where he faces a retrial for alleged involvement in terrorist plots, Sunday, July 7, 2013. Qatada's deportation was approved after Britain and Jordan signed a treaty agreeing that evidence obtained through torture would not be used against him at his retrial. (AP Photo/Sang Tan) 

Load-Date: July 9, 2013


End of Document