Jordanian Court Acquits Islamic Cleric in Terrorism Case
The New York Times
June 27, 2014 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 955 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- A military court in the Jordanian capital, Amman, on Thursday acquitted a militant Islamic cleric known as Abu Qatada on charges of planning a terrorist attack on an American school there in the late 1990s, the latest chapter in a longstanding legal fight that included a death sentence in absentia, a 10-year court battle in Britain and his deportation a year ago.
The court said it had found insufficient evidence to convict the cleric. The verdict appeared to be a remarkable reversal of one in Jordan more than 14 years ago, in which he was convicted in absentia and sentenced to death, later commuted to life imprisonment with hard labor. Supporters of the cleric, who was once described by a Spanish judge as Osama bin Laden's ''right-hand man in Europe,'' are certain to depict his acquittal as a vindication of his protestations of innocence.
''I think that justice has taken its place here today,'' the cleric's lawyer, Ghazi Thneibat, told reporters, according to The Associated Press.
''We are happy,'' said Umm Ahmed, his sister. ''But I want him to leave with us.''
The 54-year-old cleric, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, will continue to be held in connection with a separate case relating to a plot to bomb Israeli, American and other Western tourists at millennium celebrations in 2000, news reports said. Mr. Othman has denied all the charges against him.
The court's ruling seemed to surprise some in Britain, but officials said they would resist his return if he was acquitted in the second case.
''We don't want this man back,'' Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said in a radio interview.
The cleric was imprisoned in Britain or held under restrictions amounting to house arrest as he resisted efforts to deport him to Jordan, where he was convicted in two trials held in 1999 and 2000. In the first case, he was sentenced to death for the plot on the Amman school, a judgment that was later reduced to life imprisonment. In the second, he was sentenced to 15 years in prison for involvement in the plot to attack tourists. Jordan had said he would face retrials if extradited.
Britain finally deported him almost a year ago. His removal was celebrated by many in Britain as a turning point in the country's efforts to contain militant Islamic ideology linked to Al Qaeda.
Mr. Othman, a Jordanian citizen of Palestinian descent, had resisted deportation for many years by arguing that he would be tried in Jordan on evidence obtained under duress, which would be inadmissible in a British court.
Theresa May, Britain's home secretary, visited Jordan twice, meeting with King Abdullah II and senior Jordanian security officials, in an effort to complete negotiations on a treaty including provisions against the use of torture-tainted evidence in a retrial.
On Thursday, Judge Ahmad Qatarneh was quoted by Agence France-Presse as saying, ''The court did not find evidence to support charges'' that Mr. Othman conspired in late 1998 ''to carry out a terror attack on the American school in Amman.''
Accordingly, he was declared innocent, at which point the cleric burst into tears and members of his family rushed toward him. The trial in the second case was adjourned until Sept. 7.
''I am surprised at this verdict,'' Keith Vaz, the head of the influential parliamentary Home Affairs Committee in London, said in a statement. ''However, it is right that the Jordanian court has followed due process.''
James Brokenshire, the minister for immigration and security, said Mr. Othman had been viewed as a threat to national security. ''We are pleased that we were able to remove him,'' he said in a statement. ''He is subject to a deportation order, which means he will be unable to return to the U.K.''
Western European intelligence agencies have accused Mr. Othman of having links to senior Qaeda officials. German security officials have said that tapes of Mr. Othman's sermons were found in apartments in Hamburg that were used by some of those involved in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Mr. Othman, a father of five, fled to Britain and won the right to remain there in 1993 when he sought asylum, saying that he had been tortured in Jordan. He was subsequently sought by the authorities in nine countries, including the United States.
His acquittal on Thursday came just days after another militant cleric known as Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, whose real name is Mohammed al-Barqawi, was freed after serving a prison term in Jordan. Both clerics had recently condemned the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the militant Sunni group that broke away from Al Qaeda and is now rampaging through northern Iraq, according to analysts in Amman.
ISIS built a reputation for ferocity in fighting against the government and other factions in Syria's civil war. It is prompting fears in neighboring Jordan that it could spread chaos there, too, the analysts said.
Mohammed Abu Rumman, a researcher at the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan, said the release of Mr. Barqawi and the acquittal of Mr. Othman could be efforts by Jordan to encourage the less radical elements in the country's active jihadist community.
In the civil war in Syria, both clerics have endorsed the Nusra Front, Al Qaeda's affiliate in Syria, against ISIS. While the first has remained focused on fighting the Syrian government, the latter has brutally seized territory in Iraq and Syria on which it hopes to found an Islamic state.
Mr. Abu Rumman also noted that Mr. Barqawi had spoken out against armed jihad in Jordan, so the Jordanian government may find it useful to have him out of prison.
''This is a very important development for this group, some of whose members have called for taking up arms,'' Mr. Abu Rumman said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/world/middleeast/abu-qatada-acquitted-of-terrorism-charges-in-jordan.html

Load-Date: June 27, 2014


End of Document