Jordan to accept Palestinian terrorism suspect
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 1, 1997, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 17A
Length: 554 words
Byline: Storer H. Rowley; CHICAGO TRIBUNE
Body


Jerusalem ---King Hussein of Jordan has eased a potentially explosive problem for both Israel and the United States by offering to take Mousa Abu Marzook, the militant Hamas leader jailed in New York.
Jordanian officials confirmed Wednesday that the monarch has decided to allow Abu Marzook to return unconditionally to his kingdom nearly two years after the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) official was expelled from Jordan and imprisoned after flying to the United States.
Abu Marzook is accused by Israel of responsibility for a wave of attacks in which scores of Israelis died. But Israel abruptly dropped its demand for his extradition a month ago despite the vows of right-wing Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to crack down on terrorism.
With the U.S.-sponsored peace process between Israel and the Palestinians stalemated at its lowest point in four years, Israel feared more suicide bombings and terrorist violence if Abu Marzook was brought back for a lengthy public trial.
Abu Marzook has spent the last 19 months in solitary confinement in a U.S. prison, although he was never formally charged.
The 47-year-old Palestinian has said he was involved only in political activities. Jordanian officials did not say when he would return or whether he had pledged to shun violence.
Moshe Fogel, director of Israel's government press office, declined to comment on the news that Jordan would allow Abu Marzook to return.
But observers saw the king's move as coordinated with the United States and Israel as a way to neutralize controversy over Abu Marzook and to prevent his acting against the Jewish state or encouraging terrorism against it.
Netanyahu continued to underscore his view that Israel has the right to expand Jewish housing in East Jerusalem, where he ordered bulldozers to start work in March on 6,500 new apartments for Jews. The move outraged Palestinians and touched off weeks of violence.
Hoping to quell protests, Netanyahu promised Wednesday to start work within two weeks on a housing project that would be earmarked for Arab residents; the site pledged for Arab housing is near the controversial housing complex being built for Jews on the southeastern outskirts of Jerusalem.
U.S. officials have said the promise to build Arab housing was made by previous Israeli governments but not kept. However, Netanyahu insisted Wednesday, "We are absolutely committed to this."
The promise came amid reports that Netanyahu's Likud-led government is working on plans to expand Jewish settlements in Efrat, south of Bethlehem in the West Bank. The Israeli daily Maariv also reported Wednesday that the Housing Ministry is considering expanding the Jewish enclave of Neve Yaakov at the far northern edge of East Jerusalem.
While Netanyahu defended Israel's right to expand existing settlements, he reiterated his previous declaration that his government has no plans to build new ones. Speaking to CNN, he called on the PLO to resume accelerated talks on so-called "final-status" issues.
"I have offered ---and I think this is important to consider ---that we should engage in final-settlement negotiations, in fact, not delay them but expedite them," he said.
Netanyahu previously has urged expedited talks, but Palestinians rejected the idea, arguing Israel could use them to avoid implementing troop pullbacks.

Load-Date: May 2, 1997


End of Document