Jordan: Republican nominee needs strong vision on terrorism
The Lima News (Ohio)
January 3, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 The Lima News
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 393 words
Byline: Bob Blake, The Lima News, Ohio
Body


Jan. 3--ST. MARYS -- U.S. Rep. Jim Jordan doesn't want to see the Democrats win the White House. The key to victory, he said, is a candidate who is strong on terrorism, cuts federal spending, and fights for core values.
Jordan, R-Urbana, told members of the St. Marys Rotary Club on Wednesday they won't see any of that if any of the Democratic candidates for president win in November.
"If the other party is in control of the House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate and has the presidency your taxes are going to go up. That is the wrong direction for this country to go," Jordan said. "It's important whoever the Republican nominee is that we beat the Democrats."
The message Jordan wants to hear is the same one he's had since he went to Capitol Hill.
"It's the same thing I talk about. We're a country that faces three unprecedented challenges," Jordan said. "We've got to confront terrorism. Spending as a percentage of gross domestic product on the military is only 4 percent. Coming out of World War II it was 38 percent. We've got to focus on making sure we have resources in that area to deal with terrorism."
Jordan also said to compete internationally the country has to keep taxes low and spending under control.
"The federal government spends a lot of money. We spent about $23,000 per family and so we've got to get a handle on spending," Jordan said. "We have the largest economy in the world at $13 trillion. Japan has the No. 2 economy at $3 trillion. What the federal government spends, about $2.9 trillion, would be the third-highest economy.
"I want a Republican nominee for president who says, 'You know what there are core set of values in this country that are American values,'" he added. "We shouldn't shy away from defending them. I believe whoever the Republican nominee is will talk about those things. That's the message the American people care about. That gives us a chance to win."
You can comment on this story at www.limaohio.com.
To see more of The Lima News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.limanews.com. Copyright (c) 2008, The Lima News, Ohio Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: January 3, 2008


End of Document