Journalist knocks 'terror' labels
University Wire
February 28, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 394 words
Byline: By Katie Petroski, Daily Texan; SOURCE: U. Texas
Dateline: AUSTIN, Texas 
Body


An independent journalist told a campus crowd Wednesday night that the FBI ranks animal and environmental activist extremists as the No. 1 domestic terrorist threat in the nation, though most of these groups have never harmed anyone.
More than 50 people gathered to hear the UT alumnus and award-winning journalist Will Potter compare this Green Scare to the wave of fear in the 1940s stirred up by the Red Scare, when hundreds of people were falsely accused of supporting Communism. The United Student Activists teamed up with Senior Fellows to host the speech at the Geology Building.
"For a long time, corporations have been labeling animal and environmental activists as terrorists, because they don't agree with them," Potter said. "After Sept. 11, the word terrorist took on a different meaning, and businesses saw an opportunity to push even farther."
James Clark, co-president of the United Student Activists, said he believes the comparison is an accurate assumption.
"Terrorism is a pejorative word, and when the media and law enforcement use this label, it gives people a gut reaction that automatically discredits what the group is doing," Clark said. "Everyone working for a social movement is affected by the effects this terrorism level has on dissent."
Potter said his discussion is more about First Amendment rights than promoting activism.
"It doesn't matter how you feel about environmental issues because at the end of the day, recklessly labeling people as terrorists puts everyone at risk," he said. "At the point where any reasonable person doing legal activism within the community has to pause to think about the risk of being labeled a terrorist, it's gone way too far."
Groups that choose to distance themselves from illegal or questionable activities do not save themselves from being targeted by corporations with a political agenda, Potter said. He accredits this targeting of eco-terrorists to a culture war between environmental and animal activists and industrial capitalists.
The reporter finished by asking students to hear his message and "just get pissed."
"It's scary to learn about this and see the FBI harassment," Potter said. "At the same time, that fear can be turned into a positive anger. We need to reach out to everyday people who are just as fed up as everyone else with this war on terrorism."
(C) 2008 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 28, 2008


End of Document