JOURNALIST WHO COVERED TERRORISM IS FOUND DEAD; PAKISTANI FEARED INTELLIGENCE AGENCY WOULD KILL HIM FOR REPORTS ON MILITARY-MILITANT TIES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 1, 2011 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 544 words
Byline: Saeed Shah, McClatchy Newspapers
Body


ISLAMABAD -- The tortured corpse of a prominent Pakistani journalist, who had told friends that he feared the country's military intelligence agency would kill him, was found Tuesday, two days after he disappeared.
With unparalleled sources among Islamic extremists, including al-Qaida, Syed Saleem Shahzad, 40, often produced stories that embarrassed Pakistan's military and its Inter-Services Intelligence spy agency. But he also could have angered a faction of the increasingly fractured Islamist movement in a country where journalists are often targeted by both the government and extremists.
Mr. Shahzad's last story, intended to be the first of a two-part series, detailed al-Qaida's infiltration of Pakistan's navy and said a recent attack on a naval air base in Karachi was al-Qaida retaliation for the navy's detention of several suspected al-Qaida sympathizers in its ranks. He also reported that the navy was in direct talks with al-Qaida over its concern that the arrests would lead to a backlash. He was killed before the second part of the series could be published.
Mr. Shahzad, who reported for Asia Times Online, a Hong Kong-based online newspaper, and the Italian news agency Adnkronos International, disappeared Sunday evening as he was on his way from his home in an upscale Islamabad neighborhood to a television studio, where he was to take part in a show. His body was recovered from the banks of a canal in Mandi Bahauddin, a town about a two-hour drive south of Islamabad, a local police chief, Daar Ali Khattak, said.
Pakistani news channels showed pictures of his badly swollen face, covered in wounds. Reports said he had 15 "torture marks" on his body, and that he appeared to have died from a blow to the chest.
Mr. Shahzad, who often interviewed Taliban and al-Qaida leaders in their hideouts, told a McClatchy Newspapers reporter earlier this month that he was visited by ISI officials every second or third day, asking about his stories. He was buoyed, at the time, by the launch of his book, "Inside Al-Qaeda and The Taliban," published this month by Pluto Press.
In October, Mr. Shahzad had sent an email to the group Human Rights Watch, "in case something happens to me or my family in future," detailing how he was called into the ISI offices after publishing a story saying Pakistan had quietly freed Mullah Bahadar, deputy leader of the Afghan Taliban, who had been arrested in February 2010.
"Human Rights Watch is clear about the fact that Saleem Shahzad was under threat from the ISI," said the organization's Ali Dayan Hasan. "Given that Shahzad alleged in his lifetime that he had been threatened by the ISI, and given that we believe that the allegation was credible, the onus is on the ISI to prove that it was not holding him in illegal detention, and that its personnel were not responsible for his death."
An ISI official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the issue's sensitivity, described the allegations as "rubbish" but wouldn't elaborate.
Reporters Without Borders, a nongovernmental organization, said Mr. Shahzad's murder brings to 15 the number of journalists killed since the start of 2010 in Pakistan, which ranked at 151 of 178 countries in the latest Reporters Without Borders press freedom index.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Syed Saleem Shahzad

Load-Date: June 1, 2011


End of Document