Judges asked to drop contempt citation
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 14, 2012 Wednesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 400 words
Byline: ALLIE SHAH; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Rochester woman who refused to stand during her terrorism trial last fall is fighting to have record cleared.
Body


A woman jailed last fall for refusing to stand for the judge during her terrorism trial in federal court is asking to have her record cleared of the judge's contempt-of-court finding.
U.S. Chief Judge Michael E. Davis had sentenced Amina Farah Ali to serve 100 days in jail -- five days for each time she did not stand when court staff gave the "all rise" call. Ali told the judge that she would not stand up, citing her understanding of the teachings of the Muslim prophet Muhammad. She later changed her mind and began standing when requested.
Ali is one of two Rochester women convicted of conspiring to help terrorists in their native Somalia, by raising money for charity and sending some of it there. She and Hawo Mohamed Hassan are awaiting sentencing.
On Tuesday, Ali's lawyer, Daniel Scott appeared before a three-judge panel in the U.S. Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals to argue that Amina should not have to serve the 100 days. Assistant U.S. Attorney Mike Cheever spoke on behalf of the government.
Ali refused to stand during her trial, citing her interpretation of Islamic teachings. She cited a reference in which Muhammad told people who stood up when they saw him that they "overhonored" him.
Davis found her in contempt of court and ordered her jailed. After a few nights in jail and a talk with some elders from her Somali community, Ali began standing. Davis told her lawyer that he would entertain a motion to purge the contempt finding.
On Tuesday, Scott asked the appellate judges to set aside the contempt conviction. He said he filed a motion to purge the conviction, but that has been pending since the trial.
Ali is in jail pending her sentencing because her bond was revoked, but she has not served any of the 100-day sentence for contempt.
Cheever told the panel that Davis basically denied Amina's motion to purge the contempt order by not ruling on it.
"This case, in particular a terrorism trial, it is difficult to second-guess a judge for trying to maintain control. I don't think this court should second-guess Judge Davis," Cheever said.
One of the appellate judges, Diana Murphy, asked Cheever whether Ali had said anything contemptuous to the judge at the trial's end.
Cheever said that Ali told Davis and other court members that she was going to heaven and they were going to hell.
The judges said they would take the contempt issue under advisement.
Allie Shah - 612-673-4488

Load-Date: March 14, 2012


End of Document