Judge questions U.S. bid to quash detainee's lawsuit
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
FEBRUARY 12, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 380 words
Byline: Pete Yost ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Concerned about government secrecy in a terrorism case, a federal judge expressed skepticism yesterday at the Bush administration's request to dismiss a lawsuit on behalf of a Virginia man held in Saudi Arabia.
The government is bolstering its effort to get the case thrown out by submitting classified information to U.S. District Judge John Bates that is unavailable to lawyers for the imprisoned terrorism suspect, Ahmed Abu Ali, 23.
"This is about as close to a state-secrets shutdown" of a case without the executive branch of government actually doing so, the judge said at a hearing.
One of Abu Ali's lawyers, David Cole, argued that "the government would throw the adversarial process out the window" with classified information that the other side is not allowed to see.
Abu Ali was born in Houston, was valedictorian of his high school class in Falls Church, Va., and was imprisoned while attending a Saudi university on June 11, 2003. A federal prosecutor in Virginia has said Abu Ali joined an al-Qaeda cell in Saudi Arabia in 2001.
Abu Ali's family, which lives in northern Virginia, wants an American judge to order him returned to the United States, where he might face charges as part of an alleged terrorism training ring in Virginia.
His family says U.S. officials want to keep Abu Ali in Saudi Arabia so he can be subject to torture and otherwise denied his constitutional rights. The U.S. government has said Saudi officials acted on their own.
Legal experts say the lawsuit is the first on behalf of an American citizen detained in a third country at the U.S. government's request. Bates has said Abu Ali's family provided considerable evidence that the U.S. government orchestrated his capture.
Bates suggested that the administration's position arguing for secrecy is unique because Abu Ali's lawyers have no information about the government's case. Bates asked for any other instances in which even the legal theory for dismissing a case is unknown to the other side.
Justice Department lawyer Ori Lev replied that he knew of none, but said there was ample legal basis to throw out the case filed by Abu Ali's family.
Bates will decide whether he can rule on the administration's motion for dismissal based entirely on classified information Abu Ali's lawyers cannot see.

Load-Date: September 7, 2005


End of Document