Judge Declines to Back University's Plan to Fire Professor It Accuses of Terrorism
The Chronicle of Higher Education
January 10, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: THE FACULTY; Pg. 11
Length: 571 words
Byline: PIPER FOGG
Body


A federal judge declined last month to rule that the University of South Florida's plan to fire Sami Al-Arian, a tenured professor with alleged links to terrorism, did not violate his First Amendment right to free speech.
In a motion for a declaratory judgment, filed in August, the university said that the professor had raised money for terrorist groups, had helped bring terrorists into the country, and had founded organizations that sponsor terrorism. Mr. Al-Arian has denied all of those allegations.
The university's motion also asserted that the professor had violated the collective-bargaining agreement in effect between the university and its faculty. The university said that it planned to fire Mr. Al-Arian and that it expected him to sue in response, alleging violations of his free-speech rights.
Mr. Al-Arian, a computer-science professor and Palestinian refugee who came to the United States in 1975, has been at South Florida for 16 years and has been on paid leave since last January. He says the university is trying to fire him because of his political views.
In last month's decision, Judge Susan C. Bucklew of the federal district court in Tampa, Fla., essentially ruled that the university's motion was premature and that the university was asking the court to "fast-forward past the final step of the dispute-resolution process." Judge Bucklew said that according to the bargaining agreement, both parties must enter into arbitration, and one generally may not turn to litigation to bypass arbitration.
The judge said that an arbiter might find that the terrorism allegations against Mr. Al-Arian were unfounded, or that even if founded were not cause for firing. In either case, she said, the university could not legally terminate him. If an arbiter were to decide there was cause for firing, Mr. Al-Arian still might not sue the university, so a decision now on his First Amendment rights would be premature.
Considering the Options
Michael Reich, a spokesman for the University of South Florida, said it is considering all of its options, which include appealing the decision, firing Mr. Al-Arian anyway, or reinstating him.
In a statement, Mr. Reich said: "The University of South Florida filed the motion for declaratory judgment to ensure that the proposed action would not violate Dr. Al-Arian's rights. We do not believe that terminating him would violate his rights, but this was an effort to make absolutely sure. We will take this ruling into consideration, explore our options, then determine how to proceed."
Mr. Al-Arian's lawyer, Robert McKee, could not be reached for comment, but he told the Associated Press that he was pleased with the judge's ruling and is awaiting the university's next move. "The ball's in their court," he said. "If USF is, as they represented to the court, uncertain whether firing Dr. Al-Arian violates his constitutional rights, then we suggest they shouldn't fire him."
Roy Weatherford, a philosophy professor and president of the South Florida chapter of the United Faculty of Florida, said that the decision had accomplished nothing. "We're back where we started a couple hundred thousand dollars ago," he said. He added that the chapter had not endorsed Mr. Al-Arian's political views but had defended his rights and the concept of academic freedom. He said that experts had told him that if Mr. Al-Arian were fired and arbitration ensued, Mr. Al-Arian would prevail.

Load-Date: February 10, 2003


End of Document