Judge Loath to Permit TV Testimony on Islamist
The New York Times
April 5, 2014 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 682 words
Byline: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.
Body


The testimony of a key prosecution witness in the terrorism trial of a radical Islamic cleric has been thrown into doubt because a federal judge in Manhattan is balking at allowing him to testify from Britain via closed-circuit television.
The witness, Saajid Badat, has already testified through a trans-Atlantic television hookup in two other terrorism trials in the United States, most recently helping prosecutors obtain a guilty verdict against Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, a onetime spokesman for Al Qaeda.
Mr. Badat has refused to appear in person because he is still under indictment in the United States for a plot in 2001 to blow up airliners with bombs hidden in shoes, a crime for which he was convicted in Britain.
But Judge Katherine B. Forrest made it plain during a hearing on Friday that she believed Mr. Badat should appear in person at the trial of Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, an Egyptian cleric accused of conspiring to kidnap tourists in Yemen, aiding Al Qaeda in Afghanistan and planning a training camp in Oregon.
At the hearing, Mr. Badat appeared on closed-circuit television from London, and the judge took the unusual step of grilling him herself about his reasons for avoiding the United States.
Judge Forrest pointed out to Mr. Badat that when he entered a cooperation agreement in 2009 with British authorities in return for a reduced prison sentence there, he promised to give testimony at several terrorism trials in the United States, even though he faced possible arrest on the shoe-bombing indictment in Massachusetts.
As Mr. Badat sat meekly in a conference room an ocean away, Judge Forrest lectured him on the United States Constitution, saying it gave defendants a right to confront witnesses against them in court.
''We very much need you to come to this district to testify in person in this case if you will,'' the judge said.
Then she asked him if he would come to New York City.
''No, I would like to testify remotely from the U.K.,'' Mr. Badat said.
The judge asked him to reconsider. He said he would consult a lawyer.
With that, Judge Forrest set a deadline in six days for him to give a final answer.
Though she did not make a final decision on the prosecution's motion to allow the remote testimony, Judge Forrest said earlier in the week that the prosecution had not pressed vigorously enough to induce Mr. Badat to travel. She said she would allow closed-circuit testimony only in ''exceptional circumstances.''
The judge's stance has tripped up the prosecution of Mr. Mostafa, who also goes by Abu Hamza al-Masri, and is known for having prosthetic hooks in place of hands. He lost his forearms and hands, along with one eye, fighting the Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan.
Mr. Mostafa's lawyers say that if Mr. Badat is allowed to testify from Britain, it will hamper their ability to cross-examine him.
Prosecutors say Mr. Badat, a British citizen, was a member of Al Qaeda in 2000 and 2001, trained at camps in Afghanistan and acted as a translator for terrorist leaders.
He agreed to take part, along with Richard Reid, in a plot to smuggle bombs onboard airplanes in his shoes. Though provided with the explosive shoes, Mr. Badat lost heart and pulled out of the plot at the last minute.
Mr. Reid was stopped by other passengers before he could set off a bomb and eventually pleaded guilty to terrorism charges in Boston. He is serving a life sentence.
Arrested in Britain in November 2003, Mr. Badat pleaded guilty to the bombing plot, agreed to cooperate with Scotland Yard and served six years.
In court papers, prosecutors said that in the trial, scheduled to begin April 14, Mr. Badat would testify that Mr. Mostafa had ordered him to travel with another man, Feroz Ali Abassi, to Afghanistan for jihad training in 2001.
He would also testify, they said, that he later trained with Mr. Abassi at a Qaeda camp and saw him at a planning session with terrorist leaders.
Mr. Badat's testimony is important because the government has to prove Mr. Mostafa sent his followers for military training and worked to assist Al Qaeda, prosecutors argued in court documents.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/05/nyregion/judge-loath-to-permit-tv-testimony-on-islamist.html

Load-Date: April 5, 2014


End of Document