Judge Frees a Palestinian Who Refused to Testify on Terrorism
The New York Times
December 15, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 10; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 544 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


A Palestinian man jailed for eight months after he refused to testify before a Federal grand jury investigating terrorism was ordered freed yesterday by a judge who concluded that further imprisonment would not change the man's mind.
The ruling was the second in four months in which a Federal judge in Manhattan released a Palestinian imprisoned on charges of contempt of the grand jury, which has been conducting a two-year investigation into "an international scheme to launder money in support of murder and kidnapping," prosecutors said in legal papers.
The rulings have come amid a widening investigation by Federal prosecutors in New York into worldwide terrorism, and it was unclear how much of a setback the rulings represent.
The judge, Michael B. Mukasey, left little doubt that he believed that the witness, Ismail S. Elbarasse, of Virginia, had been involved in fund-raising for terrorism. He noted that prosecutors could now bring criminal contempt charges against Mr. Elbarasse and the other Palestinian, Abdelhaleem Ashqar, for their refusals to testify. A spokesman for Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, refused to comment.
Judge Mukasey cited Government assertions in court papers that Mr. Elbarasse is "a Hamas operative" and other evidence that he shared a bank account with Mohammed Abu Marzook, the Hamas political leader jailed in New York during an extradition battle with Israel before he was released to Jordan last year.
But Judge Mukasey said that Mr. Elbarasse's close association with Mr. Abu Marzook suggested that he was probably not "an untested neophyte" and therefore was unlikely to agree to testify during the 18-month period in which he could be jailed on the civil contempt order. Judge Mukasey said: "For Elbarasse to have achieved a level of trust sufficient to permit him to hold a joint account with Abu Marzook that was used to transfer substantial funds from abroad to others in this country, such funds ultimately to be used for terrorist activity abroad, suggests that Elbarasse's tenacious words will be backed at least by a willingness to endure a maximum of 18 months' imprisonment without yielding."
When Mr. Elbarasse appeared before the grand jury last April, he cited political and religious reasons for refusing to testify, "no matter what my punishment may be, no matter how long my sentence."
Both Mr. Elbarasse and Mr. Ashqar, who went on a hunger strike before he was freed in August by another judge, were offered immunity from prosecution in return for their testimony, but each man refused to answer prosecutors' questions, records show.
Mr. Elbarasse's lawyer, Stanley L. Cohen, who also represented Mr. Abu Marzook in his extradition fight, welcomed the release of Mr. Elbarasse, but sharply criticized the judge's suggestion that both of his clients had links to terrorism.
"It is obvious that the judge reached well beyond the narrow issues that were drawn before him," Mr. Cohen said. He called Mr. Elbarasse "a Palestinian hero" whose "only crime is to have the temerity and the principle to stand against the power of the U.S. Government in its unbridled attack upon the Palestinian people." He said that the judge's statements about Mr. Abu Marzook were gratuitous and unsupported.

Load-Date: December 15, 1998


End of Document