JUDGE REFUSES TO RELEASE TERRORISM SUSPECT JAMES UJAAMA
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
October 2, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c3
Length: 292 words
Byline: GENE JOHNSON, Associated Press writer
Body


SEATTLE -- Dozens of statements from friends, family and community leaders failed to persuade a federal judge on Tuesday to let James Ujaama out of jail while he awaits trial on a terrorism charge.
Magistrate John L. Weinberg noted the written statements indicating Ujaama, an American Muslim, had done valuable volunteer work in Seattle and elsewhere during the early 1990s.
But he agreed with prosecutors that the testimonials don't explain what Ujaama's been doing since then.
"He was a fine citizen over those years," the magistrate said, as Ujaama and Ujaama's mother and grandmother listened intently. "But people change."
And, he added, some of the ways Ujaama changed were "drastic" and "tragic."
Prosecutors say Ujaama, 36, tried to set up a terrorist training camp in Bly, Ore., in 1999, and that at some point he actually trained at such a camp in Afghanistan.
He was arrested July 22 in Denver and held as a material witness until Aug. 29, when he was indicted by a federal grand jury on one count of conspiracy to support the al-Qaida terrorist network, and another count of using, carrying, possessing and discharging firearms during a crime.
Ujaama denies the charges and has pleaded innocent. Still, he's been kept in solitary confinement at the Federal Detention Center in nearby SeaTac, allowed just one 15-minute social phone call per month.
Ujaama's family wanted him conditionally released pending trial. His lawyers noted that the charges against him include no direct act of violence.
After reviewing some filings made under seal by the government, Weinberg refused. He noted that Ujaama had a history of not showing up for court hearings for misdemeanor charges over the years, including domestic violence, disorderly conduct and shoplifting.

Load-Date: October 2, 2002


End of Document