Judgment deferred in school bomb threat
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 18, 2018 Saturday


Copyright 2018 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 3
Length: 482 words
Byline: Alicia Yager
Body


MAQUOKETA, Iowa - A teen apologized Friday for making bomb threats that led to the evacuation - twice - of Maquoketa High School. Ira L. Johnson, 18, said he was having some personal issues at the time he made the threats in May. "I just want to apologize that I kind of took that the wrong way and did it the wrong way to take out what had all been going on," Johnson said to Judge Mark Lawson during a hearing in Iowa District Court of Jackson County. 
Johnson was given a deferred judgment Friday after pleading guilty to threat of terrorism. Lawson imposed two years of probation for Johnson to complete in order to keep the felony conviction off his record. "Mr. Johnson, you're getting a real break today," Lawson told Johnson. "I hope you take advantage of that." Maquoketa police officers responded to the school on May 7 after a bomb threat was found written in a bathroom. The threat was found in the afternoon after classes had let out for the day, but everyone still in the building was evacuated and a bomb-sniffing law enforcement K-9 searched the structure. No explosives or bomb-making materials were found. Authorities again cleared the school on May 9 after an audio recording was found on social media of Johnson making threats. However, investigators later determined it was related to the initial threat and wasn't a new one. Court documents state Johnson admitted to making the threats. He accepted a plea deal in July, pleading guilty to the original threat of terrorism charge. Assistant Jackson County Attorney Amanda Lassance asked Lawson to accept the plea agreement, which recommended a deferred judgment with probation. She noted Johnson had no criminal history other than this incident and made an "immature" and "very, very stupid" choice. "I just think that this was a serious mistake and he should be able to ask the court for a second chance here," she said. Johnson's attorney, William Lansing, agreed that Johnson realized he made a serious mistake. Lansing said he has spoken extensively with Johnson about responsible use of social media. He added Johnson's family has made plans for him to engage in "positive" activities, including working at a medical facility. "Ira, given his circumstances, seemed to be quite better directed in his life, and I think that bodes well for him," Lansing said. Prior to sentencing, Lawson asked Johnson what he learned about the experience. Johnson replied that he learned he needs to find a person who can help when he has issues and to not be on social media "24/7" like he had been. Lawson agreed to follow the plea agreement terms, adding that Johnson needs to comply with the terms of his probation in order to keep his record clean. "Well, certainly what you did was a serious thing, but on the other hand, you are young and I would like to give you an opportunity to keep the felony off your record," Lawson said.

Load-Date: December 26, 2018


End of Document