JUDGE QUITS TO AID REFUGEES
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 25, 2008 Friday
2 Tampa Edition


Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TAMPA & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 405 words
Byline: COLLEEN JENKINS, Times Staff Writer
Dateline: TAMPA 
Highlight: Her work will help bring food and Bibles to Palestinians in West Bank camps.
Body


Hillsborough Circuit Judge Monica Sierra announced her resignation Thursday, less than one month into her sabbatical to Israel and one year shy of completing her first term on the bench.
A lifelong Tampa resident, Sierra is giving up her $145,000-a-year job to bring food and Bibles to Palestinian refugee camps in the West Bank.
The resignation takes effect Feb. 1.
In phone conversations this week with Chief Judge Manuel Menendez, Sierra said the unpaid, three-month leave she began in late December was not long enough to fulfill her commitment to the Living Bread International Church mission.
Menendez said that "after a considerable amount of soul searching and reflection," Sierra decided to devote herself to the work long-term.
"After talking to her, it's clear to me that she feels this to be her calling," Menendez said.
Living Bread International Church is a nondenominational organization that provides humanitarian aid and weekly church services for refugees. Sierra, 41, is helping create an administrative network to facilitate wider relief efforts.
"Terrorism is born in the heart of the refugee camps," Sierra wrote to her colleagues last year. "The Word of God is a powerful weapon that America can use to fight terrorism. His Word, directed into the heart of terrorism, will bring transformation to the world."
Sierra could not be reached for comment Thursday.
She faced re-election this fall and previously signaled her intent to run. Instead, the Judicial Nominating Commission will seek applications for the seat and then make recommendations to the governor's office for who should fill it.
Because state law says an appointee gets to be on the bench for at least one year before facing election, Sierra's replacement won't be on a ballot until 2010.
Sierra won her spot in 2002, beating a veteran attorney to become the county's youngest circuit judge. She poured $80,000 into her campaign. At the time of the election, she had a net worth of $413,000 and had spent a decade working in private practice with her father.
As a judge, she heard family law and dependency cases.
But after announcing her unusual sabbatical in November, she reminded reporters that judges are people with lives of their own. Sierra, who is not married and has no children, quoted the apostle James.
"True religion," she said, "is taking care of the widows and orphans."
Colleen Jenkins can be reached at cjenkins@sptimes.com or (813) 226-3337.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Monica Sierra, 41, was on a three-month leave to Israel.

Load-Date: January 25, 2008


End of Document