JUDGE COMPUTES YEARS OF LOST LIFE IN SENTENCES COURT OFFICIAL REJECTS CLAIMS OF INNOCENCE IN TRADE CENTER BLAST
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 25, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 464 words
Body


NEW YORK _ Four Muslim fundamentalists convicted in the World
Trade Center bombing drew 240 years behind bars from a merciless
judge who arrived at the sentence by adding up the victims' lost
years of life.
U.S. District Judge Kevin Duffy angrily rejected the defendants'
defiant claims of innocence, saying they robbed a nation of its sense
of security.
"Prior to February 26th, 1993, this country was a much freer
place," Duffy told Mohammad Salameh, Nidal Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima
and Ahmad Ajaj on Tuesday.  "Now we have guards.  Now we have an
identification card mentality.  It's not quite as free."
The explosion at the 110-story twin towers _ the world's
second-tallest buildings _ killed six people, injured more than 1,000
and caused $ 500 million in damage.
The judge said he arrived at the sentences by calculating how
much life was lost by the six killed _ a combined 180 years _
and adding 30 years each on two other charges.  There is no parole in
the federal system.
Duffy also fined the men $ 250,000 each and told them that if
they ever sold their story, the money would go to the victims.  But,
he added in sentencing Ayyad, "I can't imagine anyone wanting to
give you anything."
Duffy handed down the sentences after Ed Smith, whose pregnant
wife, Monica, died in the blast, asked the judge to "remember this
bombing was an act of multiple murder."
"We lost all this because the four men you are to sentence
today wanted to terrorize the people of the United States," Smith
said, bringing tears to the eyes of victims' relatives in the front
row of the courtroom.
The defendants did not go quietly or quickly.
All four read defiant, often rambling statements in their native
Arabic that lasted a total of more than seven hours.
Abouhalima complained that jurors had slept through testimony,
and Salameh likened himself to a falsely accused Nazi war criminal
"I wonder how long I will remain in prison until the government
reveals I was innocent," said Salameh, a Palestinian immigrant.
"Two years?  Seven?  Ten? Twenty?  God only knows."
Duffy responded with icy disgust, calling Salameh a "sneak and
a coward" and Abouhalima a coward "four times over."
When his turn came to speak, Ayyad said he would not "stand
here and cry and ask for mercy." "I'm telling you you're wrong
because you don't know Muslims as they really are," he said.
Duffy responded by calling him "the most hypocritical person in
the world."
Coming last was Ajaj, who spoke for nearly three hours, calling
his conviction a farce and wearing out one translator with an
exhaustive history of alleged terrorism by the U.S. government and
Israel.
"You have a lot of nerve," said Duffy, finally cutting off
Ajaj.  "You lecture this country about terrorism.  If it weren't
for you there would be no bombing.  The others were low. You were
lower." 30

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document