JUDGE'S REPORT: FBI ACTION ASSAILED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 1991, THURSDAY, ILLINOIS FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1I
Length: 422 words
Body


CHICAGO (AP) - An FBI report on a group that opposed U.S. policy in Central America should be destroyed because agents violated a court order designed to protect political dissent, a federal magistrate says in a new report.  U.S. Magistrate Joan H. Lefkow said the FBI acted on information from what proved to be an unreliable tipster. The bureau infiltrated the group's leadership, sent undercover agents to meetings, and secretly obtained bank and telephone records of the Chicago Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador, Lefkow said.  Ultimately, the investigation spread to 178 groups and individuals who had some connection with the committee, Lefkow said in the report submitted Monday.  ''The FBI's actions in Chicago constitute a serious violation'' of a 1981 consent decree against such investigations, she said in her report.  In 1985, the Justice Department's office of intelligence policy and review concluded that the committee was not involved in terrorism, but merely exercising its First Amendment rights in political activities.  Lefkow recommended the destruction of the FBI file on the committee and said hearings should be held to determine whether FBI agents should receive additional training to guard against further violation.  Her report will be forwarded to U.S. District Judge Ann C. Williams, who will enter a final judgment in the case.  The FBI's investigation was aimed at determining whether the committee was engaged in international terrorism. It was prompted by allegations against the committee made by Frank Varelli, an El Salvadoran living in Texas, Lefkow said in her report.
She noted that the FBI conceded it did not adequately investigate Varelli's background or reliability. A year after the FBI began its investigation, it learned some of Varelli's information was inaccurate, but instead of backing off, the agency expanded the probe to all chapters of the Committee in Solidarity.  The FBI argued before Lefkow that new guidelines it already adopted will preclude future violations.  Lefkow disagreed.  ''Based on the FBI's past behavior, there is a reasonable likelihood of repetition,'' she said in her report.  Richard Gutman, an attorney for the committee, expressed satisfaction with Lefkow's finding.  ''I hope this decision deters the FBI from continuing its current intimidating, political intelligence-gathering campaign'' against law-abiding Arab-Americans, he said.  FBI agent Bob Long said there would be no response to Lefkow's finding or to Gutman's remarks.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document