Judge rules on Moussaoui plan;
Government told to show secret interview information to terrorism suspect, who is acting as his own lawyer.
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 25, 2003 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 408 words
Byline: EUNICE MOSCOSO
Body


Washington --- A federal judge ruled Thursday that suspected terrorist Zacarias Moussaoui as part of his trial preparation should be allowed to see a top-secret government plan for allowing him limited access to a senior al-Qaida prisoner.
U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema said that the government's reluctance to show the plan to Moussaoui is "unacceptable" because it violates an order from an appellate court that Moussaoui, who is acting as his own attorney, be given an opportunity to respond to it.
The government plan, filed Thursday in the Eastern District of Virginia, is an effort to find a compromise on an issue that has delayed Moussaoui's trial: Moussaoui's request to interview other terrorism suspects in custody, including Ramzi Binalshibh, an alleged top al-Qaida operative captured in Pakistan last year and held in a secret location.
Cox Washington Bureau
According to reports, the plan was offered as a substitute for allowing Moussaoui to interview Binalshibh by video hookup, and contains information from Binalshibh. Brinkema ordered the interview in January, but the government appealed her ruling to the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va., which urged the government to offer an alternative in an effort at compromise.
Brinkema will hear arguments on the matter next month.
The government plan, which was not released to the public, has been classified as "Top Secret/Codeword," according to Brinkema's ruling.
Moussaoui, who is accused of conspiring with the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers, has said in court rulings that Binalshibh can testify that he was not involved in the terrorist plot.
But the government has been opposed to giving Moussaoui access to prisoners who have been dubbed "enemy combatants" because it fears such access could compromise national security, allow suspects to send messages to each other and hamper terrorism investigations.
Moussaoui, a 34-year-old French citizen, was in custody on the day of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. He had been arrested after arousing suspicion at a Minnesota flight school.
Authorities contend that he would have been "the 20th hijacker" with the group of terrorists aboard United Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania, if he had not been arrested.
Although he has admitted in court that he belongs to al-Qaida, Moussaoui has said repeatedly that he was not involved in the attacks.
The Associated Press contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo: Zacarias Moussaoui has requested to interview an alleged top al-Qaida operative.

Load-Date: April 25, 2003


End of Document