JUDGE FREEH, AT LAST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 23, 1993, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B; EDITORIAL
Length: 412 words
Body


Even taking into account the normal dose of euphoria that accompanies a major nomination and the sense of relief that the protracted saga of William S. Sessions had finally ended, President Bill Clinton's choice to head the Federal Bureau of Investigation appears impressive. The combination of Louis J. Freeh's experience as an FBI agent, a federal prosecutor and, currently, a federal judge should allow him to command the respect necessary to restore the bureau to the prominence it needs.  Praising Judge Freeh as "street-smart," the president predicted that his selection will be "good and tough - good for the FBI and tough on criminals." Whoever takes over the bureau at this point in its history will have to be both. As Mr. Sessions doggedly refused to step down in the wake of questions about his financial dealings, leadership at the FBI suffered, even as it achieved success in combating domestic terrorism. Though Judge Freeh's scant management experience may be the weakest aspect of his background, his supporters say he will be able to set the right tone because he was an agent himself for six years and can identify with the concerns of those under his direction.  As far as being tough on criminals, Mr. Clinton and everyone else pointed to the prosecution of the so-called "Pizza Connection" case, which Judge Freeh handled when he was an assistant U.S. attorney in New York City. He won praise for his skill and tenacity in breaking up the billion-dollar heroin ring, yet also won grudging admiration from one of the defense lawyers in the case for scrupulous attention to the civil liberties of the defendants when questionable searches were involved.
Judge Freeh's selection should allow the FBI to concentrate on its future.  How can it best pursue white-collar crime? Will it be able to fight terrorism by operating in what the director-designate called the "global village" of law enforcement? Can it help balance the war on drugs between prosecution and prevention? What police functions are best handled at the federal level and which are best left to state and local authorities? Will it erase past problems of discrimination, to create a bureau that looks like America and wins the nation's confidence?  "Our country must be made safe again," Judge Freeh declared in the White House Rose Garden Tuesday. If he can reach that goal and still stay within the rules, he will live up to Mr. Clinton's description of him as a "law-enforcement legend."

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document