Judge allows trial of bin Laden driver to proceed
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 18, 2008 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 414 words
Byline: By Matt Apuzzo THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The U.S. can begin trying Osama bin Laden's former driver next week at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, a federal judge ruled Thursday, rejecting the defendant's plea to halt the historic first trial in the military system set up following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
In a victory for the Bush administration, U.S. District Judge James Robertson ruled that civilian courts should let the military process play out as Congress intended - a decision that could clear the way for military commissions to begin prosecuting other terrorism suspects, including those charged directly in the 2001 attacks.
If the trial had been delayed, as requested by former bin Laden chauffeur Salim Hamdan, it would have been a sign that the entire terrorism-trial process might crumble under the weight of judicial scrutiny.
Hamdan argued that he should be given a chance to challenge the legality of the military trials, based on last month's Supreme Court ruling that stated Guantanamo Bay prisoners can oppose their detentions in federal civilian courts. If judges hold that to be the case, every detainee at the U.S. naval base in Cuba could use court challenges to delay his trial for months or years.
But Robertson refused to step in to stop the Hamdan trial, which is scheduled for Monday.
"Courts should respect the balance that Congress has struck," he said.
At Guantanamo Bay, military prosecutors said the ruling gave them more confidence that the trials would go forward against 80 detainees, including alleged Sept. 11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and others charged in the attacks.
Hamdan's Pentagon-appointed attorney, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Brian Mizer, said he intends to prove the Yemeni defendant was merely a driver and a mechanic for bin Laden - not an al-Qaida terrorist - but he doubts a fair trial is possible. "This trial is going to proceed, but it's not going to be full, open and fair," Mizer said. "There are fundamental flaws in the system."
Robertson, who was appointed to the bench by President Bill Clinton, seemed concerned at one point that government attorneys were unable to give him a clear answer about what constitutional rights prisoners have at Guantanamo Bay.
But he said he was obligated to let the process continue. He said Hamdan can raise procedural challenges during trial and, if convicted, he can ask military and civilian appeals courts to settle constitutional questions.
---
Talk
STLtoday.com/current How should the Gitmo trials play out? Talk about it in Current Affairs.

Load-Date: July 18, 2008


End of Document