Judge Limits Expert Testimony on Terrorism in Bomb Case
The New York Times
January 30, 2014 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 549 words
Byline: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.
Body


Saying he wanted to avoid turning the trial into a ''referendum on terrorism,'' a state judge handling the case of a Manhattan man accused of planning pipe bombings said on Wednesday he sees no need for an expert on Islamic terrorism to testify at the defendant's coming trial.
The judge, Justice Thomas Farber, said at a pretrial conference in Manhattan Supreme Court that he hoped to keep the jury focused on the state's evidence that the man, Jose Pimentel, had constructed bombs and intended to set them off, rather than on testimony about organizations and websites linked to Al Qaeda.
General testimony along those lines could cloud the judgment of jurors in New York City, where memories of the Sept. 11 attacks are still keenly felt, he said.
''I don't want the jury's attention diverted,'' Justice Farber said.
Mr. Pimentel is scheduled to go to trial on Feb. 24 on terrorism charges, among them weapons possession and conspiracy. He faces life in prison. He was arrested in November 2011 after a lengthy investigation involving an undercover police officer, two confidential informants and hundreds of hours of recorded conversations.
Prosecutors say Mr. Pimentel, a Dominican native who converted to Islam, began using the name Muhammad Yusuf and maintained a website encouraging jihad against the United States. He was inspired, prosecutors say, to take action after Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical Muslim cleric, was killed in September 2011 by a drone in Yemen.
An indictment charges Mr. Pimentel with building one pipe bomb in an informant's apartment and beginning to build two others, using $100 in supplies from local hardware stores and supermarkets, including match heads, Christmas lights and a converted clock.
Mr. Pimentel's lawyers, Susan J. Walsh and Lori Cohen, have said they intend to argue their client was entrapped by the police. They describe him as a down-on-his-luck young man who was easily enticed by the informant to build bombs after being plied for months with free food and marijuana.
Mr. Pimentel's trial is unusual because the federal authorities typically handle terrorism prosecutions. But the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which had monitored Mr. Pimentel, decided not to pursue charges against him, and the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., has taken on the task.
Though Mr. Pimentel was allegedly inspired by Al Qaeda propaganda, the authorities have never accused him of belonging to a larger conspiracy. Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg even described him as a ''lone wolf'' when he was arrested.
Deborah Hickey, an assistant district attorney, said an expert on terrorism would be needed to guide jurors through a maze of jihadist websites and organizations that Mr. Pimentel interacted with online. ''There is an arcane world in the cyber aspect of this case,'' she said, adding: ''Online activity is a big part of our case.''
Justice Farber said he might allow a terrorism expert to testify in a limited way about definitions of words and groups, but he thought Mr. Pimentel's online postings would be self-explanatory. ''I don't think the jury needs to be told what Osama bin Laden is at this point,'' he said.
The judge added state law did not require prosecutors to prove Mr. Pimentel was linked to a particular group to win a conviction.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/30/nyregion/judge-limits-expert-testimony-on-terrorism-in-manhattan-bomb-case.html

Load-Date: January 30, 2014


End of Document