Judge rules against mental evaluation of terrorism suspect
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 18, 2007 Wednesday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8B
Length: 299 words
Byline: Pam Louwagie, Staff Writer
Body


Terrorism suspect Mohamad Kamal Elzahabi does not need a mental health evaluation before his trial on immigration charges begins in Minneapolis at the end of the month, a federal judge ruled Tuesday.
Elzahabi has refused to meet with his defense lawyers for months, and prosecutors sought an evaluation and competency hearing. But in a six-page ruling, U.S. District Judge John Tunheim reasoned that during Elzahabi's three years in pretrial detention he has endured uncommon restrictions such as strip searches before meetings with his attorney. It was also revealed that some of their confidential conversations were inadvertently recorded.
Given those facts, Tunheim wrote, Elzahabi's decision to stop talking does not indicate incompetency "but seems instead to indicate that Elzahabi has determined it is in his best interests to cease communications with his attorney."
The order granted a request from Elzahabi's defense attorney, Paul Engh, to change the conditions under which they meet. That will mean relaxing regulations on strip searches, Engh said.
Jeffrey Paulsen of the U.S. attorney's office said his office "will continue to monitor the situation and will inform the court if additional reasons to question the defendant's competence to stand trial arise."
Elzahabi, a Lebanese national, is scheduled for trial on three immigration counts alleging that he entered into a fraudulent marriage in 1984, then used the marriage to obtain a green card and fraudulently obtained immigration documents to get jobs in Minnesota.
The government has also charged him with making false statements to the FBI about his role in shipping radios and other telecommunications devices to Pakistan and about helping a terrorism suspect obtain a driver's license. He could face trial on those counts later.

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document