Judge orders psych evaluation of Columbus terror defendant; Somali native pleaded guilty in August 2015.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 2, 2017 Saturday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2017 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B4
Length: 359 words
Byline: Earl Rinehart The Columbus Dispatch
Body


COLUMBUS Abdirahman Sheik Mohamud will undergo a psychological evaluation before a federal judge in Columbus sentences him for aiding terrorism and training in Syria with insurgents.
U.S. District Judge James L. Graham said in his order issued Tuesday that he wants the evaluation “to determine the defendant’s mental condition.” 
Graham postponed Mohamud’s sentencing on Aug. 18 after questioning whether he was pressured into joining the insurgency and if there are “de-radicalization” treatment programs. 
Mohamud, 25, pleaded guilty on Aug. 14, 2015, to providing material support to terrorists and a U.S.-designated terrorist organization, and to lying to the FBI about his travel to Syria. 
Specifically, Graham wants the examiner’s opinion concerning: whether Mohamud is likely to repeat the crimes in the future; any underlying psychological facts that led him to commit the offenses; recommendations for appropriate treatment; and appropriate limits on his activities once released from prison. 
Graham appointed psychologist Kristen E. Haskins of Grove City to conduct the evaluation. 
Assistant U.S. Attorney Doug Squires is seeking 23 years in prison for Mohamud. Defense attorney Sam Shamansky plans to ask for no prison time. 
Mohamud, a Somali native, came to the United States as a child. Prosecutors said he already had planned to launch an attack on American soil when he took the oath of citizenship Feb. 18, 2014, in Columbus. 
Two months later, he flew to Greece, the first leg of his journey to Syria to train with the Al-Nusra Front. His brother, Abdifatah Aden, was fighting with the group and Mohamud had posted messages on social media praising him. 
Al-Nusra sent Mohamud back to the United States to launch attacks. He recruited others and practiced at a firing range. Investigators said he planned to go to Texas to kidnap and execute U.S. soldiers. 
Mohamud booked a flight from Columbus to Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport in November 2014. He never got on that flight, which Shamansky said proved he had rejected terrorism. 
Mohamud was arrested on Feb. 21, 2015, following a traffic stop in which he gave officers Aden’s name.

Graphic

 
Abdirahman Sheik Mohamud speaks with his attorney Sam Shamansky during a hearing. Mohamud was scheduled to be sentenced last month on terrorism charges, but a judge has ordered an evaluation. ANDREW WELSH-HUGGINS / AP 2015

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document