Judge's ruling didn't cite countries' terrorist activities
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 19, 2017 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 17A
Length: 401 words
Byline: Staff
Body


"I'm calling into question the accuracy ofthe ruling(halting theTrump executive orderrestricting some immigrant travel). Forinstance, the district judge in Seattle said that there was no indication of terrorism from these seven countries and ourcountry. That is a factually false statement."--White House senior policy adviser Stephen Miller on the Feb. 12 edition ofABC's "This Week."
During an appearance on ABC's "ThisWeek," WhiteHousesenior policy adviser Stephen Miller took aim at court rulings temporarily halting the implementation of the Trump administration's executive order on immigration.
Severalstateshavesuedthe Trump administration over its executive order that temporarily blocks immigration and travel from seven countries in the Middle East and Africa. A federal trial court judge in Seattle ruled Feb. 3 that the federal government could not enforce the executive order while the case is pending.
So lawyers for the administration appealed that decision to the 9th Circuit, which ruled unanimously toaffirmtheSeattle judge's decision.
On the Feb. 12 edition of "This Week, " host George Stephanopoulos asked Miller whether he was "calling into question the legitimacy"of the judges who ruled on the case.
Miller responded, "I'm callingintoquestiontheaccuracy of the ruling. For instance, the district judge in Seattle said that there was no indication of terrorism from these sevencountriesandourcountry. That is a factually false statement."
Miller went on to say that "there's at least several dozen -- perhaps many more than that--cases of terrorism from these countries thathavehappened in the United States in terms of terroristic plots, terroristic activity, material support for terrorism, supporting terrorism overseas, all different kinds of terroristic activity that's been interdicted in the United States tracing back to these seven countries."
Our ruling Miller said, "I'm calling
into question the accuracy of the ruling. The district judge in Seattle said there was no indication of terrorism from these seven countries in our country."
Miller's comments seemed to reference the ruling -- the only part of the case record with legal authority. But no such statement was included in the ruling. And while the judge did make a comment along those lines during oral arguments, citing this ignores a contradictory claim in the appeals court ruling.
We rate Miller's statement Mostly False.

Load-Date: February 19, 2017


End of Document