July 23: CLC to host author, Professor Hall Gardner for presentation on building world peace
Chicago Daily Herald
July 19, 2019 Friday
WEB EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: SUBMITTED CONTENT; Pg. 0
Length: 377 words
Byline: College of Lake County Public Relations and Marketing
Body


Growing and sustaining world peace, in light of a rapidly-changing international order, is the topic of a presentation by author and Professor Hall Gardner, Ph.D., at the College of Lake County from 6-8 p.m. Tuesday, July 23 in the Room A011 Auditorium on the Grayslake Campus. Admission is free. Gardner's focus is on the diplomatic origins of war, and his research blends history and theory with contemporary international affairs. His work concentrates on questions involving NATO and European Union expansion, and he will discuss key regional conflicts with a focus on the renewed U.S.-Russian-Chinese arms race, as well as the global ramifications of the "war on terrorism." A Q & A session will follow the presentation. Gardner has been professor of international and comparative politics at American University in Paris since 1990, and he has taught and guest lectured worldwide. Among his areas of teaching and research are origins and prevention of war and conflict transformation and resolution. Gardner, who earned an M.A. and Ph.D. at Johns Hopkins University, is the author of 13 books, including "American Global Strategy and the ‘War on Terrorism,'" and is a published poet. For more information, visit www.hallgardner.com. The presentation is sponsored by three CLC organizations: the Center for Nonviolence, the Center for International Education and the Sustainability Council. 
Funding for the event is provided in part by the European Union Center at the University of Illinois, through support from the U.S. Department of Education's Title VI NRC program. About College of Lake County: College of Lake County is an innovative community college in Lake County, Ill. that transforms lives with its variety of accessible, quality education options. Offered at three campuses in Grayslake, Vernon Hills and Waukegan or online, College of Lake County provides affordable options in a state-of-the-art setting close to home. A large student network, with small class sizes, provides advantages to our students on a career-related program or a path toward a transfer degree. We're proud to serve the diverse needs of our community and student body. Connect to your future today at College of Lake County. For more information, visit www.clcillinois.edu.

Load-Date: July 19, 2019


End of Document