JUROR ASSAILS BENGHAZI PROSECUTORS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 9, 2017 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2017 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-3
Length: 520 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


WASHINGTON - U.S. prosecutors overplayed appeals to jurors' emotions and failed to prove that Ahmed Abu Khattala conspired to kill a U.S. ambassador and three other Americans in the 2012 attacks on U.S. facilities in Libya, according to a juror who convicted the militia leader last week on terrorism charges, but not murder, in the deaths in Benghazi.
The juror, a man who discussed deliberations after being contacted by The Washington Post, said in an interview that the panel of 12 had doubts early on about some of the testimony from three Libyan informants who testified under pseudonyms that they saw or heard Abu Khattala take steps to plan, execute and claim responsibility for the attacks.
Over five days, jurors painstakingly pieced together a timeline of events, the juror said, trying to establish for themselves when Abu Khattala joined a plot by several militant groups that overran and burned a U.S. special diplomatic mission on the night of Sept. 11, 2012, and fired mortars on a nearby CIA base before dawn Sept. 12.
Germany nears change
BERLIN - Germany inched toward a new government Friday as leaders from the center-left Social Democrats, the previous partners of Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative bloc, agreed to sit down next week for exploratory talks on resuming the arrangement.
Andrea Nahles, parliamentary whip for the Social Democrats, said her party's leadership would meet on Wednesday with its counterparts from Ms. Merkel's conservatives to begin the process that a majority of Germans, according to recent opinion polls, hope will lead to a fourth chancellorship for Ms. Merkel.
The two groups governed together from 2005 to 2009 and again from 2013 until this year.
Poland ignores EU warnings
WARSAW, Poland - Polish lawmakers overwhelmingly approved two bills Friday that give the ruling party greater power over the judiciary despite blunt warnings from European Union officials and others that the laws contravene democratic norms.
Supporters in the ruling conservative Law and Justice party said the changes would make Poland's courts more efficient and more accountable to citizens by giving elected representatives a role in choosing judges.
Opponents said the ruling party, led by leader Jaroslaw Kaczynski, was violating international law and Poland's Constitution by infringing on judicial independence and the separation of powers.
Japan counters terrorism
TOKYO - The Japanese government plans to create a new counterterrorism center next summer for sharing international terrorism information among 11 government ministries and agencies, including the Foreign Ministry and the National Police Agency.
The new center, which also will cross-check and analyze international terrorism information with the information held by ministries and agencies, is tentatively called the "center for sharing information on international counterterrorism measures and other issues."
Its establishment is a major part of an outline on counterterrorism measures compiled by the government ahead of the 2020 Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics, details of which have been learned by The Yomiuri Shimbun.

Load-Date: December 12, 2017


End of Document