Jury rules charity paid for terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
November 25, 2008, Tuesday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P9A
Length: 406 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


DALLAS - It took 15 years and two trials, but the government has won a terrorism conviction against what had been the nation's largest Muslim charity and five of its leaders for funneling millions of dollars to the Palestinian militant group Hamas.
"United States citizens have spoken in this case, and said with a resounding verdict of guilty that we will not tolerate those who choose to finance terrorism," U.S. Attorney Richard Roper said.
Holy Land became the government's signature victory in the tough-to-convict pursuit of terrorism financing cases. Lengthy prison sentences may await Holy Land's five convicted leaders, and some could be locked away for life.
Counting the collapse of last year's original Holy Land trial, the government has stumbled in terrorism-financing cases. Two other high-profile trials in Chicago and Florida ended without convictions on the major counts.
Holy Land has been suspected since the 1990s of bankrolling social programs run by Hamas, which the U.S. designated a terrorist organization in 1995. Prosecutors accused Holy Land of routing more than $12 million overseas to help Hamas spread its ideology and boost its ranks.
Before being taken into federal custody, the five men waved and flashed peace signs to sobbing family members. Their sentencing date has not been set.
The convictions range from supporting a terrorist organization to money laundering, which carry sentences up to 15 or 20 years on each count.
Defense attorneys say they will appeal. The two-month-long trial was a do-over from last year, when a judge declared a mistrial after jurors deadlocked on most counts following 19 days of deliberations.
On Monday, the jury returned its verdict on day eight of deliberations.
"Twelve good American citizens in the first trial didn't convict anyone of anything," said Linda Moreno, attorney for former Holy Land chairman Ghassan Elashi. "And 12 good American citizens in the second trial convicted everyone of everything. If you can make sense of that . . . explain it to me."
Elashi and Shukri Abu-Baker, Holy Land's chief executive, were convicted of a combined 69 counts, including supporting a specially designated terrorist, money laundering and tax fraud.
Mufid Abdulqader and Abdulrahman Odeh were convicted of three counts of conspiracy, and Mohammed El-Mezain was convicted of one count of conspiracy to support a terrorist organization.
Holy Land itself was convicted of all 32 counts.

Load-Date: November 25, 2008


End of Document