Jury Convicts U.S. Citizen in Plot to Bomb City's Subways
The New York Times
May 2, 2012 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 801 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body


An American citizen was convicted of a host of terrorism charges on Tuesday for participating in a plot to stage suicide attacks in the New York subways, an effort that prosecutors said was stopped just days before three former high school classmates from Queens planned to set off homemade bombs during the rush period.
The two-week trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn offered a rare look at the evolution of a terrorist plot and the workings of Al Qaeda training camps where the former classmates received their orders.
The plot began after the defendant, Adis Medunjanin, a naturalized citizen born in Bosnia, went to Pakistan with two friends from high school with the intention of fighting American troops in Afghanistan. The two friends testified that they were instead recruited to attend a Qaeda training camp, where they were told they would be far more valuable to their cause by returning to the United States to carry out an act of terrorism.
Jurors deliberated for a little more than a day before finding Mr. Medunjanin guilty on all counts. When the foreman read the verdict, Mr. Medunjanin, who rarely showed emotion during the trial, raised his palms upward and said a prayer, then reassured family members in the courtroom.
Mr. Medunjanin, 28, faces up to life in prison at his sentencing, which is scheduled for Sept. 7.
Both Loretta E. Lynch, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, and Robert C. Gottlieb, a lawyer for Mr. Medunjanin, said the trial showed that criminal courts were well suited to handle terrorism cases. That role has been the subject of controversy, with critics arguing that security risks make military tribunals a more appropriate venue, at least for terrorism suspects who were arrested abroad.
Though federal authorities have called the subway plot one of the most serious threats to national security since the Sept. 11 attacks, the trial proceeded without disruption.
''The world and our national government, including all our politicians, should take note that this is the way crimes should be decided -- not in a military commission,'' Mr. Gottlieb said.
The case against Mr. Medunjanin centered on the testimony of his friends from Flushing High School -- Najibullah Zazi and Zarein Ahmedzay -- who had already pleaded guilty to their involvement in the plot and hoped for leniency in their sentencing.
They said Mr. Medunjanin had participated at every step of the way, including helping select the sites where they would set off their bombs. They described traveling together to Pakistan to fight alongside the Taliban but being taken instead by members of Al Qaeda to a mud-walled terrorist training camp. There, they agreed to commit a suicide attack in the United States.
The plot was abandoned in September 2009, after the bomb components had already been assembled with common household materials, when the men discovered that they were being watched by law enforcement officials. Mr. Zazi was arrested that month, and Mr. Ahmedzay and Mr. Medunjanin several months later. The charges were the result of an inquiry by the Joint Terrorism Task Force of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which includes members of the New York Police Department.
During the trial, Mr. Gottlieb argued that Mr. Medunjanin had a falling out with his friends -- at one point while overseas, Mr. Zazi had a fistfight with Mr. Medunjanin -- and lost contact with them when he returned to the United States two months before his friends did. Mr. Gottlieb said Mr. Medunjanin had never planned to follow through with the attack.
But prosecutors argued that he remained so dedicated that when he feared he was going to be arrested, months after the plot was uncovered, he fled in his car and intentionally crashed into approaching traffic in a last-ditch attempt to commit a suicide attack. Mr. Medunjanin called 911 moments before the crash, screaming, ''We love death more than you love life.''
The trial also featured testimony from two men convicted in separate terrorism plots that were not related to the subway-bombing scheme. Those men, Saajid Badat, a Briton who was supposed to bring down an airplane as the second so-called shoe bomber, and Bryant Neal Vinas, a Long Island man who took up arms and fought against American troops in Afghanistan, were called as expert witnesses about Al Qaeda to corroborate facts about the overseas terrorism camps where they trained.
Ms. Lynch said the trial provided a rare glimpse of the inner workings of Al Qaeda, including ''how they look to those who are connected to our homeland and how they look for those that are disaffected.'' But she said Al Qaeda's increasing use of ''the homegrown system'' made it more likely that people who were charged with terrorism understood the legal system and would cooperate with the government.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Adis Medunjanin faces up to life in prison.
Loretta E. Lynch, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, foreground, discussing the conviction of Mr. Medunjanin on Tuesday.(A19)
 Robert C. Gottlieb at federal court in Brooklyn discussing the verdict against his client, Adis Medunjanin, on terrorism charges. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KIRSTEN LUCE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A24)                                                                   

Load-Date: May 2, 2012


End of Document